this nasa image be a composite of several satellite - base view of earth .
to make the whole - earth image , nasa scientist combine observation of different part of the planet .
view from space , earth offer no clue about the diversity of life form that reside there .
the first form of life on earth be think to have be microorganism that exist for billion of year in the ocean before plant and animal appear .
the mammal , bird , and flower so familiar to - pron - be all relatively recent , originate one  three  zero to two  zero  zero million year ago .
human have inhabit this planet for only the last two  .  five million year , and only in the last two  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year have human start look like - pron - do today .
figure one  .  two formerly call blue - green algae , these ( a ) cyanobacteria , show here at three  zero  zero x magnification under a light microscope , be some of earth 's old life form .
these ( b ) stromatolite along the shore of lake thetis in western australia be ancient structure form by the layering of cyanobacteria in shallow water .
( credit a  modification of work by nasa  credit b  modification of work by ruth ellison  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
what be biology ?
in simple term , biology be the study of live organism and - pron - interaction with one another and - pron - environment .
this be a very broad definition because the scope of biology be vast .
biologist may study anything from the microscopic or submicroscopic view of a cell to ecosystem and the whole living planet ( figure one  .  two ) .
listen to the daily news , - pron - will quickly realize how many aspect of biology be discuss every day .
for example , recent news topic include escherichia coli ( figure one  .  three ) outbreak in spinach and salmonella contamination in peanut butter .
other subject include effort toward find a cure for aids , alzheimer 's disease , and cancer .
on a global scale , many researcher be commit to find way to protect the planet , solve environmental issue , and reduce the effect of climate change .
all of these diverse endeavor be relate to different facet of the discipline of biology .
figure one  .  three escherichia coli ( e . coli ) bacteria , see in this scanning electron micrograph , be normal resident of - pron - digestive tract that aid in the absorption of vitamin k and other nutrient .
however , virulent strain be sometimes responsible for disease outbreak .
( credit  eric erbe , digital colorization by christopher pooley , both of usda , ars , emu )
the process of science biology be a science , but what exactly be science ?
what do the study of biology share with other scientific discipline ?
science ( from the latin scientia , mean " knowledge
" ) can be define as knowledge that cover general truth or the operation of general law , especially when acquire and test by the scientific method .
- pron - become clear from this definition that the application of the scientific method play a major role in science .
the scientific method be a method of research with define step that include experiment and careful observation .
the step of the scientific method will be examine in detail later , but one of the most important aspect of this method be the testing of hypothesis by mean of repeatable experiment .
a hypothesis be a suggest explanation for an event , which can be test .
although use the scientific method be inherent to science , - pron - be inadequate in determine what science be .
this be because - pron - be relatively easy to apply the scientific method to discipline such as physics and chemistry , but when - pron - come to discipline like archaeology , psychology , and geology , the scientific method become less applicable as - pron - become more difficult to repeat experiment .
these area of study be still science , however .
consider archeology
— even though one can not perform repeatable experiment , hypothesis may still be support .
for instance , an archeologist can hypothesize that an ancient culture exist base on find a piece of pottery .
further hypothesis could be make about various characteristic of this culture , and these hypothesis may be find to be correct or false through continued support or contradiction from other finding .
a hypothesis may become a verified theory .
a theory be a test and confirm explanation for observation or phenomenon .
science may be better define as field of study that attempt to comprehend the nature of the universe .
what would - pron - expect to see in a museum of natural science ?
frog ?
plant ?
dinosaur skeleton ?
exhibit about how the brain function ?
a planetarium ?
gem and mineral ?
or , maybe all of the above ?
science include such diverse field as astronomy , biology , computer science , geology , logic , physics , chemistry , and mathematic ( figure one  .  four ) .
however , those field of science relate to the physical world and - pron - phenomenon and process be consider natural science .
thus , a museum of natural science may contain any of the item list above .
figure one  .  four
the diversity of scientific field include astronomy , biology , computer science , geology , logic , physics , chemistry , mathematic , and many other field .
( credit  " image editor” / flickr )
there be no complete agreement when - pron - come to define what the natural science include , however .
for some expert , the natural science be astronomy , biology , chemistry , earth science , and physics .
other scholar choose to divide natural science into life science , which study live thing and include biology , and physical science , which study nonliv matter and include astronomy , geology , physics , and chemistry .
some discipline such as biophysic and biochemistry build on both life and physical science and be interdisciplinary .
natural science be sometimes refer to as " hard science " because - pron - rely on the use of quantitative datum  social science that study society and human behavior be more likely to use qualitative assessment to drive investigation and finding .
not surprisingly , the natural science of biology have many branch or subdiscipline .
cell biologist study cell structure and function , while biologist who study anatomy investigate the structure of an entire organism .
those biologist study physiology , however , focus on the internal functioning of an organism .
some area of biology focus on only particular type of live thing .
for example , botanist explore plant , while zoologist specialize in animal .
scientific reasoning one thing be common to all form of science  an ultimate goal " to know .
"
curiosity and inquiry be the drive force for the development of science .
scientist seek to understand the world and the way - pron - operate .
to do this , - pron - use two method of logical thinking  inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning .
inductive reasoning be a form of logical thinking that use relate observation to arrive at a general conclusion .
this type of reasoning be common in descriptive science .
a life scientist such as a biologist make observation and record - pron - .
these datum can be qualitative or quantitative , and the raw datum can be supplement with drawing , picture , photo , or video .
from many observation , the scientist can infer conclusion ( induction ) base on evidence .
inductive reasoning involve formulate generalization infer from careful observation and the analysis of a large amount of datum .
brain study provide an example .
in this type of research , many live brain be observe while people be do a specific activity , such as view image of food .
the part of the brain that " light up " during this activity be then predict to be the part control the response to the select stimulus , in this case , image of food .
the " light up " of the various area of the brain be cause by excess absorption of radioactive sugar derivative by active area of the brain .
the resultant increase in radioactivity be observe by a scanner .
then , researcher can stimulate that part of the brain to see if similar response result .
deductive reasoning or deduction be the type of logic use in hypothesis - base science .
in deductive reason , the pattern of think move in the opposite direction as compare to inductive reasoning .
deductive reasoning be a form of logical thinking that use a general principle or law to forecast specific result .
from those general principle , a scientist can extrapolate and predict the specific result that would be valid as long as the general principle be valid .
study in climate change can illustrate this type of reasoning .
for example , scientist may predict that if the climate become warm in a particular region , then the distribution of plant and animal should change .
these prediction have be make and test , and many such change have be find , such as the modification of arable area for agriculture , with change base on temperature average .
both type of logical thinking be relate to the two main pathway of scientific study  descriptive science and hypothesisbas science .
descriptive ( or discovery ) science , which be usually inductive , aim to observe , explore , and discover , while hypothesis - base science , which be usually deductive , begin with a specific question or problem and a potential answer or solution that can be test .
the boundary between these two form of study be often blur , and most scientific endeavor combine both approach .
the fuzzy boundary become apparent when think about how easily observation can lead to specific question .
for example , a gentleman in the one  nine  four  zero s observe that the burr seed that stick to - pron - clothe and - pron - dog 's fur have a tiny hook structure .
on close inspection , - pron - discover that the burrs' grip device be more reliable than a zipper .
- pron - eventually develop a company and produce the hook - and - loop fastener popularly know today as velcro .
descriptive science and hypothesis - base science be in continuous dialogue .
the scientific method biologists study the live world by pose question about - pron - and seek science - base response .
this approach be common to other science as well and be often refer to as the scientific method .
the scientific method be use even in ancient time , but - pron - be first document by england 's sir francis bacon ( one  five  six  one – one  six  two  six ) ( figure one  .  five ) , who set up inductive method for scientific inquiry .
the scientific method be not exclusively use by biologist but can be apply to almost all field of study as a logical , rational problem - solve method .
sir francis bacon ( one  five  six  one – one  six  two  six ) be credit with be the first to define the scientific method .
( credit  paul van somer )
the scientific process typically start with an observation ( often a problem to be solve ) that lead to a question .
let - pron - think about a simple problem that start with an observation and apply the scientific method to solve the problem .
one monday morning , a student arrive at class and quickly discover that the classroom be too warm .
that be an observation that also describe a problem  the classroom be too warm .
the student then ask a question  " why be the classroom so warm ?
"
propose a hypothesis recall that a hypothesis be a suggest explanation that can be test .
to solve a problem , several hypothesis may be propose .
for example , one hypothesis may be , " the classroom be warm because no one turn on the air conditioning .
"
but there could be other response to the question , and therefore other hypothesis may be propose .
a second hypothesis may be , "
the classroom be warm because there be a power failure , and so the air conditioning do not work .
"
once a hypothesis have be select , the student can make a prediction .
a prediction be similar to a hypothesis but - pron - typically have the format "
if . . .
then . . . .
"
for example , the prediction for the first hypothesis may be , " if the student turn on the air conditioning , then the classroom will no longer be too warm .
"
test a hypothesis a valid hypothesis must be testable .
- pron - should also be falsifiable , mean that - pron - can be disproven by experimental result .
importantly , science do not claim to " prove " anything because scientific understanding be always subject to modification with further information .
this step — openness to disprove idea
— be what distinguish science from nonscience .
the presence of the supernatural , for instance , be neither testable nor falsifiable .
to test a hypothesis , a researcher will conduct one or more experiment design to eliminate one or more of the hypothesis .
each experiment will have one or more variable and one or more control .
a variable be any part of the experiment that can vary or change during the experiment .
the control group contain every feature of the experimental group except - pron - be not give the manipulation that be hypothesize about .
therefore , if the result of the experimental group differ from the control group , the difference must be due to the hypothesize manipulation , rather than some outside factor .
look for the variable and control in the example that follow .
to test the first hypothesis , the student would find out if the air conditioning be on .
if the air conditioning be turn on but do not work , there should be another reason , and this hypothesis should be reject .
to test the second hypothesis , the student could check if the light in the classroom be functional .
if so , there be no power failure and this hypothesis should be reject .
each hypothesis should be test by carry out appropriate experiment .
be aware that reject one hypothesis do not determine whether or not the other hypothesis can be accept  - pron - simply eliminate one hypothesis that be not valid ( figure one  .  six ) .
use the scientific method , the hypothesis that be inconsistent with experimental datum be reject .
while this " warm classroom " example be base on observational result , other hypothesis and experiment may have clear control .
for instance , a student may attend class on monday and realize - pron - have difficulty concentrate on the lecture .
one observation to explain this occurrence may be , "
when i eat breakfast before class , i be better able to pay attention .
"
the student could then design an experiment with a control to test this hypothesis .
in hypothesis - base science , specific result be predict from a general premise .
this type of reasoning be call deductive reasoning  deduction proceed from the general to the particular .
but the reverse of the process be also possible  sometimes , scientist reach a general conclusion from a number of specific observation .
this type of reasoning be call inductive reasoning , and - pron - proceed from the particular to the general .
inductive and deductive reasoning be often use in tandem to advance scientific knowledge ( figure one  .  seven ) .
the scientific method may seem too rigid and structured .
- pron - be important to keep in mind that , although scientist often follow this sequence , there be flexibility .
sometimes an experiment lead to conclusion that favor a change in approach  often , an experiment bring entirely new scientific question to the puzzle .
many time , science do not operate in a linear fashion  instead , scientist continually draw inference and make generalization , find pattern as - pron - research proceed .
scientific reasoning be more complex than the scientific method alone suggest .
notice , too , that the scientific method can be apply to solve problem that be not necessarily scientific in nature .
two types of science  basic science and applied science
the scientific community have be debate for the last few decade about the value of different type of science .
be - pron - valuable to pursue science for the sake of simply gain knowledge , or do scientific knowledge only have worth if - pron - can apply - pron - to solve a specific problem or to better - pron - life ?
this question focus on the difference between two type of science  basic science and apply science .
basic science or " pure " science seek to expand knowledge regardless of the short - term application of that knowledge .
- pron - be not focus on develop a product or a service of immediate public or commercial value .
the immediate goal of basic science be knowledge for knowledge 's sake , though this do not mean that , in the end , - pron - may not result in a practical application .
in contrast , apply science or " technology , " aim to use science to solve real - world problem , make - pron - possible , for example , to improve a crop yield , find a cure for a particular disease , or save animal threaten by a natural disaster ( figure one  .  eight ) .
in apply science , the problem be usually define for the researcher .
figure one  .  eight
after hurricane ike strike the gulf coast in two  zero  zero  eight , the u . s . fish and wildlife service rescue this brown pelican .
thank to apply science , scientist know how to rehabilitate the bird .
( credit  fema )
some individual may perceive apply science as " useful " and basic science as " useless .
"
a question these people may pose to a scientist advocate knowledge acquisition would be , "
what for ?
"
a careful look at the history of science , however , reveal that basic knowledge have result in many remarkable application of great value .
many scientist think that a basic understanding of science be necessary before an application be develop  therefore , apply science relie on the result generate through basic science .
other scientist think that - pron - be time to move on from basic science and instead to find solution to actual problem .
both approach be valid .
- pron - be true that there be problem that demand immediate attention  however , few solution would be find without the help of the wide knowledge foundation generate through basic science .
one example of how basic and apply science can work together to solve practical problem occur after the discovery of dna structure lead to an understanding of the molecular mechanism govern dna replication .
strand of dna , unique in every human , be find in - pron - cell , where - pron - provide the instruction necessary for life .
during dna replication , dna make new copy of - pron - , shortly before a cell divide .
understand the mechanism of dna replication enable scientist to develop laboratory technique that be now use to identify genetic disease , pinpoint individual who be at a crime scene , and determine paternity .
without basic science , - pron - be unlikely that apply science would exist .
another example of the link between basic and applied research be the human genome project , a study in which each human chromosome be analyze and map to determine the precise sequence of dna subunit and the exact location of each gene .
( the gene be the basic unit of heredity  an individual 's complete collection of gene be - pron - or - pron - genome . )
other less complex organism have also be study as part of this project in order to gain a good understanding of human chromosome .
the human genome project ( figure one  .  nine ) rely on basic research carry out with simple organism and , later , with the human genome .
an important end goal eventually become use the datum for applied research , seek cure and early diagnosis for genetically relate disease .
figure one  .  nine
the human genome project be a one  three  - year collaborative effort among researcher work in several different field of science .
the project , which sequence the entire human genome , be complete in two  zero  zero  three .
( credit  the u . s . department of energy genome programs ( http / / genomics . energy . gov ) )
while research effort in both basic science and apply science be usually carefully plan , - pron - be important to note that some discovery be make by serendipity , that is , by mean of a fortunate accident or a lucky surprise .
penicillin be discover when biologist alexander fleming accidentally leave a petri dish of staphylococcus bacteria open .
an unwanted mold grow on the dish , kill the bacteria .
the mold turn out to be penicillium , and a new antibiotic be discover .
even in the highly organize world of science , luck — when combine with an observant , curious mind — can lead to unexpected breakthrough .
report scientific work
whether scientific research be basic science or apply science , scientist must share - pron - finding in order for other researcher to expand and build upon - pron - discovery .
collaboration with other scientist — when planning , conduct , and analyzing result
— be all important for scientific research .
for this reason , important aspect of a scientist 's work be communicate with peer and disseminate result to peer .
scientist can share result by present - pron - at a scientific meeting or conference , but this approach can reach only the select few who be present .
instead , most scientist present - pron - result in peer - review manuscript that be publish in scientific journal .
peer - review manuscript be scientific paper that be review by a scientist 's colleague , or peer .
these colleague be qualified individual , often expert in the same research area , who judge whether or not the scientist 's work be suitable for publication .
the process of peer review help to ensure that the research describe in a scientific paper or grant proposal be original , significant , logical , and thorough .
grant proposal , which be request for research funding , be also subject to peer review .
scientist publish - pron - work so other scientist can reproduce - pron - experiment under similar or different condition to expand on the finding .
the experimental result must be consistent with the finding of other scientist .
a scientific paper be very different from creative writing .
although creativity be require to design experiment , there be fix guideline when - pron - come to present scientific result .
first , scientific writing must be brief , concise , and accurate .
a scientific paper need to be succinct but detailed enough to allow peer to reproduce the experiment .
the scientific paper consist of several specific section — introduction , material and method , result , and discussion .
this structure be sometimes call the " imrad " format .
there be usually acknowledgment and reference section as well as an abstract ( a concise summary ) at the beginning of the paper .
there may be additional section depend on the type of paper and the journal where - pron - will be publish  for example , some review paper require an outline .
the introduction start with brief , but broad , background information about what be know in the field .
a good introduction also give the rationale of the work  - pron - justify the work carry out and also briefly mention the end of the paper , where the hypothesis or research question drive the research will be present .
the introduction refer to the published scientific work of other and therefore require citation follow the style of the journal .
use the work or idea of other without proper citation be consider plagiarism .
the material and method section include a complete and accurate description of the substance use , and the method and technique use by the researcher to gather datum .
the description should be thorough enough to allow another researcher to repeat the experiment and obtain similar result , but - pron - do not have to be verbose .
this section will also include information on how measurement be make and what type of calculation and statistical analysis be use to examine raw datum .
although the material and method section give an accurate description of the experiment , - pron - do not discuss - pron - .
some journal require a result section follow by a discussion section , but - pron - be more common to combine both .
if the journal do not allow the combination of both section , the result section simply narrate the finding without any further interpretation .
the result be present by mean of table or graph , but no duplicate information should be present .
in the discussion section , the researcher will interpret the result , describe how variable may be relate , and attempt to explain the observation .
- pron - be indispensable to conduct an extensive literature search to put the result in the context of previously publish scientific research .
therefore , proper citation be include in this section as well .
finally , the conclusion section summarize the importance of the experimental finding .
while the scientific paper almost certainly answer one or more scientific question that be state , any good research should lead to more question .
therefore , a well - do scientific paper leave door open for the researcher and other to continue and expand on the finding .
review article do not follow the imrad format because - pron - do not present original scientific finding , or primary literature  instead , - pron - summarize and comment on finding that be publish as primary literature and typically include extensive reference sections . response , but - pron - be not always easy to define life .
for example , a branch of biology call virology study virus , which exhibit some of the characteristic of living entity but lack other .
- pron - turn out that although virus can attack live organism , because disease , and even reproduce , - pron - do not meet the criterion that biologist use to define life .
consequently , virologist be not biologist , strictly speak .
similarly , some biologist study the early molecular evolution that give rise to life  since the event that precede life be not biological event , these scientist be also exclude from biology in the strict sense of the term .
from - pron - early beginning , biology have wrestle with three question  what be the share property that make something " alive " ?
and once - pron - know something be alive , how do - pron - find meaningful level of organization in - pron - structure ?
and , finally , when face with the remarkable diversity of life , how do - pron - organize the different kind of organism so that - pron - can better understand - pron - ?
as new organism be discover every day , biologist continue to seek answer to these and other question .
property of life all live organism share several key characteristic or function  order , sensitivity or response to the environment , reproduction , adaptation , growth and development , regulation , homeostasis , energy processing , and evolution .
when view together , these nine characteristic serve to define life .
organism be highly organize , coordinated structure that consist of one or more cell .
even very simple , single - cell organism be remarkably complex  inside each cell , atom make up molecule  these in turn make up cell organelle and other cellular inclusion .
in multicellular organism ( figure one  .  one  zero ) , similar cell form tissue .
tissue , in turn , collaborate to create organ ( body structure with a distinct function ) .
organ work together to form organ system .
figure one  .  one  one
the leaf of this sensitive plant ( mimosa pudica ) will instantly droop and fold when touch .
after a few minute , the plant return to normal .
( credit  alex lomas )
organisms respond to diverse stimulus .
for example , plant can bend toward a source of light , climb on fence and wall , or respond to touch ( figure one  .  one  one ) .
even tiny bacteria can move toward or away from chemical ( a process call chemotaxi ) or light ( phototaxi ) .
movement toward a stimulus be consider a positive response , while movement away from a stimulus be consider a negative response .
reproduction single - cell organism reproduce by first duplicate - pron - dna , and then divide - pron - equally as the cell prepare to divide to form two new cell .
multicellular organism often produce specialize reproductive germline cell that will form new individual .
when reproduction occur , gene contain dna be pass along to an organism 's offspring .
these gene ensure that the offspring will belong to the same specie and will have similar characteristic , such as size and shape .
growth and development organisms grow and develop follow specific instruction cod for by - pron - gene .
these gene provide instruction that will direct cellular growth and development , ensure that a species' young ( figure one  .  one  two ) will grow up to exhibit many of the same characteristic as - pron - parent .
figure one  .  one  two
although no two look alike , these kitten have inherit gene from both parent and share many of the same characteristic .
( credit  rocky mountain feline rescue )
regulation
even the small organism be complex and require multiple regulatory mechanism to coordinate internal function , respond to stimulus , and cope with environmental stress .
two example of internal function regulate in an organism be nutrient transport and blood flow .
organ ( group of tissue work together ) perform specific function , such as carry oxygen throughout the body , remove waste , deliver nutrient to every cell , and cool the body .
figure one  .  one  three
polar bear ( ursus maritimus ) and other mammal live in ice - cover region maintain - pron - body temperature by generate heat and reduce heat loss through thick fur and a dense layer of fat under - pron - skin .
( credit  " longhorndave” / flickr )
in order to function properly , cell need to have appropriate condition such as proper temperature , ph , and appropriate concentration of diverse chemical .
these condition may , however , change from one moment to the next .
organism be able to maintain internal condition within a narrow range almost constantly , despite environmental change , through homeostasis ( literally , " steady state” ) —the ability of an organism to maintain constant internal condition .
for example , an organism need to regulate body temperature through a process know as thermoregulation .
organism that live in cold climate , such as the polar bear ( figure one  .  one  three ) , have body structure that help - pron - withstand low temperature and conserve body heat .
structure that aid in this type of insulation include fur , feather , blubber , and fat .
in hot climate , figure one  .  one  four
the california condor ( gymnogyps californianus ) use chemical energy derive from food to power flight .
california condor be an endanger specie  this bird have a wing tag that help biologist identify the individual .
( credit  pacific southwest region u . s . fish and wildlife service )
all organism use a source of energy for - pron - metabolic activity .
some organism capture energy from the sun and convert - pron - into chemical energy in food  other use chemical energy in molecule - pron - take in as food ( figure one  .  one  four ) .
levels of organization of live thing
live thing be highly organized and structured , follow a hierarchy that can be examine on a scale from small to large .
the atom be the small and most fundamental unit of matter .
- pron - consist of a nucleus surround by electron .
atom form molecule .
a molecule be a chemical structure consist of at least two atom hold together by one or more chemical bond .
many molecule that be biologically important be macromolecule , large molecule that be typically form by polymerization ( a polymer be a large molecule that be make by combine small unit call monomer , which be simple than macromolecule ) .
an example of a macromolecule be deoxyribonucleic acid ( dna ) ( figure one  .  one  five ) , which contain the instruction for the structure and functioning of all live organism .
some cell contain aggregate of macromolecule surround by membrane  these be call organelle .
organelle be small structure that exist within cell .
example of organelle include mitochondria and chloroplast , which carry out indispensable function  mitochondria produce energy to power the cell , while chloroplast enable green plant to utilize the energy in sunlight to make sugar .
all live thing be make of cell  the cell - pron - be the small fundamental unit of structure and function in live organism .
( this requirement be why virus be not consider live  - pron - be not make of cell .
to make new virus , - pron - have to invade and hijack the reproductive mechanism of a live cell  only then can - pron - obtain the material - pron - need to reproduce . )
some organism consist of a single cell and other be multicellular .
cell be classify as prokaryotic or eukaryotic .
prokaryote be single - cell or colonial organism that do not have membranebound nucleus  in contrast , the cell of eukaryote do have membrane - bind organelle and a membrane - bind nucleus .
in large organism , cell combine to make tissue , which be group of similar cell carry out similar or related function .
organ be collection of tissue group together perform a common function .
organ be present not only in animal but also in plant .
an organ system be a high level of organization that consist of functionally relate organ .
mammal have many organ system .
for instance , the circulatory system transport blood through the body and to and from the lung  - pron - include organ such as the heart and blood vessel .
organism be individual living entity .
for example , each tree in a forest be an organism .
single - cell prokaryote and single - cell eukaryote be also consider organism and be typically refer to as microorganism .
all the individual of a specie live within a specific area be collectively call a population .
for example , a forest may include many pine tree .
all of these pine tree represent the population of pine tree in this forest .
different population may live in the same specific area .
for example , the forest with the pine tree include population of flower plant and also insect and microbial population .
a community be the sum of population inhabit a particular area .
for instance , all of the tree , flower , insect , and other population in a forest form the forest 's community .
the forest - pron - be an ecosystem .
an ecosystem consist of all the live thing in a particular area together with the abiotic , non - live part of that environment such as nitrogen in the soil or rain water .
at the high level of organization ( figure one  .  one  six ) , the biosphere be the collection of all ecosystem , and - pron - represent the zone of life on earth .
- pron - include land , water , and even the atmosphere to a certain extent .
the biological level of organization of live thing be show .
from a single organelle to the entire biosphere , live organism be part of a highly structured hierarchy .
( credit " organell "  modification of work by umberto salvagnin  credit " cell "  modification of work by bruce wetzel , harry schaefer / national cancer institute  credit " tissue
"  modification of work by kilbad  fama clamosa  mikael häggström  credit " organ
" 
modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal  credit " organism
" 
modification of work by " crystal " / flickr
 credit " ecosystem
"
 modification of work by us fish and wildlife service headquarters  credit " biosphere " 
modification of work by the fact that biology , as a science , have such a broad scope have to do with the tremendous diversity of life on earth .
the source of this diversity be evolution , the process of gradual change during which new specie arise from old specie .
evolutionary biologist study the evolution of live thing in everything from the microscopic world to ecosystem .
the evolution of various life form on earth can be summarize in a phylogenetic tree ( figure one  .  one  seven ) .
a phylogenetic tree be a diagram show the evolutionary relationship among biological specie base on similarity and difference in genetic or physical trait or both .
a phylogenetic tree be compose of node and branch .
the internal node represent ancestor and be point in evolution when , base on scientific evidence , an ancestor be think to have diverge to form two new specie .
the length of each branch be proportional to the time elapse since the split .
this phylogenetic tree be construct by microbiologist carl woese use datum obtain from sequence ribosomal rna gene .
the tree show the separation of live organism into three domain  bacteria , archaea , and eukarya .
bacteria and archaea be prokaryote , single - cell organism lack intracellular organelle .
( credit  eric gaba  nasa astrobiology institute ) carl woese and the phylogenetic tree
in the past , biologist group live organism into five kingdom  animal , plant , fungus , protist , and bacteria .
the organizational scheme be base mainly on physical feature , as oppose to physiology , biochemistry , or molecular biology , all of which be use by modern systematic .
the pioneering work of american microbiologist carl woese in the early one  nine  seven  zero have show , however , that life on earth have evolve along three lineage , now call domain — bacteria , archaea , and eukarya .
the first two be prokaryotic cell with microbe that lack membrane - enclose nucleus and organelle .
the third domain contain the eukaryote and include unicellular microorganism together with the four original kingdom ( exclude bacteria ) .
woese define archaea as a new domain , and this result in a new taxonomic tree ( figure one  .  one  seven ) .
many organism belong to the archaea domain live under extreme condition and be call extremophile .
to construct - pron - tree , woese use genetic relationship rather than similarity base on morphology ( shape ) .
woese 's tree be construct from comparative sequencing of the gene that be universally distribute , present in every organism , and conserve ( mean that these gene have remain essentially unchanged throughout evolution ) .
woese 's approach be revolutionary because comparison of physical feature be insufficient to differentiate between the prokaryote that appear fairly similar in spite of - pron - tremendous biochemical diversity and genetic variability ( figure one  .  one  eight ) .
the comparison of homologous dna and rna sequence provide woese with a sensitive device that reveal the extensive variability of prokaryote , and which justify the separation of the prokaryote into two domain  bacteria and archaea .
these image represent different domain .
the ( a ) bacteria in this micrograph belong to domain bacteria , while the ( b ) extremophile ( not visible ) live in this hot vent belong to domain archaea .
both the ( c ) sunflower and ( d ) lion be part of domain eukarya .
( credit a  modification of work by drew march  credit b  modification of work by steve jurvetson  credit c  modification of work by michael arrighi  credit d  modification of work by leszek leszcynski ) branches of biological study
the scope of biology be broad and therefore contain many branch and subdiscipline .
biologist may pursue one of those subdiscipline and work in a more focused field .
for instance , molecular biology and biochemistry study biological process at the molecular and chemical level , include interaction among molecule such as dna , rna , and protein , as well as the way - pron - be regulate .
microbiology , the study of microorganism , be the study of the structure and function of single - cell organism .
- pron - be quite a broad branch - pron - , and depend on the subject of study , there be also microbial physiologist , ecologist , and geneticist , among other .
forensic science be the application of science to answer question relate to the law .
biologist as well as chemist and biochemist can be forensic scientist .
forensic scientist provide scientific evidence for use in court , and - pron - job involve examine trace material associate with crime .
interest in forensic science have increase in the last few year , possibly because of popular television show that feature forensic scientist on the job .
also , the development of molecular technique and the establishment of dna database have expand the type of work that forensic scientist can do .
- pron - job activity be primarily relate to crime against people such as murder , rape , and assault .
- pron - work involve analyze sample such as hair , blood , and other body fluid and also process dna ( figure one  .  one  nine ) find in many different environment and material .
forensic scientist also analyze other biological evidence leave at crime scene , such as insect larvae or pollen grain .
student who want to pursue career in forensic science will most likely be require to take chemistry and biology course as well as some intensive math course .
another field of biological study , neurobiology , study the biology of the nervous system , and although - pron - be consider a branch of biology , - pron - be also recognize as an interdisciplinary field of study know as neuroscience .
because of - pron - interdisciplinary nature , this subdiscipline study different function of the nervous system use molecular , cellular , developmental , medical , and computational approach .
paleontology , another branch of biology , use fossil to study life 's history ( figure one  .  two  zero ) .
zoology and botany be the study of animal and plant , respectively .
biologist can also specialize as biotechnologist , ecologist , or physiologist , to name just a few area .
this be just a small sample of the many field that biologist can pursue .
biology be the culmination of the achievement of the natural science from - pron - inception to today .
excitingly , - pron - be the cradle of emerge science , such as the biology of brain activity , genetic engineering of custom organism , and the biology of evolution that use the laboratory tool of molecular biology to retrace the early stage of life on earth .
a scan of news headline — whether report on immunization , a newly discover specie , sport doping , or a genetically - modify food
— demonstrate the way biology be active in and important to - pron - everyday world . 
atom be the building block of molecule find in the universe — air , soil , water , rock . . .
and also the cell of all live organism .
in this model of an organic molecule , the atom of carbon ( black ) , hydrogen ( white ) , nitrogen ( blue ) , oxygen ( red ) , and sulfur ( yellow ) be show in proportional atomic size .
the silver rod indicate chemical bond .
element in various combination comprise all matter , include live thing .
some of the most abundant element in live organism include carbon , hydrogen , nitrogen , oxygen , sulfur , and phosphoru .
these form the nucleic acid , protein , carbohydrate , and lipid that be the fundamental component of living matter .
biologist must understand these important building block and the unique structure of the atom that make up molecule , allow for the formation of cell , tissue , organ system , and entire organism .
all biological process follow the law of physics and chemistry , so in order to understand how biological system work , - pron - be important to understand the underlie physics and chemistry .
for example , the flow of blood within the circulatory system follow the law of physics that regulate the mode of fluid flow .
the breakdown of the large , complex molecule of food into small molecule — and the conversion of these to release energy to be store in adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) —is a series of chemical reaction that follow chemical law .
the property of water and the formation of hydrogen bond be key to understand living process .
recognize the property of acid and base be important , for example , to - pron - understanding of the digestive process .
therefore , the fundamental of physics and chemistry be important for gain insight into biological process .
at - pron - most fundamental level , life be make up of matter .
matter be any substance that occupy space and have mass .
element be unique form of matter with specific chemical and physical property that can not be break down into small substance by ordinary chemical reaction .
there be one  one  eight element , but only nine  two occur naturally .
the remain element be synthesize in laboratory and be unstable .
each element be designate by - pron - chemical symbol , which be a single capital letter or , when the first letter be already " take " by another element , a combination of two letter .
some element follow the english term for the element , such as c for carbon and ca for calcium .
other elements' chemical symbol derive from - pron - latin name  for example , the symbol for sodium be na , refer to natrium , the latin word for sodium .
the four element common to all live organism be oxygen ( o ) , carbon ( c ) , hydrogen ( h ) , and nitrogen ( n ) .
in the nonliv world , element be find in different proportion , and some element common to live organism be relatively rare on the earth as a whole , as show in table two  .  one .
for example , the atmosphere be rich in nitrogen and oxygen but contain little carbon and hydrogen , while the earth 's crust , although - pron - contain oxygen and a small amount of hydrogen , have little nitrogen and carbon .
in spite of - pron - difference in abundance , all element and the chemical reaction between - pron - obey the same chemical and physical law regardless of whether - pron - be a part of the living or non - live world .
to understand how element come together , - pron - must first discuss the small component or building block of an element , the atom .
an atom be the small unit of matter that retain all of the chemical property of an element .
for example , one gold atom have all of the property of gold in that - pron - be a solid metal at room temperature .
a gold coin be simply a very large number of gold atom mold into the shape of a coin and contain small amount of other element know as impurity .
gold atom can not be break down into anything small while still retain the property of gold .
an atom be compose of two region  the nucleus , which be in the center of the atom and contain proton and neutron , and the outermost region of the atom which hold - pron - electron in orbit around the nucleus , as illustrate in figure two  .  two .
atom contain proton , electron , and neutron , among other subatomic particle .
the only exception be hydrogen ( h ) , which be make of one proton and one electron with no neutron .
element , such as helium , depict here , be make up of atom .
atom be make up of proton and neutron locate within the nucleus , with electron in orbital surround the nucleus .
proton and neutron have approximately the same mass , about one  .  six  seven å~ one  zero - two  four gram .
scientist arbitrarily define this amount of mass as one atomic mass unit ( amu ) or one dalton , as show in table two  .  two .
although similar in mass , proton and neutron differ in - pron - electric charge .
a proton be positively charge whereas a neutron be uncharged .
therefore , the number of neutron in an atom contribute significantly to - pron - mass , but not to - pron - charge .
electron be much small in mass than proton , weigh only nine  .  one  one å~ one  zero - two  eight gram , or about one  /  one  eight  zero  zero of an atomic mass unit .
hence , - pron - do not contribute much to an element
's overall atomic mass .
therefore , when consider atomic mass , - pron - be customary to ignore the mass of any electron and calculate the atom 's mass base on the number of proton and neutron alone .
although not significant contributor to mass , electron do contribute greatly to the atom 's charge , as each electron have a negative charge equal to the positive charge of a proton .
in uncharged , neutral atom , the number of electron orbit the nucleus be equal to the number of proton inside the nucleus .
in these atom , the positive and negative charge cancel each other out , lead to an atom with no net charge .
account for the size of proton , neutron , and electron , most of the volume of an atom — great than nine  nine percent
— be , in fact , empty space .
with all this empty space , one may ask why so - call solid object do not just pass through one another .
the reason - pron - do not be that the electron that surround all atom be negatively charge and negative charge repel each other .
atom of each element contain a characteristic number of proton and electron .
the number of proton determine an element 's atomic number and be use to distinguish one element from another .
the number of neutron be variable , result in isotope , which be different form of the same atom that vary only in the number of neutron - pron - possess .
together , the number of proton and the number of neutron determine an element 's mass number , as illustrate in figure two  .  three .
note that the small contribution of mass from electron be disregard in calculate the mass number .
this approximation of mass can be use to easily calculate how many neutron an element have by simply subtract the number of proton from the mass number .
since an element 's isotope will have slightly different mass number , scientist also determine the atomic mass , which be the calculated mean of the mass number for - pron - naturally occur isotope .
often , the result number contain a fraction .
for example , the atomic mass of chlorine ( cl ) be three  five  .  four  five because chlorine be compose of several isotope , some ( the majority ) with atomic mass three  five ( one  seven proton and one  eight neutron ) and some with atomic mass three  seven ( one  seven proton and two  zero neutron ) .
isotope be different form of an element that have the same number of proton but a different number of neutron .
some element — such as carbon , potassium , and uranium — have naturally occur isotope .
carbon -  one  two contain six proton , six neutron , and six electron  therefore , - pron - have a mass number of one  two ( six proton and six neutron ) .
carbon -  one  four contain six proton , eight neutron , and six electron  - pron - atomic mass be one  four ( six proton and eight neutron ) .
these two alternate form of carbon be isotope .
some isotope may emit neutron , proton , and electron , and attain a more stable atomic configuration ( low level of potential energy )  these be radioactive isotope , or radioisotope .
radioactive decay ( carbon -  one  four lose neutron to eventually become carbon -  one  two ) describe the energy loss that occur when an unstable atom 's nucleus release radiation .
carbon be normally present in the atmosphere in the form of gaseous compound like carbon dioxide and methane .
carbon -  one  four
( one  four c ) be a naturally occur radioisotope that be create in the atmosphere from atmospheric one  four n ( nitrogen ) by the addition of a neutron and the loss of a proton because of cosmic ray .
this be a continuous process , so more one  four c be always be create .
as a live organism incorporate one  four c initially as carbon dioxide fix in the process of photosynthesis , the relative amount of one  four c in - pron - body be equal to the concentration of one  four c in the atmosphere .
when an organism die , - pron - be no longer ingest one  four c , so the ratio between one  four c and one  two c will decline as one  four c decay gradually to one  four n by a process call beta decay — the emission of electron or positron .
this decay give off energy in a slow process .
after approximately five  ,  seven  three  zero year , half of the start concentration of one  four c will have be convert back to one  four n .
the time - pron - take for half of the original concentration of an isotope to decay back to - pron - more stable form be call - pron - half - life .
because the half - life of one  four c be long , - pron - be use to date formerly live object such as old bone or wood .
compare the ratio of the one  four c concentration find in an object to the amount of one  four c detect in the atmosphere , the amount of the isotope that have not yet decay can be determine .
on the basis of this amount , the age of the material , such as the pygmy mammoth show in figure two  .  four , can be calculate with accuracy if - pron - be not much old than about five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year .
other element have isotope with different half life .
for example , four  zero k ( potassium -  four  zero ) have a half - life of one  .  two  five billion year , and two  three  five u ( uranium two  three  five ) have a half - life of about seven  zero  zero million year .
through the use of radiometric dating , scientist can study the age of fossil or other remain of extinct organism to understand how organism have evolve from early specie .
the age of carbon - contain remain less than about five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year old , such as this pygmy mammoth , can be determine use carbon date .
the different element be organize and display in the periodic table .
devise by russian chemist dmitri mendeleev ( one  eight  three  four – one  nine  zero  seven ) in one  eight  six  nine , the table group element that , although unique , share certain chemical property with other element .
the property of element be responsible for - pron - physical state at room temperature  - pron - may be gas , solid , or liquid .
element also have specific chemical reactivity , the ability to combine and to chemically bond with each other .
in the periodic table , show in figure two  .  five , the element be organize and display accord to - pron - atomic number and be arrange in a series of row and column base on share chemical and physical property .
in addition to provide the atomic number for each element , the periodic table also display the element 's atomic mass .
look at carbon , for example , - pron - symbol ( c ) and name appear , as well as - pron - atomic number of six ( in the upper left - hand corner ) and - pron - atomic mass of one  two  .  one  one .
the periodic table show the atomic mass and atomic number of each element .
the atomic number appear above the symbol for the element and the approximate atomic mass appear below - pron - .
the periodic table group element accord to chemical property .
the difference in chemical reactivity between the element be base on the number and spatial distribution of an atom 's electron .
atom that chemically react and bond to each other form molecule .
molecule be simply two or more atom chemically bond together .
logically , when two atom chemically bond to form a molecule , - pron - electron , which form the outermost region of each atom , come together first as the atom form a chemical bond .
- pron - should be stress that there be a connection between the number of proton in an element , the atomic number that distinguish one element from another , and the number of electron - pron - have .
in all electrically neutral atom , the number of electron be the same as the number of proton .
thus , each element , at least when electrically neutral , have a characteristic number of electron equal to - pron - atomic number .
an early model of the atom be develop in one  nine  one  three by danish scientist niels bohr ( one  eight  eight  five – one  nine  six  two ) .
the bohr model show the atom as a central nucleus contain proton and neutron , with the electron in circular orbital at specific distance from the nucleus , as illustrate in figure two  .  six .
these orbit form electron shell or energy level , which be a way of visualize the number of electron in the outermost shell .
these energy level be designate by a number and the symbol " n .
"
for example , one n represent the first energy level locate close to the nucleus .
the bohr model be develop by niels bohrs in one  nine  one  three .
in this model , electron exist within principal shell .
an electron normally exist in the low energy shell available , which be the one close to the nucleus .
energy from a photon of light can bump - pron - up to a high energy shell , but this situation be unstable , and the electron quickly decay back to the ground state .
in the process , a photon of light be release .
electron fill orbital in a consistent order  - pron - first fill the orbital close to the nucleus , then - pron - continue to fill orbital of increase energy further from the nucleus .
if there be multiple orbital of equal energy , - pron - will be fill with one electron in each energy level before a second electron be add .
the electron of the outermost energy level determine the energetic stability of the atom and - pron - tendency to form chemical bond with other atom to form molecule .
under standard condition , atom fill the inner shell first , often result in a variable number of electron in the outermost shell .
the innermost shell have a maximum of two electron but the next two electron shell can each have a maximum of eight electron .
this be know as the octet rule , which state , with the exception of the innermost shell , that atom be more stable energetically when - pron - have eight electron in - pron - valence shell , the outermost electron shell .
example of some neutral atom and - pron - electron configuration be show in figure two  .  seven .
notice that in this figure two  .  seven , helium have a complete outer electron shell , with two electron fill - pron - first and only shell .
similarly , neon have a complete outer two n shell contain eight electron .
in contrast , chlorine and sodium have seven and one in - pron - outer shell , respectively , but theoretically - pron - would be more energetically stable if - pron - follow the octet rule and have eight .
bohr diagram indicate how many electron fill each principal shell .
group one  eight element ( helium , neon , and argon be show ) have a full outer , or valence , shell .
a full valence shell be the most stable electron configuration .
element in other group have partially fill valence shell and gain or lose electron to achieve a stable electron configuration .
an atom may give , take , or share electron with another atom to achieve a full valence shell , the most stable electron configuration .
look at this figure , how many electron do element in group one need to lose in order to achieve a stable electron configuration ?
how many electron do element in group one  four and one  seven need to gain to achieve a stable configuration ?
understand that the organization of the periodic table be base on the total number of proton ( and electron ) help - pron - know how electron be distribute among the outer shell .
the periodic table be arrange in column and row base on the number of electron and where these electron be locate .
take a close look at the some of the element in the table ' far right column in figure two  .  five .
the group one  eight atom helium ( - pron - ) , neon ( ne ) , and argon ( ar ) all have fill outer electron shell , make - pron - unnecessary for - pron - to share electron with other atom to attain stability  - pron - be highly stable as single atom .
- pron - non - reactivity have result in - pron - be name the inert gas ( or noble gas ) .
compare this to the group one element in the left - hand column .
these element , include hydrogen ( h ) , lithium ( li ) , and sodium ( na ) , all have one electron in - pron - outermost shell .
that mean that - pron - can achieve a stable configuration and a fill outer shell by donate or share one electron with another atom or a molecule such as water .
hydrogen will donate or share - pron - electron to achieve this configuration , while lithium and sodium will donate - pron - electron to become stable .
as a result of lose a negatively charge electron , - pron - become positively charge ion .
group one  seven element , include fluorine and chlorine , have seven electron in - pron - outmost shell , so - pron - tend to fill this shell with an electron from other atom or molecule , make - pron - negatively charge ion .
group one  four element , of which carbon be the most important to living system , have four electron in - pron - outer shell allow - pron - to make several covalent bond ( discuss below ) with other atom .
thus , the column of the periodic table represent the potential share state of these elements' outer electron shell that be responsible for - pron - similar chemical characteristic .
although useful to explain the reactivity and chemical bonding of certain element , the bohr model of the atom do not accurately reflect how electron be spatially distribute surround the nucleus .
- pron - do not circle the nucleus like the earth orbit the sun , but be find in electron orbital .
these relatively complex shape result from the fact that electron behave not just like particle , but also like wave .
mathematical equation from quantum mechanic know as wave function can predict within a certain level of probability where an electron may be at any give time .
the area where an electron be most likely to be find be call - pron - orbital .
recall that the bohr model depict an atom 's electron shell configuration .
within each electron shell be subshell , and each subshell have a specify number of orbital contain electron .
while - pron - be impossible to calculate exactly where an electron be locate , scientist know that - pron - be most probably locate within - pron - orbital path .
subshell be designate by the letter s , p , d , and f . the s subshell be spherical in shape and have one orbital .
principal shell one n have only a single s orbital , which can hold two electron .
principal shell two n have one s and one p subshell , and can hold a total of eight electron .
the p subshell have three dumbbell - shape orbital , as illustrate in figure two  .  eight .
subshell d and f have more complex shape and contain five and seven orbital , respectively .
these be not show in the illustration .
principal shell three n have s , p , and d subshell and can hold one  eight electron .
principal shell four n have s , p , d and f orbital and can hold three  two electron .
move away from the nucleus , the number of electron and orbital find in the energy level increase .
progress from one atom to the next in the periodic table , the electron structure can be work out by fit an extra electron into the next available orbital .
the s subshell be shape like sphere .
both the one n and two n principal shell have an s orbital , but the size of the sphere be large in the two n orbital .
each sphere be a single orbital .
p subshell be make up of three dumbbellshap orbital .
principal shell two n have a p subshell , but shell one do not .
the close orbital to the nucleus , call the one orbital , can hold up to two electron .
this orbital be equivalent to the innermost electron shell of the bohr model of the atom .
- pron - be call the one orbital because - pron - be spherical around the nucleus .
the one orbital be the close orbital to the nucleus , and - pron - be always fill first , before any other orbital can be fill .
hydrogen have one electron  therefore , - pron - have only one spot within the one s orbital occupy .
this be designate as one s one , where the superscript one refer to the one electron within the one orbital .
helium have two electron  therefore , - pron - can completely fill the one orbital with - pron - two electron .
this be designate as one s two , refer to the two electron of helium in the one orbital .
on the periodic table figure two  .  five , hydrogen and helium be the only two element in the first row ( period )  this be because - pron - only have electron in - pron - first shell , the one orbital .
hydrogen and helium be the only two element that have the one and no other electron orbital in the electrically neutral state .
the second electron shell may contain eight electron .
this shell contain another spherical s
orbital and three " dumbbell " shape p orbital , each of which can hold two electron , as show in figure two  .  eight .
after the one orbital be fill , the second electron shell be fill , first fill - pron - two s orbital and then - pron - three p orbital .
when fill the p orbital , each take a single electron  once each p orbital have an electron , a second may be add .
lithium ( li ) contain three electron that occupy the first and second shell .
two electron fill the one orbital , and the third electron then fill the two s orbital .
- pron - electron configuration be one s two  two s one .
neon ( ne ) , on the other hand , have a total of ten electron  two be in - pron - innermost one s orbital and eight fill - pron - second shell ( two each in the two s and three p orbital )  thus , - pron - be an inert gas and energetically stable as a single atom that will rarely form a chemical bond with other atom .
large element have additional orbital , make up the third electron shell .
while the concept of electron shell and orbital be closely relate , orbital provide a more accurate depiction of the electron configuration of an atom because the orbital model specify the different shape and special orientation of all the place that electron may occupy .
all element be most stable when - pron - outermost shell be fill with electron accord to the octet rule .
this be because - pron - be energetically favorable for atom to be in that configuration
and - pron - make - pron - stable .
however , since not all element have enough electron to fill - pron - outermost shell , atom form chemical bond with other atom thereby obtain the electron - pron - need to attain a stable electron configuration .
when two or more atom chemically bond with each other , the resultant chemical structure be a molecule .
the familiar water molecule , h two o , consist of two hydrogen atom and one oxygen atom  these bond together to form water , as illustrate in figure two  .  nine .
atom can form molecule by donate , accept , or share electron to fill - pron - outer shell .
two or more atom may bond with each other to form a molecule .
when two hydrogen and an oxygen share electron via covalent bond , a water molecule be form .
chemical reaction occur when two or more atom bond together to form molecule or when bond atom be break apart .
the substance use in the beginning of a chemical reaction be call the reactant ( usually find on the left side of a chemical equation ) , and the substance find at the end of the reaction be know as the product ( usually find on the right side of a chemical equation ) .
an arrow be typically draw between the reactant and product to indicate the direction of the chemical reaction  this direction be not always a " one - way street .
"
for the creation of the water molecule show above , the chemical equation would be  an example of a simple chemical reaction be the break down of hydrogen peroxide molecule , each of which consist of two hydrogen atom bond to two oxygen atom ( h two o two ) .
the reactant hydrogen peroxide be break down into water , contain one oxygen atom bind to two hydrogen atom ( h two o ) , and oxygen , which consist of two bond oxygen atom ( o two ) .
in the equation below , the reaction include two hydrogen peroxide molecule and two water molecule .
this be an example of a balanced chemical equation , wherein the number of atom of each element be the same on each side of the equation .
accord to the law of conservation of matter , the number of atom before and after a chemical reaction should be equal , such that no atom be , under normal circumstance , create or destroy .
even though all of the reactant and product of this reaction be molecule ( each atom remain bond to at least one other atom ) , in this reaction only hydrogen peroxide and water be representative of compound  - pron - contain atom of more than one type of element .
molecular oxygen , on the other hand , as show in figure two  .  one  zero  , consist of two doubly bond oxygen atom and be not classify as a compound but as a mononuclear molecule .
the oxygen atom in an o two molecule be join by a double bond .
some chemical reaction , such as the one show above , can proceed in one direction until the reactant be all use up .
the equation that describe these reaction contain a unidirectional arrow and be irreversible .
reversible reaction be those that can go in either direction .
in reversible reaction , reactant be turn into product , but when the concentration of product go beyond a certain threshold ( characteristic of the particular reaction ) , some of these product will be convert back into reactant  at this point , the designation of product and reactant be reverse .
this back and forth continue until a certain relative balance between reactant and product occur — a state call equilibrium .
these situation of reversible reaction be often denote by a chemical equation with a double headed arrow pointing towards both the reactant and product .
for example , in human blood , excess hydrogen ion ( h+ ) bind to bicarbonate ion ( hco three - ) form an equilibrium state with carbonic acid ( h two co three ) .
if carbonic acid be add to this system , some of - pron - would be convert to bicarbonate and hydrogen ion .
in biological reaction , however , equilibrium be rarely obtain because the concentration of the reactant or product or both be constantly change , often with a product of one reaction be a reactant for another .
to return to the example of excess hydrogen ion in the blood , the formation of carbonic acid will be the major direction of the reaction .
however , the carbonic acid can also leave the body as carbon dioxide gas ( via exhalation ) instead of be convert back to bicarbonate ion , thus drive the reaction to the right by the chemical law know as law of mass action .
these reaction be important for maintain the homeostasis of - pron - blood .
some atom be more stable when - pron - gain or lose an electron ( or possibly two ) and form ion .
this fill - pron - outermost electron shell and make - pron - energetically more stable .
because the number of electron do not equal the number of proton , each ion have a net charge .
cation be positive ion that be form by lose electron .
negative ion be form by gain electron and be call anion .
anion be designate by - pron - elemental name be alter to end in " - ide
"  the anion of chlorine be call chloride , and the anion of sulfur be call sulfide , for example .
this movement of electron from one element to another be refer to as electron transfer .
as figure two  .  one  one illustrate , sodium ( na ) only have one electron in - pron - outer electron shell .
- pron - take less energy for sodium to donate that one electron than - pron - do to accept seven more electron to fill the outer shell .
if sodium lose an electron , - pron - now have one  one proton , one  one neutron , and only one  zero electron , leave - pron - with an overall charge of + one .
- pron - be now refer to as a sodium ion .
chlorine ( cl ) in - pron - low energy state ( call the ground state ) have seven electron in - pron - outer shell .
again , - pron - be more energy - efficient for chlorine to gain one electron than to lose seven .
therefore , - pron - tend to gain an electron to create an ion with one  seven proton , one  seven neutron , and one  eight electron , give - pron - a net negative ( – one ) charge .
- pron - be now refer to as a chloride ion .
in this example , sodium will donate - pron - one electron to empty - pron - shell , and chlorine will accept that electron to fill - pron - shell .
both ion now satisfy the octet rule and have complete outermost shell .
because the number of electron be no longer equal to the number of proton , each be now an ion and have a + one ( sodium cation ) or – one ( chloride anion ) charge .
note that these transaction can normally only take place simultaneously  in order for a sodium atom to lose an electron , - pron - must be in the presence of a suitable recipient like a chlorine atom .
in the formation of an ionic compound , metal lose electron and nonmetal gain electron to achieve an octet .
ionic bond be form between ion with opposite charge .
for instance , positively charge sodium ion and negatively charge chloride ion bond together to make crystal of sodium chloride , or table salt , create a crystalline molecule with zero net charge .
certain salt be refer to in physiology as electrolyte ( include sodium , potassium , and calcium ) , ion necessary for nerve impulse conduction , muscle contraction and water balance .
many sport drink and dietary supplement provide these ion to replace those lose from the body via sweat during exercise .
another way the octet rule can be satisfied be by the sharing of electron between atom to form covalent bond .
these bond be strong and much more common than ionic bond in the molecule of live organism .
covalent bond be commonly find in carbon - base organic molecule , such as - pron - dna and protein .
covalent bond be also find in inorganic molecule like h two o , co two , and o two .
one , two , or three pair of electron may be share , make single , double , and triple bond , respectively .
the more covalent bond between two atom , the strong - pron - connection .
thus , triple bond be the strong .
the strength of different level of covalent bonding be one of the main reason live organism have a difficult time in acquire nitrogen for use in construct - pron - molecule , even though molecular nitrogen , n two , be the most abundant gas in the atmosphere .
molecular nitrogen consist of two nitrogen atom triple bond to each other and , as with all molecule , the sharing of these three pair of electron between the two nitrogen atom allow for the filling of - pron - outer electron shell , make the molecule more stable than the individual nitrogen atom .
this strong triple bond make - pron - difficult for live system to break apart this nitrogen in order to use - pron - as constituent of protein and dna .
the formation of water molecule provide an example of covalent bonding .
the hydrogen and oxygen atom that combine to form water molecule be bind together by covalent bond , as show in figure two  .  nine .
the electron from the hydrogen split - pron - time between the incomplete outer shell of the hydrogen atom and the incomplete outer shell of the oxygen atom .
to completely fill the outer shell of oxygen , which have six electron in - pron - outer shell but which would be more stable with eight , two electron ( one from each hydrogen atom ) be need  hence the well - know formula
h two o .
the electron be share between the two element to fill the outer shell of each , make both element more stable .
there be two type of covalent bond  polar and nonpolar .
in a polar covalent bond , show in figure two  .  one  two , the electron be unequally share by the atom and be attract more to one nucleus than the other .
because of the unequal distribution of electron between the atom of different element , a slightly positive ( δ+ ) or slightly negative ( δ– ) charge develop .
this partial charge be an important property of water and account for many of - pron - characteristic .
water be a polar molecule , with the hydrogen atom acquire a partial positive charge and the oxygen a partial negative charge .
this occur because the nucleus of the oxygen atom be more attractive to the electron of the hydrogen atom than the hydrogen nucleus be to the oxygen 's electron .
thus oxygen have a high electronegativity than hydrogen and the share electron spend more time in the vicinity of the oxygen nucleus than - pron - do near the nucleus of the hydrogen atom , give the atom of oxygen and hydrogen slightly negative and positive charge , respectively .
another way of state this be that the probability of find a share electron near an oxygen nucleus be more likely than find - pron - near a hydrogen nucleus .
either way , the atom 's relative electronegativity contribute to the development of partial charge whenever one element be significantly more electronegative than the other , and the charge generate by these polar bond may then be use for the formation of hydrogen bond base on the attraction of opposite partial charge .
( hydrogen bond , which be discuss in detail below , be weak bond between slightly positively charge hydrogen atom to slightly negatively charge atom in other molecule . )
since macromolecule often have atom within - pron - that differ in electronegativity , polar bond be often present in organic molecule .
nonpolar covalent bond form between two atom of the same element or between different element that share electron equally .
for example , molecular oxygen ( o two ) be nonpolar because the electron will be equally distribute between the two oxygen atom .
another example of a nonpolar covalent bond be methane ( ch four ) , also show in figure two  .  one  two .
carbon have four electron in - pron - outermost shell and need four more to fill - pron - .
- pron - get these four from four hydrogen atom , each atom provide one , make a stable outer shell of eight electron .
carbon and hydrogen do not have the same electronegativity but be similar  thus , nonpolar bond form .
the hydrogen atom each need one electron for - pron - outermost shell , which be fill when - pron - contain two electron .
these element share the electron equally among the carbon and the hydrogen atom , create a nonpolar covalent molecule .
whether a molecule be polar or nonpolar depend both on bond type and molecular shape .
both water and carbon dioxide have polar covalent bond , but carbon dioxide be linear , so the partial charge on the molecule cancel each other out .
ionic and covalent bond between element require energy to break .
ionic bond be not as strong as covalent , which determine - pron - behavior in biological system .
however , not all bond be ionic or covalent bond .
weak bond can also form between molecule .
two weak bond that occur frequently be hydrogen bond and van der waals interaction .
without these two type of bond , life as - pron - know - pron - would not exist .
hydrogen bond provide many of the critical , lifesustain property of water and also stabilize the structure of protein and dna , the building block of cell .
when polar covalent bond contain hydrogen form , the hydrogen in that bond have a slightly positive charge because hydrogen 's electron be pull more strongly toward the other element and away from the hydrogen .
because the hydrogen be slightly positive , - pron - will be attract to neighbor negative charge .
when this happen , a weak interaction occur between the δ+of the hydrogen from one molecule and the δ– charge on the more electronegative atom of another molecule , usually oxygen or nitrogen , or within the same molecule .
this interaction be call a hydrogen bond .
this type of bond be common and occur regularly between water molecule .
individual hydrogen bond be weak and easily broken  however , - pron - occur in very large number in water and in organic polymer , create a major force in combination .
hydrogen bond be also responsible for zip together the dna double helix .
like hydrogen bond , van der waal interaction be weak attraction or interaction between molecule .
van der waals attraction can occur between any two or more molecule and be dependent on slight fluctuation of the electron density , which be not always symmetrical around an atom .
for these attraction to happen , the molecule need to be very close to one another .
these bond — along with ionic , covalent , and hydrogen bond
— contribute to the three - dimensional structure of the protein in - pron - cell that be necessary for - pron - proper function .
pharmaceutical chemist be responsible for the development of new drug and try to determine the mode of action of both old and new drug .
- pron - be involve in every step of the drug development process .
drug can be find in the natural environment or can be synthesize in the laboratory .
in many case , potential drug find in nature be change chemically in the laboratory to make - pron - safe and more effective , and sometimes synthetic version of drug substitute for the version find in nature .
after the initial discovery or synthesis of a drug , the chemist then develop the drug , perhaps chemically alter - pron - , test - pron - to see if the drug be toxic , and then design method for efficient large - scale production .
then , the process of get the drug approve for human use begin .
in the united states , drug approval be handle by the food and drug administration ( fda ) and involve a series of large - scale experiment use human subject to make sure the drug be not harmful and effectively treat the condition - pron - aim to treat .
this process often take several year and require the participation of physician and scientist , in addition to chemist , to complete testing and gain approval .
an example of a drug that be originally discover in a live organism be paclitaxel ( taxol ) , an anti - cancer drug use to treat breast cancer .
this drug be discover in the bark of the pacific yew tree .
another example be aspirin , originally isolate from willow tree bark .
find drug often mean test hundred of sample of plant , fungus , and other form of life to see if any biologically active compound be find within - pron - .
sometimes , traditional medicine can give modern medicine clue to where an active compound can be find .
for example , the use of willow bark to make medicine have be know for thousand of year , date back to ancient egypt .
- pron - be not until the late one  eight  zero  zero , however , that the aspirin molecule , know as acetylsalicylic acid , be purify and market for human use .
occasionally , drug develop for one use be find to have unforeseen effect that allow these drug to be use in other , unrelated way .
for example , the drug minoxidil ( rogaine ) be originally develop to treat high blood pressure .
when test on human , - pron - be notice that individual take the drug would grow new hair .
eventually the drug be market to man and woman with baldness to restore lose hair .
the career of the pharmaceutical chemist may involve detective work , experimentation , and drug development , all with the goal of make human being healthy .
why do scientist spend time look for water on other planet ?
why be water so important ?
- pron - be because water be essential to life as - pron - know - pron - .
water be one of the more abundant molecule and the one most critical to life on earth .
approximately six  zero – seven  zero percent of the human body be make up of water .
without - pron - , life as - pron - know - pron - simply would not exist .
the polarity of the water molecule and - pron - result hydrogen bonding make water a unique substance with special property that be intimately tie to the process of life .
life originally evolve in a watery environment , and most of an organism 's cellular chemistry and metabolism occur inside the watery content of the cell 's cytoplasm .
special property of water be - pron - high heat capacity and heat of vaporization , - pron - ability to dissolve polar molecule , - pron - cohesive and adhesive property , and - pron - dissociation into ion that lead to the generation of ph . understand these characteristic of water help to elucidate - pron - importance in maintain life .
one of water 's important property be that - pron - be compose of polar molecule  the hydrogen and oxygen within water molecule ( h two o ) form polar covalent bond .
while there be no net charge to a water molecule , the polarity of water create a slightly positive charge on hydrogen and a slightly negative charge on oxygen , contribute to water 's property of attraction .
water 's charge be generate because oxygen be more electronegative than hydrogen , make - pron - more likely that a share electron would be find near the oxygen nucleus than the hydrogen nucleus , thus generate the partial negative charge near the oxygen .
as a result of water 's polarity , each water molecule attract other water molecule because of the opposite charge between water molecule , form hydrogen bond .
water also attract or be attract to other polar molecule and ion .
a polar substance that interact readily with or dissolve in water be refer to as hydrophilic ( hydro - = " water "  - philic = " love " ) .
in contrast , non - polar molecule such as oil and fat do not interact well with water , as show in figure two  .  one  three and separate from - pron - rather than dissolve in - pron - , as - pron - see in salad dressing contain oil and vinegar ( an acidic water solution ) .
these nonpolar compound be call hydrophobic ( hydro - = " water "  - phobic = " fear " ) .
the formation of hydrogen bond be an important quality of the liquid water that be crucial to life as - pron - know - pron - .
as water molecule make hydrogen bond with each other , water take on some unique chemical characteristic compare to other liquid and , since live thing have a high water content , understand these chemical feature be key to understand life .
in liquid water , hydrogen bond be constantly form and break as the water molecule slide past each other .
the breaking of these bond be cause by the motion ( kinetic energy ) of the water molecule due to the heat contain in the system .
when the heat be raise as water be boil , the high kinetic energy of the water molecule cause the hydrogen bond to break completely and allow water molecule to escape into the air as gas ( steam or water vapor ) .
on the other hand , when the temperature of water be reduce and water freeze , the water molecule form a crystalline structure maintain by hydrogen bonding ( there be not enough energy to break the hydrogen bond ) that make ice less dense than liquid water , a phenomenon not see in the solidification of other liquid .
oil and water do not mix .
as this macro image of oil and water show , oil do not dissolve in water but form droplet instead .
this be due to - pron - be a nonpolar compound .
( credit  gautam dogra ) .
the formation of hydrogen bond be an important quality of the liquid water that be crucial to life as - pron - know - pron - .
as water molecule make hydrogen bond with each other , water take on some unique chemical characteristic compare to other liquid and , since live thing have a high water content , understand these chemical feature be key to understand life .
in liquid water , hydrogen bond be constantly form and break as the water molecule slide past each other .
the breaking of these bond be cause by the motion ( kinetic energy ) of the water molecule due to the heat contain in the system .
when the heat be raise as water be boil , the high kinetic energy of the water molecule cause the hydrogen bond to break completely and allow water molecule to escape into the air as gas ( steam or water vapor ) .
on the other hand , when the temperature of water be reduce and water freeze , the water molecule form a crystalline structure maintain by hydrogen bonding ( there be not enough energy to break the hydrogen bond ) that make ice less dense than liquid water , a phenomenon not see in the solidification of other liquid .
water 's low density in - pron - solid form be due to the way hydrogen bond be orient as - pron - freeze  the water molecule be push farther apart compare to liquid water .
with most other liquid , solidification when the temperature drop include the lowering of kinetic energy between molecule , allow - pron - to pack even more tightly than in liquid form and give the solid a great density than the liquid .
the low density of ice , illustrate and picture in figure two  .  one  four , an anomaly , cause - pron - to float at the surface of liquid water , such as in an iceberg or in the ice cube in a glass of ice water .
in lake and pond , ice will form on the surface of the water create an insulate barrier that protect the animal and plant life in the pond from freezing .
without this layer of insulate ice , plant and animal live in the pond would freeze in the solid block of ice and could not survive .
the detrimental effect of freeze on live organism be cause by the expansion of ice relative to liquid water .
the ice crystal that form upon freeze rupture the delicate membrane essential for the function of living cell , irreversibly damage - pron - .
cell can only survive freezing if the water in - pron - be temporarily replace by another liquid like glycerol .
hydrogen bonding make ice less dense than liquid water .
the ( a ) lattice structure of ice make - pron - less dense than the freely flow molecule of liquid water , enable - pron - to ( b ) float on water .
water 's
high heat capacity be a property cause by hydrogen bonding among water molecule .
water have the highest specific heat capacity of any liquid .
specific heat be define as the amount of heat one gram of a substance must absorb or lose to change - pron - temperature by one degree celsius .
for water , this amount be one calorie .
- pron - therefore take water a long time to heat and long time to cool .
in fact , the specific heat capacity of water be about five time more than that of sand .
this explain why the land cool faster than the sea .
due to - pron - high heat capacity , water be use by warm blooded animal to more evenly disperse heat in - pron - body  - pron - act in a similar manner to a car 's cooling system , transport heat from warm place to cool place , cause the body to maintain a more even temperature .
water also have a high heat of vaporization , the amount of energy require to change one gram of a liquid substance to a gas .
a considerable amount of heat energy ( five  eight  six cal ) be require to accomplish this change in water .
this process occur on the surface of water .
as liquid water heat up , hydrogen bonding make - pron - difficult to separate the liquid water molecule from each other , which be require for - pron - to enter - pron - gaseous phase ( steam ) .
as a result , water act as a heat sink or heat reservoir and require much more heat to boil than do a liquid such as ethanol ( grain alcohol ) , whose hydrogen bond with other ethanol molecule be weak than water 's hydrogen bonding .
eventually , as water reach - pron - boiling point of one  zero  zero åã celsius ( two  one  two åã fahrenheit ) , the heat be able to break the hydrogen bond between the water molecule , and the kinetic energy ( motion ) between the water molecule allow - pron - to escape from the liquid as a gas .
even when below - pron - boiling point , water 's individual molecule acquire enough energy from other water molecule such that some surface water molecule can escape and vaporize  this process be know as evaporation .
the fact that hydrogen bond need to be break for water to evaporate mean that a substantial amount of energy be use in the process .
as the water evaporate , energy be take up by the process , cool the environment where the evaporation be take place .
in many live organism , include in human , the evaporation of sweat , which be nine  zero percent water , allow the organism to cool so that homeostasis of body temperature can be maintain .
since water be a polar molecule with slightly positive and slightly negative charge , ion and polar molecule can readily dissolve in - pron - .
therefore , water be refer to as a solvent , a substance capable of dissolve other polar molecule and ionic compound .
the charge associate with these molecule will form hydrogen bond with water , surround the particle with water molecule .
this be refer to as a sphere of hydration , or a hydration shell , as illustrate in figure two  .  one  five and serve to keep the particle separate or disperse in the water .
when ionic compound be add to water , the individual ion react with the polar region of the water molecule and - pron - ionic bond be disrupt in the process of dissociation .
dissociation occur when atom or group of atom break off from molecule and form ion .
consider table salt ( nacl , or sodium chloride )  when nacl crystal be add to water , the molecule of nacl dissociate into na+ and cl– ion , and sphere of hydration form around the ion , illustrate in figure two  .  one  five .
the positively charge sodium ion be surround by the partially negative charge of the water molecule 's oxygen .
the negatively charge chloride ion be surround by the partially positive charge of the hydrogen on the water molecule .
have - pron - ever fill a glass of water to the very top and then slowly add a few more drop ?
before - pron - overflow , the water form a dome - like shape above the rim of the glass .
this water can stay above the glass because of the property of cohesion .
in cohesion , water molecule be attract to each other ( because of hydrogen bonding ) , keep the molecule together at the liquid - gas ( water - air ) interface , although there be no more room in the glass .
cohesion allow for the development of surface tension , the capacity of a substance to withstand be rupture when place under tension or stress .
this be also why water form droplet when place on a dry surface rather than be flatten out by gravity .
when a small scrap of paper be place onto the droplet of water , the paper float on top of the water droplet even though paper be denser ( heavy ) than the water .
cohesion and surface tension keep the hydrogen bond of water molecule intact and support the item float on the top .
- pron - ' even possible to " float
" a needle on top of a glass of water if - pron - be place gently without break the surface tension , as show in figure two  .  one  six .
these cohesive force be relate to water 's property of adhesion , or the attraction between water molecule and other molecule .
this attraction be sometimes strong than water 's cohesive force , especially when the water be expose to charge surface such as those find on the inside of thin glass tube know as capillary tube .
adhesion be observe when water " climb " up the tube place in a glass of water  notice that the water appear to be high on the side of the tube than in the middle .
this be because the water molecule be attract to the charge glass wall of the capillary more than - pron - be to each other and therefore adhere to - pron - .
this type of adhesion be call capillary action , and be illustrate in figure two  .  one  seven .
the weight of the needle be pull the surface downward  at the same time , the surface tension be pull - pron - up , suspend - pron - on the surface of the water and keep - pron - from sink .
notice the indentation in the water around the needle .
these cohesive force be relate to water 's property of adhesion , or the attraction between water molecule and other molecule .
this attraction be sometimes strong than water 's cohesive force , especially when the water be expose to charge surface such as those find on the inside of thin glass tube know as capillary tube .
adhesion be observe when water " climb " up the tube place in a glass of water  notice that the water appear to be high on the side of the tube than in the middle .
this be because the water molecule be attract to the charge glass wall of the capillary more than - pron - be to each other and therefore adhere to - pron - .
this type of adhesion be call capillary action , and be illustrate in figure two  .  one  seven .
capillary action in a glass tube be cause by the adhesive force exert by the internal surface of the glass exceed the cohesive force between the water molecul - pron - . 
why be cohesive and adhesive force important for life ?
cohesive and adhesive force be important for the transport of water from the root to the leaf in plant .
these force create a " pull " on the water column .
this pull result from the tendency of water molecule be evaporate on the surface of the plant to stay connected to water molecule below - pron - , and so - pron - be pull along .
plant use this natural phenomenon to help transport water from - pron - root to - pron - leaf .
without these property of water , plant would be unable to receive the water and the dissolved mineral - pron - require .
in another example , insect such as the water strider , show in figure two  .  one  eight , use the surface tension of water to stay afloat on the surface layer of water and even mate there .
the ph of a solution indicate - pron - acidity or alkalinity .
litmus or ph paper ,
filter paper that have be treat with a natural water - soluble dye so - pron - can be use as a ph indicator , to test how much acid ( acidity ) or base ( alkalinity ) exist in a solution .
- pron - may have even use some to test whether the water in a swimming pool be properly treat .
in both case , the ph test measure the concentration of hydrogen ion in a give solution .
hydrogen ion be spontaneously generate in pure water by the dissociation ( ionization ) of a small percentage of water molecule into equal number of hydrogen ( h+ ) ion and hydroxide ( oh - ) ion .
while the hydroxide ion be keep in solution by - pron - hydrogen bond with other water molecule , the hydrogen ion , consist of naked proton , be immediately attract to un - ionize water molecule , form hydronium ion ( h three  zero + ) .
still , by convention , scientist refer to hydrogen ion and - pron - concentration as if - pron - be free in this state in liquid water .
the concentration of hydrogen ion dissociate from pure water be one å~ one  zero - seven mole h+ ion per liter of water .
mole ( mol ) be a way to express the amount of a substance ( which can be atom , molecule , ion , etc ) , with one mole be equal to six  .  zero  two x one  zero  two  three particle of the substance .
therefore , one mole of water be equal to six  .  zero  two x one  zero  two  three water molecule .
the ph be calculate as the negative of the base one  zero logarithm of this concentration .
the log one  zero of one å~ one  zero - seven be -  seven  .  zero , and the negative of this number ( indicate by the " p " of " ph " ) yield a ph of seven  .  zero , which be also know as neutral ph . the ph inside of human cell and blood be example of two area of the body where near - neutral ph be maintain .
non - neutral ph reading result from dissolve acid or base in water .
use the negative logarithm to generate positive integer , high concentration of hydrogen ion yield a low ph number , whereas low level of hydrogen ion result in a high ph . an acid be a substance that increase the concentration of hydrogen ion ( h+ ) in a solution , usually by have one of - pron - hydrogen atom dissociate .
a base provide either hydroxide ion ( oh– ) or other negatively charge ion that combine with hydrogen ion , reduce - pron - concentration in the solution and thereby raise the ph .
in case where the base release hydroxide ion , these ion bind to free hydrogen ion , generate new water molecule .
the strong the acid , the more readily - pron - donate h+ .
for example , hydrochloric acid ( hcl ) completely dissociate into hydrogen and chloride ion and be highly acidic , whereas the acid in tomato juice or vinegar do not completely dissociate and be consider weak acid .
conversely , strong base be those substance that readily donate oh– or take up hydrogen ion .
sodium hydroxide ( naoh ) and many household cleaner be highly alkaline and give up oh– rapidly when place in water , thereby raise the ph . an example of a weak basic solution be seawater , which have a ph near eight  .  zero , close enough to neutral ph that marine organism adapt to this saline environment be able to thrive in - pron - .
the ph scale be , as previously mention , an inverse logarithm and range from zero to one  four ( figure two  .  one  nine ) .
anything below seven  .  zero ( range from zero  .  zero to six  .  nine ) be acidic , and anything above seven  .  zero ( from seven  .  one to one  four  .  zero ) be alkaline .
extreme in ph in either direction from seven  .  zero be usually consider inhospitable to life .
the ph inside cell ( six  .  eight ) and the ph in the blood ( seven  .  four ) be both very close to neutral .
however , the environment in the stomach be highly acidic , with a ph of one to two .
so how do the cell of the stomach survive in such an acidic environment ?
how do - pron - homeostatically maintain the near neutral ph inside - pron - ?
the answer be that - pron - can not do - pron - and be constantly die .
new stomach cell be constantly produce to replace dead one , which be digest by the stomach acid .
- pron - be estimate that the lining of the human stomach be completely replace every seven to ten day .
the ph scale measure the concentration of hydrogen ion ( h+ ) in a solution .
so how can organism whose body require a near - neutral ph ingest acidic and basic substance ( a human drinking orange juice , for example ) and survive ?
buffer be the key .
buffer readily absorb excess h+ or oh– , keep the ph of the body carefully maintain in the narrow range require for survival .
maintain a constant blood ph be critical to a person 's well - being .
the buffer maintain the ph of human blood involve carbonic acid ( h two co three ) , bicarbonate ion ( hco three – ) , and carbon dioxide ( co two ) .
when bicarbonate ion combine with free hydrogen ion and become carbonic acid , hydrogen ion be remove , moderate ph change .
similarly , as show in figure two  .  two  zero , excess carbonic acid can be convert to carbon dioxide gas and exhale through the lung .
this prevent too many free hydrogen ion from build up in the blood and dangerously reduce the blood 's
ph . likewise , if too much oh– be introduce into the system , carbonic acid will combine with - pron - to create bicarbonate , lower the ph . without this buffer system , the body 's ph would fluctuate enough to put survival in jeopardy .
this diagram show the body 's buffering of blood ph level .
the blue arrow show the process of raise ph as more co two be make .
the purple arrow indicate the reverse process  the lowering of ph as more bicarbonate be create .
other example of buffer be antacid use to combat excess stomach acid .
many of these over - the - counter medication work in the same way as blood buffer , usually with at least one ion capable of absorb hydrogen and moderate ph , bring relief to those that suffer " heartburn " after eat .
the unique property of water that contribute to this capacity to balance ph — as well as water 's other characteristic — be essential to sustain life on earth .
cell be make of many complex molecule call macromolecule , such as protein , nucleic acid ( rna and dna ) , carbohydrate , and lipid .
the macromolecule be a subset of organic molecule ( any carbon - contain liquid , solid , or gas ) that be especially important for life .
the fundamental component for all of these macromolecule be carbon .
the carbon atom have unique property that allow - pron - to form covalent bond to as many as four different atom , make this versatile element ideal to serve as the basic structural component , or " backbone , " of the macromolecule .
individual carbon atom have an incomplete outermost electron shell .
with an atomic number of six ( six electron and six proton ) , the first two electron fill the inner shell , leave four in the second shell .
therefore , carbon atom can form up to four covalent bond with other atom to satisfy the octet rule .
the methane molecule provide an example  - pron - have the chemical formula ch four .
each of - pron - four hydrogen atom form a single covalent bond with the carbon atom by share a pair of electron .
this result in a fill outermost shell .
hydrocarbon be organic molecule consist entirely of carbon and hydrogen , such as methane ( ch four ) describe above .
- pron - often use hydrocarbon in - pron - daily life as fuel — like the propane in a gas grill or the butane in a light .
the many covalent bond between the atom in hydrocarbon store a great amount of energy , which be release when these molecule be burn ( oxidize ) .
methane , an excellent fuel , be the simple hydrocarbon molecule , with a central carbon atom bond to four different hydrogen atom , as illustrate in figure two  .  two  one .
the geometry of the methane molecule , where the atom reside in three dimension , be determine by the shape of - pron - electron orbital .
the carbon and the four hydrogen atom form a shape know as a tetrahedron , with four triangular face  for this reason , methane be describe as have tetrahedral geometry .
methane have a tetrahedral geometry , with each of the four hydrogen atom space one  zero  nine  .  five åã apart .
as the backbone of the large molecule of live thing , hydrocarbon may exist as linear carbon chain , carbon ring , or combination of both .
furthermore , individual carbon - to - carbon bond may be single , double , or triple covalent bond , and each type of bond affect the geometry of the molecule in a specific way .
this three - dimensional shape or conformation of the large molecule of life ( macromolecule ) be critical to how - pron - function .
hydrocarbon chain be form by successive bond between carbon atom and may be branched or unbranched .
furthermore , the overall geometry of the molecule be alter by the different geometry of single , double , and triple covalent bond , illustrate in figure two  .  two  two .
the hydrocarbon ethane , ethene , and ethyne serve as example of how different carbon - to - carbon bond affect the geometry of the molecule .
the name of all three molecule start with the prefix " eth - , " which be the prefix for two carbon hydrocarbon .
the suffix " - ane , " " - ene , " and " - yne
" refer to the presence of single , double , or triple carbon - carbon bond , respectively .
thus , propane , propene , and propyne follow the same pattern with three carbon molecule , butane , butane , and butyne for four carbon molecule , and so on .
double and triple bond change the geometry of the molecule  single bond allow rotation along the axis of the bond , whereas double bond lead to a planar configuration and triple bond to a linear one .
these geometry have a significant impact on the shape a particular molecule can assume .
when carbon form single bond with other atom , the shape be tetrahedral .
when two carbon atom form a double bond , the shape be planar , or flat .
single bond , like those find in ethane , be able to rotate .
double bond , like those find in ethene can not rotate , so the atom on either side be lock in place .
so far , the hydrocarbon - pron - have discuss have be aliphatic hydrocarbon , which consist of linear chain of carbon atom .
another type of hydrocarbon , aromatic hydrocarbon , consist of closed ring of carbon atom .
ring structure be find in hydrocarbon , sometimes with the presence of double bond , which can be see by compare the structure of cyclohexane to benzene in figure two  .  two  three .
example of biological molecule that incorporate the benzene ring include some amino acid and cholesterol and - pron - derivative , include the hormone estrogen and testosterone .
the benzene ring be also find in the herbicide two  ,  four  - d . benzene be a natural component of crude oil and have be classify as a carcinogen .
some hydrocarbon have both aliphatic and aromatic portion  beta - carotene be an example of such a hydrocarbon .
carbon can form five - and six membered ring .
single or double bond may connect the carbon in the ring , and nitrogen may be substitute for carbon .
the three - dimensional placement of atom and chemical bond within organic molecule be central to understand - pron - chemistry .
molecule that share the same chemical formula but differ in the placement ( structure ) of - pron - atom and / or chemical bond be know as isomer .
structural isomer ( like butane and isobutene show in figure two  .  two  four a ) differ in the placement of - pron - covalent bond 
both molecule have four carbon and ten hydrogen ( c four h one  zero ) , but the different arrangement of the atom within the molecule lead to difference in - pron - chemical property .
for example , due to - pron - different chemical property , butane be suit for use as a fuel for cigarette lighter and torch , whereas isobutene be suit for use as a refrigerant and a propellant in spray can .
geometric isomer , on the other hand , have similar placement of - pron - covalent bond but differ in how these bond be make to the surround atom , especially in carbon - to - carbon double bond .
in the simple molecule butene ( c four h eight ) , the two methyl group ( ch three ) can be on either side of the double covalent bond central to the molecule , as illustrate in figure two  .  two  four b .
when the carbon be bind on the same side of the double bond , this be the cis configuration  if - pron - be on opposite side of the double bond , - pron - be a trans configuration .
in the tran configuration , the carbon form a more or less linear structure , whereas the carbon in the cis configuration make a bend ( change in direction ) of the carbon backbone .
in triglyceride ( fat and oil ) , long carbon chain know as fatty acid may contain double bond , which can be in either the cis or tran configuration , illustrate in figure two  .  two  five .
fat with at least one double bond between carbon atom be unsaturated fat .
when some of these bond be in the cis configuration , the result bend in the carbon backbone of the chain mean that triglyceride molecule can not pack tightly , so - pron - remain liquid ( oil ) at room temperature .
on the other hand , triglycerid with tran double bond ( popularly call tran fat ) , have relatively linear fatty acid that be able to pack tightly together at room temperature and form solid fat .
in the human diet , tran fat be link to an increase risk of cardiovascular disease , so many food manufacturer have reduce or eliminate - pron - use in recent year .
in contrast to unsaturated fat , triglyceride without double bond between carbon atom be call saturate fat , mean that - pron - contain all the hydrogen atom available .
saturate fat be a solid at room temperature and usually of animal origin .
these space - fill model show a cis ( oleic acid ) and a tran ( eliadic acid ) fatty acid .
notice the bend in the molecule because by the cis configuration .
enantiomer be molecule that share the same chemical structure and chemical bond but differ in the three - dimensional placement of atom so that - pron - be mirror image .
as show in figure two  .  two  six , an amino acid alanine example , the two structure be non - superimposable .
in nature , only the l - form of amino acid be use to make protein .
some d form of amino acid be see in the cell wall of bacteria , but never in - pron - protein .
similarly , the d - form of glucose be the main product of photosynthesis and the l - form of the molecule be rarely see in nature .
d - alanine and l - alanine be example of enantiomer or mirror image .
only the l - form of amino acid be use to make protein .
functional group be group of atom that occur within molecule and confer specific chemical property to those molecule .
- pron - be find along the " carbon backbone " of macromolecule .
this carbon backbone be form by chain and / or ring of carbon atom with the occasional substitution of an element such as nitrogen or oxygen .
molecule with other element in - pron - carbon backbone be substitute hydrocarbon .
the functional group in a macromolecule be usually attach to the carbon backbone at one or several different place along - pron - chain and / or ring structure .
each of the four type of macromolecule — protein , lipid , carbohydrate , and nucleic acid — have - pron - own characteristic set of functional group that contribute greatly to - pron - differ chemical property and - pron - function in live organism .
a functional group can participate in specific chemical reaction .
some of the important functional group in biological molecule be show in figure two  .  two  seven  - pron - include  hydroxyl , methyl , carbonyl , carboxyl , amino , phosphate , and sulfhydryl .
these group play an important role in the formation of molecule like dna , protein , carbohydrate , and lipid .
functional group be usually classify as hydrophobic or hydrophilic depend on - pron - charge or polarity characteristic .
an example of a hydrophobic group be the non - polar methane molecule .
among the hydrophilic functional group be the carboxyl group find in amino acid , some amino acid side chain , and the fatty acid that form triglyceride and phospholipid .
this carboxyl group ionize to release hydrogen ion ( h+ ) from the cooh group result in the negatively charge coo - group  this contribute to the hydrophilic nature of whatev molecule - pron - be find on .
other functional group , such as the carbonyl group , have a partially negatively charge oxygen atom that may form hydrogen bond with water molecule , again make the molecule more hydrophilic .
the functional group show here be find in many different biological molecule .
hydrogen bond between functional group ( within the same molecule or between different molecule ) be important to the function of many macromolecule and help - pron - to fold properly into and maintain the appropriate shape for function .
hydrogen bond be also involve in various recognition process , such as dna complementary base pairing and the binding of an enzyme to - pron - substrate , as illustrate in figure two  .  two  eight .
matter be anything that occupy space and have mass .
- pron - be make up of element .
all of the nine  two element that occur naturally have unique quality that allow - pron - to combine in various way to create molecule , which in turn combine to form cell , tissue , organ system , and organism .
atom , which consist of proton , neutron , and electron , be the small unit of an element that retain all of the property of that element .
electron can be transfer , share , or because charge disparity between atom to create bond , include ionic , covalent , and hydrogen bond , as well as van der waals interaction .
water have many property that be critical to maintain life .
- pron - be a polar molecule , allow for the formation of hydrogen bond .
hydrogen bond allow ion and other polar molecule to dissolve in water .
therefore , water be an excellent solvent .
the hydrogen bond between water molecule because the water to have a high heat capacity , mean - pron - take a lot of add heat to raise - pron - temperature .
as the temperature rise , the hydrogen bond between water continually break and form anew .
this allow for the overall temperature to remain stable , although energy be add to the system .
water also exhibit a high heat of vaporization , which be key to how organism cool - pron - by the evaporation of sweat .
water 's
cohesive force allow for the property of surface tension , whereas - pron - adhesive property be see as water rise inside capillary tube .
the ph value be a measure of hydrogen ion concentration in a solution and be one of many chemical characteristic that be highly regulated in live organism through homeostasis .
acid and base can change ph value , but buffer tend to moderate the change - pron - because .
these property of water be intimately connect to the biochemical and physical process perform by live organism , and life would be very different if these property be alter , if - pron - could exist at all .
the unique property of carbon make - pron - a central part of biological molecule .
carbon bind to oxygen , hydrogen , and nitrogen covalently to form the many molecule important for cellular function .
carbon have four electron in - pron - outermost shell and can form four bond .
carbon and hydrogen can form hydrocarbon chain or ring .
functional group be group of atom that confer specific property to hydrocarbon ( or substitute hydrocarbon ) chain or ring that define - pron - overall chemical characteristic and function .
food provide the body with the nutrient - pron - need to survive .
many of these critical nutrient be biological macromolecule , or large molecule , necessary for life .
these macromolecule ( polymer ) be build from different combination of small organic molecule ( monomer ) .
what specific type of biological macromolecule do live thing require ?
how be these molecule form ?
what function do - pron - serve ?
in this chapter , these question will be explore .
as - pron - have learn , biological macromolecule be large molecule , necessary for life , that be build from small organic molecule .
there be four major class of biological macromolecule ( carbohydrate , lipid , protein , and nucleic acid )  each be an important cell component and perform a wide array of function .
combine , these molecule make up the majority of a cell 's dry mass ( recall that water make up the majority of - pron - complete mass ) .
biological macromolecule be organic , mean - pron - contain carbon .
in addition , - pron - may contain hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , and additional minor element . 
most macromolecule be make from single subunit , or building block , call monomer .
the monomer combine with each other use covalent bond to form large molecule know as polymer .
in do so , monomer release water molecule as byproduct .
this type of reaction be know as dehydration synthesis , which mean " to put together while lose water .
" 
in a dehydration synthesis reaction ( figure three  .  two ) , the hydrogen of one monomer combine with the hydroxyl group of another monomer , release a molecule of water .
at the same time , the monomer share electron and form covalent bond .
as additional monomer join , this chain of repeat monomer form a polymer .
different type of monomer can combine in many configuration , give rise to a diverse group of macromolecule .
even one kind of monomer can combine in a variety of way to form several different polymer  for example , glucose monomer be the constituent of starch , glycogen , and cellulose . 
polymer be break down into monomer in a process know as hydrolysis , which mean " to split water , " a reaction in which a water molecule be use during the breakdown ( figure three  .  three ) .
during these reaction , the polymer be break into two component  one part gain a hydrogen atom ( h+ ) and the other gain a hydroxyl molecule ( oh– ) from a split water molecule . 
dehydration and hydrolysis reaction be catalyze , or " speed up , " by specific enzyme  dehydration reaction involve the formation of new bond , require energy , while hydrolysis reaction break bond and release energy .
these reaction be similar for most macromolecule , but each monomer and polymer reaction be specific for - pron - class .
for example , in - pron - body , food be hydrolyze , or break down , into small molecule by catalytic enzyme in the digestive system .
this allow for easy absorption of nutrient by cell in the intestine .
each macromolecule be break down by a specific enzyme .
for instance , carbohydrate be break down by amylase , sucrase , lactase , or maltase .
protein be break down by the enzyme pepsin and peptidase , and by hydrochloric acid .
lipid be break down by lipase .
breakdown of these macromolecule provide energy for cellular activity . 
most people be familiar with carbohydrate , one type of macromolecule , especially when - pron - come to what - pron - eat .
to lose weight , some individual adhere to " low - carb " diet .
athlete , in contrast , often " carb - load
" before important competition to ensure that - pron - have enough energy to compete at a high level .
carbohydrate be , in fact , an essential part of - pron - diet  grain , fruit , and vegetable be all natural source of carbohydrate .
carbohydrate provide energy to the body , particularly through glucose , a simple sugar that be a component of starch and an ingredient in many staple food .
carbohydrate also have other important function in human , animal , and plant . 
carbohydrates can be represent by the stoichiometric formula ( ch two o ) n , where n be the number of carbon in the molecule .
in other word , the ratio of carbon to hydrogen to oxygen be one   two   one in carbohydrate molecule .
this formula also explain the origin of the term " carbohydrate "  the component be carbon ( " carbo " ) and the component of water ( hence , " hydrate " ) .
carbohydrate be classify into three subtype  monosaccharide , disaccharide , and polysaccharide . 
monosaccharides
( mono - = " one
"  sacchar - = "
sweet " ) be simple sugar , the most common of which be glucose .
in monosaccharide , the number of carbon usually range from three to seven .
most monosaccharide name end with the suffix - ose .
if the sugar have an aldehyde group ( the functional group with the structure r - cho ) , - pron - be know as an aldose , and if - pron - have a ketone group ( the functional group with the structure rc ( =o ) r ' ) , - pron - be know as a ketose .
depend on the number of carbon in the sugar , - pron - also may be know as triose ( three carbon ) , pentose ( five carbon ) , and or hexose ( six carbon ) .
see figure three  .  four for an illustration of the monosaccharide . 
the chemical formula for glucose be c six h one  two o six .
in human , glucose be an important source of energy .
during cellular respiration , energy be release from glucose , and that energy be use to help make adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) .
plant synthesize glucose use carbon dioxide and water , and glucose in turn be use for energy requirement for the plant .
excess glucose be often store as starch that be catabolize ( the breakdown of large molecule by cell ) by human and other animal that feed on plant . 
galactose ( part of lactose , or milk sugar ) and fructose ( find in sucrose , in fruit ) be other common monosaccharide .
although glucose , galactose , and fructose all have the same chemical formula ( c six h one  two o six ) , - pron - differ structurally and chemically ( and be know as isomer ) because of the different arrangement of functional group around the asymmetric carbon  all of these monosaccharide have more than one asymmetric carbon ( figure three  .  five ) . 
monosaccharides can exist as a linear chain or as ring - shape molecule  in aqueous solution - pron - be usually find in ring form ( figure three  .  six ) .
glucose in a ring form can have two different arrangement of the hydroxyl group ( oh ) around the anomeric carbon ( carbon one that become asymmetric in the process of ring formation ) .
if the hydroxyl group be below carbon number one in the sugar , - pron - be say to be in the alpha ( α ) position , and if - pron - be above the plane , - pron - be say to be in the beta ( β ) position . 
disaccharides ( di - =
" two " ) form when two monosaccharide undergo a dehydration reaction ( also know as a condensation reaction or dehydration synthesis ) .
during this process , the hydroxyl group of one monosaccharide combine with the hydrogen of another monosaccharide , release a molecule of water and form a covalent bond .
a covalent bond form between a carbohydrate molecule and another molecule ( in this case , between two monosaccharide ) be know as a glycosidic bond ( figure three  .  seven ) .
glycosidic bond ( also call glycosidic linkage ) can be of the alpha or the beta type . 
common disaccharide include lactose , maltose , and sucrose ( figure three  .  eight ) .
lactose be a disaccharide consisting of the monomer glucose and galactose .
- pron - be find naturally in milk .
maltose , or malt sugar , be a disaccharide form by a dehydration reaction between two glucose molecule .
the most common disaccharide be sucrose , or table sugar , which be compose of the monomer glucose and fructose . 
a long chain of monosaccharide link by glycosidic bond be know as a polysaccharide ( poly - = " many " ) .
the chain may be branched or unbranched , and - pron - may contain different type of monosaccharide .
the molecular weight may be one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero dalton or more depend on the number of monomer join .
starch , glycogen , cellulose , and chitin be primary example of polysaccharide . 
starch be the store form of sugar in plant and be make up of a mixture of amylose and amylopectin ( both polymer of glucose ) .
plant be able to synthesize glucose , and the excess glucose , beyond the plant 's immediate energy need , be store as starch in different plant part , include root and seed .
the starch in the seed provide food for the embryo as - pron - germinate and can also act as a source of food for human and animal .
the starch that be consume by human be break down by enzyme , such as salivary amylase , into small molecule , such as maltose and glucose .
the cell can then absorb the glucose . 
starch be make up of glucose monomer that be join by α one - four or α one - six glycosidic bond .
the number one - four and one - six refer to the carbon number of the two residue that have join to form the bond .
as illustrate in figure three  .  nine , amylose be starch form by unbranched chain of glucose monomer ( only α one - four linkage ) , whereas amylopectin be a branched polysaccharide ( α one - six linkage at the branch point ) . 
glycogen be the storage form of glucose in human and other vertebrate and be make up of monomer of glucose .
glycogen be the animal equivalent of starch and be a highly branched molecule usually store in liver and muscle cell .
whenever blood glucose level decrease , glycogen be break down to release glucose in a process know as glycogenolysis . 
cellulose be the most abundant natural biopolymer .
the cell wall of plant be mostly make of cellulose  this provide structural support to the cell .
wood and paper be mostly cellulosic in nature .
cellulose be make up of glucose monomer that be link by β one - four glycosidic bond ( figure three  .  one  zero ) . 
as show in figure three  .  one  zero , every other glucose monomer in cellulose be flip over , and the monomer be pack tightly as extend long chain .
this give cellulose - pron - rigidity and high tensile strength — which be so important to plant cell .
while the β one - four linkage can not be break down by human digestive enzyme , herbivore such as cow , koala , buffalo , and horse be able , with the help of the specialize flora in - pron - stomach , to digest plant material that be rich in cellulose and use - pron - as a food source .
in these animal , certain specie of bacteria and protist reside in the ruman ( part of the digestive system of herbivore ) and secrete the enzyme cellulase .
the appendix of grazing animal also contain bacteria that digest cellulose , give - pron - an important role in the digestive system of ruminant .
cellulas can break down cellulose into glucose monomer that can be use as an energy source by the animal .
termite be also able to break down cellulose because of the presence of other organism in - pron - body that secrete cellulas . 
carbohydrates serve various function in different animal .
arthropod ( insect , crustacean , and other ) have an outer skeleton , call the exoskeleton , which protect - pron - internal body part ( as see in the bee in figure three  .  one  one ) .
this exoskeleton be make of the biological macromolecule chitin , which be a polysaccharide - contain nitrogen .
- pron - be make of repeat unit of n - acetyl - β - d - glucosamine , a modify sugar .
chitin be also a major component of fungal cell wall  fungus be neither animal nor plant and form a kingdom of - pron - own in the domain eukarya . 
be carbohydrate good for - pron - ?
people who wish to lose weight be often tell that carbohydrate be bad for - pron - and should be avoid .
some diet completely forbid carbohydrate consumption , claim that a low - carbohydrate diet help people to lose weight faster .
however , carbohydrate have be an important part of the human diet for thousand of year  artifact from ancient civilization show the presence of wheat , rice , and corn in - pron - ancestors' storage area . 
carbohydrates should be supplement with protein , vitamin , and fat to be part of a well - balance diet .
calorie - wise , a gram of carbohydrate provide four  .  three kcal .
for comparison , fat provide nine kcal / g , a less desirable ratio .
carbohydrate contain soluble and insoluble element  the insoluble part be know as fiber , which be mostly cellulose .
fiber have many us  - pron - promote regular bowel movement by add bulk , and - pron - regulate the rate of consumption of blood glucose .
fiber also help to remove excess cholesterol from the body 
fiber bind to the cholesterol in the small intestine , then attach to the cholesterol and prevent the cholesterol particle from enter the bloodstream , and then cholesterol exit the body via the fece .
fiber - rich diet also have a protective role in reduce the occurrence of colon cancer .
in addition , a meal contain whole grain and vegetable give a feeling of fullness .
as an immediate source of energy , glucose be break down during the process of cellular respiration , which produce atp , the energy currency of the cell .
without the consumption of carbohydrate , the availability of " instant energy " would be reduce .
eliminate carbohydrate from the diet be not the good way to lose weight .
a low - calorie diet that be rich in whole grain , fruit , vegetable , and lean meat , together with plenty of exercise and plenty of water , be the more sensible way to lose weight . 
lipids include a diverse group of compound that be largely nonpolar in nature .
this be because - pron - be hydrocarbon that include mostly nonpolar carbon – carbon or carbon – hydrogen bond .
non - polar molecule be hydrophobic ( " water fear " ) , or insoluble in water .
lipid perform many different function in a cell .
cell store energy for long - term use in the form of fat .
lipid also provide insulation from the environment for plant and animal ( figure three  .  one  two ) .
for example , - pron - help keep aquatic bird and mammal dry when form a protective layer over fur or feather because of - pron - water - repellant hydrophobic nature .
lipid be also the building block of many hormone and be an important constituent of all cellular membrane .
lipid include fat , oil , wax , phospholipid , and steroid . 
a fat molecule consist of two main component — glycerol and fatty acid .
glycerol be an organic compound ( alcohol ) with three carbon , five hydrogen , and three hydroxyl ( oh ) group .
fatty acid have a long chain of hydrocarbon to which a carboxyl group be attach , hence the name " fatty acid .
"
the number of carbon in the fatty acid may range from four to three  six  most common be those contain one  two – one  eight carbon .
in a fat molecule , the fatty acid be attach to each of the three carbon of the glycerol molecule with an ester bond through an oxygen atom ( figure three  .  one  three ) .
during this ester bond formation , three water molecule be release .
the three fatty acid in the triacylglycerol may be similar or dissimilar .
fat be also call triacylglycerol or triglyceride because of - pron - chemical structure .
some fatty acid have common name that specify - pron - origin .
for example , palmitic acid , a saturate fatty acid , be derive from the palm tree .
arachidic acid be derive from arachis hypogea , the scientific name for groundnut or peanut . 
fatty acid may be saturate or unsaturated .
in a fatty acid chain , if there be only single bond between neighboring carbon in the hydrocarbon chain , the fatty acid be say to be saturate .
saturate fatty acid be saturate with hydrogen  in other word , the number of hydrogen atom attach to the carbon skeleton be maximize .
stearic acid be an example of a saturated fatty acid ( figure three  .  one  four )  most unsaturated fat be liquid at room temperature and be call oil .
if there be one double bond in the molecule , then - pron - be know as a monounsaturat fat ( e . g . , olive oil ) , and if there be more than one double bond , then - pron - be know as a polyunsaturat fat ( e . g . , canola oil ) . 
when a fatty acid have no double bond , - pron - be know as a saturated fatty acid because no more hydrogen may be add to the carbon atom of the chain .
a fat may contain similar or different fatty acid attach to glycerol .
long straight fatty acid with single bond tend to get pack tightly and be solid at room temperature .
animal fat with stearic acid and palmitic acid ( common in meat ) and the fat with butyric acid ( common in butter ) be example of saturate fat .
mammal store fat in specialized cell call adipocyte , where globule of fat occupy most of the cell 's volume .
in plant , fat or oil be store in many seed and be use as a source of energy during seedl development .
unsaturated fat or oil be usually of plant origin and contain cis unsaturated fatty acid .
cis and tran indicate the configuration of the molecule around the double bond .
if hydrogen be present in the same plane , - pron - be refer to as a cis fat  if the hydrogen atom be on two different plane , - pron - be refer to as a trans fat .
the cis double bond cause a bend or a " kink
" that prevent the fatty acid from pack tightly , keep - pron - liquid at room temperature ( figure three  .  one  six ) .
olive oil , corn oil , canola oil , and cod liver oil be example of unsaturated fat .
unsaturated fat help to lower blood cholesterol level whereas saturate fat contribute to plaque formation in the artery . 
in the food industry , oil be artificially hydrogenate to make - pron - semi - solid and of a consistency desirable for many process food product .
simply speak , hydrogen gas be bubble through oil to solidify - pron - .
during this hydrogenation process , double bond of the cis - conformation in the hydrocarbon chain may be convert to double bond in the trans - conformation . 
margarine , some type of peanut butter , and shortening be example of artificially hydrogenate tran fat .
recent study have show that an increase in tran fat in the human diet may lead to an increase in level of low - density lipoprotein ( ldl ) , or " bad " cholesterol , which in turn may lead to plaque deposition in the artery , result in heart disease .
many fast food restaurant have recently ban the use of tran fat , and food label be require to display the tran fat content . 
essential fatty acid be fatty acid require but not synthesize by the human body .
consequently , - pron - have to be supplement through ingestion via the diet .
omega -  three fatty acid ( like that show in figure three  .  one  seven ) fall into this category and be one of only two know for human ( the other be omega -  six fatty acid ) .
these be polyunsaturat fatty acid and be call omega -  three because the third carbon from the end of the hydrocarbon chain be connect to - pron - neighboring carbon by a double bond . 
the farth carbon away from the carboxyl group be number as the omega ( ω ) carbon , and if the double bond be between the third and fourth carbon from that end , - pron - be know as an omega -  three fatty acid .
nutritionally important because the body do not make - pron - , omega -  three fatty acid include alpha - linoleic acid ( ala ) , eicosapentaenoic acid ( epa ) , and docosahexaenoic acid ( dha ) , all of which be polyunsaturat .
salmon , trout , and tuna be good source of omega -  three fatty acid .
research indicate that omega -  three fatty acid reduce the risk of sudden death from heart attack , reduce triglyceride in the blood , low blood pressure , and prevent thrombosis by inhibit blood clotting .
- pron - also reduce inflammation , and may help reduce the risk of some cancer in animal . 
like carbohydrate , fat have receive a lot of bad publicity .
- pron - be true that eat an excess of fry food and other " fatty " food lead to weight gain .
however , fat do have important function .
many vitamin be fat soluble , and fat serve as a long - term storage form of fatty acid  a source of energy .
- pron - also provide insulation for the body .
therefore , " healthy " fat in moderate amount should be consume on a regular basis . 
wax cover the feather of some aquatic bird and the leaf surface of some plant .
because of the hydrophobic nature of wax , - pron - prevent water from stick on the surface ( figure three  .  one  eight ) .
wax be make up of long fatty acid chain esterify to long - chain alcohol . 
phospholipid be major constituent of the plasma membrane , the outermost layer of animal cell .
like fat , - pron - be compose of fatty acid chain attach to a glycerol or sphingosine backbone .
instead of three fatty acid attach as in triglyceride , however , there be two fatty acid form diacylglycerol , and the third carbon of the glycerol backbone be  occupy by a modify phosphate group ( figure three  .  one  nine ) .
a phosphate group alone attach to a diaglycerol do not qualify as a phospholipid  - pron - be phosphatidate ( diacylglycerol three  - phosphate ) , the precursor of phospholipid .
the phosphate group be modify by an alcohol .
phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylserine be two important phospholipid that be find in plasma membrane . 
a phospholipid be an amphipathic molecule , mean - pron - have a hydrophobic and a hydrophilic part .
the fatty acid chain be hydrophobic and can not interact with water , whereas the phosphate - contain group be hydrophilic and interact with water  the head be the hydrophilic part , and the tail contain the hydrophobic fatty acid .
in a membrane , a bilayer of phospholipid form the matrix of the structure , the fatty acid tail of phospholipid face inside , away from water , whereas the phosphate group face the outside , aqueous side ( figure three  .  two  zero ) . 
phospholipid be responsible for the dynamic nature of the plasma membrane .
if a drop of phospholipid be place in water , - pron - spontaneously form a structure know as a micelle , where the hydrophilic phosphate head face the outside and the fatty acid face the interior of this structure . 
unlike the phospholipid and fat discuss earlier , steroid have a fused ring structure .
although - pron - do not resemble the other lipid , - pron - be group with - pron - because - pron - be also hydrophobicand insoluble in water .
all steroid have four link carbon ring and several of - pron - , like cholesterol , have a short tail ( figure three  .  two  one ) .
many steroid also have the –oh functional group , which put - pron - in the alcohol classification ( sterol ) . 
cholesterol be the most common steroid .
cholesterol be mainly synthesize in the liver and be the precursor to many steroid hormone such as testosterone and estradiol , which be secrete by the gonad and endocrine gland .
- pron - be also the precursor to vitamin d . cholesterol be also the precursor of bile salt , which help in the emulsification of fat and - pron - subsequent absorption by cell .
although cholesterol be often speak of in negative term by lay people , - pron - be necessary for proper functioning of the body .
- pron - be a component of the plasma membrane of animal cell and be find within the phospholipid bilayer .
be the outermost structure in animal cell , the plasma membrane be responsible for the transport of material and cellular recognition and - pron - be involve in cell - to - cell communication . 
protein be one of the most abundant organic molecule in living system and have the most diverse range of function of all macromolecule .
protein may be structural , regulatory , contractile , or protective  - pron - may serve in transport , storage , or membrane  or - pron - may be toxin or enzyme .
each cell in a live system may contain thousand of protein , each with a unique function .
- pron - structure , like - pron - function , vary greatly .
- pron - be all , however , polymer of amino acid , arrange in a linear sequence . 
enzymes , which be produce by live cell , be catalyst in biochemical reaction ( like digestion ) and be usually complex or conjugate protein .
each enzyme be specific for the substrate ( a reactant that bind to an enzyme ) - pron - act on .
the enzyme may help in breakdown , rearrangement , or synthesis reaction .
enzyme that break down - pron - substrate be call catabolic enzyme , enzyme that build more complex molecule from - pron - substrate be call anabolic enzyme , and enzyme that affect the rate of reaction be call catalytic enzyme .
- pron - should be note that all enzyme increase the rate of reaction and , therefore , be consider to be organic catalyst .
an example of an enzyme be salivary amylase , which hydrolyze - pron - substrate amylose , a component of starch . 
hormones be chemical - signal molecule , usually small protein or steroid , secrete by endocrine cell that act to control or regulate specific physiological process , include growth , development , metabolism , and reproduction .
for example , insulin be a protein hormone that help to regulate the blood glucose level .
the primary type and function of protein be list in table three  .  one . 
protein have different shape and molecular weight  some protein be globular in shape whereas other be fibrous in nature .
for example , hemoglobin be a globular protein , but collagen , find in - pron - skin , be a fibrous protein .
protein shape be critical to - pron - function , and this shape be maintain by many different type of chemical bond .
change in temperature , ph , and exposure to chemical may lead to permanent change in the shape of the protein , lead to loss of function , know as denaturation .
all protein be make up of different arrangement of the same two  zero type of amino acid . 
amino acid be the monomer that make up protein .
each amino acid have the same fundamental structure , which consist of a central carbon atom , also know as the alpha ( α ) carbon , bond to an amino group ( nh two ) , a carboxyl group ( cooh ) , and to a hydrogen atom .
every amino acid also have another atom or group of atom bond to the central atom know as the r group ( figure three  .  two  two ) . 
the name " amino acid " be derive from the fact that - pron - contain both amino group and carboxyl - acid - group in - pron - basic structure .
as mention , there be two  zero amino acid present in protein .
ten of these be consider essential amino acid in human because the human body can not produce - pron - and - pron - be obtain from the diet .
for each amino acid , the r group ( or side chain ) be different ( figure three  .  two  three ) . 
the chemical nature of the side chain determine the nature of the amino acid ( that is , whether - pron - be acidic , basic , polar , or nonpolar ) .
for example , the amino acid glycine have a hydrogen atom as the r group .
amino acid such as valine , methionine , and alanine be nonpolar or hydrophobic in nature , while amino acid such as serine , threonine , and cysteine be polar and have hydrophilic side chain .
the side chain of lysine and arginine be positively charge , and therefore these amino acid be also know as basic amino acid .
proline have an r group that be link to the amino group , form a ring - like structure .
proline be an exception to the standard structure of an animo acid since - pron - amino group be not separate from the side chain ( figure three  .  two  three ) . 
amino acid be represent by a single upper case letter or a three - letter abbreviation .
for example , valine be know by the letter v or the three - letter symbol val .
just as some fatty acid be essential to a diet , some amino acid be necessary as well .
- pron - be know as essential amino acid , and in human - pron - include isoleucine , leucine , and cysteine .
essential amino acid refer to those necessary for construction of protein in the body , although not produce by the body  which amino acid be essential varie from organism to organism . 
the sequence and the number of amino acid ultimately determine the protein ' s shape , size , and function .
each amino acid be attach to another amino acid by a covalent bond , know as a peptide bond , which be form by a dehydration reaction .
the carboxyl group of one amino acid and the amino group of the incoming amino acid combine , release a molecule of water .
the result bond be the peptide bond ( figure three  .  two  four ) . 
the product form by such linkage be call peptide .
as more amino acid join to this grow chain , the result chain be know as a polypeptide .
each polypeptide have a free amino group at one end .
this end be call the n terminal , or the amino terminal , and the other end have a free carboxyl group , also know as the c or carboxyl terminal .
while the term polypeptide and protein be sometimes use interchangeably , a polypeptide be technically a polymer of amino acid , whereas the term protein be use for a polypeptide or polypeptide that have combine together , often have bind non - peptide prosthetic group , have a distinct shape , and have a unique function .
after protein synthesis ( translation ) , most protein be modify .
these be know as post - translational modification .
- pron - may undergo cleavage , phosphorylation , or may require the addition of other chemical group .
only after these modification be the protein completely functional . 
as discuss earlier , the shape of a protein be critical to - pron - function .
for example , an enzyme can bind to a specific substrate at a site know as the active site .
if this active site be alter because of local change or change in overall protein structure , the enzyme may be unable to bind to the substrate .
to understand how the protein get - pron - final shape or conformation , - pron - need to understand the four level of protein structure  primary , secondary , tertiary , and quaternary . 
the unique sequence of amino acid in a polypeptide chain be - pron - primary structure .
for example , the pancreatic hormone insulin have two polypeptide chain , a and b , and - pron - be link together by disulfide bond .
the n terminal amino acid of the a chain be glycine , whereas the c terminal amino acid be asparagine ( figure three  .  two  five ) .
the sequence of amino acid in the a and b chain be unique to insulin . 
the unique sequence for every protein be ultimately determine by the gene encode the protein .
a change in nucleotide sequence of the gene 's coding region may lead to a different amino acid be add to the grow polypeptide chain , cause a change in protein structure and function .
in sickle cell anemia , the hemoglobin β chain ( a small portion of which be show in figure three  .  two  six ) have a single amino acid substitution , cause a change in protein structure and function .
specifically , the amino acid glutamic acid be substitute by valine in the β chain .
what be most remarkable to consider be that a hemoglobin molecule be make up of two alpha chain and two beta chain that each consist of about one  five  zero amino acid .
the molecule , therefore , have about six  zero  zero amino acid .
the structural difference between a normal hemoglobin molecule and a sickle cell molecule — which dramatically decrease life expectancy
— be a single amino acid of the six  zero  zero .
what be even more remarkable be that those six  zero  zero amino acid be encode by three nucleotide each , and the mutation be cause by a single base change ( point mutation ) , one in one  eight  zero  zero base . 
because of this change of one amino acid in the chain , hemoglobin molecule form long fiber that distort the biconcave , or disc - shape , red blood cell and assume a crescent or " sickle " shape , which clog artery ( figure three  .  two  seven ) .
this can lead to myriad serious health problem such as breathlessness , dizziness , headache , and abdominal pain for those affect by this disease . 
the local folding of the polypeptide in some region give rise to the secondary structure of the protein .
the most common be the α - helix and β - pleated sheet structure ( figure three  .  two  eight ) .
both structure be the α - helix structure — the helix hold in shape by hydrogen bond .
the hydrogen bond form between the oxygen atom in the carbonyl group in one amino acid and another amino acid that be four amino acid farther along the chain . 
every helical turn in an alpha helix have three  .  six amino acid residue .
the r group ( the variant group ) of the polypeptide protrude out from the α - helix chain .
in the β - pleated sheet , the " pleat " be form by hydrogen bonding between atom on the backbone of the polypeptide chain .
the r group be attach to the carbon and extend above and below the fold of the pleat .
the pleated segment align parallel or antiparallel to each other , and hydrogen bond form between the partially positive nitrogen atom in the amino group and the partially negative oxygen atom in the carbonyl group of the peptide backbone .
the α - helix and β - pleated sheet structure be find in most globular and fibrous protein and - pron - play an important structural role . 
the unique three - dimensional structure of a polypeptide be - pron - tertiary structure ( figure three  .  two  nine ) .
this structure be in part due to chemical interaction at work on the polypeptide chain .
primarily , the interaction among r group create the complex three - dimensional tertiary structure of a protein .
the nature of the r group find in the amino acid involve can counteract the formation of the hydrogen bond describe for standard secondary structure .
for example , r group with like charge be repel by each other and those with unlike charge be attract to each other ( ionic bond ) .
when protein fold take place , the hydrophobic r group of nonpolar amino acid lie in the interior of the protein , whereas the hydrophilic r group lie on the outside .
the former type of interaction be also know as hydrophobic interaction .
interaction between cysteine side chain form disulfide linkage in the presence of oxygen , the only covalent bond form during protein folding . 
all of these interaction , weak and strong , determine the final three - dimensional shape of the protein .
when a protein lose - pron - three - dimensional shape , - pron - may no longer be functional . 
in nature , some protein be form from several polypeptide , also know as subunit , and the interaction of these subunit form the quaternary structure .
weak interaction between the subunit help to stabilize the overall structure .
for example , insulin ( a globular protein ) have a combination of hydrogen bond and disulfide bond that because - pron - to be mostly clump into a ball shape .
insulin start out as a single polypeptide and lose some internal sequence in the presence of post - translational modification after the formation of the disulfide linkage that hold the remain chain together .
silk ( a fibrous protein ) , however , have a β - pleated sheet structure that be the result of hydrogen bonding between different chain . 
the four level of protein structure ( primary , secondary , tertiary , and quaternary ) be illustrate in figure three  .  three  zero . 
each protein have - pron - own unique sequence and shape that be hold together by chemical interaction .
if the protein be subject to change in temperature , ph , or exposure to chemical , the protein structure may change , lose - pron - shape without lose - pron - primary sequence in what be know as denaturation .
denaturation be often reversible because the primary structure of the polypeptide be conserve in the process if the denature agent be remove , allow the protein to resume - pron - function .
sometimes denaturation be irreversible , lead to loss of function .
one example of irreversible protein denaturation be when an egg be fry .
the albumin protein in the liquid egg white be denature when place in a hot pan .
not all protein be denature at high temperature  for instance , bacteria that survive in hot spring have protein that function at temperature close to boil .
the stomach be also very acidic , have a low ph , and denature protein as part of the digestion process  however , the digestive enzyme of the stomach retain - pron - activity under these condition . 
protein fold be critical to - pron - function .
- pron - be originally think that the protein - pron - be responsible for the folding process .
only recently be - pron - find that often - pron - receive assistance in the folding process from protein helper know as chaperone ( or chaperonin ) that associate with the target protein during the folding process .
- pron - act by prevent aggregation of polypeptide that make up the complete protein structure , and - pron - disassociate from the protein once the target protein be fold . 
nucleic acid be the most important macromolecule for the continuity of life .
- pron - carry the genetic blueprint of a cell and carry instruction for the functioning of the cell . 
the two main type of nucleic acid be deoxyribonucleic acid ( dna ) and ribonucleic acid ( rna ) .
dna be the genetic material find in all live organism , range from single - cell bacteria to multicellular mammal .
- pron - be find in the nucleus of eukaryote and in the organelle , chloroplast , and mitochondrion .
in prokaryote , the dna be not enclose in a membranous envelope . 
the entire genetic content of a cell be know as - pron - genome , and the study of genome be genomic .
in eukaryotic cell but not in prokaryote , dna form a complex with histone protein to form chromatin , the substance of eukaryotic chromosome .
a chromosome may contain ten of thousand of gene .
many gene contain the information to make protein product  other gene code for rna product .
dna control all of the cellular activity by turn the gene " on " or " off .
" 
the other type of nucleic acid , rna , be mostly involve in protein synthesis .
the dna molecule never leave the nucleus but instead use an intermediary to communicate with the rest of the cell .
this intermediary be the messenger rna ( mrna ) .
other type of rna — like rrna , trna , and microrna — be involve in protein synthesis and - pron - regulation . 
dna and rna be make up of monomer know as nucleotide .
the nucleotide combine with each other to form a polynucleotide , dna or rna .
each nucleotide be make up of three component  a nitrogenous base , a pentose ( five - carbon ) sugar , and a phosphate group ( figure three  .  three  one ) .
each nitrogenous base in a nucleotide be attach to a sugar molecule , which be attach to one or more phosphate group . 
the nitrogenous base , important component of nucleotide , be organic molecule and be so name because - pron - contain carbon and nitrogen .
- pron - be base because - pron - contain an amino group that have the potential of bind an extra hydrogen , and thus , decrease the hydrogen ion concentration in - pron - environment , make - pron - more basic .
each nucleotide in dna contain one of four possible nitrogenous base  adenine ( a ) , guanine ( g ) cytosine ( c ) , and thymine ( t ) . 
adenine and guanine be classify as purine .
the primary structure of a purine be two carbon - nitrogen ring .
cytosine , thymine , and uracil be classify as pyrimidine which have a single carbon - nitrogen ring as - pron - primary structure ( figure three  .  three  one ) .
each of these basic carbon - nitrogen ring have different functional group attach to - pron - .
in molecular biology shorthand , the nitrogenous base be simply know by - pron - symbol a , t , g , c , and u . dna contain a , t , g , and c whereas rna contain a , u , g , and c . 
the pentose sugar in dna be deoxyribose , and in rna , the sugar be ribose ( figure three  .  three  one ) .
the difference between the sugar be the presence of the hydroxyl group on the second carbon of the ribose and hydrogen on the second carbon of the deoxyribose .
the carbon atom of the sugar molecule be number as one ′ , two ′ , three ′ , four ′ , and five ′ ( one ′ be read as " one prime " ) .
the phosphate residue be attach to the hydroxyl group of the five ′ carbon of one sugar and the hydroxyl group of the three ′ carbon of the sugar of the next nucleotide , which form a five ′– three ′ phosphodiester linkage .
the phosphodiester linkage be not form  by simple dehydration reaction like the other linkage connect monomer in macromolecule  - pron - formation involve the removal of two phosphate group .
a polynucleotide may have thousand of such phosphodiester linkage . 
dna have a double - helix structure ( figure three  .  three  two ) .
the sugar and phosphate lie on the outside of the helix , form the backbone of the dna .
the nitrogenous base be stack in the interior , like the step of a staircase , in pair  the pair be bind to each other by hydrogen bond .
every base pair in the double helivx be separate from the next base pair by zero  .  three  four nm .
the two strand of the helix run in opposite direction , mean that the five ′ carbon end of one strand will face the three ′ carbon end of - pron - matching strand .
( this be refer to as antiparallel orientation and be important to dna replication and in many nucleic acid interaction . ) 
only certain type of base pairing be allow .
for example , a certain purine can only pair with a certain pyrimidine .
this mean a can pair with t , and g can pair with c , as show in figure three  .  three  three .
this be know as the base complementary rule .
in other word , the dna strand be complementary to each other .
if the sequence of one strand be aattggcc , the complementary strand would have the sequence ttaaccgg .
during dna replication , each strand be copy , result in a daughter dna double helix contain one parental dna strand and a newly synthesize strand . 
ribonucleic acid , or rna , be mainly involve in the process of protein synthesis under the direction of dna .
rna be usually single - strand and be make of ribonucleotide that be link by phosphodiester bond .
a ribonucleotide in the rna chain contain ribose ( the pentose sugar ) , one of the four nitrogenous base ( a , u , g , and c ) , and the phosphate group . 
there be four major type of rna  messenger rna ( mrna ) , ribosomal rna ( rrna ) , transfer rna ( trna ) , and microrna ( mirna ) .
the first , mrna , carry the message from dna , which control all of the cellular activity in a cell .
if a cell require a certain protein to be synthesize , the gene for this product be turn " on " and the messenger rna be synthesize in the nucleus .
the rna base sequence be complementary to the cod sequence of the dna from which - pron - have be copy .
however , in rna , the base t be absent and u be present instead .
if the dna strand have a sequence aattgcgc , the sequence of the complementary rna be uuaacgcg .
in the cytoplasm , the mrna interact with ribosome and other cellular machinery ( figure three  .  three  four ) . 
the mrna be read in set of three base know as codon .
each codon code for a single amino acid .
in this way , the mrna be read and the protein product be make .
ribosomal rna ( rrna ) be a major constituent of ribosome on which the mrna bind .
the rrna ensure the proper alignment of the mrna and the ribosome  the rrna of the ribosome  also have an enzymatic activity ( peptidyl transferase ) and catalyze the formation of the peptide bond between two aligned amino acid .
transfer rna ( trna ) be one of the small of the four type of rna , usually seven  zero – nine  zero nucleotide long .
- pron - carry the correct amino acid to the site of protein synthesis .
- pron - be the base pair between the trna and mrna that allow for the correct amino acid to be insert in the polypeptide chain .
micrornas be the small rna molecule and - pron - role involve the regulation of gene expression by interfere with the expression of certain mrna message .
table three  .  two summarize feature of dna and rna . 
even though the rna be single strand , most rna type show extensive intramolecular base pair between complementary sequence , create a predictable three - dimensional structure essential for - pron - function . 
as - pron - have learn , information flow in an organism take place from dna to rna to protein .
dna dictate the structure of mrna in a process know as transcription , and rna dictate the structure of protein in a process know as translation .
this be know as the central dogma of life , which hold true for all organism  however , exception to the rule occur in connection with viral infection . 
proteins , carbohydrate , nucleic acid , and lipid be the four major class of biological macromolecule — large molecule necessary for life that be build from small organic molecule .
macromolecule be make up of single unit know as monomer that be join by covalent bond to form large polymer .
the polymer be more than the sum of - pron - part  - pron - acquire new characteristic , and lead to an osmotic pressure that be much low than that form by - pron - ingredient  this be an important advantage in the maintenance of cellular osmotic condition .
a monomer join with another monomer with the release of a water molecule , lead to the formation of a covalent bond .
these type of reaction be know as dehydration or condensation reaction .
when polymer be break down into small unit ( monomer ) , a molecule of water be use for each bond break by these reaction  such reaction be know as hydrolysis reaction .
dehydration and hydrolysis reaction be similar for all macromolecule , but each monomer and polymer reaction be specific to - pron - class .
dehydration reaction typically require an investment of energy for new bond formation , while hydrolysis reaction typically release energy by break bond . 
carbohydrates be a group of macromolecule that be a vital energy source for the cell and provide structural support to plant cell , fungus , and all of the arthropod that include lobster , crab , shrimp , insect , and spider .
carbohydrate be classify as monosaccharide , disaccharide , and polysaccharide depend on the number of monomer in the molecule .
monosaccharide be link by glycosidic bond that be form as a result of dehydration reaction , form disaccharide and polysaccharide with the elimination of a water molecule for each bond form .
glucose , galactose , and fructose be common monosaccharide , whereas common disaccharide include lactose , maltose , and sucrose .
starch and glycogen , example of polysaccharide , be the storage form of glucose in plant and animal , respectively .
the long polysaccharide chain may be branched or unbranched .
cellulose be an example of an unbranched polysaccharide , whereas amylopectin , a constituent of starch , be a highly branched molecule .
storage of glucose , in the form of polymer like starch of glycogen , make - pron - slightly less accessible for metabolism  however , this prevent - pron - from leak out of the cell or create a high osmotic pressure that could because excessive water uptake by the cell . 
lipids be a class of macromolecule that be nonpolar and hydrophobic in nature .
major type include fat and oil , wax , phospholipid , and steroid .
fat be a store form of energy and be also know as triacylglycerol or triglyceride .
fat be make up of fatty acid and either glycerol or sphingosine .
fatty acid may be unsaturated or saturate , depend on the presence or absence of double bond in the hydrocarbon chain .
if only single bond be present , - pron - be know as saturate fatty acid .
unsaturated fatty acid may have one or more double bond in the hydrocarbon chain .
phospholipid make up the matrix of membrane .
- pron - have a glycerol or sphingosine backbone to which two fatty acid chain and a phosphate - contain group be attach .
steroid be another class of lipid .
- pron - basic structure have four fused carbon ring .
cholesterol be a type of steroid and be an important constituent of the plasma membrane , where - pron - help to maintain the fluid nature of the membrane .
- pron - be also the precursor of steroid hormone such as testosterone . 
protein be a class of macromolecule that perform a diverse range of function for the cell .
- pron - help in metabolism by provide structural support and by act as enzyme , carrier , or hormone .
the building block of protein ( monomer ) be amino acid .
each amino acid have a central carbon that be link to an amino group , a carboxyl group , a hydrogen atom , and an r group or side chain .
there be two  zero commonly occur amino acid , each of which differ in the r group .
each amino acid be link to - pron - neighbor by a peptide bond .
a long chain of amino acid be know as a polypeptide . 
protein be organize at four level  primary , secondary , tertiary , and ( optional ) quaternary .
the primary structure be the unique sequence of amino acid .
the local folding of the polypeptide to form structure such as the α helix and β - pleated sheet constitute the secondary structure .
the overall three - dimensional structure be the tertiary structure .
when two or more polypeptide combine to form the complete protein structure , the configuration be know as the quaternary structure of a protein .
protein shape and function be intricately link  any change in shape cause by change in temperature or ph may lead to protein denaturation and a loss in function . 
nucleic acid be molecule make up of nucleotide that direct cellular activity such as cell division and protein synthesis .
each nucleotide be make up of a pentose sugar , a nitrogenous base , and a phosphate group .
there be two type of nucleic acid  dna and rna .
dna carry the genetic blueprint of the cell and be pass on from parent to offspring  ( in the form of chromosome ) .
- pron - have a double - helical structure with the two strand run in opposite direction , connect by hydrogen bond , and complementary to each other .
rna be single - strand and be make of a pentose sugar ( ribose ) , a nitrogenous base , and a phosphate group .
rna be involve in protein synthesis and - pron - regulation .
messenger rna ( mrna ) be copy from the dna , be export from the nucleus to the cytoplasm , and contain information for the construction of protein .
ribosomal rna ( rrna ) be a part of the ribosome at the site of protein synthesis , whereas transfer rna ( trna ) carry the amino acid to the site of protein synthesis .
microrna regulate the use of mrna for protein synthesis . 
figure three  .  two
in the dehydration synthesis reaction depict above , two molecule of glucose be link together to form the disaccharide maltose .
in the process , a water molecule be form .
figure three  .  three
in the hydrolysis reaction show here , the disaccharide maltose be break down to form two glucose monomer with the addition of a water molecule .
note that this reaction be the reverse of the synthesis reaction show in figure three  .  two .
figure three  .  four monosaccharide be classify base on the position of - pron - carbonyl group and the number of carbon in the backbone .
aldose have a carbonyl group ( indicate in green ) at the end of the carbon chain , and ketose have a carbonyl group in the middle of the carbon chain .
trioses , pentose , and hexose have three , five , and six carbon backbone , respectively .
figure three  .  six five and six carbon monosaccharide exist in equilibrium between linear and ring form .
when the ring form , the side chain - pron - close on be lock into an α or β position .
fructose and ribose also form ring , although - pron - form five - membered ring as oppose to the six - membered ring of glucose .
figure three  .  seven sucrose be form when a monomer of glucose and a monomer of fructose be join in a dehydration reaction to form a glycosidic bond .
in the process , a water molecule be lose .
by convention , the carbon atom in a monosaccharide be number from the terminal carbon close to the carbonyl group .
in sucrose , a glycosidic linkage be form between carbon one in glucose and carbon two in fructose .
figure three  .  eight common disaccharide include maltose ( grain sugar ) , lactose ( milk sugar ) , and sucrose ( table sugar ) .
figure three  .  nine
amylose and amylopectin be two different form of starch .
amylose be compose of unbranched chain of glucose monomer connect by α one  ,  four glycosidic linkage .
amylopectin be compose of branched chain of glucose monomer connect by α one  ,  four and α one  ,  six glycosidic linkage .
because of the way the subunit be join , the glucose chain have a helical structure .
glycogen ( not show ) be similar in structure to amylopectin but more highly branched .
figure three  .  one  zero
in cellulose , glucose monomer be link in unbranched chain by β one - four glycosidic linkage .
because of the way the glucose subunit be join , every glucose monomer be flip relative to the next one result in a linear , fibrous structure .
figure three  .  one  one insect have a hard outer exoskeleton make of chitin , a type of polysaccharide .
( credit  louise docker )
obesity be a worldwide health concern , and many disease such as diabetes and heart disease be become more prevalent because of obesity .
this be one of the reason why register dietitian be increasingly seek after for advice .
register dietitian help plan nutrition program for individual in various setting .
- pron - often work with patient in health care facility , design nutrition plan to treat and prevent disease .
for example , dietitian may teach a patient with diabete how to manage blood sugar level by eat the correct type and amount of carbohydrate .
dietitians may also work in nursing home , school , and private practice .
to become a registered dietitian , one need to earn at least a bachelor 's degree in dietetic , nutrition , food technology , or a related field .
in addition , register dietitian must complete a supervised internship program and pass a national exam .
those who pursue career in dietetic take course in nutrition , chemistry , biochemistry , biology , microbiology , and human physiology .
dietitians must become expert in the chemistry and physiology ( biological function ) of food ( protein , carbohydrate , and fat ) .
figure three  .  one  two hydrophobic lipid in the fur of aquatic mammal , such as this river otter , protect - pron - from the element .
( credit  ken bosma )
figure three  .  one  three
triacylglycerol be form by the joining of three fatty acid to a glycerol backbone in a dehydration reaction .
three molecule of water be release in the process .
figure three  .  one  four
stearic acid be a common saturated fatty acid .
figure three  .  one  five oleic acid be a common unsaturated fatty acid .
figure three  .  one  six saturated fatty acid have hydrocarbon chain connect by single bond only .
unsaturated fatty acid have one or more double bond .
each double bond may be in a cis or tran configuration .
in the cis configuration , both hydrogen be on the same side of the hydrocarbon chain .
in the tran configuration , the hydrogen be on opposite side .
a cis double bond cause a kink in the chain .
figure three  .  one  seven
alpha - linolenic acid be an example of an omega -  three fatty acid .
- pron - have three cis double bond and , as a result , a curve shape .
for clarity , the carbon be not show .
each singly bond carbon have two hydrogen associate with - pron - , also not show .
figure three  .  one  eight waxy covering on some leaf be make of lipid .
( credit  roger griffith )
figure three  .  one  nine
a phospholipid be a molecule with two fatty acid and a modify phosphate group attach to a glycerol backbone .
the phosphate may be modify by the addition of charged or polar chemical group .
two chemical group that may modify the phosphate , choline and serine , be show here .
both choline and serine attach to the phosphate group at the position label r via the hydroxyl group indicate in green .
figure three  .  two  zero
the phospholipid bilayer be the major component of all cellular membrane .
the hydrophilic head group of the phospholipid face the aqueous solution .
the hydrophobic tail be sequester in the middle of the bilayer .
figure three  .  two  one steroid such as cholesterol and cortisol be compose of four fused hydrocarbon ring .
figure three  .  two  two amino acid have a central asymmetric carbon to which an amino group , a carboxyl group , a hydrogen atom , and a side chain ( r group ) be attach .
figure three  .  two  four
peptide bond formation be a dehydration synthesis reaction .
the carboxyl group of one amino acid be link to the amino group of the incoming amino acid .
in the process , a molecule of water be release .
cytochrome c be an important component of the electron transport chain , a part of cellular respiration , and - pron - be normally find in the cellular organelle , the mitochondrion .
this protein have a heme prosthetic group , and the central ion of the heme get alternately reduce and oxidize during electron transfer .
because this essential protein 's role in produce cellular energy be crucial , - pron - have change very little over million of year .
protein sequencing have show that there be a considerable amount of cytochrome c amino acid sequence homology among different specie  in other word , evolutionary kinship can be assess by measure the similarity or difference among various species' dna or protein sequence .
scientist have determine that human cytochrome c contain one  zero  four amino acid .
for each cytochrome c molecule from different organism that have be sequence to date , three  seven of these amino acid appear in the same position in all sample of cytochrome c .
this indicate that there may have be a common ancestor .
on compare the human and chimpanzee protein sequence , no sequence difference be find .
when human and rhesus monkey sequence be compare , the single difference find be in one amino acid .
in another comparison , human to yeast sequencing show a difference in the four  four th position .
figure three  .  two  five
bovine serum insulin be a protein hormone make of two peptide chain , a ( two  one amino acid long ) and b ( three  zero amino acid long ) .
in each chain , primary structure be indicate by three - letter abbreviation that represent the name of the amino acid in the order - pron - be present .
the amino acid cysteine ( cys ) have a sulfhydryl ( sh ) group as a side chain .
two sulfhydryl group can react in the presence of oxygen to form a disulfide ( s - s ) bond .
two disulfide bond connect the a and b chain together , and a third help the a chain fold into the correct shape .
note that all disulfide bond be the same length , but be draw different size for clarity .
figure three  .  two  six
the beta chain of hemoglobin be one  four  seven residue in length , yet a single amino acid substitution lead to sickle cell anemia .
in normal hemoglobin , the amino acid at position seven be glutamate .
in sickle cell hemoglobin , this glutamate be replace by a valine .
figure three  .  two  seven
in this blood smear , visualize at five  three  five x magnification use bright field microscopy , sickle cell be crescent shape , while normal cell be disc - shape .
( credit  modification of work by ed uthman  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
figure three  .  two  eight
the α - helix and β - pleated sheet be secondary structure of protein that form because of hydrogen bonding between carbonyl and amino group in the peptide backbone .
certain amino acid have a propensity to form an α - helix , while other have a propensity to form a β - pleated sheet .
figure three  .  two  nine
the tertiary structure of protein be determine by a variety of chemical interaction .
these include hydrophobic interaction , ionic bonding , hydrogen bonding and disulfide linkage .
figure three  .  three  zero
the four level of protein structure can be observe in these illustration .
( credit  modification of work by national human genome research institute )
figure three  .  three  one
a nucleotide be make up of three component  a nitrogenous base , a pentose sugar , and one or more phosphate group .
carbon residu in the pentose be number one ′ through five ′ ( the prime distinguish these residue from those in the base , which be number without use a prime notation ) .
the base be attach to the one ′ position of the ribose , and the phosphate be attach to the five ′ position .
when a polynucleotide be form , the five ′ phosphate of the incoming nucleotide attache to the three ′ hydroxyl group at the end of the grow chain .
two type of pentose be find in nucleotide , deoxyribose ( find in dna ) and ribose ( find in rna ) .
deoxyribose be similar in structure to ribose , but - pron - have an h instead of an oh at the two ′ position .
base can be divide into two category  purine and pyrimidine .
purine have a double ring structure , and pyrimidine have a single ring .
figure three  .  three  two native dna be an antiparallel double helix .
the phosphate backbone ( indicate by the curvy line ) be on the outside , and the base be on the inside .
each base from one strand interact via hydrogen bonding with a base from the oppose strand .
( credit  jerome walker / dennis myts ) figure three  .  three  four
a ribosome have two part  a large subunit and a small subunit .
the mrna sit in between the two subunit .
a trna molecule recognize a codon on the mrna , bind to - pron - by complementary base pairing , and add the correct amino acid to the grow peptide chain . 
close - pron - eye and picture a brick wall .
what be the basic building block of that wall ?
a single brick , of course .
like a brick wall , - pron - body be compose of basic building block , and the building block of - pron - body be cell .
- pron - body have many kind of cell , each specialize for a specific purpose .
just as a home be make from a variety of building material , the human body be construct from many cell type .
for example , epithelial cell protect the surface of the body and cover the organ and body cavity within .
bone cell help to support and protect the body .
cell of the immune system fight invade bacteria .
additionally , blood and blood cell carry nutrient and oxygen throughout the body while remove carbon dioxide .
each of these cell type play a vital role during the growth , development , and day - to - day maintenance of the body .
in spite of - pron - enormous variety , however , cell from all organism — even one as diverse as bacteria , onion , and human — share certain fundamental characteristic .
a cell be the small unit of a live thing .
a live thing , whether make of one cell ( like bacteria ) or many cell ( like a human ) , be call an organism .
thus , cell be the basic building block of all organism .
several cell of one kind that interconnect with each other and perform a share function form tissue , several tissue combine to form an organ ( - pron - stomach , heart , or brain ) , and several organ make up an organ system ( such as the digestive system , circulatory system , or nervous system ) .
several system that function together form an organism ( like a human being ) .
here , - pron - will examine the structure and function of cell .
there be many type of cell , all group into one of two broad category  prokaryotic and eukaryotic .
for example , both animal and plant cell be classify as eukaryotic cell , whereas bacterial cell be classify as prokaryotic .
before discuss the criterion for determine whether a cell be prokaryotic or eukaryotic , let - pron - first examine how biologist study cell .
microscopy cells vary in size .
with few exception , individual cell can not be see with the naked eye , so scientist use microscope ( micro - = "
small "
 - scope = " to look at " ) to study - pron - .
a microscope be an instrument that magnify an object .
most photograph of cell be take with a microscope , and these image can also be call micrograph .
the optic of a microscope 's lens change the orientation of the image that the user see .
a speciman that be right - side up and face right on the microscope slide will appear upside - down and face leave when view through a microscope , and vice versa .
similarly , if the slide be move left while look through the microscope , - pron - will appear to move right , and if move down , - pron - will seem to move up .
this occur because microscope use two set of lens to magnify the image .
because of the manner by which light travel through the lens , this system of two lens produce an invert image ( binocular , or dissect microscope , work in a similar manner , but include an additional magnification system that make the final image appear to be upright ) .
light microscopes
to give - pron - a sense of cell size , a typical human red blood cell be about eight millionth of a meter or eight micrometer ( abbreviate as eight μm ) in diameter  the head of a pin of be about two thousandth of a meter ( two mm ) in diameter .
that mean about two  five  zero red blood cell could fit on the head of a pin .
most student microscope be classify as light microscope ( figure four  .  two a ) .
visible light pass and be bent through the lens system to enable the user to see the speciman .
light microscope be advantageous for view live organism , but since individual cell be generally transparent , - pron - component be not distinguishable unless - pron - be color with special stain .
stain , however , usually kill the cell .
light microscope commonly use in the undergraduate college laboratory magnify up to approximately four  zero  zero time .
two parameter that be important in microscopy be magnification and resolve power .
magnification be the process of enlarge an object in appearance .
resolve power be the ability of a microscope to distinguish two adjacent structure as separate  the high the resolution , the good the clarity and detail of the image .
when oil immersion lens be use for the study of small object , magnification be usually increase to one  ,  zero  zero  zero time .
in order to gain a good understanding of cellular structure and function , scientist typically use electron microscope .
most light microscope use in a college biology lab can magnify cell up to approximately four  zero  zero time and have a resolution of about two  zero  zero nanometer .
( b ) electron microscope provide a much high magnification , one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero x , and a have a resolution of five  zero picometer .
electron microscopes
in contrast to light microscope , electron microscope ( figure four  .  two b ) use a beam of electron instead of a beam of light .
not only do this allow for high magnification and , thus , more detail ( figure four  .  three ) , - pron - also provide high resolve power .
the method use to prepare the speciman for view with an electron microscope kill the speciman .
electron have short wavelength ( short than photon ) that move best in a vacuum , so live cell can not be view with an electron microscope .
in a scanning electron microscope , a beam of electron move back and forth across a cell 's surface , create detail of cell surface characteristic .
in a transmission electron microscope , the electron beam penetrate the cell and provide detail of a cell 's internal structure .
as - pron - may imagine , electron microscope be significantly more bulky and expensive than light microscope .
these salmonella bacteria appear as tiny purple dot when view with a light microscope .
( b )
this scan electron microscope micrograph show salmonella bacteria ( in red ) invade human cell ( yellow ) .
even though subfigure ( b ) show a different salmonella speciman than subfigure ( a ) , - pron - can still observe the comparative increase in magnification and detail .
cell theory
the microscope - pron - use today be far more complex than those use in the one  six  zero  zero s by antony van leeuwenhoek , a dutch shopkeeper who have great skill in craft lens .
despite the limitation of - pron - now - ancient lens , van leeuwenhoek observe the movement of protista ( a type of single - cell organism ) and sperm , which - pron - collectively term " animalcule .
"
in a one  six  six  five publication call micrographia , experimental scientist robert hooke coin the term " cell " for the box - like structure - pron - observe when view cork tissue through a lens .
in the one  six  seven  zero , van leeuwenhoek discover bacteria and protozoa .
later advance in lens , microscope construction , and stain technique enable other scientist to see some component inside cell .
by the late one  eight  three  zero , botanist matthias schleiden and zoologist theodor schwann be study tissue and propose the unified cell theory , which state that all live thing be compose of one or more cell , the cell be the basic unit of life , and new cell arise from exist cell .
rudolf virchow later make important contribution to this theory .
cell fall into one of two broad category  prokaryotic and eukaryotic .
only the predominantly single - cell organism of the domain bacteria and archaea be classify as prokaryote ( pro - = " before "  - kary - = " nucleus " ) .
cell of animal , plant , fungus , and protist be all eukaryote ( ceu - = " true " ) and be make up of eukaryotic cell .
component of prokaryotic cells
all cell share four common component  one ) a plasma membrane , an outer covering that separate the cell
's interior from - pron - surround environment
 two ) cytoplasm , consist of a jelly - like cytosol within the cell in which other cellular component be find  three ) dna , the genetic material of the cell  and four ) ribosome , which synthesize protein .
however , prokaryote differ from eukaryotic cell in several way .
a prokaryote be a simple , mostly single - cell ( unicellular ) organism that lack a nucleus , or any other membrane - bind organelle .
- pron - will shortly come to see that this be significantly different in eukaryote .
prokaryotic dna be find in a central part of the cell  the nucleoid .
this figure show the generalize structure of a prokaryotic cell .
all prokaryote have chromosomal dna localize in a nucleoid , ribosome , a cell membrane , and a cell wall .
the other structure show be present in some , but not all , bacteria .
most prokaryote have a peptidoglycan cell wall and many have a polysaccharide capsule ( figure four  .  five ) .
the cell wall act as an extra layer of protection , help the cell maintain - pron - shape , and prevent dehydration .
the capsule enable the cell to attach to surface in - pron - environment .
some prokaryote have flagella , pili , or fimbriae .
flagella be use for locomotion .
pili be use to exchange genetic material during a type of reproduction call conjugation .
fimbriae be use by bacteria to attach to a host cell .
cell size
at zero  .  one to five  .  zero μm in diameter , prokaryotic cell be significantly small than eukaryotic cell , which have diameter range from one  zero to one  zero  zero μm ( figure four  .  six ) .
the small size of prokaryote allow ion and organic molecule that enter - pron - to quickly diffuse to other part of the cell .
similarly , any waste produce within a prokaryotic cell can quickly diffuse out .
this be not the case in eukaryotic cell , which have develop different structural adaptation to enhance intracellular transport .
this figure show relative size of microbe on a logarithmic scale ( recall that each unit of increase in a logarithmic scale represent a one  zero  - fold increase in the quantity be measure ) .
small size , in general , be necessary for all cell , whether prokaryotic or eukaryotic .
let - pron - examine why that be so .
first , - pron - will consider the area and volume of a typical cell .
not all cell be spherical in shape , but most tend to approximate a sphere .
- pron - may remember from - pron - high school geometry course that the formula for the surface area of a sphere be four πr two , while the formula for - pron - volume be four πr three  /  three .
thus , as the radius of a cell increase , - pron - surface area increase as the square of - pron - radius , but - pron - volume increase as the cube of - pron - radius ( much more rapidly ) .
therefore , as a cell increase in size , - pron - surface area - to - volume ratio decrease .
this same principle would apply if the cell have the shape of a cube ( figure four  .  seven ) .
if the cell grow too large , the plasma membrane will not have sufficient surface area to support the rate of diffusion require for the increase volume .
in other word , as a cell grow , - pron - become less efficient .
one way to become more efficient be to divide  another way be to develop organelle that perform specific task .
these adaptation lead to the development of more sophisticated cell call eukaryotic cell .
have - pron - ever hear the phrase " form follow function ?
"
- pron - ' a philosophy practice in many industry .
in architecture , this mean that building should be construct to support the activity that will be carry out inside - pron - .
for example , a skyscraper should be build with several elevator bank  a hospital should be build so that - pron - emergency room be easily accessible .
- pron - natural world also utilize the principle of form follow function , especially in cell biology , and this will become clear as - pron - explore eukaryotic cell ( figure four  .  eight ) .
unlike prokaryotic cell , eukaryotic cell have  one ) a membrane - bind nucleus  two ) numerous membrane - bind organelle such as the endoplasmic reticulum , golgi apparatus , chloroplast , mitochondrion , and other  and three ) several , rod - shape chromosome .
because a eukaryotic cell 's nucleus be surround by a membrane , - pron - be often say to have a " true nucleus .
"
the word " organelle " mean
" little organ ,
" and , as already mention , organelle have specialize cellular function , just as the organ of - pron - body have specialize function .
at this point , - pron - should be clear to - pron - that eukaryotic cell have a more complex structure than prokaryotic cell .
organelle allow different function to be compartmentalize in different area of the cell .
before turn to organelle , let - pron - first examine two important component of the cell  the plasma membrane and the cytoplasm .
the plasma membrane
like prokaryote , eukaryotic cell have a plasma membrane ( figure four  .  nine ) , a phospholipid bilayer with embed protein that separate the internal content of the cell from - pron - surround environment .
a phospholipid be a lipid molecule with two fatty acid chain and a phosphate - contain group .
the plasma membrane control the passage of organic molecule , ion , water , and oxygen into and out of the cell .
waste ( such as carbon dioxide and ammonia ) also leave the cell by pass through the plasma membrane .
the eukaryotic plasma membrane be a phospholipid bilayer with protein and cholesterol embed in - pron - .
the plasma membrane of cell that specialize in absorption be fold into fingerlike projection call microvilli ( singular = microvillus )  ( figure four  .  one  zero ) .
such cell be typically find line the small intestine , the organ that absorb nutrient from digest food .
this be an excellent example of form follow function .
people with celiac disease have an immune response to gluten , which be a protein find in wheat , barley , and rye .
the immune response damage microvilli , and thus , afflict individual can not absorb nutrient .
this lead to malnutrition , cramp , and diarrhea .
patient suffer from celiac disease must follow a gluten - free diet .
microvilli , show here as - pron - appear on cell line the small intestine , increase the surface area available for absorption .
these microvilli be only find on the area of the plasma membrane that face the cavity from which substance will be absorb .
the cytoplasm the cytoplasm be the entire region of a cell between the plasma membrane and the nuclear envelope ( a structure to be discuss shortly ) .
- pron - be make up of organelle suspend in the gel - like cytosol , the cytoskeleton , and various chemical ( figure four  .  eight ) .
even though the cytoplasm consist of seven  zero to eight  zero percent water , - pron - have a semi - solid consistency , which come from the protein within - pron - .
however , protein be not the only organic molecule find in the cytoplasm .
glucose and other simple sugar , polysaccharide , amino acid , nucleic acid , fatty acid , and derivative of glycerol be find there , too .
ion of sodium , potassium , calcium , and many other element be also dissolve in the cytoplasm .
many metabolic reaction , include protein synthesis , take place in the cytoplasm .
the nucleus typically , the nucleus be the most prominent organelle in a cell ( figure four  .  eight ) .
the nucleus ( plural = nucleus ) house the cell 's dna and direct the synthesis of ribosome and protein .
let - pron - look at - pron - in more detail ( figure four  .  one  one ) .
the nucleus store chromatin ( dna plus protein ) in a gel - like substance call the nucleoplasm .
the nucleolus be a condensed region of chromatin where ribosome synthesis occur .
the boundary of the nucleus be call the nuclear envelope .
- pron - consist of two phospholipid bilayer  an outer membrane and an inner membrane .
the nuclear membrane be continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum .
nuclear pore allow substance to enter and exit the nucleus .
the nuclear envelope
the nuclear envelope be a double - membrane structure that constitute the outermost portion of the nucleus ( figure four  .  one  one ) .
both the inner and outer membrane of the nuclear envelope be phospholipid bilayer .
the nuclear envelope be punctuate with pore that control the passage of ion , molecule , and rna between the nucleoplasm and cytoplasm .
the nucleoplasm be the semi - solid fluid inside the nucleus , where - pron - find the chromatin and the nucleolus .
chromatin and chromosomes to understand chromatin , - pron - be helpful to first consider chromosome .
chromosome be structure within the nucleus that be make up of dna , the hereditary material .
- pron - may remember that in prokaryote , dna be organize into a single circular chromosome .
in eukaryote , chromosome be linear structure .
every eukaryotic specie have a specific number of chromosome in the nucleus of - pron - body 's cell .
for example , in human , the chromosome number be four  six , while in fruit fly , - pron - be eight .
chromosome be only visible and distinguishable from one another when the cell be get ready to divide .
when the cell be in the growth and maintenance phase of - pron - life cycle , protein be attach to chromosome , and - pron - resemble an unwound , jumbled bunch of thread .
these unwound protein - chromosome complex be call chromatin ( figure four  .  one  two )  chromatin describe the material that make up the chromosome both when condense and decondens .
this image show various level of the organization of chromatin ( dna and protein ) .
( b )
this image show pair chromosome .
the nucleolus - pron - already know that the nucleus direct the synthesis of ribosome , but how do - pron - do this ?
some chromosome have section of dna that encode ribosomal rna .
a darkly stain area within the nucleus call the nucleolus ( plural = nucleoli ) aggregate the ribosomal rna with associated protein to assemble the ribosomal subunit that be then transport out through the pore in the nuclear envelope to the cytoplasm .
ribosomes ribosomes be the cellular structure responsible for protein synthesis .
when view through an electron microscope , ribosome appear either as cluster ( polyribosome ) or single , tiny dot that float freely in the cytoplasm .
- pron - may be attach to the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane or the cytoplasmic side of the endoplasmic reticulum and the outer membrane of the nuclear envelope ( figure four  .  eight ) .
electron microscopy have show - pron - that ribosome , which be large complex of protein and rna , consist of two subunit , aptly call large and small ( figure four  .  one  three ) .
ribosome receive - pron - " order " for protein synthesis from the nucleus where the dna be transcribe into messenger rna ( mrna ) .
the mrna travel to the ribosome , which translate the code provide by the sequence of the nitrogenous base in the mrna into a specific order of amino acid in a protein .
amino acid be the building block of protein .
ribosome be make up of a large subunit ( top ) and a small subunit ( bottom ) .
during protein synthesis , ribosome assemble amino acid into protein .
because protein synthesis be an essential function of all cell ( include enzyme , hormone , antibody , pigment , structural component , and surface receptor ) , ribosome be find in practically every cell .
ribosome be particularly abundant in cell that synthesize large amount of protein .
for example , the pancreas be responsible for create several digestive enzyme and the cell that produce these enzyme contain many ribosome .
thus , - pron - see another example of form follow function .
mitochondria mitochondria ( singular = mitochondrion ) be often call the " powerhouse " or " energy factory " of a cell because - pron - be responsible for make adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) , the cell 's main energy - carry molecule .
atp represent the short - term store energy of the cell .
cellular respiration be the process of make atp use the chemical energy find in glucose and other nutrient .
in mitochondria , this process use oxygen and produce carbon dioxide as a waste product .
in fact , the carbon dioxide that - pron - exhale with every breath come from the cellular reaction that produce carbon dioxide as a byproduct .
in keep with - pron - theme of form follow function , - pron - be important to point out that muscle cell have a very high concentration of mitochondrion that produce atp .
- pron - muscle cell need a lot of energy to keep - pron - body move .
when - pron - cell do not get enough oxygen , - pron - do not make a lot of atp .
instead , the small amount of atp - pron - make in the absence of oxygen be accompany by the production of lactic acid .
mitochondria be oval - shape , double membrane organelle ( figure four  .  one  four ) that have - pron - own ribosome and dna .
each membrane be a phospholipid bilayer embed with protein .
the inner layer have fold call cristae .
the area surround by the fold be call the mitochondrial matrix .
the cristae and the matrix have different role in cellular respiration .
this electron micrograph show a mitochondrion as view with a transmission electron microscope .
this organelle have an outer membrane and an inner membrane .
the inner membrane contain fold , call cristae , which increase - pron - surface area .
the space between the two membrane be call the intermembrane space , and the space inside the inner membrane be call the mitochondrial matrix .
atp synthesis take place on the inner membrane .
( credit  modification of work by matthew britton  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
peroxisomes peroxisomes be small , round organelle enclose by single membrane .
- pron - carry out oxidation reaction that break down fatty acid and amino acid .
- pron - also detoxify many poison that may enter the body .
( many of these oxidation reaction release hydrogen peroxide , h two o two , which would be damaging to cell  however , when these reaction be confine to peroxisome , enzyme safely break down the h two o two into oxygen and water . )
for example , alcohol be detoxify by peroxisome in liver cell .
glyoxysome , which be specialize peroxisome in plant , be responsible for convert store fat into sugar .
vesicle and vacuoles vesicles and vacuole be membrane - bind sac that function in storage and transport .
other than the fact that vacuole be somewhat large than vesicle , there be a very subtle distinction between - pron - 
the membrane of vesicle can fuse with either the plasma membrane or other membrane system within the cell .
additionally , some agent such as enzyme within plant vacuole break down macromolecule .
the membrane of a vacuole do not fuse with the membrane of other cellular component .
animal cells versus plant cells at this point
, - pron - know that each eukaryotic cell have a plasma membrane , cytoplasm , a nucleus , ribosome , mitochondria , peroxisome , and in some , vacuole , but there be some striking difference between animal and plant cell .
while both animal and plant cell have microtubule organizing center ( mtocs ) , animal cell also have centriole associate with the mtoc  a complex call the centrosome .
animal cell each have a centrosome and lysosome , whereas plant cell do not .
plant cell have a cell wall , chloroplast and other specialized plastid , and a large central vacuole , whereas animal cell do not .
the centrosome
the centrosome be a microtubule - organizing center find near the nucleus of animal cell .
- pron - contain a pair of centriole , two structure that lie perpendicular to each other ( figure four  .  one  five ) .
each centriole be a cylinder of nine triplet of microtubule .
the centrosome consist of two centriole that lie at right angle to each other .
each centriole be a cylinder make up of nine triplet of microtubule .
nontubulin protein ( indicate by the green line ) hold the microtubule triplet together .
the centrosome ( the organelle where all microtubule originate ) replicate - pron - before a cell divide , and the centriole appear to have some role in pull the duplicate chromosome to opposite end of the divide cell .
however , the exact function of the centriole in cell division be not clear , because cell that have have the centrosome remove can still divide , and plant cell , which lack centrosome , be capable of cell division .
lysosomes animal cell have another set of organelle not find in plant cell  lysosome .
the lysosome be the cell 's “ garbage disposal .
"
in plant cell , the digestive process take place in vacuole .
enzyme within the lysosome aid the breakdown of protein , polysaccharide , lipid , nucleic acid , and even wear - out organelle .
these enzyme be active at a much low ph than that of the cytoplasm .
therefore , the ph within lysosome be more acidic than the ph of the cytoplasm .
many reaction that take place in the cytoplasm could not occur at a low ph , so again , the advantage of compartmentalize the eukaryotic cell into organelle be apparent .
the cell wall if - pron - examine figure four  .  eight b , the diagram of a plant cell , - pron - will see a structure external to the plasma membrane call the cell wall .
the cell wall be a rigid covering that protect the cell , provide structural support , and give shape to the cell .
fungal and protistan cell also have cell wall .
while the chief component of prokaryotic cell wall be peptidoglycan , the major organic molecule in the plant cell wall be cellulose (
figure four  .  one  six ) , a polysaccharide make up of glucose unit .
have - pron - ever notice that when - pron - bite into a raw vegetable , like celery , - pron - crunch ?
that ' because - pron - be tear the rigid cell wall of the celery cell with - pron - tooth .
cellulose be a long chain of β - glucose molecule connect by a one - four linkage .
the dashed line at each end of the figure indicate a series of many more glucose unit .
the size of the page make - pron - impossible to portray an entire cellulose molecule .
chloroplast like the mitochondria , chloroplast have - pron - own dna and ribosome , but chloroplast have an entirely different function .
chloroplast be plant cell organelle that carry out photosynthesis .
photosynthesis be the series of reaction that use carbon dioxide , water , and light energy to make glucose and oxygen .
this be a major difference between plant and animal  plant ( autotroph ) be able to make - pron - own food , like sugar , while animal ( heterotrophs ) must ingest - pron - food .
like mitochondria , chloroplast have outer and inner membrane , but within the space enclose by a chloroplast 's inner membrane be a set of interconnect and stack fluid - fill membrane sac call thylakoid ( figure four  .  one  seven ) .
each stack of thylakoid be call a granum ( plural = grana ) .
the fluid enclose by the inner membrane that surround the grana be call the stroma .
the chloroplast have an outer membrane , an inner membrane , and membrane structure call thylakoid that be stack into grana .
the space inside the thylakoid membrane be call the thylakoid space .
the light harvesting reaction take place in the thylakoid membrane , and the synthesis of sugar take place in the fluid inside the inner membrane , which be call the stroma .
chloroplast also have - pron - own genome , which be contain on a single circular chromosome .
the chloroplast contain a green pigment call chlorophyll , which capture the light energy that drive the reaction of photosynthesis .
like plant cell , photosynthetic protist also have chloroplast .
some bacteria perform photosynthesis , but - pron - chlorophyll be not relegate to an organelle .
previously , - pron - mention vacuole as essential component of plant cell .
if - pron - look at figure four  .  eight b , - pron - will see that plant cell each have a large central vacuole that occupy most of the area of the cell .
the central vacuole play a key role in regulate the cell 's concentration of water in change environmental condition .
have - pron - ever notice that if - pron - forget to water a plant for a few day , - pron - wilt ?
that ' because as the water concentration in the soil become low than the water concentration in the plant , water move out of the central vacuole and cytoplasm .
as the central vacuole shrink , - pron - leave the cell wall unsupported .
this loss of support to the cell wall of plant cell result in the wilted appearance of the plant .
the central vacuole also support the expansion of the cell .
when the central vacuole hold more water , the cell get large without have to invest a lot of energy in synthesize new cytoplasm .
the endomembrane system ( endo = " within " ) be a group of membrane and organelle ( figure four  .  one  eight ) in eukaryotic cell that work together to modify , package , and transport lipid and protein .
- pron - include the nuclear envelope , lysosome , and vesicle , which - pron - have already mention , and the endoplasmic reticulum and golgi apparatus , which - pron - will cover shortly .
although not technically within the cell , the plasma membrane be include in the endomembrane system because , as - pron - will see , - pron - interact with the other endomembranous organelle .
the endomembrane system do not include the membrane of either mitochondria or chloroplast .
the endoplasmic reticulum
the endoplasmic reticulum ( er ) ( figure four  .  one  eight ) be a series of interconnect membranous sac and tubule that collectively modify protein and synthesize lipid .
however , these two function be perform in separate area of the er  the rough er and the smooth er , respectively .
the hollow portion of the er tubule be call the luman or cisternal space .
the membrane of the er , which be a phospholipid bilayer embed with protein , be continuous with the nuclear envelope .
rough er
the rough endoplasmic reticulum ( rer ) be so name because the ribosome attach to - pron - cytoplasmic surface give - pron - a stud appearance when view through an electron microscope .
this transmission electron micrograph show the rough endoplasmic reticulum and other organelle in a pancreatic cell .
ribosome transfer - pron - newly synthesize protein into the luman of the rer where - pron - undergo structural modification , such as fold or the acquisition of side chain .
these modify protein will be incorporate into cellular membrane —
the membrane of the er or those of other organelle — or secrete from the cell ( such as protein hormone , enzyme ) .
the rer also make phospholipid for cellular membrane .
if the phospholipid or modify protein be not destine to stay in the rer , - pron - will reach - pron - destination via transport vesicle that bud from the rer 's membrane ( figure four  .  one  eight ) .
since the rer be engage in modify protein ( such as enzyme , for example ) that will be secrete from the cell , - pron - would be correct in assume that the rer be abundant in cell that secrete protein .
this be the case with cell of the liver , for example .
smooth er
the smooth endoplasmic reticulum ( ser ) be continuous with the rer but have few or no ribosome on - pron - cytoplasmic surface ( figure four  .  one  eight ) .
function of the ser include synthesis of carbohydrate , lipid , and steroid hormone  detoxification of medication and poison  and storage of calcium ion .
in muscle cell , a specialized ser call the sarcoplasmic reticulum be responsible for storage of the calcium ion that be need to trigger the coordinate contraction of the muscle cell .
the golgi apparatus - pron - have already mention that vesicle can bud from the er and transport - pron - content elsewhere , but where do the vesicle go ?
before reach - pron - final destination , the lipid or protein within the transport vesicle still need to be sort , package , and tag so that - pron - wind up in the right place .
sort , tag , packaging , and distribution of lipid and protein take place in the golgi apparatus ( also call the golgi body ) , a series of flatten membrane .
the golgi apparatus in this white blood cell be visible as a stack of semicircular , flatten ring in the low portion of the image .
several vesicle can be see near the golgi apparatus .
( credit  modification of work by louisa howard )
the receive side of the golgi apparatus be call the cis face .
the opposite side be call the tran face .
the transport vesicle that form from the er travel to the cis face , fuse with - pron - , and empty - pron - content into the luman of the golgi apparatus .
as the protein and lipid travel through the golgi , - pron - undergo further modification that allow - pron - to be sort .
the most frequent modification be the addition of short chain of sugar molecule .
these newly modify protein and lipid be then tag with phosphate group or other small molecule so that - pron - can be rout to - pron - proper destination .
finally , the modify and tag protein be package into secretory vesicle that bud from the tran face of the golgi .
while some of these vesicle deposit - pron - content into other part of the cell where - pron - will be use , other secretory vesicle fuse with the plasma membrane and release - pron - content outside the cell .
in another example of form follow function , cell that engage in a great deal of secretory activity ( such as cell of the salivary gland that secrete digestive enzyme or cell of the immune system that secrete antibody ) have an abundance of golgi .
in plant cell , the golgi apparatus have the additional role of synthesizing polysaccharide , some of which be incorporate into the cell wall and some of which be use in other part of the cell .
lysosome
in addition to - pron - role as the digestive component and organelle - recycling facility of animal cell , lysosome be consider to be part of the endomembrane system .
lysosome also use - pron - hydrolytic enzyme to destroy pathogen ( disease - cause organism ) that may enter the cell .
a good example of this occur in a group of white blood cell call macrophage , which be part of - pron - body 's immune system .
in a process know as phagocytosis or endocytosis , a section of the plasma membrane of the macrophage invaginate ( fold in ) and engulfs a pathogen .
the invaginated section , with the pathogen inside , then pinch - pron - off from the plasma membrane and become a vesicle .
the vesicle fuse with a lysosome .
the lysosome 's hydrolytic enzyme then destroy the pathogen .
a macrophage have engulf ( phagocytiz ) a potentially pathogenic bacterium and then fuse with a lysosome within the cell to destroy the pathogen .
other organelle be present in the cell but for simplicity be not show .
if - pron - be to remove all the organelle from a cell , would the plasma membrane and the cytoplasm be the only component leave ?
no .
within the cytoplasm , there would still be ion and organic molecule , plus a network of protein fiber that help maintain the shape of the cell , secure some organelle in specific position , allow cytoplasm and vesicle to move within the cell , and enable cell within multicellular organism to move .
collectively , this network of protein fiber be know as the cytoskeleton .
there be three type of fiber within the cytoskeleton  microfilament , intermediate filament , and microtubule ( figure four  .  two  two ) .
here , - pron - will examine each .
microfilament thicken the cortex around the inner edge of a cell  like rubber band , - pron - resist tension .
microtubule be find in the interior of the cell where - pron - maintain cell shape by resist compressive force .
intermediate filament be find throughout the cell and hold organelle in place .
microfilament of the three type of protein fiber in the cytoskeleton
, microfilament be the narrow .
- pron - function in cellular movement , have a diameter of about seven nm , and be make of two intertwine strand of a globular protein call actin ( figure four  .  two  three ) .
for this reason , microfilament be also know as actin filament .
actin be power by atp to assemble - pron - filamentous form , which serve as a track for the movement of a motor protein call myosin .
this enable actin to engage in cellular event require motion , such as cell division in animal cell and cytoplasmic streaming , which be the circular movement of the cell cytoplasm in plant cell .
actin and myosin be plentiful in muscle cell .
when - pron - actin and myosin filament slide past each other , - pron - muscle contract .
microfilament also provide some rigidity and shape to the cell .
- pron - can depolymerize ( disassemble ) and reform quickly , thus enable a cell to change - pron - shape and move .
white blood cell ( - pron - body 's infection - fight cell ) make good use of this ability .
- pron - can move to the site of an infection and phagocytize the pathogen .
intermediate filaments intermediate filament be make of several strand of fibrous protein that be wind together ( figure four  .  two  four ) .
these element of the cytoskeleton get - pron - name from the fact that - pron - diameter , eight to one  zero nm , be between those of microfilament and microtubule .
intermediate filament consist of several intertwined strand of fibrous protein .
intermediate filament have no role in cell movement .
- pron - function be purely structural .
- pron - bear tension , thus maintain the shape of the cell , and anchor the nucleus and other organelle in place .
figure four  .  two  two show how intermediate filament create a supportive scaffolding inside the cell .
the intermediate filament be the most diverse group of cytoskeletal element .
several type of fibrous protein be find in the intermediate filament .
- pron - be probably most familiar with keratin , the fibrous protein that strengthen - pron - hair , nail , and the epidermis of the skin .
microtubule
as - pron - name imply , microtubule be small hollow tube .
the wall of the microtubule be make of polymerized dimer of α - tubulin and β - tubulin , two globular protein ( figure four  .  two  five ) .
with a diameter of about two  five nm , microtubule be the wide component of the cytoskeleton .
- pron - help the cell resist compression , provide a track along which vesicle move through the cell , and pull replicate chromosome to opposite end of a divide cell .
like microfilament , microtubule can dissolve and reform quickly .
microtubule be hollow .
- pron - wall consist of one  three polymerize dimer of α - tubulin and β - tubulin ( right image ) .
the left image show the molecular structure of the tube .
microtubule be also the structural element of flagella , cilium , and centriole ( the latter be the two perpendicular body of the centrosome ) .
in fact , in animal cell , the centrosome be the microtubule - organizing center .
in eukaryotic cell , flagella and cilium be quite different structurally from - pron - counterpart in prokaryote , as discuss below .
flagella and cilia
to refresh - pron - memory , flagella ( singular = flagellum ) be long , hair - like structure that extend from the plasma membrane and be use to move an entire cell ( for example , sperm , euglena ) .
when present , the cell have just one flagellum or a few flagella .
when cilium ( singular = cilium ) be present , however , many of - pron - extend along the entire surface of the plasma membrane .
- pron - be short , hair - like structure that be use to move entire cell ( such as paramecia ) or substance along the outer surface of the cell ( for example , the cilium of cell line the fallopian tube that move the ovum toward the uterus , or cilium line the cell of the respiratory tract that trap particulate matter and move - pron - toward - pron - nostril . )
despite - pron - difference in length and number , flagella and cilium share a common structural arrangement of microtubule call a " nine + two array .
"
this be an appropriate name because a single flagellum or cilium be make of a ring of nine microtubule doublet , surround a single microtubule doublet in the center
( figure four  .  two  six ) .
- pron - already know that a group of similar cell work together be call a tissue .
as - pron - may expect , if cell be to work together , - pron - must communicate with each other , just as - pron - need to communicate with other if - pron - work on a group project .
let - pron - take a look at how cell communicate with each other .
extracellular matrix of animal cells most animal cell release material into the extracellular space .
the primary component of these material be protein , and the most abundant protein be collagen .
collagen fiber be interweave with carbohydrate - contain protein molecule call proteoglycan .
collectively , these material be call the extracellular matrix ( figure four  .  two  seven ) .
not only do the extracellular matrix hold the cell together to form a tissue , but - pron - also allow the cell within the tissue to communicate with each other .
how can this happen ?
the extracellular matrix consist of a network of protein and carbohydrate .
cell have protein receptor on the extracellular surface of - pron - plasma membrane .
when a molecule within the matrix bind to the receptor , - pron - change the molecular structure of the receptor .
the receptor , in turn , change the conformation of the microfilament position just inside the plasma membrane .
these conformational change induce chemical signal inside the cell that reach the nucleus and turn " on " or " off " the transcription of specific section of dna , which affect the production of associate protein , thus change the activity within the cell .
blood clotting provide an example of the role of the extracellular matrix in cell communication .
when the cell line a blood vessel be damage , - pron - display a protein receptor call tissue factor .
when tissue factor bind with another factor in the extracellular matrix , - pron - cause platelet to adhere to the wall of the damaged blood vessel , stimulate the adjacent smooth muscle cell in the blood vessel to contract ( thus constrict the blood vessel ) , and initiate a series of step that stimulate the platelet to produce clotting factor .
intercellular junctions cells can also communicate with each other via direct contact , refer to as intercellular junction .
there be some difference in the way that plant and animal cell do this .
plasmodesma be junction between plant cell , whereas animal cell contact include tight junction , gap junction , and desmosome .
plasmodesma
in general , long stretch of the plasma membrane of neighbor plant cell can not touch one another because - pron - be separate by the cell wall that surround each cell ( figure four  .  eight b ) .
how then , can a plant transfer water and other soil nutrient from - pron - root , through - pron - stem , and to - pron - leaf ?
such transport use the vascular tissue ( xylem and phloem ) primarily .
there also exist structural modification call plasmodesma ( singular = plasmodesma ) , numerous channel that pass between cell wall of adjacent plant cell , connect - pron - cytoplasm , and enable material to be transport from cell to cell , and thus throughout the plant .
a plasmodesma be a channel between the cell wall of two adjacent plant cell .
plasmodesma allow material to pass from the cytoplasm of one plant cell to the cytoplasm of an adjacent cell .
tight junctions
a tight junction be a watertight seal between two adjacent animal cell ( figure four  .  two  nine ) .
the cell be hold tightly against each other by protein ( predominantly two protein call claudin and occludin ) .
tight junction form watertight connection between adjacent animal cell .
protein create tight junction adherence .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
this tight adherence prevent material from leak between the cell  tight junction be typically find in epithelial tissue that line internal organ and cavity , and comprise most of the skin .
for example , the tight junction of the epithelial cell line - pron - urinary bladder prevent urine from leak out into the extracellular space .
desmosomes also find only in animal cell be desmosome , which act like spot weld between adjacent epithelial cell ( figure four  .  three  zero ) .
short protein call cadherin in the plasma membrane connect to intermediate filament to create desmosome .
the cadherin join two adjacent cell together and maintain the cell in a sheet - like formation in organ and tissue that stretch , like the skin , heart , and muscle .
a desmosome form a very strong spot weld between cell .
- pron - be create by the linkage of cadherin and intermediate filament .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal ) gap junctions gap junction in animal cell be like plasmodesma in plant cell in that - pron - be channel between adjacent cell that allow for the transport of ion , nutrient , and other substance that enable cell to communicate ( figure four  .  three  one ) .
structurally , however , gap junction and plasmodesma differ .
a gap junction be a protein - line pore that allow water and small molecule to pass between adjacent animal cell .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal ) gap junction develop when a set of six protein ( call connexin ) in the plasma membrane arrange - pron - in an elongated donut - like configuration call a connexon .
when the pore ( " doughnut hole " ) of connexon in adjacent animal cell align , a channel between the two cell form .
gap junction be particularly important in cardiac muscle  the electrical signal for the muscle to contract be pass efficiently through gap junction , allow the heart muscle cell to contract in tandem .
introduction
the plasma membrane , which be also call the cell membrane , have many function , but the most basic one be to define the border of the cell and keep the cell functional .
the plasma membrane be selectively permeable .
this mean that the membrane allow some material to freely enter or leave the cell , while other material can not move freely , but require the use of a specialized structure , and occasionally , even energy investment for crossing .
a cell 's plasma membrane define the cell , outline - pron - border , and determine the nature of - pron - interaction with - pron - environment ( see table five  .  one for a summary ) .
cell exclude some substance , take in other , and excrete still other , all in control quantity .
the plasma membrane must be very flexible to allow certain cell , such as red blood cell and white blood cell , to change shape as - pron - pass through narrow capillary .
these be the more obvious function of a plasma membrane .
in addition , the surface of the plasma membrane carry marker that allow cell to recognize one another , which be vital for tissue and organ formation during early development , and which later play a role in the " self " versus " non - self " distinction of the immune response .
among the most sophisticated function of the plasma membrane be the ability to transmit signal by mean of complex , integral protein know as receptor .
these protein act both as receiver of extracellular input and as activator of intracellular process .
these membrane receptor provide extracellular attachment site for effector like hormone and growth factor , and - pron - activate intracellular response cascade when - pron - effector be bind .
occasionally , receptor be hijack by virus ( hiv , human immunodeficiency virus , be one example )
that use - pron - to gain entry into cell , and at time , the gene encode receptor become mutate , cause the process of signal transduction to malfunction with disastrous consequence .
fluid mosaic model
the existence of the plasma membrane be identify in the one  eight  nine  zero s , and - pron - chemical component be identify in one  nine  one  five .
the principal component identify at that time be lipid and protein .
the first widely accept model of the plasma membrane 's structure be propose in one  nine  three  five by hugh davson and james danielli  - pron - be base on the " railroad track " appearance of the plasma membrane in early electron micrograph .
- pron - theorize that the structure of the plasma membrane resemble a sandwich , with protein be analogous to the bread , and lipid be analogous to the filling .
in the one  nine  five  zero , advance in microscopy , notably transmission electron microscopy ( tem ) , allow researcher to see that the core of the plasma membrane consist of a double , rather than a single , layer .
a new model that better explain both the microscopic observation and the function of that plasma membrane be propose by s . j . singer and garth l . nicolson in one  nine  seven  two .
the explanation propose by singer and nicolson be call the fluid mosaic model .
the model have evolve somewhat over time , but - pron - still good account for the structure and function of the plasma membrane as - pron - now understand - pron - .
the fluid mosaic model describe the structure of the plasma membrane as a mosaic of component — include phospholipid , cholesterol , protein , and carbohydrate — that give the membrane a fluid character .
plasma membrane range from five to one  zero nm in thickness .
for comparison , human red blood cell , visible via light microscopy , be approximately eight μm wide , or approximately one  ,  zero  zero  zero time wide than a plasma membrane .
the membrane do look a bit like a sandwich .
the fluid mosaic model of the plasma membrane describe the plasma membrane as a fluid combination of phospholipid , cholesterol , and protein .
carbohydrate attach to lipid ( glycolipid ) and to protein ( glycoprotein ) extend from the outward - face surface of the membrane .
the principal component of a plasma membrane be lipid ( phospholipid and cholesterol ) , protein , and carbohydrate attach to some of the lipid and some of the protein .
a phospholipid be a molecule consist of glycerol , two fatty acid , and a phosphate - link head group .
cholesterol , another lipid compose of four fused carbon ring , be find alongside the phospholipid in the core of the membrane .
the proportion of protein , lipid , and carbohydrate in the plasma membrane vary with cell type , but for a typical human cell , protein account for about five  zero percent of the composition by mass , lipid ( of all type ) account for about four  zero percent of the composition by mass , with the remain one  zero percent of the composition by mass be carbohydrate .
however , the concentration of protein and lipid vary with different cell membrane .
for example , myelin , an outgrowth of the membrane of specialized cell that insulate the axon of the peripheral nerve , contain only one  eight percent protein and seven  six percent lipid .
the mitochondrial inner membrane contain seven  six percent protein and only two  four percent lipid .
the plasma membrane of human red blood cell be three  zero percent lipid .
carbohydrate be present only on the exterior surface of the plasma membrane and be attach to protein , form glycoprotein , or attach to lipid , form glycolipid .
phospholipid
the main fabric of the membrane be compose of amphiphilic , phospholipid molecule .
the hydrophilic or " water - love " area of these molecule ( which look like a collection of ball in an artist 's rendition of the model )
( figure five  .  two ) be in contact with the aqueous fluid both inside and outside the cell .
hydrophobic , or water - hat molecule , tend to be non - polar .
- pron - interact with other non - polar molecule in chemical reaction , but generally do not interact with polar molecule .
when place in water , hydrophobic molecule tend to form a ball or cluster .
the hydrophilic region of the phospholipid tend to form hydrogen bond with water and other polar molecule on both the exterior and interior of the cell .
thus , the membrane surface that face the interior and exterior of the cell be hydrophilic .
in contrast , the interior of the cell membrane be hydrophobic and will not interact with water .
therefore , phospholipid form an excellent two - layer cell membrane that separate fluid within the cell from the fluid outside of the cell .
a phospholipid molecule ( figure five  .  three ) consist of a three - carbon glycerol backbone with two fatty acid molecule attach to carbon one and two , and a phosphate - contain group attach to the third carbon .
this arrangement give the overall molecule an area describe as - pron - head ( the phosphate - contain group ) , which have a polar character or negative charge , and an area call the tail ( the fatty acid ) , which have no charge .
the head can form hydrogen bond , but the tail can not .
a molecule with this arrangement of a positively or negatively charge area and an uncharged , or non - polar , area be refer to as amphiphilic or " dual - loving .
"
this phospholipid molecule be compose of a hydrophilic head and two hydrophobic tail .
the hydrophilic head group consist of a phosphate - contain group attach to a glycerol molecule .
the hydrophobic tail , each contain either a saturated or an unsaturated fatty acid , be long hydrocarbon chain .
this characteristic be vital to the structure of a plasma membrane because , in water , phospholipid tend to become arrange with - pron - hydrophobic tail face each other and - pron - hydrophilic head face out .
in this way , - pron - form a lipid bilayer — a barrier compose of a double layer of phospholipid that separate the water and other material on one side of the barrier from the water and other material on the other side .
in fact , phospholipid heat in an aqueous solution tend to spontaneously form small sphere or droplet ( call micelle or liposome ) , with - pron - hydrophilic head form the exterior and - pron - hydrophobic tail on the inside .
in an aqueous solution , phospholipid tend to arrange - pron - with - pron - polar head face outward and - pron - hydrophobic tail face inward .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
proteins proteins make up the second major component of plasma membrane .
integral protein ( some specialized type be call integrin ) be , as - pron - name suggest , integrate completely into the membrane structure , and - pron - hydrophobic membranespann region interact with the hydrophobic region of the the phospholipid bilayer ( figure five  .  two ) .
single - pass integral membrane protein usually have a hydrophobic transmembrane segment that consist of two  zero – two  five amino acid .
some span only part of the membrane — associate with a single layer — while other stretch from one side of the membrane to the other , and be expose on either side .
some complex protein be compose of up to one  two segment of a single protein , which be extensively fold and embed in the membrane ( figure five  .  five ) .
this type of protein have a hydrophilic region or region , and one or several mildly hydrophobic region .
this arrangement of region of the protein tend to orient the protein alongside the phospholipid , with the hydrophobic region of the protein adjacent to the tail of the phospholipid and the hydrophilic region or region of the protein protrude from the membrane and in contact with the cytosol or extracellular fluid .
integral membran protein may have one or more alpha - helix that span the membrane ( example one and two ) , or - pron - may have beta - sheet that span the membrane ( example three ) .
( credit  " foobar” / wikimedia commons )
chapter five  structure and function of plasma membranes one  three  nine peripheral protein be find on the exterior and interior surface of membrane , attach either to integral protein or to phospholipid .
peripheral protein , along with integral protein , may serve as enzyme , as structural attachment for the fiber of the cytoskeleton , or as part of the cell 's recognition site .
these be sometimes refer to as " cell - specific " protein .
the body recognize - pron - own protein and attack foreign protein associate with invasive pathogen .
carbohydrates carbohydrates be the third major component of plasma membrane .
- pron - be always find on the exterior surface of cell and be bind either to protein ( form glycoprotein ) or to lipid ( form glycolipid )
( figure five  .  two ) .
these carbohydrate chain may consist of two – six  zero monosaccharide unit and can be either straight or branched .
along with peripheral protein , carbohydrate form specialized site on the cell surface that allow cell to recognize each other .
these site have unique pattern that allow the cell to be recognize , much the way that the facial feature unique to each person allow - pron - or - pron - to be recognize .
this recognition function be very important to cell , as - pron - allow the immune system to differentiate between body cell ( call " self " ) and foreign cell or tissue ( call " non - self " ) .
similar type of glycoprotein and glycolipid be find on the surface of virus and may change frequently , prevent immune cell from recognize and attack - pron - .
these carbohydrate on the exterior surface of the cell — the carbohydrate component of both glycoprotein and glycolipid — be collectively refer to as the glycocalyx ( mean " sugar coat " ) .
the glycocalyx be highly hydrophilic and attract large amount of water to the surface of the cell .
this aid in the interaction of the cell with - pron - watery environment and in the cell 's ability to obtain substance dissolve in the water .
as discuss above , the glycocalyx be also important for cell identification , self / non - self determination , and embryonic development , and be use in cell - cell attachment to form tissue .
membrane fluidity
the mosaic characteristic of the membrane , describe in the fluid mosaic model , help to illustrate - pron - nature .
the integral protein and lipid exist in the membrane as separate but loosely attach molecule .
these resemble the separate , multicolored tile of a mosaic picture , and - pron - float , move somewhat with respect to one another .
the membrane be not like a balloon , however , that can expand and contract  rather , - pron - be fairly rigid and can burst if penetrate or if a cell take in too much water .
however , because of - pron - mosaic nature , a very fine needle can easily penetrate a plasma membrane without cause - pron - to burst , and the membrane will flow and self - seal when the needle be extract .
the mosaic characteristic of the membrane explain some but not all of - pron - fluidity .
there be two other factor that help maintain this fluid characteristic .
one factor be the nature of the phospholipid - pron - .
in - pron - saturate form , the fatty acid in phospholipid tail be saturate with bind hydrogen atom .
there be no double bond between adjacent carbon atom .
this result in tail that be relatively straight .
in contrast , unsaturated fatty acid do not contain a maximal number of hydrogen atom , but - pron - do contain some double bond between adjacent carbon atom  a double bond result in a bend in the string of carbon of approximately three  zero degree ( figure five  .  three ) .
thus , if saturate fatty acid , with - pron - straight tail , be compress by decrease temperature , - pron - press in on each other , make a dense and fairly rigid membrane .
if unsaturated fatty acid be compress , the " kink " in - pron - tail elbow adjacent phospholipid molecule away , maintain some space between the phospholipid molecule .
this " elbow room " help to maintain fluidity in the membrane at temperature at which membran with saturate fatty acid tail in - pron - phospholipid would " freeze " or solidify .
the relative fluidity of the membrane be particularly important in a cold environment .
a cold environment tend to compress membrane compose largely of saturate fatty acid , make - pron - less fluid and more susceptible to rupture .
many organism ( fish be one example ) be capable of adapt to cold environment by change the proportion of unsaturated fatty acid in - pron - membrane in response to the lowering of the temperature .
animal have an additional membrane constituent that assist in maintain fluidity .
cholesterol , which lie alongside the phospholipid in the membrane , tend to dampen the effect of temperature on the membrane .
thus , this lipid function as a buffer , prevent low temperature from inhibit fluidity and prevent increase temperature from increase fluidity too much .
thus , cholesterol extend , in both direction , the range of temperature in which the membrane be appropriately fluid and consequently functional .
cholesterol also serve other function , such as organize cluster of transmembrane protein into lipid raft .
plasma membrane must allow certain substance to enter and leave a cell , and prevent some harmful material from enter and some essential material from leave .
in other word , plasma membrane be selectively permeable —
- pron - allow some substance to pass through , but not other .
if - pron - be to lose this selectivity , the cell would no longer be able to sustain - pron - , and - pron - would be destroy .
some cell require large amount of specific substance than do other cell  - pron - must have a way of obtain these material from extracellular fluid .
this may happen passively , as certain material move back and forth , or the cell may have special mechanism that facilitate transport .
some material be so important to a cell that - pron - spend some of - pron - energy , hydrolyze adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) , to obtain these material .
red blood cell use some of - pron - energy do just that .
all cell spend the majority of - pron - energy to maintain an imbalance of sodium and potassium ion between the interior and exterior of the cell .
the most direct form of membrane transport be passive .
passive transport be a naturally occur phenomenon and do not require the cell to exert any of - pron - energy to accomplish the movement .
in passive transport , substance move from an area of high concentration to an area of low concentration .
a physical space in which there be a range of concentration of a single substance be say to have a concentration gradient .
selective permeability plasma membrane be asymmetric  the interior of the membrane be not identical to the exterior of the membrane .
in fact , there be a considerable difference between the array of phospholipid and protein between the two leaflet that form a membrane .
on the interior of the membrane , some protein serve to anchor the membrane to fiber of the cytoskeleton .
there be peripheral protein on the exterior of the membrane that bind element of the extracellular matrix .
carbohydrate , attach to lipid or protein , be also find on the exterior surface of the plasma membrane .
these carbohydrate complex help the cell bind substanc that the cell need in the extracellular fluid .
this add considerably to the selective nature of plasma membrane .
the exterior surface of the plasma membrane be not identical to the interior surface of the same membrane .
recall that plasma membrane be amphiphilic
 - pron - have hydrophilic and hydrophobic region .
this characteristic help the movement of some material through the membrane and hinder the movement of other .
lipid - soluble material with a low molecular weight can easily slip through the hydrophobic lipid core of the membrane .
substance such as the fat - soluble vitamin a , d , e , and k readily pass through the plasma membrane in the digestive tract and other tissue .
fat - soluble drug and hormone also gain easy entry into cell and be readily transport into the body 's tissue and organ .
molecule of oxygen and carbon dioxide have no charge and so pass through membrane by simple diffusion .
polar substanc present problem for the membrane .
while some polar molecule connect easily with the outside of a cell , - pron - can not readily pass through the lipid core of the plasma membrane .
additionally , while small ion could easily slip through the space in the mosaic of the membrane , - pron - charge prevent - pron - from do so .
ion such as sodium , potassium , calcium , and chloride must have special mean of penetrate plasma membrane .
simple sugar and amino acid also need help with transport across plasma membrane , achieve by various transmembrane protein ( channel ) .
diffusion diffusion be a passive process of transport .
a single substance tend to move from an area of high concentration to an area of low concentration until the concentration be equal across a space .
- pron - be familiar with diffusion of substance through the air .
for example , think about someone open a bottle of ammonia in a room fill with people .
the ammonia gas be at - pron - high concentration in the bottle  - pron - low concentration be at the edge of the room .
the ammonia vapor will diffuse , or spread away , from the bottle , and gradually , more and more people will smell the ammonia as - pron - spread .
material move within the cell
's cytosol by diffusion , and certain material move through the plasma membrane by diffusion ( figure five  .  eight ) .
diffusion expend no energy .
on the contrary , concentration gradient be a form of potential energy , dissipate as the gradient be eliminate .
diffusion through a permeable membrane move a substance from an area of high concentration ( extracellular fluid , in this case ) down - pron - concentration gradient ( into the cytoplasm ) .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
each separate substance in a medium , such as the extracellular fluid , have - pron - own concentration gradient , independent of the concentration gradient of other material .
in addition , each substance will diffuse accord to that gradient .
within a system , there will be different rate of diffusion of the different substance in the medium .
factor that affect diffusion molecules move constantly in a random manner , at a rate that depend on - pron - mass , - pron - environment , and the amount of thermal energy - pron - possess , which in turn be a function of temperature .
this movement account for the diffusion of molecule through whatev medium in which - pron - be localize .
a substance will tend to move into any space available to - pron - until - pron - be evenly distribute throughout - pron - .
after a substance have diffuse completely through a space , remove - pron - concentration gradient , molecule will still move around in the space , but there will be no net movement of the number of molecule from one area to another .
this lack of a concentration gradient in which there be no net movement of a substance be know as dynamic equilibrium .
while diffusion will go forward in the presence of a concentration gradient of a substance , several factor affect the rate of diffusion .

extent of the concentration gradient 
the great the difference in concentration , the more rapid the diffusion .
the closer the distribution of the material get to equilibrium , the slow the rate of diffusion become .

mass of the molecule diffusing 
heavy molecule move more slowly  therefore , - pron - diffuse more slowly .
the reverse be true for light molecule .

temperature 
high temperature increase the energy and therefore the movement of the molecule , increase the rate of diffusion .
low temperature decrease the energy of the molecule , thus decrease the rate of diffusion .

solvent density 
as the density of a solvent increase , the rate of diffusion decrease .
the molecule slow down because - pron - have a more difficult time get through the denser medium .
if the medium be less dense , diffusion increase .
because cell primarily use diffusion to move material within the cytoplasm , any increase in the cytoplasm 's density will inhibit the movement of the material .
an example of this be a person experience dehydration .
as the body 's cell lose water , the rate of diffusion decrease in the cytoplasm , and the cells' function deteriorate .
neuron tend to be very sensitive to this effect .
dehydration frequently lead to unconsciousness and possibly coma because of the decrease in diffusion rate within the cell .

solubility  as discuss earlier , nonpolar or lipid - soluble material pass through plasma membrane more easily than polar material , allow a fast rate of diffusion .

surface area and thickness of the plasma membrane 
increase surface area increase the rate of diffusion , whereas a thick membrane reduce - pron - .

distance travel  the great the distance that a substance must travel , the slow the rate of diffusion .
this place an upper limitation on cell size .
a large , spherical cell will die because nutrient or waste can not reach or leave the center of the cell , respectively .
therefore , cell must either be small in size , as in the case of many prokaryote , or be flatten , as with many single - cell eukaryote .
a variation of diffusion be the process of filtration .
in filtration , material move accord to - pron - concentration gradient through a membrane  sometimes the rate of diffusion be enhance by pressure , cause the substance to filter more rapidly .
this occur in the kidney , where blood pressure force large amount of water and accompany dissolve substance , or solut , out of the blood and into the renal tubule .
the rate of diffusion in this instance be almost totally dependent on pressure .
one of the effect of high blood pressure be the appearance of protein in the urine , which be " squeeze through " by the abnormally high pressure .
facilitate transport
in facilitate transport , also call facilitate diffusion , material diffuse across the plasma membrane with the help of membrane protein .
a concentration gradient exist that would allow these material to diffuse into the cell without expend cellular energy .
however , these material be ion be polar molecule that be repel by the hydrophobic part of the cell membrane .
facilitate transport protein shield these material from the repulsive force of the membrane , allow - pron - to diffuse into the cell .
the material be transport be first attach to protein or glycoprotein receptor on the exterior surface of the plasma membrane .
this allow the material that be need by the cell to be remove from the extracellular fluid .
the substance be then pass to specific integral protein that facilitate - pron - passage .
some of these integral protein be collection of beta pleated sheet that form a pore or channel through the phospholipid bilayer .
other be carrier protein which bind with the substance and aid - pron - diffusion through the membrane .
channel
the integral protein involve in facilitated transport be collectively refer to as transport protein , and - pron - function as either channel for the material or carrier .
in both case , - pron - be transmembrane protein .
channel be specific for the substance that be be transport .
channel protein have hydrophilic domain expose to the intracellular and extracellular fluid  - pron - additionally have a hydrophilic channel through - pron - core that provide a hydrate opening through the membrane layer ( figure five  .  nine ) .
passage through the channel allow polar compound to avoid the nonpolar central layer of the plasma membrane that would otherwise slow or prevent - pron - entry into the cell .
aquaporin be channel protein that allow water to pass through the membrane at a very high rate .
facilitate transport move substanc down - pron - concentration gradient .
- pron - may cross the plasma membrane with the aid of channel protein .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
channel protein be either open at all time or - pron - be " gate , " which control the opening of the channel .
the attachment of a particular ion to the channel protein may control the opening , or other mechanism or substance may be involve .
in some tissue , sodium and chloride ion pass freely through open channel , whereas in other tissue a gate must be open to allow passage .
an example of this occur in the kidney , where both form of channel be find in different part of the renal tubule .
cell involve in the transmission of electrical impulse , such as nerve and muscle cell , have gate channel for sodium , potassium , and calcium in - pron - membrane .
opening and closing of these channel change the relative concentration on oppose side of the membrane of these ion , result in the facilitation of electrical transmission along membrane ( in the case of nerve cell ) or in muscle contraction ( in the case of muscle cell ) .
carrier proteins
another type of protein embed in the plasma membrane be a carrier protein .
this aptly name protein bind a substance and , in do so , trigger a change of - pron - own shape , move the bind molecule from the outside of the cell to - pron - interior ( figure five  .  one  zero )  depend on the gradient , the material may move in the opposite direction .
carrier protein be typically specific for a single substance .
this selectivity add to the overall selectivity of the plasma membrane .
the exact mechanism for the change of shape be poorly understand .
protein can change shape when - pron - hydrogen bond be affect , but this may not fully explain this mechanism .
each carrier protein be specific to one substance , and there be a finite number of these protein in any membrane .
this can because problem in transport enough of the material for the cell to function properly .
when all of the protein be bind to - pron - ligand , - pron - be saturate and the rate of transport be at - pron - maximum .
increase the concentration gradient at this point will not result in an increase rate of transport .
some substance be able to move down - pron - concentration gradient across the plasma membrane with the aid of carrier protein .
carrier protein change shape as - pron - move molecule across the membrane .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
an example of this process occur in the kidney .
glucose , water , salt , ion , and amino acid need by the body be filter in one part of the kidney .
this filtrate , which include glucose , be then reabsorb in another part of the kidney .
because there be only a finite number of carrier protein for glucose , if more glucose be present than the protein can handle , the excess be not transport and - pron - be excrete from the body in the urine .
in a diabetic individual , this be describe as " spill glucose into the urine .
"
a different group of carrier protein call glucose transport protein , or glut , be involve in transport glucose and other hexose sugar through plasma membrane within the body .
channel and carrier protein transport material at different rate .
channel protein transport much more quickly than do carrier protein .
channel protein facilitate diffusion at a rate of ten of million of molecule per second , whereas carrier protein work at a rate of a thousand to a million molecule per second .
osmosis osmosis be the movement of water through a semipermeable membrane accord to the concentration gradient of water across the membrane , which be inversely proportional to the concentration of solute .
while diffusion transport material across membrane and within cell , osmosis transport only water across a membrane and the membrane limit the diffusion of solute in the water .
not surprisingly , the aquaporin that facilitate water movement play a large role in osmosis , most prominently in red blood cell and the membrane of kidney tubule .
mechanism osmosis be a special case of diffusion .
water , like other substance , move from an area of high concentration to one of low concentration .
an obvious question be what make water move at all ?
imagine a beaker with a semipermeable membrane separate the two side or half
( figure five  .  one  one ) .
on both side of the membrane the water level be the same , but there be different concentration of a dissolve substance , or solute , that can not cross the membrane ( otherwise the concentration on each side would be balance by the solute cross the membrane ) .
if the volume of the solution on both side of the membrane be the same , but the concentration of solute be different , then there be different amount of water , the solvent , on either side of the membrane .
in osmosis , water always move from an area of high water concentration to one of low concentration .
in the diagram show , the solute can not pass through the selectively permeable membrane , but the water can .
to illustrate this , imagine two full glass of water .
one have a single teaspoon of sugar in - pron - , whereas the second one contain one - quarter cup of sugar .
if the total volume of the solution in both cup be the same , which cup contain more water ?
because the large amount of sugar in the second cup take up much more space than the teaspoon of sugar in the first cup , the first cup have more water in - pron - .
return to the beaker example , recall that - pron - have a mixture of solute on either side of the membrane .
a principle of diffusion be that the molecule move around and will spread evenly throughout the medium if - pron - can .
however , only the material capable of get through the membrane will diffuse through - pron - .
in this example , the solute can not diffuse through the membrane , but the water can .
water have a concentration gradient in this system .
thus , water will diffuse down - pron - concentration gradient , cross the membrane to the side where - pron - be less concentrated .
this diffusion of water through the membrane — osmosis — will continue until the concentration gradient of water go to zero or until the hydrostatic pressure of the water balance the osmotic pressure .
osmosis proceed constantly in living system .
tonicity tonicity describe how an extracellular solution can change the volume of a cell by affect osmosis .
a solution ' s tonicity often directly correlate with the osmolarity of the solution .
osmolarity describe the total solute concentration of the solution .
a solution with low osmolarity have a great number of water molecule relative to the number of solute particle  a solution with high osmolarity have few water molecule with respect to solute particle .
in a situation in which solution of two different osmolaritie be separate by a membrane permeable to water , though not to the solute , water will move from the side of the membrane with low osmolarity ( and more water ) to the side with high osmolarity ( and less water ) .
this effect make sense if - pron - remember that the solute can not move across the membrane , and thus the only component in the system that can move — the water
— move along - pron - own concentration gradient .
an important distinction that concern live system be that osmolarity measure the number of particle ( which may be molecule ) in a solution .
therefore , a solution that be cloudy with cell may have a low osmolarity than a solution that be clear , if the second solution contain more dissolved molecule than there be cell .
hypotonic solutions
three term
— hypotonic , isotonic , and hypertonic — be use to relate the osmolarity of a cell to the osmolarity of the extracellular fluid that contain the cell .
in a hypotonic situation , the extracellular fluid have low osmolarity than the fluid inside the cell , and water enter the cell .
( in living system , the point of reference be always the cytoplasm , so the prefix hypo - mean that the extracellular fluid have a low concentration of solute , or a low osmolarity , than the cell cytoplasm . )
- pron - also mean that the extracellular fluid have a high concentration of water in the solution than do the cell .
in this situation , water will follow - pron - concentration gradient and enter the cell .
hypertonic solutions
as for a hypertonic solution , the prefix hyper - refer to the extracellular fluid have a high osmolarity than the cell 's cytoplasm  therefore , the fluid contain less water than the cell do .
because the cell have a relatively high concentration of water , water will leave the cell .
isotonic solutions
in an isotonic solution , the extracellular fluid have the same osmolarity as the cell .
if the osmolarity of the cell match that of the extracellular fluid , there will be no net movement of water into or out of the cell , although water will still move in and out .
blood cell and plant cell in hypertonic , isotonic , and hypotonic solution take on characteristic appearance .
tonicity in living systems
in a hypotonic environment , water enter a cell , and the cell swell .
in an isotonic condition , the relative concentration of solute and solvent be equal on both side of the membrane .
there be no net water movement  therefore , there be no change in the size of the cell .
in a hypertonic solution , water leave a cell and the cell shrink .
if either the hypo - or hyper - condition go to excess , the cell 's function become compromised , and the cell may be destroy .
a red blood cell will burst , or lyse , when - pron - swell beyond the plasma membrane 's capability to expand .
remember , the membrane resemble a mosaic , with discrete space between the molecule compose - pron - .
if the cell swell , and the space between the lipid and protein become too large , the cell will break apart .
in contrast , when excessive amount of water leave a red blood cell , the cell shrink , or crenate .
this have the effect of concentrate the solute leave in the cell , make the cytosol denser and interfere with diffusion within the cell .
the cell 's
ability to function will be compromise and may also result in the death of the cell .
various live thing have way of control the effect of osmosis — a mechanism call osmoregulation .
some organism , such as plant , fungus , bacteria , and some protist , have cell wall that surround the plasma membrane and prevent cell lysis in a hypotonic solution .
the plasma membrane can only expand to the limit of the cell wall , so the cell will not lyse .
in fact , the cytoplasm in plant be always slightly hypertonic to the cellular environment , and water will always enter a cell if water be available .
this inflow of water produce turgor pressure , which stiffen the cell wall of the plant ( figure five  .  one  three ) .
in nonwoody plant , turgor pressure support the plant .
conversly , if the plant be not water , the extracellular fluid will become hypertonic , cause water to leave the cell .
in this condition , the cell do not shrink because the cell wall be not flexible .
however , the cell membrane detach from the wall and constrict the cytoplasm .
this be call plasmolysis .
plant lose turgor pressure in this condition and wilt ( figure five  .  one  four ) .
the turgor pressure within a plant cell depend on the tonicity of the solution that - pron - be bath in .
without adequate water , the plant on the left have lose turgor pressure , visible in - pron - wilting  the turgor pressure be restore by water - pron - ( right ) .
( credit  victor m . vicente selvas )
tonicity be a concern for all live thing .
for example , paramecia and amoebas , which be protist that lack cell wall , have contractile vacuole .
this vesicle collect excess water from the cell and pump - pron - out , keep the cell from lys as - pron - take on water from - pron - environment .
a paramecium 's contractile vacuole , here visualize use bright field light microscopy at four  eight  zero x magnification , continuously pump water out of the organism 's body to keep - pron - from burst in a hypotonic medium .
( credit  modification of work by nih  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
many marine invertebrate have internal salt level match to - pron - environment , make - pron - isotonic with the water in which - pron - live .
fish , however , must spend approximately five percent of - pron - metabolic energy maintain osmotic homeostasis .
freshwater fish live in an environment that be hypotonic to - pron - cell .
these fish actively take in salt through - pron - gill and excrete dilute urine to rid - pron - of excess water .
saltwater fish live in the reverse environment , which be hypertonic to - pron - cell , and - pron - secrete salt through - pron - gill and excrete highly concentrated urine .
in vertebrate , the kidney regulate the amount of water in the body .
osmoreceptor be specialized cell in the brain that monitor the concentration of solute in the blood .
if the level of solute increase beyond a certain range , a hormone be release that retards water loss through the kidney and dilute the blood to safe level .
animal also have high concentration of albumin , which be produce by the liver , in - pron - blood .
this protein be too large to pass easily through plasma membrane and be a major factor in control the osmotic pressure apply to tissue .
active transport mechanism require the use of the cell 's energy , usually in the form of adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) .
if a substance must move into the cell against - pron - concentration gradient — that is , if the concentration of the substance inside the cell be great than - pron - concentration in the extracellular fluid ( and vice versa ) —the cell must use energy to move the substance .
some active transport mechanism move small - molecular weight material , such as ion , through the membrane .
other mechanism transport much large molecule .
electrochemical gradient - pron - have discuss simple concentration gradient — differential concentration of a substance across a space or a membrane — but in living system , gradient be more complex .
because ion move into and out of cell and because cell contain protein that do not move across the membrane and be mostly negatively charge , there be also an electrical gradient , a difference of charge , across the plasma membrane .
the interior of live cell be electrically negative with respect to the extracellular fluid in which - pron - be bath , and at the same time , cell have high concentration of potassium ( k+ ) and low concentration of sodium ( na+ ) than do the extracellular fluid .
so in a live cell , the concentration gradient of na+ tend to drive - pron - into the cell , and the electrical gradient of na+ ( a positive ion ) also tend to drive - pron - inward to the negatively charge interior .
the situation be more complex , however , for other element such as potassium .
the electrical gradient of k+ , a positive ion , also tend to drive - pron - into the cell , but the concentration gradient of k+ tend to drive k+ out of the cell ( figure five  .  one  six ) .
the combined gradient of concentration and electrical charge that affect an ion be call - pron - electrochemical gradient .
move against a gradient to move substance against a concentration or electrochemical gradient , the cell must use energy .
this energy be harvest from atp generate through the cell 's metabolism .
active transport mechanism , collectively call pump , work against electrochemical gradient .
small substance constantly pass through plasma membrane .
active transport maintain concentration of ion and other substance need by live cell in the face of these passive movement .
much of a cell 's supply of metabolic energy may be spend maintain these process .
( most of a red blood cell 's metabolic energy be use to maintain the imbalance between exterior and interior sodium and potassium level require by the cell . )
because active transport mechanism depend on a cell 's metabolism for energy , - pron - be sensitive to many metabolic poison that interfere with the supply of atp .
two mechanism exist for the transport of small - molecular weight material and small molecule .
primary active transport move ion across a membrane and create a difference in charge across that membrane , which be directly dependent on atp .
secondary active transport describe the movement of material that be due to the electrochemical gradient establish by primary active transport that do not directly require atp .
carrier proteins for active transport
an important membrane adaption for active transport be the presence of specific carrier protein or pump to facilitate movement  there be three type of these protein or transporter ( figure five  .  one  seven ) .
a uniporter carry one specific ion or molecule .
a symporter carry two different ion or molecule , both in the same direction .
an antiporter also carry two different ion or molecule , but in different direction .
all of these transporter can also transport small , uncharged organic molecule like glucose .
these three type of carrier protein be also find in facilitate diffusion , but - pron - do not require atp to work in that process .
some example of pump for active transport be na+ - k+ atpase , which carry sodium and potassium ion , and h+ - k+ atpase , which carry hydrogen and potassium ion .
both of these be antiporter carrier protein .
two other carrier protein be ca two + atpase and h+ atpase , which carry only calcium and only hydrogen ion , respectively .
both be pump .
a uniporter carry one molecule or ion .
a symporter carry two different molecule or ion , both in the same direction .
an antiporter also carry two different molecule or ion , but in different direction .
( credit  modification of work by " lupask” / wikimedia commons )
primary active transport
the primary active transport that function with the active transport of sodium and potassium allow secondary active transport to occur .
the second transport method be still consider active because - pron - depend on the use of energy as do primary transport ( figure five  .  one  eight ) .
primary active transport move ion across a membrane , create an electrochemical gradient ( electrogenic transport ) .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
one of the most important pump in animal cell be the sodium - potassium pump ( na+ - k+ atpase ) , which maintain the electrochemical gradient ( and the correct concentration of na+ and k+ ) in live cell .
the sodium - potassium pump move k+ into the cell while move na+ out at the same time , at a ratio of three na+ for every two k+ ion move in .
the na+ - k+ atpase exist in two form , depend on - pron - orientation to the interior or exterior of the cell and - pron - affinity for either sodium or potassium ion .
the process consist of the follow six step .
one .
with the enzyme orient towards the interior of the cell , the carrier have a high affinity for sodium ion .
three ion bind to the protein .
two .
atp be hydrolyze by the protein carrier and a low - energy phosphate group attache to - pron - .
three .
as a result , the carrier change shape and re - orient - pron - towards the exterior of the membrane .
the protein 's affinity for sodium decrease and the three sodium ion leave the carrier .
four .
the shape change increase the carrier 's affinity for potassium ion , and two such ion attach to the protein .
subsequently , the low - energy phosphate group detach from the carrier .
five .
with the phosphate group remove and potassium ion attach , the carrier protein reposition - pron - towards the interior of the cell .
the carrier protein , in - pron - new configuration , have a decrease affinity for potassium , and the two ion be release into the cytoplasm .
the protein now have a high affinity for sodium ion , and the process start again .
several thing have happen as a result of this process .
at this point , there be more sodium ion outside of the cell than inside and more potassium ion inside than out .
for every three ion of sodium that move out , two ion of potassium move in .
this result in the interior be slightly more negative relative to the exterior .
this difference in charge be important in create the condition necessary for the secondary process .
the sodium - potassium pump be , therefore , an electrogenic pump ( a pump that create a charge imbalance ) , create an electrical imbalance across the membrane and contribute to the membrane potential .
secondary active transport ( co - transport )
secondary active transport bring sodium ion , and possibly other compound , into the cell .
as sodium ion concentration build outside of the plasma membrane because of the action of the primary active transport process , an electrochemical gradient be create .
if a channel protein exist and be open , the sodium ion will be pull through the membrane .
this movement be use to transport other substance that can attach - pron - to the transport protein through the membrane ( figure five  .  one  nine ) .
many amino acid , as well as glucose , enter a cell this way .
this secondary process be also use to store high - energy hydrogen ion in the mitochondria of plant and animal cell for the production of atp .
the potential energy that accumulate in the store hydrogen ion be translate into kinetic energy as the ion surge through the channel protein atp synthase , and that energy be use to convert adp into atp .
in addition to move small ion and molecule through the membrane , cell also need to remove and take in large molecule and particle ( see table five  .  two for example ) .
some cell be even capable of engulf entire unicellular microorganism .
- pron - may have correctly hypothesize that the uptake and release of large particle by the cell require energy .
a large particle , however , can not pass through the membrane , even with energy supply by the cell .
endocytosis endocytosis be a type of active transport that move particle , such as large molecule , part of cell , and even whole cell , into a cell .
there be different variation of endocytosis , but all share a common characteristic 
the plasma membrane of the cell invaginate , form a pocket around the target particle .
the pocket pinch off , result in the particle be contain in a newly create intracellular vesicle form from the plasma membrane .
phagocytosis phagocytosis ( the condition of " cell eat " ) be the process by which large particle , such as cell or relatively large particle , be take in by a cell .
for example , when microorganism invade the human body , a type of white blood cell call a neutrophil will remove the invader through this process , surround and engulf the microorganism , which be then destroy by the neutrophil ( figure five  .  two  zero ) .
in phagocytosis , the cell membrane surround the particle and engulfs - pron - .
( credit  mariana ruiz villareal )
in preparation for phagocytosis , a portion of the inward - face surface of the plasma membrane become coat with a protein call clathrin , which stabilize this section of the membrane .
the coated portion of the membrane then extend from the body of the cell and surround the particle , eventually enclose - pron - .
once the vesicle contain the particle be enclose within the cell , the clathrin disengage from the membrane and the vesicle merge with a lysosome for the breakdown of the material in the newly form compartment ( endosome ) .
when accessible nutrient from the degradation of the vesicular content have be extract , the newly form endosome merge with the plasma membrane and release - pron - content into the extracellular fluid .
the endosomal membrane again become part of the plasma membrane .
pinocytosis a variation of endocytosis be call pinocytosis .
this literally mean " cell drinking " and be name at a time when the assumption be that the cell be purposefully take in extracellular fluid .
in reality , this be a process that take in molecule , include water , which the cell need from the extracellular fluid .
pinocytosis result in a much small vesicle than do phagocytosis , and the vesicle do not need to merge with a lysosome .
in pinocytosis , the cell membrane invaginate , surround a small volume of fluid , and pinch off .
( credit  mariana ruiz villareal )
a variation of pinocytosis be call potocytosis .
this process use a coat protein , call caveolin , on the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane , which perform a similar function to clathrin .
the cavity in the plasma membrane that form the vacuole have membrane receptor and lipid raft in addition to caveolin .
the vacuole or vesicle form in caveolae ( singular caveola ) be small than those in pinocytosis .
potocytosis be use to bring small molecule into the cell and to transport these molecule through the cell for - pron - release on the other side of the cell , a process call transcytosis .
receptor - mediate endocytosis a targeted variation of endocytosis employ receptor protein in the plasma membrane that have a specific bind affinity for certain substance .
in receptor - mediate endocytosis , uptake of substance by the cell be target to a single type of substance that bind to the receptor on the external surface of the cell membrane .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
in receptor - mediate endocytosis , as in phagocytosis , clathrin be attach to the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane .
if uptake of a compound be dependent on receptor - mediate endocytosis and the process be ineffective , the material will not be remove from the tissue fluid or blood .
instead , - pron - will stay in those fluid and increase in concentration .
some human disease be cause by the failure of receptor - mediate endocytosis .
for example , the form of cholesterol term low - density lipoprotein or ldl ( also refer to as " bad " cholesterol ) be remove from the blood by receptor - mediate endocytosis .
in the human genetic disease familial hypercholesterolemia , the ldl receptor be defective or miss entirely .
people with this condition have life - threaten level of cholesterol in - pron - blood , because - pron - cell can not clear ldl particle from - pron - blood .
although receptor - mediate endocytosis be design to bring specific substance that be normally find in the extracellular fluid into the cell , other substance may gain entry into the cell at the same site .
flu virus , diphtheria , and cholera toxin all have site that cross - react with normal receptor - bind site and gain entry into cell .
exocytosis
the reverse process of move material into a cell be the process of exocytosis .
exocytosis be the opposite of the process discuss above in that - pron - purpose be to expel material from the cell into the extracellular fluid .
waste material be envelop in a membrane and fuse with the interior of the plasma membrane .
this fusion open the membranous envelope on one  five  eight chapter five  structure and function of plasma membranes
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  one  four  four  eight  /  one  .  one  zero the exterior of the cell , and the waste material be expel into the extracellular space ( figure five  .  two  three ) .
other example of cell release molecule via exocytosis include the secretion of protein of the extracellular matrix and secretion of neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft by synaptic vesicle .
introduction virtually every task perform by live organism require energy .
energy be need to perform heavy labor and exercise , but human also use a great deal of energy while think , and even during sleep .
in fact , the live cell of every organism constantly use energy .
nutrient and other molecule be import , metabolized ( break down ) and possibly synthesize into new molecule , modify if need , transport around the cell , and may be distribute to the entire organism .
for example , the large protein that make up muscle be actively build from small molecule .
complex carbohydrate be break down into simple sugar that the cell use for energy .
just as energy be require to both build and demolish a building , energy be require for both the synthesis and breakdown of molecule .
additionally , signal molecule such as hormone and neurotransmitter be transport between cell .
pathogenic bacteria and virus be ingest and break down by cell .
cell must also export waste and toxin to stay healthy , and many cell must swim or move surround material via the beat motion of cellular appendage like cilium and flagella .
the cellular process list above require a steady supply of energy .
from where , and in what form , do this energy come ?
how do live cell obtain energy , and how do - pron - use - pron - ?
this chapter will discuss different form of energy and the physical law that govern energy transfer .
this chapter will also describe how cell use energy and replenish - pron - , and how chemical reaction in the cell be perform with great efficiency .
scientist use the term bioenergetic to discuss the concept of energy flow ( figure six  .  two ) through living system , such as cell .
cellular process such as the building and break down of complex molecule occur through stepwise chemical reaction .
some of these chemical reaction be spontaneous and release energy , whereas other require energy to proceed .
just as live thing must continually consume food to replenish what have be use , cell must continually produce more energy to replenish that use by the many energy - require chemical reaction that constantly take place .
all of the chemical reaction that take place inside cell , include those that use energy and those that release energy , be the cell 's metabolism .
most life form on earth get - pron - energy from the sun .
plant use photosynthesis to capture sunlight , and herbivore eat those plant to obtain energy .
carnivore eat the herbivore , and decomposer digest plant and animal matter .
during the chemical reaction of photosynthesis , energy be provide in the form of a very high - energy molecule call atp , or adenosine triphosphate , which be the primary energy currency of all cell .
just as the dollar be use as currency to buy good , cell use molecule of atp as energy currency to perform immediate work .
the sugar ( glucose ) be store as starch or glycogen .
energy - store polymer like these be break down into glucose to supply molecule of atp .
solar energy be require to synthesize a molecule of glucose during the reaction of photosynthesis .
in photosynthesis , light energy from the sun be initially transform into chemical energy that be temporally store in the energy carrier molecul atp and nadph ( nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate ) .
the store energy in atp and nadph be then use later in photosynthesis to build one molecule of glucose from six molecule of co two .
this process be analogous to eat breakfast in the morning to acquire energy for - pron - body that can be use later in the day .
under ideal condition , energy from one  eight molecule of atp be require to synthesize one molecule of glucose during the reaction of photosynthesis .
glucose molecule can also be combine with and convert into other type of sugar .
when sugar be consume , molecule of glucose eventually make - pron - way into each live cell of the organism .
inside the cell , each sugar molecule be break down through a complex series of chemical reaction .
the goal of these reaction be to harvest the energy store inside the sugar molecule .
the harvest energy be use to make high - energy atp molecule , which can be use to perform work , power many chemical reaction in the cell .
the amount of energy need to make one molecule of glucose from six molecule of carbon dioxide be one  eight molecule of atp and one  two molecule of nadph ( each one of which be energetically equivalent to three molecule of atp ) , or a total of five  four molecule equivalent require for the synthesis of one molecule of glucose .
this process be a fundamental and efficient way for cell to generate the molecular energy that - pron - require .
plant , like this oak tree and acorn , use energy from sunlight to make sugar and other organic molecule .
both plant and animal ( like this squirrel ) use cellular respiration to derive energy from the organic molecule originally produce by plant .
metabolic pathways
the process of make and break down sugar molecule illustrate two type of metabolic pathway .
a metabolic pathway be a series of interconnect biochemical reaction that convert a substrate molecule or molecule , step - by - step , through a series of metabolic intermediate , eventually yield a final product or product .
in the case of sugar metabolism , the first metabolic pathway synthesized sugar from small molecule , and the other pathway break sugar down into small molecule .
these two opposite process — the first require energy and the second produce energy — be refer to as anabolic ( building ) and catabolic ( break down ) pathway , respectively .
consequently , metabolism be compose of building ( anabolism ) and degradation ( catabolism ) .
there be more to the complexity of metabolism than understand the metabolic pathway alone .
metabolic complexity vary from organism to organism .
photosynthesis be the primary pathway in which photosynthetic organism like plant ( the majority of global synthesis be do by planktonic algae ) harvest the sun 's energy and convert - pron - into carbohydrate .
the by - product of photosynthesis be oxygen , require by some cell to carry out cellular respiration .
during cellular respiration , oxygen aid in the catabolic breakdown of carbon compound , like carbohydrate .
among the product of this catabolism be co two and atp .
in addition , some eukaryote perform catabolic process without oxygen ( fermentation )  that is , - pron - perform or use anaerobic metabolism .
organism probably evolve anaerobic metabolism to survive ( live organism come into existence about three  .  eight billion year ago , when the atmosphere lack oxygen ) .
despite the difference between organism and the complexity of metabolism , researcher have find that all branch of life share some of the same metabolic pathway , suggest that all organism evolve from the same ancient common ancestor ( figure six  .  four ) .
evidence indicate that over time , the pathway diverge , add specialized enzyme to allow organism to better adapt to - pron - environment , thus increase - pron - chance to survive .
however , the underlie principle remain that all organism must harvest energy from - pron - environment and convert - pron - to atp to carry out cellular function .
anabolic and catabolic pathways anabolic pathway require an input of energy to synthesize complex molecule from simple one .
synthesize sugar from co two be one example .
other example be the synthesis of large protein from amino acid building block , and the synthesis of new dna strand from nucleic acid building block .
these biosynthetic process be critical to the life of the cell , take place constantly , and demand energy provide by atp and other high - energy molecule like nadh ( nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ) and nadph ( figure six  .  five ) .
atp be an important molecule for cell to have in sufficient supply at all time .
the breakdown of sugar illustrate how a single molecule of glucose can store enough energy to make a great deal of atp , three  six to three  eight molecule .
this be a catabolic pathway .
catabolic pathway involve the degradation ( or breakdown ) of complex molecule into simple one .
molecular energy store in the bond of complex molecule be release in catabolic pathway and harvest in such a way that - pron - can be use to produce atp .
other energy - store molecule , such as fat , be also break down through similar catabolic reaction to release energy and make atp ( figure six  .  five ) .
- pron - be important to know that the chemical reaction of metabolic pathway do not take place spontaneously .
each reaction step be facilitate , or catalyze , by a protein call an enzyme .
enzyme be important for catalyze all type of biological reaction — those that require energy as well as those that release energy .
anabolic pathway be those that require energy to synthesize large molecule .
catabolic pathway be those that generate energy by break down large molecule .
both type of pathway be require for maintain the cell 's energy balance .
energy be define as the ability to do work .
as - pron - have learn , energy exist in different form .
for example , electrical energy , light energy , and heat energy be all different type of energy .
while these be all familiar type of energy that one can see or feel , there be another type of energy that be much less tangible .
this energy be associate with something as simple as an object hold above the ground .
in order to appreciate the way energy flow into and out of biological system , - pron - be important to understand more about the different type of energy that exist in the physical world .
type of energy
when an object be in motion , there be energy associate with that object .
in the example of an airplane in flight , there be a great deal of energy associate with the motion of the airplane .
this be because move object be capable of enact a change , or do work .
think of a wreck ball .
even a slow - move wreck ball can do a great deal of damage to other object .
however , a wreck ball that be not in motion be incapable of perform work .
energy associate with object in motion be call kinetic energy .
a speed bullet , a walk person , the rapid movement of molecule in the air ( which produce heat ) , and electromagnetic radiation like light all have kinetic energy .
now what if that same motionless wreck ball be lift two story above a car with a crane ?
if the suspend wreck ball be unmov , be there energy associate with - pron - ?
the answer be yes .
the suspend wreck ball have energy associate with - pron - that be fundamentally different from the kinetic energy of object in motion .
this form of energy result from the fact that there be the potential for the wreck ball to do work .
if - pron - be release , indeed - pron - would do work .
because this type of energy refer to the potential to do work , - pron - be call potential energy .
object transfer - pron - energy between kinetic and potential in the following way  as the wreck ball hang motionless , - pron - have zero kinetic and one  zero  zero percent potential energy .
once - pron - be release , - pron - kinetic energy begin to increase because - pron - build speed due to gravity .
at the same time , as - pron - near the ground , - pron - lose potential energy .
somewhere mid - fall - pron - have five  zero percent kinetic and five  zero percent potential energy .
just before - pron - hit the ground , the ball have nearly lose - pron - potential energy and have near - maximal kinetic energy .
other example of potential energy include the energy of water hold behind a dam ( figure six  .  six ) , or a person about to skydive out of an airplane .
water behind a dam have potential energy .
move water , such as in a waterfall or a rapidly flow river , have kinetic energy .
potential energy be not only associate with the location of matter ( such as a child sit on a tree branch ) , but also with the structure of matter .
a spring on the ground have potential energy if - pron - be compress  so do a rubber band that be pull taut .
the very existence of living cell rely heavily on structural potential energy .
on a chemical level , the bond that hold the atom of molecule together have potential energy .
remember that anabolic cellular pathway require energy to synthesize complex molecule from simple one , and catabolic pathway release energy when complex molecule be break down .
the fact that energy can be release by the breakdown of certain chemical bond imply that those bond have potential energy .
in fact , there be potential energy store within the bond of all the food molecule - pron - eat , which be eventually harness for use .
this be because these bond can release energy when break .
the type of potential energy that exist within chemical bond , and be release when those bond be break , be call chemical energy ( figure six  .  seven ) .
chemical energy be responsible for provide live cell with energy from food .
the release of energy be bring about by break the molecular bond within fuel molecule .
the molecule in gasoline ( octane , the chemical formula show ) contain chemical energy within the chemical bond .
this energy be transform into kinetic energy that allow a car to race on a racetrack .
free energy
after learn that chemical reaction release energy when energy - store bond be break , an important next question be how be the energy associate with chemical reaction quantify and express ?
how can the energy release from one reaction be compare to that of another reaction ?
a measurement of free energy be use to quantitate these energy transfer .
free energy be call gibbs free energy ( abbreviate with the letter g ) after josiah willard gibbs , the scientist who develop the measurement .
recall that accord to the second law of thermodynamic , all energy transfer involve the loss of some amount of energy in an unusable form such as heat , result in entropy .
gibbs free energy specifically refer to the energy associate with a chemical reaction that be available after entropy be account for .
in other word , gibbs free energy be usable energy , or energy that be available to do work .
every chemical reaction involve a change in free energy , call delta g ( δg ) .
the change in free energy can be calculate for any system that undergo such a change , such as a chemical reaction .
to calculate δg , subtract the amount of energy lose to entropy ( denote as δs ) from the total energy change of the system .
this total energy change in the system be call enthalpy and be denote as δh .
the formula for calculate δg be as follow , where the symbol t refer to absolute temperature in kelvin ( degree celsius + two  seven  three ) 
δg = δh − tδs
the standard free energy change of a chemical reaction be express as an amount of energy per mole of the reaction product ( either in kilojoule or kilocalorie , kj / mol or kcal / mol  one kj = zero  .  two  three  nine kcal ) under standard ph , temperature , and pressure condition .
standard ph , temperature , and pressure condition be generally calculate at ph seven  .  zero in biological system , two  five degree celsius , and one  zero  zero kilopascal ( one atm pressure ) , respectively .
- pron - be important to note that cellular condition vary considerably from these standard condition , and so standard calculated δg value for biological reaction will be different inside the cell .
endergonic reactions and exergonic reaction
if energy be release during a chemical reaction , then the result value from the above equation will be a negative number .
in other word , reaction that release energy have a δg < zero .
a negative δg also mean that the product of the reaction have less free energy than the reactant , because - pron - give off some free energy during the reaction .
reaction that have a negative δg and consequently release free energy be call exergonic reaction .
think  exergonic mean energy be exit the system .
these reaction be also refer to as spontaneous reaction , because - pron - can occur without the addition of energy into the system .
understanding which chemical reaction be spontaneous and release free energy be extremely useful for biologist , because these reaction can be harness to perform work inside the cell .
an important distinction must be draw between the term spontaneous and the idea of a chemical reaction that occur immediately .
contrary to the everyday use of the term , a spontaneous reaction be not one that suddenly or quickly occur .
the rusting of iron be an example of a spontaneous reaction that occur slowly , little by little , over time .
if a chemical reaction require an input of energy rather than release energy , then the δg for that reaction will be a positive value .
in this case , the product have more free energy than the reactant .
thus , the product of these reaction can be think of as energy - store molecule .
these chemical reaction be call endergonic reaction , and - pron - be nonspontaneous .
an endergonic reaction will not take place on - pron - own without the addition of free energy .
let - pron - revisit the example of the synthesis and breakdown of the food molecule , glucose .
remember that the building of complex molecule , such as sugar , from simple one be an anabolic process and require energy .
therefore , the chemical reaction involve in anabolic process be endergonic reaction .
on the other hand , the catabolic process of break sugar down into simple molecule release energy in a series of exergonic reaction .
like the example of rust above , the breakdown of sugar involve spontaneous reaction , but these reaction do not occur instantaneously .
figure six  .  eight show some other example of endergonic and exergonic reaction .
late section will provide more information about what else be require to make even spontaneous reaction happen more efficiently .
an important concept in the study of metabolism and energy be that of chemical equilibrium .
most chemical reaction be reversible .
- pron - can proceed in both direction , release energy into - pron - environment in one direction , and absorb - pron - from the environment in the other direction ( figure six  .  nine ) .
the same be true for the chemical reaction involve in cell metabolism , such as the break down and build up of protein into and from individual amino acid , respectively .
reactant within a closed system will undergo chemical reaction in both direction until a state of equilibrium be reach .
this state of equilibrium be one of the low possible free energy and a state of maximal entropy .
energy must be put into the system to push the reactant and product away from a state of equilibrium .
either reactant or product must be add , remove , or change .
if a cell be a closed system , - pron - chemical reaction would reach equilibrium , and - pron - would die because there would be insufficient free energy leave to perform the work need to maintain life .
in a live cell , chemical reaction be constantly move towards equilibrium , but never reach - pron - .
this be because a live cell be an open system .
material pass in and out , the cell recycle the product of certain chemical reaction into other reaction , and chemical equilibrium be never reach .
in this way , live organism be in a constant energy - require , uphill battle against equilibrium and entropy .
this constant supply of energy ultimately come from sunlight , which be use to produce nutrient in the process of photosynthesis .
exergonic and endergonic reaction result in change in gibbs free energy .
exergonic reaction release energy  endergonic reaction require energy to proceed .
activation energy
there be another important concept that must be consider regard endergonic and exergonic reaction .
even exergonic reaction require a small amount of energy input to get go before - pron - can proceed with - pron - energy - release step .
these reaction have a net release of energy , but still require some energy in the beginning .
this small amount of energy input necessary for all chemical reaction to occur be call the activation energy ( or free energy of activation ) and be abbreviate ea ( figure six  .  one  zero ) .
why would an energy - releasing , negative δg reaction actually require some energy to proceed ?
the reason lie in the step that take place during a chemical reaction .
during chemical reaction , certain chemical bond be break and new one be form .
for example , when a glucose molecule be break down , bond between the carbon atom of the molecule be break .
since these be energy - store bond , - pron - release energy when break .
however , to get - pron - into a state that allow the bond to break , the molecule must be somewhat contorted .
a small energy input be require to achieve this contorted state .
this contorted state be call the transition state , and - pron - be a high - energy , unstable state .
for this reason , reactant molecule do not last long in - pron - transition state , but very quickly proceed to the next step of the chemical reaction .
free energy diagram illustrate the energy profile for a give reaction .
whether the reaction be exergonic or endergonic determine whether the product in the diagram will exist at a low or high energy state than both the reactant and the product .
however , regardless of this measure , the transition state of the reaction exist at a high energy state than the reactant , and thus , ea be always positive .
where do the activation energy require by chemical reactant come from ?
the source of the activation energy need to push reaction forward be typically heat energy from the surrounding .
heat energy ( the total bond energy of reactant or product in a chemical reaction ) speed up the motion of molecule , increase the frequency and force with which - pron - collide  - pron - also move atom and bond within the molecule slightly , help - pron - reach - pron - transition state .
for this reason , heat up a system will because chemical reactant within that system to react more frequently .
increase the pressure on a system have the same effect .
once reactant have absorb enough heat energy from - pron - surrounding to reach the transition state , the reaction will proceed .
the activation energy of a particular reaction determine the rate at which - pron - will proceed .
the high the activation energy , the slow the chemical reaction will be .
the example of iron rusting illustrate an inherently slow reaction .
this reaction occur slowly over time because of - pron - high ea .
additionally , the burning of many fuel , which be strongly exergonic , will take place at a negligible rate unless - pron - activation energy be overcome by sufficient heat from a spark .
once - pron - begin to burn , however , the chemical reaction release enough heat to continue the burn process , supply the activation energy for surround fuel molecule .
like these reaction outside of cell , the activation energy for most cellular reaction be too high for heat energy to overcome at efficient rate .
in other word , in order for important cellular reaction to occur at appreciable rate ( number of reaction per unit time ) , - pron - activation energy must be lower ( figure six  .  one  zero )  this be refer to as catalysis .
this be a very good thing as far as live cell be concern .
important macromolecule , such as protein , dna , and rna , store considerable energy , and - pron - breakdown be exergonic .
if cellular temperature alone provide enough heat energy for these exergonic reaction to overcome - pron - activation barrier , the essential component of a cell would disintegrate .
thermodynamic refer to the study of energy and energy transfer involve physical matter .
the matter and - pron - environment relevant to a particular case of energy transfer be classify as a system , and everything outside of that system be call the surrounding .
for instance , when heat a pot of water on the stove , the system include the stove , the pot , and the water .
energy be transfer within the system ( between the stove , pot , and water ) .
there be two type of system  open and closed .
an open system be one in which energy can be transfer between the system and - pron - surrounding .
the stovetop system be open because heat can be lose into the air .
a closed system be one that can not transfer energy to - pron - surrounding .
biological organism be open system .
energy be exchange between - pron - and - pron - surrounding , as - pron - consume energystor molecule and release energy to the environment by do work .
like all thing in the physical world , energy be subject to the law of physics .
the law of thermodynamic govern the transfer of energy in and among all system in the universe .
the first law of thermodynamics
the first law of thermodynamic deal with the total amount of energy in the universe .
- pron - state that this total amount of energy be constant .
in other word , there have always be , and always will be , exactly the same amount of energy in the universe .
energy exist in many different form .
accord to the first law of thermodynamic , energy may be transfer from place to place or transform into different form , but - pron - can not be create or destroy .
the transfer and transformation of energy take place around - pron - all the time .
light bulb transform electrical energy into light energy .
gas stove transform chemical energy from natural gas into heat energy .
plant perform one of the most biologically useful energy transformation on earth  that of convert the energy of sunlight into the chemical energy store within organic molecule ( figure six  .  two ) .
some example of energy transformation be show in figure six  .  one  one .
the challenge for all live organism be to obtain energy from - pron - surrounding in form that - pron - can transfer or transform into usable energy to do work .
live cell have evolve to meet this challenge very well .
chemical energy store within organic molecule such as sugar and fat be transform through a series of cellular chemical reaction into energy within molecule of atp .
energy in atp molecule be easily accessible to do work .
example of the type of work that cell need to do include build complex molecule , transport material , power the beat motion of cilium or flagella , contract muscle fiber to create movement , and reproduction .
show be two example of energy be transfer from one system to another and transform from one form to another .
human can convert the chemical energy in food , like this ice cream cone , into kinetic energy ( the energy of movement to ride a bicycle ) .
plant can convert electromagnetic radiation ( light energy ) from the sun into chemical energy .
the second law of thermodynamics a live cell 's primary task of obtain , transform , and use energy to do work
may seem simple .
however , the second law of thermodynamic explain why these task be hard than - pron - appear .
none of the energy transfer - pron - have discuss , along with all energy transfer and transformation in the universe , be completely efficient .
in every energy transfer , some amount of energy be lose in a form that be unusable .
in most case , this form be heat energy .
thermodynamically , heat energy be define as the energy transfer from one system to another that be not do work .
for example , when an airplane fly through the air , some of the energy of the fly plane be lose as heat energy due to friction with the surround air .
this friction actually heat the air by temporarily increase the speed of air molecule .
likewise , some energy be lose as heat energy during cellular metabolic reaction .
this be good for warm - blooded creature like - pron - , because heat energy help to maintain - pron - body temperature .
strictly speak , no energy transfer be completely efficient , because some energy be lose in an unusable form .
an important concept in physical system be that of order and disorder ( also know as randomness ) .
the more energy that be lose by a system to - pron - surrounding , the less order and more random the system be .
scientist refer to the measure of randomness or disorder within a system as entropy .
high entropy mean high disorder and low energy ( figure six  .  one  two ) .
to better understand entropy , think of a student 's bedroom .
if no energy or work be put into - pron - , the room would quickly become messy .
- pron - would exist in a very disordered state , one of high entropy .
energy must be put into the system , in the form of the student do work and put everything away , in order to bring the room back to a state of cleanliness and order .
this state be one of low entropy .
similarly , a car or house must be constantly maintain with work in order to keep - pron - in an order state .
leave alone , the entropy of the house or car gradually increase through rust and degradation .
molecule and chemical reaction have vary amount of entropy as well .
for example , as chemical reaction reach a state of equilibrium , entropy increase , and as molecule at a high concentration in one place diffuse and spread out , entropy also increase .
all physical system can be think of in this way  live thing be highly order , require constant energy input to be maintain in a state of low entropy .
as live system take in energy - store molecule and transform - pron - through chemical reaction , - pron - lose some amount of usable energy in the process , because no reaction be completely efficient .
- pron - also produce waste and by - product that be not useful energy source .
this process increase the entropy of the system 's surrounding .
since all energy transfer result in the loss of some usable energy , the second law of thermodynamic state that every energy transfer or transformation increase the entropy of the universe .
even though live thing be highly order and maintain a state of low entropy , the entropy of the universe in total be constantly increase due to the loss of usable energy with each energy transfer that occur .
essentially , live thing be in a continuous uphill battle against this constant increase in universal entropy .
entropy be a measure of randomness or disorder in a system .
gas have high entropy than liquid , and liquid have high entropy than solid .
even exergonic , energy - release reaction require a small amount of activation energy in order to proceed .
however , consider endergonic reaction , which require much more energy input , because - pron - product have more free energy than - pron - reactant .
within the cell , where do energy to power such reaction come from ?
the answer lie with an energysupply molecule call adenosine triphosphate , or atp .
atp be a small , relatively simple molecule ( figure six  .  one  three ) , but within some of - pron - bond , - pron - contain the potential for a quick burst of energy that can be harness to perform cellular work .
this molecule can be think of as the primary energy currency of cell in much the same way that money be the currency that people exchange for thing - pron - need .
atp be use to power the majority of energy - require cellular reaction .
atp be the primary energy currency of the cell .
- pron - have an adenosine backbone with three phosphate group attach .
as - pron - name suggest , adenosine triphosphate be comprise of adenosine bind to three phosphate group ( figure six  .  one  three ) .
adenosine be a nucleoside consisting of the nitrogenous base adenine and a five - carbon sugar , ribose .
the three phosphate group , in order of close to furthest from the ribose sugar , be label alpha , beta , and gamma .
together , these chemical group constitute an energy powerhouse .
however , not all bond within this molecule exist in a particularly high - energy state .
both bond that link the phosphate be equally high - energy bond ( phosphoanhydride bond ) that , when break , release sufficient energy to power a variety of cellular reaction and process .
these high - energy bond be the bond between the second and third ( or beta and gamma ) phosphate group and between the first and second phosphate group .
the reason that these bond be consider " high - energy " be because the product of such bond breaking — adenosine diphosphate ( adp ) and one inorganic phosphate group ( pi ) —have considerably low free energy than the reactant  atp and a water molecule .
because this reaction take place with the use of a water molecule , - pron - be consider a hydrolysis reaction .
in other word , atp be hydrolyze into adp in the following reaction  atp + h two o → adp + pi + free energy like most chemical reaction , the hydrolysis of atp to adp be reversible .
the reverse reaction regenerate atp from adp + pi .
indeed , cell rely on the regeneration of atp just as people rely on the regeneration of spend money through some sort of income .
since atp hydrolysis release energy , atp regeneration must require an input of free energy .
the formation of atp be express in this equation  adp + pi + free energy → atp + h two o two prominent question remain with regard to the use of atp as an energy source .
exactly how much free energy be release with the hydrolysis of atp , and how be that free energy use to do cellular work ?
the calculated δg for the hydrolysis of one mole of atp into adp and pi be − seven  .  three kcal / mole ( − three  zero  .  five kj / mol ) .
since this calculation be true under standard condition , - pron - would be expect that a different value exist under cellular condition .
in fact , the δg for the hydrolysis of one mole of atp in a live cell be almost double the value at standard condition  one  four kcal / mol ( − five  seven kj / mol ) .
atp be a highly unstable molecule .
unless quickly use to perform work , atp spontaneously dissociate into adp + pi , and the free energy release during this process be lose as heat .
the second question pose above , that is , how the energy release by atp hydrolysis be use to perform work inside the cell , depend on a strategy call energy coupling .
cell couple the exergonic reaction of atp hydrolysis with endergonic reaction , allow - pron - to proceed .
one example of energy coupling use atp involve a transmembrane ion pump that be extremely important for cellular function .
this sodium - potassium pump ( na+ / k+ pump ) drive sodium out of the cell and potassium into the cell ( figure six  .  one  four ) .
a large percentage of a cell
's
atp be spend power this pump , because cellular process bring a great deal of sodium into the cell and potassium out of the cell .
the pump work constantly to stabilize cellular concentration of sodium and potassium .
in order for the pump to turn one cycle ( export three na+ ion and import two k+ ion ) , one molecule of atp must be hydrolyze .
when atp be hydrolyze , - pron - gamma phosphate do not simply float away , but be actually transfer onto the pump protein .
this process of a phosphate group bind to a molecule be call phosphorylation .
as with most case of atp hydrolysis , a phosphate from atp be transfer onto another molecule .
in a phosphorylat state , the na+ / k+ pump have more free energy and be trigger to undergo a conformational change .
this change allow - pron - to release na+ to the outside of the cell .
- pron - then bind extracellular k+ , which , through another conformational change , cause the phosphate to detach from the pump .
this release of phosphate trigger the k+ to be release to the inside of the cell .
essentially , the energy release from the hydrolysis of atp be couple with the energy require to power the pump and transport na+ and k+ ion .
atp perform cellular work use this basic form of energy couple through phosphorylation .
often during cellular metabolic reaction , such as the synthesis and breakdown of nutrient , certain molecule must be alter slightly in - pron - conformation to become substrate for the next step in the reaction series .
one example be during the very first step of cellular respiration , when a molecule of the sugar glucose be break down in the process of glycolysis .
in the first step of this process , atp be require for the phosphorylation of glucose , create a high - energy but unstable intermediate .
this phosphorylation reaction power a conformational change that allow the phosphorylat glucose molecule to be convert to the phosphorylated sugar fructose .
fructose be a necessary intermediate for glycolysis to move forward .
here , the exergonic reaction of atp hydrolysis be couple with the endergonic reaction of convert glucose into a phosphorylat intermediate in the pathway .
once again , the energy release by break a phosphate bond within atp be use for the phosphorylation of another molecule , create an unstable intermediate and power an important conformational change .
a substance that help a chemical reaction to occur be a catalyst , and the special molecule that catalyze biochemical reaction be call enzyme .
almost all enzyme be protein , make up of chain of amino acid , and - pron - perform the critical task of lower the activation energy of chemical reaction inside the cell .
enzyme do this by bind to the reactant molecule , and hold - pron - in such a way as to make the chemical bond - breaking and bond - form process take place more readily .
- pron - be important to remember that enzyme do not change the δg of a reaction .
in other word , - pron - do not change whether a reaction be exergonic ( spontaneous ) or endergonic .
this be because - pron - do not change the free energy of the reactant or product .
- pron - only reduce the activation energy require to reach the transition state .
enzyme active site and substrate specificity
the chemical reactant to which an enzyme bind be the enzyme 's substrate .
there may be one or more substrate , depend on the particular chemical reaction .
in some reaction , a single - reactant substrate be break down into multiple product .
in other , two substrate may come together to create one large molecule .
two reactant may also enter a reaction , both become modified , and leave the reaction as two product .
the location within the enzyme where the substrate bind be call the enzyme 's active site .
the active site be where the " action " happen , so to speak .
since enzyme be protein , there be a unique combination of amino acid residue ( also call side chain , or r group ) within the active site .
each residue be characterize by different property .
residue can be large or small , weakly acidic or basic , hydrophilic or hydrophobic , positively or negatively charge , or neutral .
the unique combination of amino acid residue , - pron - position , sequence , structure , and property , create a very specific chemical environment within the active site .
this specific environment be suit to bind , albeit briefly , to a specific chemical substrate ( or substrate ) .
due to this jigsaw puzzle - like match between an enzyme and - pron - substrate ( which adapt to find the good fit between the transition state and the active site ) , enzyme be know for - pron - specificity .
the " good fit " result from the shape and the amino acid functional group 's attraction to the substrate .
there be a specifically match enzyme for each substrate and , thus , for each chemical reaction  however , there be flexibility as well .
the fact that active site be so perfectly suit to provide specific environmental condition also mean that - pron - be subject to influence by the local environment .
- pron - be true that increase the environmental temperature generally increase reaction rate , enzyme - catalyze or otherwise .
however , increase or decrease the temperature outside of an optimal range can affect chemical bond within the active site in such a way that - pron - be less well suited to bind substrate .
high temperature will eventually because enzyme , like other biological molecule , to denature , a process that change the natural property of a substance .
likewise , the ph of the local environment can also affect enzyme function .
active site amino acid residue have - pron - own acidic or basic property that be optimal for catalysis .
these residue be sensitive to change in ph that can impair the way substrate molecule bind .
enzyme be suit to function best within a certain ph range , and , as with temperature , extreme ph value ( acidic or basic ) of the environment can because enzyme to denature .
induced fit and enzyme function
for many year , scientist think that enzyme - substrate binding take place in a simple " lock - and - key " fashion .
this model assert that the enzyme and substrate fit together perfectly in one instantaneous step .
however , current research support a more refined view call induce fit ( figure six  .  one  six ) .
the induce - fit model expand upon the lock - and - key model by describe a more dynamic interaction between enzyme and substrate .
as the enzyme and substrate come together , - pron - interaction cause a mild shift in the enzyme 's structure that confirm an ideal binding arrangement between the enzyme and the transition state of the substrate .
this ideal bind maximiz the enzyme 's ability to catalyze - pron - reaction .
when an enzyme bind - pron - substrate , an enzyme - substrate complex be form .
this complex lower the activation energy of the reaction and promote - pron - rapid progression in one of many way .
on a basic level , enzyme promote chemical reaction that involve more than one substrate by bring the substrate together in an optimal orientation .
the appropriate region ( atom and bond ) of one molecule be juxtapose to the appropriate region of the other molecule with which - pron - must react .
another way in which enzyme promote the reaction of - pron - substrate be by create an optimal environment within the active site for the reaction to occur .
certain chemical reaction may proceed best in a slightly acidic or non - polar environment .
the chemical property that emerge from the particular arrangement of amino acid residue within an active site create the perfect environment for an enzyme 's specific substrate to react .
- pron - have learn that the activation energy require for many reaction include the energy involve in manipulating or slightly contort chemical bond so that - pron - can easily break and allow other to reform .
enzymatic action can aid this process .
the enzyme - substrate complex can lower the activation energy by contort substrate molecule in such a way as to facilitate bond - break , help to reach the transition state .
finally , enzyme can also lower activation energy by take part in the chemical reaction - pron - .
the amino acid residue can provide certain ion or chemical group that actually form covalent bond with substrate molecule as a necessary step of the reaction process .
in these case , - pron - be important to remember that the enzyme will always return to - pron - original state at the completion of the reaction .
one of the hallmark property of enzyme be that - pron - remain ultimately unchanged by the reaction - pron - catalyze .
after an enzyme be do catalyze a reaction , - pron - release - pron - product ( s ) .
accord to the induce - fit model , both enzyme and substrate undergo dynamic conformational change upon bind .
the enzyme contort the substrate into - pron - transition state , thereby increase the rate of the reaction .
control of metabolism through enzyme regulation
- pron - would seem ideal to have a scenario in which all of the enzyme encode in an organism 's genome exist in abundant supply and function optimally under all cellular condition , in all cell , at all time .
in reality , this be far from the case .
a variety of mechanism ensure that this do not happen .
cellular need and condition vary from cell to cell , and change within individual cell over time .
the require enzyme and energetic demand of stomach cell be different from those of fat storage cell , skin cell , blood cell , and nerve cell .
furthermore , a digestive cell work much hard to process and break down nutrient during the time that closely follow a meal compare with many hour after a meal .
as these cellular demand and condition vary , so do the amount and functionality of different enzyme .
since the rate of biochemical reaction be control by activation energy , and enzym low and determine activation energy for chemical reaction , the relative amount and functioning of the variety of enzyme within a cell ultimately determine which reaction will proceed and at which rate .
this determination be tightly control .
in certain cellular environment , enzyme activity be partly control by environmental factor , like ph and temperature .
there be other mechanism through which cell control the activity of enzyme and determine the rate at which various biochemical reaction will occur .
regulation of enzymes by molecules enzymes can be regulate in way that either promote or reduce - pron - activity .
there be many different kind of molecule that inhibit or promote enzyme function , and various mechanism exist for do so .
in some case of enzyme inhibition , for example , an inhibitor molecule be similar enough to a substrate that - pron - can bind to the active site and simply block the substrate from bind .
when this happen , the enzyme be inhibit through competitive inhibition , because an inhibitor molecule compete with the substrate for active site binding ( figure six  .  one  seven ) .
on the other hand , in noncompetitive inhibition , an inhibitor molecule bind to the enzyme in a location other than an allosteric site and still manage to block substrate bind to the active site .
competitive and noncompetitive inhibition affect the rate of reaction differently .
competitive inhibitor affect the initial rate but do not affect the maximal rate , whereas noncompetitive inhibitor affect the maximal rate .
some inhibitor molecule bind to enzyme in a location where - pron - binding induce a conformational change that reduce the affinity of the enzyme for - pron - substrate .
this type of inhibition be call allosteric inhibition ( figure six  .  one  eight ) .
most allosterically regulated enzyme be make up of more than one polypeptide , mean that - pron - have more than one protein subunit .
when an allosteric inhibitor bind to an enzyme , all active site on the protein subunit be change slightly such that - pron - bind - pron - substrate with less efficiency .
there be allosteric activator as well as inhibitor .
allosteric activator bind to location on an enzyme away from the active site , induce a conformational change that increase the affinity of the enzyme 's active site ( s ) for - pron - substrate ( s ) .
allosteric inhibitor modify the active site of the enzyme so that substrate bind be reduce or prevent .
in contrast , allosteric activator modify the active site of the enzyme so that the affinity for the substrate increase .
many enzyme do not work optimally , or even at all , unless bind to other specific non - protein helper molecule , either temporarily through ionic or hydrogen bond or permanently through strong covalent bond .
two type of helper molecule be cofactor and coenzyme .
bind to these molecule promote optimal conformation and function for - pron - respective enzyme .
cofactor be inorganic ion such as iron ( fe++ ) and magnesium ( mg++ ) .
one example of an enzyme that require a metal ion as a cofactor be the enzyme that build dna molecule , dna polymerase , which require bind zinc ion ( zn++ ) to function .
coenzyme be organic helper molecule , with a basic atomic structure make up of carbon and hydrogen , which be require for enzyme action .
the most common source of coenzyme be dietary vitamin ( figure six  .  two  zero ) .
some vitamin be precursor to coenzyme and other act directly as coenzyme .
vitamin c be a coenzyme for multiple enzyme that take part in build the important connective tissue component , collagen .
an important step in the breakdown of glucose to yield energy be catalysis by a multi - enzyme complex call pyruvate dehydrogenase .
pyruvate dehydrogenase be a complex of several enzyme that actually require one cofactor ( a magnesium ion ) and five different organic coenzyme to catalyze - pron - specific chemical reaction .
therefore , enzyme function be , in part , regulate by an abundance of various cofactor and coenzyme , which be supply primarily by the diet of most organism .
vitamin be important coenzyme or precursor of coenzyme , and be require for enzyme to function properly .
multivitamin capsule usually contain mixture of all the vitamin at different percentage .
enzyme compartmentalization
in eukaryotic cell , molecule such as enzyme be usually compartmentalize into different organelle .
this allow for yet another level of regulation of enzyme activity .
enzyme require only for certain cellular process can be house separately along with - pron - substrate , allow for more efficient chemical reaction .
example of this sort of enzyme regulation base on location and proximity include the enzyme involve in the latter stage of cellular respiration , which take place exclusively in the mitochondria , and the enzyme involve in the digestion of cellular debris and foreign material , locate within lysosome .
feedback inhibition in metabolic pathways molecules can regulate enzyme function in many way .
a major question remain , however  what be these molecule and where do - pron - come from ?
some be cofactor and coenzyme , ion , and organic molecule , as - pron - have learn .
what other molecule in the cell provide enzymatic regulation , such as allosteric modulation , and competitive and noncompetitive inhibition ?
the answer be that a wide variety of molecule can perform these role .
some of these molecule include pharmaceutical and non - pharmaceutical drug , toxin , and poison from the environment .
perhaps the most relevant source of enzyme regulatory molecule , with respect to cellular metabolism , be the product of the cellular metabolic reaction - pron - .
in a most efficient and elegant way , cell have evolve to use the product of - pron - own reaction for feedback inhibition of enzyme activity .
feedback inhibition involve the use of a reaction product to regulate - pron - own further production ( figure six  .  two  one ) .
the cell respond to the abundance of specific product by slow down production during anabolic or catabolic reaction .
such reaction product may inhibit the enzyme that catalyze - pron - production through the mechanism describe above .
metabolic pathway be a series of reaction catalyze by multiple enzyme .
feedback inhibition , where the end product of the pathway inhibit an upstream step , be an important regulatory mechanism in cell .
the production of both amino acid and nucleotide be control through feedback inhibition .
additionally , atp be an allosteric regulator of some of the enzyme involve in the catabolic breakdown of sugar , the process that produce atp .
in this way , when atp be abundant , the cell can prevent - pron - further production .
remember that atp be an unstable molecule that can spontaneously dissociate into adp .
if too much atp be present in a cell , much of - pron - would go to waste .
on the other hand , adp serve as a positive allosteric regulator ( an allosteric activator ) for some of the same enzyme that be inhibit by atp .
thus , when relative level of adp be high compare to atp , the cell be trigger to produce more atp through the catabolism of sugar .
the electrical energy plant in figure seven  .  one convert energy from one form to another form that can be more easily use .
this type of generate plant start with underground thermal energy ( heat ) and transform - pron - into electrical energy that will be transport to home and factory .
like a generate plant , plant and animal also must take in energy from the environment and convert - pron - into a form that - pron - cell can use .
energy enter an organism 's body in one form and be convert into another form that can fuel the organism 's life function .
in the process of photosynthesis , plant and other photosynthetic producer take in energy in the form of light ( solar energy ) and convert - pron - into chemical energy , glucose , which store this energy in - pron - chemical bond .
then , a series of metabolic pathway , collectively call cellular respiration , extract the energy from the bond in glucose and convert - pron - into a form that all live thing can use — both producer , such as plant , and consumer , such as animal .
energy production within a cell involve many coordinated chemical pathway .
most of these pathway be combination of oxidation and reduction reaction .
oxidation and reduction occur in tandem .
an oxidation reaction strip an electron from an atom in a compound , and the addition of this electron to another compound be a reduction reaction .
because oxidation and reduction usually occur together , these pair of reaction be call oxidation reduction reaction , or redox reaction .
electron and energy
the removal of an electron from a molecule , oxidize - pron - , result in a decrease in potential energy in the oxidize compound .
the electron ( sometimes as part of a hydrogen atom ) , do not remain unbonded , however , in the cytoplasm of a cell .
rather , the electron be shift to a second compound , reduce the second compound .
the shift of an electron from one compound to another remove some potential energy from the first compound ( the oxidize compound ) and increase the potential energy of the second compound ( the reduce compound ) .
the transfer of electron between molecule be important because most of the energy store in atom and use to fuel cell function be in the form of high - energy electron .
the transfer of energy in the form of electron allow the cell to transfer and use energy in an incremental fashion — in small package rather than in a single , destructive burst .
this chapter focus on the extraction of energy from food  - pron - will see that as - pron - track the path of the transfer , - pron - be track the path of electron move through metabolic pathway .
electron carriers
in living system , a small class of compound function as electron shuttle  - pron - bind and carry high - energy electron between compound in pathway .
the principal electron carrier - pron - will consider be derive from the b vitamin group and be derivative of nucleotide .
these compound can be easily reduce ( that is , - pron - accept electron ) or oxidize ( - pron - lose electron ) .
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ( nad )
( figure seven  .  two ) be derive from vitamin b three , niacin .
nad+ be the oxidize form of the molecule  nadh be the reduce form of the molecule after - pron - have accept two electron and a proton ( which together be the equivalent of a hydrogen atom with an extra electron ) .
nad+ can accept electron from an organic molecule accord to the general equation  rh reduce agent + nad+ oxidizing agent → nadh reduced + r oxidize when electron be add to a compound , - pron - be reduce .
a compound that reduce another be call a reduce agent .
in the above equation , rh be a reduce agent , and nad+ be reduce to nadh .
when electron be remove from compound , - pron - oxidize .
a compound that oxidize another be call an oxidizing agent .
in the above equation , nad+ be an oxidizing agent , and rh be oxidize to r . similarly , flavin adenine dinucleotide ( fad+ ) be derive from vitamin b two , also call riboflavin .
- pron - reduce form be fadh two .
a second variation of nad , nadp , contain an extra phosphate group .
both nad+ and fad+ be extensively use in energy extraction from sugar , and nadp play an important role in anabolic reaction and photosynthesis .
the oxidize form of the electron carrier ( nad+ ) be show on the left and the reduce form ( nadh ) be show on the right .
the nitrogenous base in nadh have one more hydrogen ion and two more electron than in nad+ .
atp in live systems
a live cell can not store significant amount of free energy .
excess free energy would result in an increase of heat in the cell , which would result in excessive thermal motion that could damage and then destroy the cell .
rather , a cell must be able to handle that energy in a way that enable the cell to store energy safely and release - pron - for use only as need .
live cell accomplish this by use the compound adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) .
atp be often call the " energy currency " of the cell , and , like currency , this versatile compound can be use to fill any energy need of the cell .
how ?
- pron - function similarly to a rechargeable battery .
when atp be break down , usually by the removal of - pron - terminal phosphate group , energy be release .
the energy be use to do work by the cell , usually by the release phosphate bind to another molecule , activate - pron - .
for example , in the mechanical work of muscle contraction , atp supply the energy to move the contractile muscle protein .
recall the active transport work of the sodium - potassium pump in cell membrane .
atp alter the structure of the integral protein that function as the pump , change - pron - affinity for sodium and potassium .
in this way , the cell perform work , pump ion against - pron - electrochemical gradient .
atp structure and function
at the heart of atp be a molecule of adenosine monophosphate ( amp ) , which be compose of an adenine molecule bond to a ribose molecule and to a single phosphate group ( figure seven  .  three ) .
ribose be a five - carbon sugar find in rna , and amp be one of the nucleotide in rna .
the addition of a second phosphate group to this core molecule result in the formation of adenosine diphosphate ( adp )  the addition of a third phosphate group form adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) .
atp ( adenosine triphosphate ) have three phosphate group that can be remove by hydrolysis to form adp ( adenosine diphosphate ) or amp ( adenosine monophosphate ) . the negative charge on the phosphate group naturally repel each other , require energy to bond - pron - together and release energy when these bond be break .
the addition of a phosphate group to a molecule require energy .
phosphate group be negatively charge and thus repel one another when - pron - be arrange in series , as - pron - be in adp and atp .
this repulsion make the adp and atp molecule inherently unstable .
the release of one or two phosphate group from atp , a process call dephosphorylation , release energy .
energy from atp hydrolysis be the process of break complex macromolecule apart .
during hydrolysis , water be split , or lys , and the result hydrogen atom ( h+ ) and a hydroxyl group ( oh - ) be add to the large molecule .
the hydrolysis of atp produce adp , together with an inorganic phosphate ion ( pi ) , and the release of free energy .
to carry out life process , atp be continuously break down into adp , and like a rechargeable battery , adp be continuously regenerate into atp by the reattachment of a third phosphate group .
water , which be break down into - pron - hydrogen atom and hydroxyl group during atp hydrolysis , be regenerate when a third phosphate be add to the adp molecule , reform atp .
obviously , energy must be infuse into the system to regenerate atp .
where do this energy come from ?
in nearly every live thing on earth , the energy come from the metabolism of glucose .
in this way , atp be a direct link between the limited set of exergonic pathway of glucose catabolism and the multitude of endergonic pathway that power living cell .
phosphorylation recall that , in some chemical reaction , enzyme may bind to several substrate that react with each other on the enzyme , form an intermediate complex .
an intermediate complex be a temporary structure , and - pron - allow one of the substrate ( such as atp ) and reactant to more readily react with each other  in reaction involve atp , atp be one of the substrate and adp be a product .
during an endergonic chemical reaction , atp form an intermediate complex with the substrate and enzyme in the reaction .
this intermediate complex allow the atp to transfer - pron - third phosphate group , with - pron - energy , to the substrate , a process call phosphorylation .
phosphorylation refer to the addition of the phosphate ( ~p ) .
this be illustrate by the follow generic reaction  a + enzyme + atp → ⎡ ⎣a − enzyme − ∼ p⎤⎦ → b + enzyme + adp + phosphate ion when the intermediate complex break apart , the energy be use to modify the substrate and convert - pron - into a product of the reaction .
the adp molecule and a free phosphate ion be release into the medium and be available for recycle through cell metabolism .
substrate phosphorylation atp be generate through two mechanism during the breakdown of glucose .
a few atp molecule be generate ( that is , regenerate from adp ) as a direct result of the chemical reaction that occur in the catabolic pathway .
a phosphate group be remove from an intermediate reactant in the pathway , and the free energy of the reaction be use to add the third phosphate to an available adp molecule , produce atp ( figure seven  .  four ) .
this very direct method of phosphorylation be call substrate - level phosphorylation .
in phosphorylation reaction , the gamma phosphate of atp be attach to a protein .
oxidative phosphorylation
most of the atp generate during glucose catabolism , however , be derive from a much more complex process , chemiosmosis , which take place in mitochondria ( figure seven  .  five ) within a eukaryotic cell or the plasma membrane of a prokaryotic cell .
chemiosmosis , a process of atp production in cellular metabolism , be use to generate nine  zero percent of the atp make during glucose catabolism and be also the method use in the light reaction of photosynthesis to harness the energy of sunlight .
the production of atp use the process of chemiosmosis be call oxidative phosphorylation because of the involvement of oxygen in the process .
in eukaryote , oxidative phosphorylation take place in mitochondria .
in prokaryote , this process take place in the plasma membrane .
- pron - have read that nearly all of the energy use by live cell come to - pron - in the bond of the sugar , glucose .
glycolysis be the first step in the breakdown of glucose to extract energy for cellular metabolism .
nearly all live organism carry out glycolysis as part of - pron - metabolism .
the process do not use oxygen and be therefore anaerobic .
glycolysis take place in the cytoplasm of both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell .
glucose enter heterotrophic cell in two way .
one method be through secondary active transport in which the transport take place against the glucose concentration gradient .
the other mechanism use a group of integral protein call glut protein , also know as glucose transporter protein .
these transporter assist in the facilitated diffusion of glucose .
glycolysis begin with the six carbon ring - shape structure of a single glucose molecule and end with two molecule of a three - carbon sugar call pyruvate .
glycolysis consist of two distinct phase .
the first part of the glycolysis pathway trap the glucose molecule in the cell and use energy to modify - pron - so that the six - carbon sugar molecule can be split evenly into the two three - carbon molecule .
the second part of glycolysis extract energy from the molecule and store - pron - in the form of atp and nadh , the reduce form of nad .
first half of glycolysis ( energy - require steps ) step one .
the first step in glycolysis ( figure seven  .  six ) be catalyze by hexokinase , an enzyme with broad specificity that catalyze the phosphorylation of six - carbon sugar .
hexokinase phosphorylate glucose use atp as the source of the phosphate , produce glucose -  six  - phosphate , a more reactive form of glucose .
this reaction prevent the phosphorylat glucose molecule from continue to interact with the glut protein , and - pron - can no longer leave the cell because the negatively charge phosphate will not allow - pron - to cross the hydrophobic interior of the plasma membrane .
step two .
in the second step of glycolysis , an isomerase convert glucose -  six  - phosphate into one of - pron - isomer , fructose -  six  - phosphate .
an isomerase be an enzyme that catalyze the conversion of a molecule into one of - pron - isomer .
( this change from phosphoglucose to phosphofructose allow the eventual split of the sugar into two three - carbon molecule . ) .
step three .
the third step be the phosphorylation of fructose -  six  - phosphate , catalyze by the enzyme phosphofructokinase .
a second atp molecule donate a high - energy phosphate to fructose -  six  - phosphate , produce fructose -  one  ,  six  - bisphosphate .
in this pathway , phosphofructokinase be a rate - limit enzyme .
- pron - be active when the concentration of adp be high  - pron - be less active when adp level be low and the concentration of atp be high .
thus , if there be " sufficient " atp in the system , the pathway slow down .
this be a type of end product inhibition , since atp be the end product of glucose catabolism .
step four .
the newly add high - energy phosphate further destabilize fructose -  one  ,  six  - bisphosphate .
the fourth step in glycolysis employ an enzyme , aldolase , to cleave one  ,  six  - bisphosphate into two three - carbon isomer  dihydroxyacetone - phosphate and glyceraldehyde -  three  - phosphate .
step five .
in the fifth step , an isomerase transform the dihydroxyacetone - phosphate into - pron - isomer , glyceraldehyde -  three  - phosphate .
thus , the pathway will continue with two molecule of a single isomer .
at this point in the pathway , there be a net investment of energy from two atp molecule in the breakdown of one glucose molecule .
the first half of glycolysis use two atp molecule in the phosphorylation of glucose , which be then split into two three - carbon molecule .
second half of glycolysis ( energy - release step )
so far , glycolysis have cost the cell two atp molecule and produce two small , three - carbon sugar molecule .
both of these molecule will proceed through the second half of the pathway , and sufficient energy will be extract to pay back the two atp molecule use as an initial investment and produce a profit for the cell of two additional atp molecule and two even high - energy nadh molecule .
step six .
the sixth step in glycolysis ( figure seven  .  seven ) oxidize the sugar ( glyceraldehyde -  three  - phosphate ) , extract high - energy electron , which be pick up by the electron carrier nad+ , produce nadh .
the sugar be then phosphorylat by the addition of a second phosphate group , produce one  ,  three  - bisphosphoglycerate .
note that the second phosphate group do not require another atp molecule .
the second half of glycolysis involve phosphorylation without atp investment ( step six ) and produce two nadh and four atp molecule per glucose .
here again be a potential limit factor for this pathway .
the continuation of the reaction depend upon the availability of the oxidize form of the electron carrier , nad+ .
thus , nadh must be continuously oxidize back into nad+ in order to keep this step go .
if nad+ be not available , the second half of glycolysis slow down or stop .
if oxygen be available in the system , the nadh will be oxidize readily , though indirectly , and the high - energy electron from the hydrogen release in this process will be use to produce atp .
in an environment without oxygen , an alternate pathway ( fermentation ) can provide the oxidation of nadh to nad+ .
step seven .
in the seventh step , catalyze by phosphoglycerate kinase ( an enzyme name for the reverse reaction ) , one  ,  three  - bisphosphoglycerate donate a high - energy phosphate to adp , form one molecule of atp .
( this be an example of substrate - level phosphorylation . )
a carbonyl group on the one  ,  three  - bisphosphoglycerate be oxidize to a carboxyl group , and three  - phosphoglycerate be form .
step eight .
in the eighth step , the remain phosphate group in three  - phosphoglycerate move from the third carbon to the second carbon , produce two  - phosphoglycerate ( an isomer of three  - phosphoglycerate ) .
the enzyme catalyze this step be a mutase ( isomerase ) .
step nine .
enolase catalyze the ninth step .
this enzyme cause two  - phosphoglycerate to lose water from - pron - structure  this be a dehydration reaction , result in the formation of a double bond that increase the potential energy in the remain phosphate bond and produce phosphoenolpyruvate ( pep ) .
step one  zero .
the last step in glycolysis be catalyze by the enzyme pyruvate kinase ( the enzyme in this case be name for the reverse reaction of pyruvate 's conversion into pep ) and result in the production of a second atp molecule by substratelevel phosphorylation and the compound pyruvic acid ( or - pron - salt form , pyruvate ) .
many enzyme in enzymatic pathway be name for the reverse reaction , since the enzyme can catalyze both forward and reverse reaction ( these may have be describe initially by the reverse reaction that take place in vitro , under non - physiological condition ) .
outcomes of glycolysis glycolysis start with glucose and end with two pyruvate molecule , a total of four atp molecule and two molecule of nadh .
two atp molecule be use in the first half of the pathway to prepare the six - carbon ring for cleavage , so the cell have a net gain of two atp molecule and two nadh molecule for - pron - use .
if the cell can not catabolize the pyruvate molecule further , - pron - will harvest only two atp molecule from one molecule of glucose .
mature mammalian red blood cell be not capable of aerobic respiration — the process in which organism convert energy in the presence of oxygen — and glycolysis be - pron - sole source of atp .
if glycolysis be interrupt , these cell lose - pron - ability to maintain - pron - sodium - potassium pump , and eventually , - pron - die .
the last step in glycolysis will not occur if pyruvate kinase , the enzyme that catalyze the formation of pyruvate , be not available in sufficient quantity .
in this situation , the entire glycolysis pathway will proceed , but only two atp molecule will be make in the second half .
thus , pyruvate kinase be a rate - limit enzyme for glycolysis .
if oxygen be available , aerobic respiration will go forward .
in eukaryotic cell , the pyruvate molecule produce at the end of glycolysis be transport into mitochondria , which be the site of cellular respiration .
there , pyruvate will be transform into an acetyl group that will be pick up and activate by a carrier compound call coenzyme a ( coa ) .
the result compound be call acetyl coa . coa be make from vitamin b five , pantothenic acid .
acetyl coa can be use in a variety of way by the cell , but - pron - major function be to deliver the acetyl group derive from pyruvate to the next stage of the pathway in glucose catabolism .
breakdown of pyruvate
in order for pyruvate , the product of glycolysis , to enter the next pathway , - pron - must undergo several change .
the conversion be a three - step process ( figure seven  .  eight ) .
step one .
a carboxyl group be remove from pyruvate , release a molecule of carbon dioxide into the surround medium .
the result of this step be a two - carbon hydroxyethyl group bind to the enzyme ( pyruvate dehydrogenase ) .
this be the first of the six carbon from the original glucose molecule to be remove .
this step proceed twice ( remember  there be two pyruvate molecule produce at the end of glycolsis ) for every molecule of glucose metabolize  thus , two of the six carbon will have be remove at the end of both step .
step two .
the hydroxyethyl group be oxidize to an acetyl group , and the electron be pick up by nad+ , form nadh .
the high - energy electron from nadh will be use later to generate atp .
step three .
the enzyme - bind acetyl group be transfer to coa , produce a molecule of acetyl coa . upon enter the mitochondrial matrix , a multi - enzyme complex convert pyruvate into acetyl coa .
in the process , carbon dioxide be release and one molecule of nadh be form .
note that during the second stage of glucose metabolism , whenever a carbon atom be remove , - pron - be bind to two oxygen atom , produce carbon dioxide , one of the major end product of cellular respiration .
acetyl coa to co two
in the presence of oxygen , acetyl coa deliver - pron - acetyl group to a four - carbon molecule , oxaloacetate , to form citrate , a six - carbon molecule with three carboxyl group  this pathway will harvest the remainder of the extractable energy from what begin as a glucose molecule .
this single pathway be call by different name  the citric acid cycle ( for the first intermediate form — citric acid , or citrate — when acetate join to the oxaloacetate ) , the tca cycle ( since citric acid or citrate and isocitrate be tricarboxylic acid ) , and the krebs cycle , after hans krebs , who first identify the step in the pathway in the one  nine  three  zero s in pigeon flight muscle .
citric acid cycle
like the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl coa , the citric acid cycle take place in the matrix of mitochondria .
almost all of the enzyme of the citric acid cycle be soluble , with the single exception of the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase , which be embed in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion .
unlike glycolysis , the citric acid cycle be a closed loop  the last part of the pathway regenerate the compound use in the first step .
the eight step of the cycle be a series of redox , dehydration , hydration , and decarboxylation reaction that produce two carbon dioxide molecule , one gtp / atp , and reduce form of nadh and fadh two
( figure seven  .  nine ) .
this be consider an aerobic pathway because the nadh and fadh two produce must transfer - pron - electron to the next pathway in the system , which will use oxygen .
if this transfer do not occur , the oxidation step of the citric acid cycle also do not occur .
note that the citric acid cycle produce very little atp directly and do not directly consume oxygen .
in the citric acid cycle , the acetyl group from acetyl coa be attach to a four - carbon oxaloacetate molecule to form a six - carbon citrate molecule .
through a series of step , citrate be oxidize , release two carbon dioxide molecule for each acetyl group feed into the cycle .
in the process , three nad+ molecule be reduce to nadh , one fad molecule be reduce to fadh two , and one atp or gtp ( depend on the cell type ) be produce ( by substrate - level phosphorylation ) .
because the final product of the citric acid cycle be also the first reactant , the cycle run continuously in the presence of sufficient reactant .
( credit  modification of work by " yikrazuul” / wikimedia commons )
step in the citric acid cycle step one .
prior to the start of the first step , a transitional phase occur during which pyruvic acid be convert to acetyl coa .
then , the first step of the cycle begin  this be a condensation step , combine the two - carbon acetyl group with a fourcarbon oxaloacetate molecule to form a six - carbon molecule of citrate .
coa be bind to a sulfhydryl group ( - sh ) and diffuse away to eventually combine with another acetyl group .
this step be irreversible because - pron - be highly exergonic .
the rate of this reaction be control by negative feedback and the amount of atp available .
if atp level increase , the rate of this reaction decrease .
if atp be in short supply , the rate increase .
step two .
in step two , citrate lose one water molecule and gain another as citrate be convert into - pron - isomer , isocitrate .
step three .
in step three , isocitrate be oxidize , produce a five - carbon molecule , α - ketoglutarate , together with a molecule of co two and two electron , which reduce nad+ to nadh .
this step be also regulate by negative feedback from atp and nadh , and a positive effect of adp .
step three and four .
step three and four be both oxidation and decarboxylation step , which release electron that reduce nad+ to nadh and release carboxyl group that form co two molecule .
α - ketoglutarate be the product of step three , and a succinyl group be the product of step four .
coa bind the succinyl group to form succinyl
coa .
the enzyme that catalyze step four be regulate by feedback inhibition of atp , succinyl coa , and nadh .
step five .
in step five , a phosphate group be substitute for coenzyme a , and a high - energy bond be form .
this energy be use in substrate - level phosphorylation ( during the conversion of the succinyl group to succinate ) to form either guanine triphosphate ( gtp ) or atp .
there be two form of the enzyme , call isoenzyme , for this step , depend upon the type of animal tissue in which - pron - be find .
one form be find in tissue that use large amount of atp , such as heart and skeletal muscle .
this form produce atp .
the second form of the enzyme be find in tissue that have a high number of anabolic pathway , such as liver .
this form produce gtp .
gtp be energetically equivalent to atp  however , - pron - use be more restricted .
in particular , protein synthesis primarily use gtp .
step six .
step six be a dehydration process that convert succinate into fumarate .
two hydrogen atom be transfer to fad , produce fadh two .
the energy contain in the electron of these atom be insufficient to reduce nad+ but adequate to reduce fad .
unlike nadh , this carrier remain attach to the enzyme and transfer the electron to the electron transport chain directly .
this process be make possible by the localization of the enzyme catalyze this step inside the inner membrane of the mitochondrion .
step seven .
water be add to fumarate during step seven , and malate be produce .
the last step in the citric acid cycle regenerate oxaloacetate by oxidize malate .
another molecule of nadh be produce in the process .
product of the citric acid cycle
two carbon atom come into the citric acid cycle from each acetyl group , represent four out of the six carbon of one glucose molecule .
two carbon dioxide molecule be release on each turn of the cycle  however , these do not necessarily contain the most recently add carbon atom .
the two acetyl carbon atom will eventually be release on later turn of the cycle  thus , all six carbon atom from the original glucose molecule be eventually incorporate into carbon dioxide .
each turn of the cycle form three nadh molecule and one fadh two molecule .
these carrier will connect with the last portion of aerobic respiration to produce atp molecule .
one gtp or atp be also make in each cycle .
several of the intermediate compound in the citric acid cycle can be use in synthesize non - essential amino acid  therefore , the cycle be amphibolic ( both catabolic and anabolic ) .
- pron - have just read about two pathway in glucose catabolism — glycolysis and the citric acid cycle
— that generate atp .
most of the atp generate during the aerobic catabolism of glucose , however , be not generate directly from these pathway .
rather , - pron - be derive from a process that begin with move electron through a series of electron transporter that undergo redox reaction .
this cause hydrogen ion to accumulate within the matrix space .
therefore , a concentration gradient form in which hydrogen ion diffuse out of the matrix space by pass through atp synthase .
the current of hydrogen ion power the catalytic action of atp synthase , which phosphorylat adp , produce atp .
electron transport chain
the electron transport chain ( figure seven  .  one  zero ) be the last component of aerobic respiration and be the only part of glucose metabolism that use atmospheric oxygen .
oxygen continuously diffuse into plant  in animal , - pron - enter the body through the respiratory system .
electron transport be a series of redox reaction that resemble a relay race or bucket brigade in that electron be pass rapidly from one component to the next , to the endpoint of the chain where the electron reduce molecular oxygen , produce water .
there be four complex compose of protein , label i through iv in figure seven  .  one  zero , and the aggregation of these four complex , together with associate mobile , accessory electron carrier , be call the electron transport chain .
the electron transport chain be present in multiple copy in the inner mitochondrial membrane of eukaryote and the plasma membrane of prokaryote .
the electron transport chain be a series of electron transporter embed in the inner mitochondrial membrane that shuttle electron from nadh and fadh two to molecular oxygen .
in the process , proton be pump from the mitochondrial matrix to the intermembrane space , and oxygen be reduce to form water .
complex i to start , two electron be carry to the first complex aboard nadh .
this complex , label i , be compose of flavin mononucleotide ( fmn ) and an iron - sulfur ( fe - s ) - contain protein .
fmn , which be derive from vitamin b two , also call riboflavin , be one of several prosthetic group or co - factor in the electron transport chain .
a prosthetic group be a nonprotein molecule require for the activity of a protein .
prosthetic group be organic or inorganic , non - peptide molecule bind to a protein that facilitate - pron - function  prosthetic group include co - enzyme , which be the prosthetic group of enzyme .
the enzyme in complex i be nadh dehydrogenase and be a very large protein , contain four  five amino acid chain .
complex i can pump four hydrogen ion across the membrane from the matrix into the intermembrane space , and - pron - be in this way that the hydrogen ion gradient be establish and maintain between the two compartment separate by the inner mitochondrial membrane .
q and complex ii complex ii directly receive fadh two , which do not pass through complex i .
the compound connect the first and second complex to the third be ubiquinone ( q ) .
the q molecule be lipid soluble and freely move through the hydrophobic core of the membrane .
once - pron - be reduce , ( qh two ) , ubiquinone deliver - pron - electron to the next complex in the electron transport chain .
q receive the electron derive from nadh from complex i and the electron derive from fadh two from complex ii , include succinate dehydrogenase .
this enzyme and fadh two form a small complex that deliver electron directly to the electron transport chain , bypass the first complex .
since these electron bypass and thus do not energize the proton pump in the first complex , few atp molecule be make from the fadh two electron .
the number of atp molecule ultimately obtain be directly proportional to the number of proton pump across the inner mitochondrial membrane .
complex iii
the third complex be compose of cytochrome b , another fe - s protein , rieske center ( two fe -  two s center ) , and cytochrome c protein  this complex be also call cytochrome oxidoreductase .
cytochrome protein have a prosthetic group of heme .
the heme molecule be similar to the heme in hemoglobin , but - pron - carry electron , not oxygen .
as a result , the iron ion at - pron - core be reduce and oxidize as - pron - pass the electron , fluctuate between different oxidation state  fe++ ( reduce ) and fe+++ ( oxidize ) .
the heme molecule in the cytochrome have slightly different characteristic due to the effect of the different protein bind - pron - , give slightly different characteristic to each complex .
complex iii pump proton through the membrane and pass - pron - electron to cytochrome c for transport to the fourth complex of protein and enzyme (
cytochrome c be the acceptor of electron from q  however , whereas q carry pair of electron , cytochrome c can accept only one at a time ) .
complex iv
the fourth complex be compose of cytochrome protein c , a , and a three .
this complex contain two heme group ( one in each of the two cytochrome , a , and a three ) and three copper ion ( a pair of cua and one cub in cytochrome a three ) .
the cytochrome hold an oxygen molecule very tightly between the iron and copper ion until the oxygen be completely reduce .
the reduced oxygen then pick up two hydrogen ion from the surround medium to make water ( h two o ) .
the removal of the hydrogen ion from the system contribute to the ion gradient use in the process of chemiosmosis .
chemiosmosis
in chemiosmosis , the free energy from the series of redox reaction just describe be use to pump hydrogen ion ( proton ) across the membrane .
the uneven distribution of h+ ion across the membrane establish both concentration and electrical gradient ( thus , an electrochemical gradient ) , owe to the hydrogen ions' positive charge and - pron - aggregation on one side of the membrane .
if the membrane be open to diffusion by the hydrogen ion , the ion would tend to diffuse back across into the matrix , drive by - pron - electrochemical gradient .
recall that many ion can not diffuse through the nonpolar region of phospholipid membrane without the aid of ion channel .
similarly , hydrogen ion in the matrix space can only pass through the inner mitochondrial membrane through an integral membrane protein call atp synthase ( figure seven  .  one  one ) .
this complex protein act as a tiny generator , turn by the force of the hydrogen ion diffuse through - pron - , down - pron - electrochemical gradient .
the turning of part of this molecular machine facilitate the addition of a phosphate to adp , form atp , use the potential energy of the hydrogen ion gradient .
chemiosmosis ( figure seven  .  one  two ) be use to generate nine  zero percent of the atp make during aerobic glucose catabolism  - pron - be also the method use in the light reaction of photosynthesis to harness the energy of sunlight in the process of photophosphorylation .
recall that the production of atp use the process of chemiosmosis in mitochondria be call oxidative phosphorylation .
the overall result of these reaction be the production of atp from the energy of the electron remove from hydrogen atom .
these atom be originally part of a glucose molecule .
at the end of the pathway , the electron be use to reduce an oxygen molecule to oxygen ion .
the extra electron on the oxygen attract hydrogen ion ( proton ) from the surround medium , and water be form .
atp yield
the number of atp molecule generate from the catabolism of glucose vary .
for example , the number of hydrogen ion that the electron transport chain complex can pump through the membrane vary between specie .
another source of variance stem from the shuttle of electron across the membrane of the mitochondria .
( the nadh generate from glycolysis can not easily enter mitochondria . )
thus , electron be pick up on the inside of mitochondria by either nad+ or fad+ .
as - pron - have learn earlier , these fad+ molecule can transport few ion  consequently , few atp molecule be generate when fad+ act as a carrier .
nad+ be use as the electron transporter in the liver and fad+ act in the brain .
another factor that affect the yield of atp molecule generate from glucose be the fact that intermediate compound in these pathway be use for other purpose .
glucose catabolism connect with the pathway that build or break down all other biochemical compound in cell , and the result be somewhat messy than the ideal situation describe thus far .
for example , sugar other than glucose be feed into the glycolytic pathway for energy extraction .
moreover , the five - carbon sugar that form nucleic acid be make from intermediate in glycolysis .
certain nonessential amino acid can be make from intermediate of both glycolysis and the citric acid cycle .
lipid , such as cholesterol and triglyceride , be also make from intermediate in these pathway , and both amino acid and triglyceride be break down for energy through these pathway .
overall , in living system , these pathway of glucose catabolism extract about three  four percent of the energy contain in glucose .
in aerobic respiration , the final electron acceptor be an oxygen molecule , o two .
if aerobic respiration occur , then atp will be produce use the energy of high - energy electron carry by nadh or fadh two to the electron transport chain .
if aerobic respiration do not occur , nadh must be reoxidiz to nad+ for reuse as an electron carrier for the glycolytic pathway to continue .
how be this do ?
some living system use an organic molecule as the final electron acceptor .
process that use an organic molecule to regenerate nad+ from nadh be collectively refer to as fermentation .
in contrast , some living system use an inorganic molecule as a final electron acceptor .
both method be call anaerobic cellular respiration in which organism convert energy for - pron - use in the absence of oxygen .
anaerobic cellular respiration certain prokaryote , include some specie of bacteria and archaea , use anaerobic respiration .
for example , the group of archaea call methanogen reduce carbon dioxide to methane to oxidize nadh .
these microorganism be find in soil and in the digestive tract of ruminant , such as cow and sheep .
similarly , sulfate - reduce bacteria and archaea , most of which be anaerobic ( figure seven  .  one  three ) , reduce sulfate to hydrogen sulfide to regenerate nad+ from nadh .
the green color see in these coastal water be from an eruption of hydrogen sulfide - produce bacteria .
these anaerobic , sulfate - reduce bacteria release hydrogen sulfide gas as - pron - decompose algae in the water .
the enzyme use in this reaction be lactate dehydrogenase ( ldh ) .
the reaction can proceed in either direction , but the reaction from left to right be inhibit by acidic condition .
such lactic acid accumulation be once believe to because muscle stiffness , fatigue , and soreness , although more recent research dispute this hypothesis .
once the lactic acid have be remove from the muscle and circulate to the liver , - pron - can be reconvert into pyruvic acid and further catabolize for energy .
alcohol fermentation
another familiar fermentation process be alcohol fermentation ( figure seven  .  one  five ) that produce ethanol , an alcohol .
the first chemical reaction of alcohol fermentation be the follow ( co two do not participate in the second reaction ) 
pyruvic acid → co two + acetaldehyde + nadh → ethanol + nad+
the first reaction be catalyze by pyruvate decarboxylase , a cytoplasmic enzyme , with a coenzyme of thiamine pyrophosphate ( tpp , derive from vitamin b one and also call thiamine ) .
a carboxyl group be remove from pyruvic acid , release carbon dioxide as a gas .
the loss of carbon dioxide reduce the size of the molecule by one carbon , make acetaldehyde .
the second reaction be catalyze by alcohol dehydrogenase to oxidize nadh to nad+ and reduce acetaldehyde to ethanol .
the fermentation of pyruvic acid by yeast produce the ethanol find in alcoholic beverage .
ethanol tolerance of yeast be variable , range from about five percent to two  one percent , depend on the yeast strain and environmental condition .
fermentation of grape juice into wine produce co two as a byproduct .
fermentation tank have valve so that the pressure inside the tank create by the carbon dioxide produce can be release .
other types of fermentation other fermentation method occur in bacteria .
many prokaryote be facultatively anaerobic .
this mean that - pron - can switch between aerobic respiration and fermentation , depend on the availability of oxygen .
certain prokaryote , like clostridia , be obligate anaerobe .
obligate anaerobe live and grow in the absence of molecular oxygen .
oxygen be a poison to these microorganism and kill - pron - on exposure .
- pron - should be note that all form of fermentation , except lactic acid fermentation , produce gas .
the production of particular type of gas be use as an indicator of the fermentation of specific carbohydrate , which play a role in the laboratory identification of the bacteria .
various method of fermentation be use by assorted organism to ensure an adequate supply of nad+ for the sixth step in glycolysis .
without these pathway , that step would not occur and no atp would be harvest from the breakdown of glucose .
- pron - have learn about the catabolism of glucose , which provide energy to live cell .
but live thing consume more than glucose for food .
how do a turkey sandwich end up as atp in - pron - cell ?
this happen because all of the catabolic pathway for carbohydrate , protein , and lipid eventually connect into glycolysis and the citric acid cycle pathway ( see figure seven  .  one  seven ) .
metabolic pathway should be think of as porous — that is , substance enter from other pathway , and intermediate leave for other pathway .
these pathway be not close system .
many of the substrate , intermediate , and product in a particular pathway be reactant in other pathway .
connection of other sugars to glucose metabolism glycogen , a polymer of glucose , be an energy storage molecule in animal .
when there be adequate atp present , excess glucose be shunt into glycogen for storage .
glycogen be make and store in both liver and muscle .
the glycogen will be hydrolyze into glucose monomer ( g -  one  - p ) if blood sugar level drop .
the presence of glycogen as a source of glucose allow atp to be produce for a long period of time during exercise .
glycogen be break down into g -  one  - p and convert into g -  six  - p in both muscle and liver cell , and this product enter the glycolytic pathway .
sucrose be a disaccharide with a molecule of glucose and a molecule of fructose bond together with a glycosidic linkage .
fructose be one of the three dietary monosaccharide , along with glucose and galactose ( which be part of the milk sugar , the disaccharide lactose ) , which be absorb directly into the bloodstream during digestion .
the catabolism of both fructose and galactose produce the same number of atp molecule as glucose .
connection of proteins to glucose metabolism protein be hydrolyze by a variety of enzyme in cell .
most of the time , the amino acid be recycle into the synthesis of new protein .
if there be excess amino acid , however , or if the body be in a state of starvation , some amino acid will be shunt into the pathway of glucose catabolism ( figure seven  .  one  six ) .
each amino acid must have - pron - amino group remove prior to entry into these pathway .
the amino group be convert into ammonia .
in mammal , the liver synthesize urea from two ammonia molecule and a carbon dioxide molecule .
thus , urea be the principal waste product in mammal produce from the nitrogen originate in amino acid , and - pron - leave the body in urine .
the carbon skeleton of certain amino acid ( indicate in box ) derive from protein can feed into the citric acid cycle .
connection of lipid and glucose metabolisms
the lipid that be connect to the glucose pathway be cholesterol and triglyceride .
cholesterol be a lipid that contribute to cell membrane flexibility and be a precursor of steroid hormone .
the synthesis of cholesterol start with acetyl group and proceed in only one direction .
the process can not be reverse .
triglyceride be a form of long - term energy storage in animal .
triglyceride be make of glycerol and three fatty acid .
animal can make most of the fatty acid - pron - need .
triglyceride can be both make and break down through part of the glucose catabolism pathway .
glycerol can be phosphorylat to glycerol -  three  - phosphate , which continue through glycolysis .
fatty acid be catabolize in a process call beta - oxidation that take place in the matrix of the mitochondria and convert - pron - fatty acid chain into two carbon unit of acetyl group .
the acetyl group be pick up by coa to form acetyl coa that proceed into the citric acid cycle .
glycogen from the liver and muscle , hydrolyze into glucose -  one  - phosphate , together with fat and protein , can feed into the catabolic pathway for carbohydrate .
cellular respiration must be regulate in order to provide balanced amount of energy in the form of atp .
the cell also must generate a number of intermediate compound that be use in the anabolism and catabolism of macromolecule .
without control , metabolic reaction would quickly come to a stand still as the forward and backward reaction reach a state of equilibrium .
resource would be use inappropriately .
a cell do not need the maximum amount of atp that - pron - can make all the time 
at time , the cell need to shunt some of the intermediate to pathway for amino acid , protein , glycogen , lipid , and nucleic acid production .
in short , the cell need to control - pron - metabolism .
regulatory mechanisms
a variety of mechanism be use to control cellular respiration .
some type of control exist at each stage of glucose metabolism .
access of glucose to the cell can be regulate use the glut protein that transport glucose ( figure seven  .  one  eight ) .
different form of the glut protein control passage of glucose into the cell of specific tissue .
glut four be a glucose transporter that be store in vesicle .
a cascade of event that occur upon insulin bind to a receptor in the plasma membrane cause glut four  - contain vesicle to fuse with the plasma membrane so that glucose may be transport into the cell .
some reaction be control by have two different enzyme — one each for the two direction of a reversible reaction .
reaction that be catalyze by only one enzyme can go to equilibrium , stall the reaction .
in contrast , if two different enzyme ( each specific for a give direction ) be necessary for a reversible reaction , the opportunity to control the rate of the reaction increase , and equilibrium be not reach .
a number of enzyme involve in each of the pathway — in particular , the enzyme catalyze the first committed reaction of the pathway — be control by attachment of a molecule to an allosteric site on the protein .
the molecule most commonly use in this capacity be the nucleotide atp , adp , amp , nad+ , and nadh .
these regulator , allosteric effector , may increase or decrease enzyme activity , depend on the prevailing condition .
the allosteric effector alter the steric structure of the enzyme , usually affect the configuration of the active site .
this alteration of the protein 's ( the enzyme 's ) structure either increase or decrease - pron - affinity for - pron - substrate , with the effect of increase or decrease the rate of the reaction .
the attachment signal to the enzyme .
this bind can increase or decrease the enzyme 's activity , provide feedback .
this feedback type of control be effective as long as the chemical affect - pron - be attach to the enzyme .
once the overall concentration of the chemical decrease , - pron - will diffuse away from the protein , and the control be relaxed .
control of catabolic pathways enzymes , protein , electron carrier , and pump that play role in glycolysis , the citric acid cycle , and the electron transport chain tend to catalyze non - reversible reaction .
in other word , if the initial reaction take place , the pathway be commit to proceed with the remain reaction .
whether a particular enzyme activity be release depend upon the energy need of the cell ( as reflect by the level of atp , adp , and amp ) .
glycolysis
the control of glycolysis begin with the first enzyme in the pathway , hexokinase ( figure seven  .  one  nine ) .
this enzyme catalyze the phosphorylation of glucose , which help to prepare the compound for cleavage in a later step .
the presence of the negatively charge phosphate in the molecule also prevent the sugar from leave the cell .
when hexokinase be inhibit , glucose diffus out of the cell and do not become a substrate for the respiration pathway in that tissue .
the product of the hexokinase reaction be glucose -  six  - phosphate , which accumulate when a later enzyme , phosphofructokinase , be inhibit .
the glycolysis pathway be primarily regulate at the three key enzymatic step ( one , two , and seven ) as indicate .
note that the first two step that be regulate occur early in the pathway and involve hydrolysis of atp .
phosphofructokinase be the main enzyme control in glycolysis .
high level of atp , citrate , or a low , more acidic ph decrease the enzyme 's activity .
an increase in citrate concentration can occur because of a blockage in the citric acid cycle .
fermentation , with - pron - production of organic acid like lactic acid , frequently account for the increase acidity in a cell  however , the product of fermentation do not typically accumulate in cell .
the last step in glycolysis be catalyze by pyruvate kinase .
the pyruvate produce can proceed to be catabolize or convert into the amino acid alanine .
if no more energy be need and alanine be in adequate supply , the enzyme be inhibit .
the enzyme 's activity be increase when fructose -  one  ,  six  - bisphosphate level increase .
( recall that fructose -  one  ,  six  - bisphosphate be an intermediate in the first half of glycolysis . )
the regulation of pyruvate kinase involve phosphorylation by a kinase ( pyruvate kinase kinase ) , result in a less - active enzyme .
dephosphorylation by a phosphatase reactivate - pron - .
pyruvate kinase be also regulate by atp ( a negative allosteric effect ) .
if more energy be need , more pyruvate will be convert into acetyl coa through the action of pyruvate dehydrogenase .
if either acetyl group or nadh accumulate , there be less need for the reaction and the rate decrease .
pyruvate dehydrogenase be also regulate by phosphorylation  a kinase phosphorylat - pron - to form an inactive enzyme , and a phosphatase reactivate - pron - .
the kinase and the phosphatase be also regulate .
citric acid cycle
the citric acid cycle be control through the enzyme that catalyze the reaction that make the first two molecule of nadh ( figure seven  .  nine ) .
these enzyme be isocitrate dehydrogenase and α - ketoglutarate dehydrogenase .
when adequate atp and nadh level be available , the rate of these reaction decrease .
when more atp be need , as reflect in rise adp level , the rate increase .
α - ketoglutarate dehydrogenase will also be affect by the level of succinyl coa — a subsequent intermediate in the cycle — cause a decrease in activity .
a decrease in the rate of operation of the pathway at this point be not necessarily negative , as the increase level of the α - ketoglutarate not use by the citric acid cycle can be use by the cell for amino acid ( glutamate ) synthesis .
electron transport chain specific enzyme of the electron transport chain be unaffected by feedback inhibition , but the rate of electron transport through the pathway be affect by the level of adp and atp .
great atp consumption by a cell be indicate by a buildup of adp .
as atp usage decrease , the concentration of adp decrease , and now , atp begin to build up in the cell .
this change be the relative concentration of adp to atp trigger the cell to slow down the electron transport chain .
this world map show earth 's distribution of photosynthesis as see via chlorophyll a concentration .
on land , this be evident via terrestrial plant , and in oceanic zone , via phytoplankton .
the process in all organism — from bacteria to human — require energy .
to get this energy , many organism access store energy by eat , that is , by ingest other organism .
but where do the store energy in food originate ?
all of this energy can be trace back to photosynthesis .
photosynthesis be essential to all life on earth  both plant and animal depend on - pron - .
- pron - be the only biological process that can capture energy that originate in outer space ( sunlight ) and convert - pron - into chemical compound ( carbohydrate ) that every organism use to power - pron - metabolism .
in brief , the energy of sunlight be capture and use to energize electron , which be then store in the covalent bond of sugar molecule .
how long lasting and stable be those covalent bond ?
the energy extract today by the burning of coal and petroleum product represent sunlight energy capture and store by photosynthesis almost two  zero  zero million year ago .
plant , algae , and a group of bacteria call cyanobacteria be the only organism capable of perform photosynthesis ( figure eight  .  two ) .
because - pron - use light to manufacture - pron - own food , - pron - be call photoautotroph ( literally , " self - feeder use light " ) .
other organism , such as animal , fungus , and most other bacteria , be term heterotroph ( " other feeder " ) , because - pron - must rely on the sugar produce by photosynthetic organism for - pron - energy need .
a third very interesting group of bacteria synthesize sugar , not by use sunlight 's energy , but by extract energy from inorganic chemical compound  hence , - pron - be refer to as chemoautotroph .
photoautotroph include ( a ) plant , ( b ) algae , and ( c ) cyanobacteria synthesize - pron - organic compound via photosynthesis use sunlight as an energy source .
cyanobacteria and planktonic algae can grow over enormous area in water , at time completely cover the surface .
in a ( d ) deep sea vent , chemoautotroph , such as these ( e ) thermophilic bacteria , capture energy from inorganic compound to produce organic compound .
the ecosystem surround the vent have a diverse array of animal , such as tubeworm , crustacean , and octopi that derive energy from the bacteria .
the importance of photosynthesis be not just that - pron - can capture sunlight 's energy .
a lizard sun - pron - on a cold day can use the sun 's energy to warm up .
photosynthesis be vital because - pron - evolve as a way to store the energy in solar radiation ( the " photo -
" part ) as high - energy electron in the carbon - carbon bond of carbohydrate molecule ( the " - synthesis " part ) .
those carbohydrate be the energy source that heterotroph use to power the synthesis of atp via respiration .
therefore , photosynthesis power nine  nine percent of earth 's ecosystem .
when a top predator , such as a wolf , prey on a deer ( figure eight  .  three ) , the wolf be at the end of an energy path that go from nuclear reaction on the surface of the sun , to light , to photosynthesis , to vegetation , to deer , and finally to wolf .
the energy store in carbohydrate molecule from photosynthesis pass through the food chain .
the predator that eat these deer receive a portion of the energy that originate in the photosynthetic vegetation that the deer consume .
( credit  modification of work by steve vanriper , u . s . fish and wildlife service )
main structures and summary of photosynthesis photosynthesis be a multi - step process that require sunlight , carbon dioxide ( which be low in energy ) , and water as substrate ( figure eight  .  four ) .
after the process be complete , - pron - release oxygen and produce glyceraldehyde -  three  - phosphate ( ga three p ) , simple carbohydrate molecule ( which be high in energy ) that can subsequently be convert into glucose , sucrose , or any of dozen of other sugar molecule .
these sugar molecule contain energy and the energized carbon that all live thing need to survive .
photosynthesis use solar energy , carbon dioxide , and water to produce energy - store carbohydrate .
oxygen be generate as a waste product of photosynthesis .
photosynthesis use solar energy , carbon dioxide , and water to produce energy - store carbohydrate .
oxygen be generate as a waste product of photosynthesis .
the basic equation for photosynthesis be deceptively simple .
in reality , the process take place in many step involve intermediate reactant and product .
glucose , the primary energy source in cell , be make from two three - carbon ga three ps .
although the equation look simple , the many step that take place during photosynthesis be actually quite complex .
before learn the detail of how photoautotroph turn sunlight into food , - pron - be important to become familiar with the structure involve .
in plant , photosynthesis generally take place in leaf , which consist of several layer of cell .
the process of photosynthesis occur in a middle layer call the mesophyll .
the gas exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen occur through small , regulated opening call stoma ( singular  stoma ) , which also play role in the regulation of gas exchange and water balance .
the stoma be typically locate on the underside of the leaf , which help to minimize water loss .
each stoma be flank by guard cell that regulate the opening and closing of the stoma by swell or shrink in response to osmotic change .
in all autotrophic eukaryote , photosynthesis take place inside an organelle call a chloroplast .
for plant , chloroplastcontain cell exist in the mesophyll .
chloroplast have a double membrane envelope ( compose of an outer membrane and an inner membrane ) .
within the chloroplast be stack , disc - shape structure call thylakoid .
embed in the thylakoid membrane be chlorophyll , a pigment ( molecule that absorb light ) responsible for the initial interaction between light and plant material , and numerous protein that make up the electron transport chain .
the thylakoid membrane enclose an internal space call the thylakoid luman .
as show in figure eight  .  six , a stack of thylakoid be call a granum , and the liquid - fill space surround the granum be call stroma or " bed " ( not to be confuse with stoma or " mouth , " an opening on the leaf epidermis ) .
the two parts of photosynthesis photosynthesis take place in two sequential stage  the light - dependent reaction and the light independent - reaction .
in the light - dependent reaction , energy from sunlight be absorb by chlorophyll and that energy be convert into store chemical energy .
in the light - independent reaction , the chemical energy harvest during the light - dependent reaction drive the assembly of sugar molecule from carbon dioxide .
therefore , although the light - independent reaction do not use light as a reactant , - pron - require the product of the light - dependent reaction to function .
in addition , several enzyme of the light - independent reaction be activate by light .
the light - dependent reaction utilize certain molecule to temporarily store the energy  these be refer to as energy carrier .
the energy carrier that move energy from light - dependent reaction to light - independent reaction can be think of as " full " because - pron - be rich in energy .
after the energy be release , the " empty " energy carrier return to the light - dependent reaction to obtain more energy .
figure eight  .  seven illustrate the component inside the chloroplast where the light - dependent and light - independent reaction take place .
photosynthesis take place in two stage  light dependent reaction and the calvin cycle .
light - dependent reaction , which take place in the thylakoid membrane , use light energy to make atp and nadph .
the calvin cycle , which take place in the stroma , use energy derive from these compound to make ga three p from co two .
how can light be use to make food ?
when a person turn on a lamp , electrical energy become light energy .
like all other form of kinetic energy , light can travel , change form , and be harness to do work .
in the case of photosynthesis , light energy be convert into chemical energy , which photoautotroph use to build carbohydrate molecule ( figure eight  .  nine ) .
however , autotroph only use a few specific component of sunlight .
what be light energy ?
the sun emit an enormous amount of electromagnetic radiation ( solar energy ) .
human can see only a fraction of this energy , which portion be therefore refer to as " visible light .
"
the manner in which solar energy travel be describe as wave .
scientist can determine the amount of energy of a wave by measure - pron - wavelength , the distance between consecutive point of a wave .
a single wave be measure from two consecutive point , such as from crest to crest or from trough to trough .
the wavelength of a single wave be the distance between two consecutive point of similar position ( two crest or two trough ) along the wave .
visible light constitute only one of many type of electromagnetic radiation emit from the sun and other star .
scientist differentiate the various type of radiant energy from the sun within the electromagnetic spectrum .
the electromagnetic spectrum be the range of all possible frequency of radiation ( figure eight  .  one  one ) .
the difference between wavelength relate to the amount of energy carry by - pron - .
the sun emit energy in the form of electromagnetic radiation .
this radiation exist at different wavelength , each of which have - pron - own characteristic energy .
all electromagnetic radiation , include visible light , be characterize by - pron - wavelength .
each type of electromagnetic radiation travel at a particular wavelength .
the longer the wavelength ( or the more stretched out - pron - appear in the diagram ) , the less energy be carry .
short , tight wave carry the most energy .
this may seem illogical , but think of - pron - in term of a piece of move a heavy rope .
- pron - take little effort by a person to move a rope in long , wide wave .
to make a rope move in short , tight wave , a person would need to apply significantly more energy .
the electromagnetic spectrum ( figure eight  .  one  one ) show several type of electromagnetic radiation originate from the sun , include x - ray and ultraviolet ( uv ) ray .
the high - energy wave can penetrate tissue and damage cell and dna , explain why both x - ray and uv ray can be harmful to live organism .
absorption of light light energy initiate the process of photosynthesis when pigment absorb the light .
organic pigment , whether in the human retina or the chloroplast thylakoid , have a narrow range of energy level that - pron - can absorb .
energy level low than those represent by red light be insufficient to raise an orbital electron to a populatable , excited ( quantum ) state .
energy level high than those in blue light will physically tear the molecule apart , call bleaching .
so retinal pigment can only " see " ( absorb ) seven  zero  zero nm to four  zero  zero nm light , which be therefore call visible light .
for the same reason , plant pigment molecule absorb only light in the wavelength range of seven  zero  zero nm to four  zero  zero nm  plant physiologist refer to this range for plant as photosynthetically active radiation .
the visible light see by human as white light actually exist in a rainbow of color .
certain object , such as a prism or a drop of water , disperse white light to reveal the color to the human eye .
the visible light portion of the electromagnetic spectrum show the rainbow of color , with violet and blue have short wavelength , and therefore high energy .
at the other end of the spectrum toward red , the wavelength be long and have low energy .
the color of visible light do not carry the same amount of energy .
violet have the short wavelength and therefore carry the most energy , whereas red have the long wavelength and carry the least amount of energy .
( credit  modification of work by nasa )
understanding pigments
different kind of pigment exist , and each have evolve to absorb only certain wavelength ( color ) of visible light .
pigment reflect or transmit the wavelength - pron - can not absorb , make - pron - appear in the correspond color .
chlorophyll and carotenoid be the two major class of photosynthetic pigment find in plant and algae  each class have multiple type of pigment molecule .
there be five major chlorophyll  a , b , c and d and a related molecule find in prokaryote call bacteriochlorophyll .
chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b be find in high plant chloroplast and will be the focus of the follow discussion .
with dozen of different form , carotenoid be a much large group of pigment .
the carotenoid find in fruit — such as the red of tomato ( lycopene ) , the yellow of corn seed ( zeaxanthin ) , or the orange of an orange peel ( β - carotene ) —are use as advertisement to attract seed disperser .
in photosynthesis , carotenoid function as photosynthetic pigment that be very efficient molecule for the disposal of excess energy .
when a leaf be expose to full sun , the light - dependent reaction be require to process an enormous amount of energy  if that energy be not handle properly , - pron - can do significant damage .
therefore , many carotenoid reside in the thylakoid membrane , absorb excess energy , and safely dissipate that energy as heat .
each type of pigment can be identify by the specific pattern of wavelength - pron - absorb from visible light , which be the absorption spectrum .
the graph in figure eight  .  one  three show the absorption spectra for chlorophyll a , chlorophyll b , and a type of carotenoid pigment call β - carotene ( which absorb blue and green light ) .
notice how each pigment have a distinct set of peak and trough , reveal a highly specific pattern of absorption .
chlorophyll a absorb wavelength from either end of the visible spectrum ( blue and red ) , but not green .
because green be reflect or transmit , chlorophyll appear green .
carotenoid absorb in the short - wavelength blue region , and reflect the longer yellow , red , and orange wavelength .
chlorophyll a , ( b ) chlorophyll b , and ( c ) β - carotene be hydrophobic organic pigment find in the thylakoid membrane .
chlorophyll a and b , which be identical except for the part indicate in the red box , be responsible for the green color of leaf .
β - carotene be responsible for the orange color in carrot .
each pigment have ( d ) a unique absorbance spectrum .
many photosynthetic organism have a mixture of pigment  use - pron - , the organism can absorb energy from a wide range of wavelength .
not all photosynthetic organism have full access to sunlight .
some organism grow underwater where light intensity and quality decrease and change with depth .
other organism grow in competition for light .
plant on the rainfor floor must be able to absorb any bit of light that come through , because the tall tree absorb most of the sunlight and scatter the remain solar radiation .
plant that commonly grow in the shade have adapt to low level of light by change the relative concentration of - pron - chlorophyll pigment .
( credit  jason hollinger )
when study a photosynthetic organism , scientist can determine the type of pigment present by generate absorption spectra .
an instrument call a spectrophotometer can differentiate which wavelength of light a substance can absorb .
spectrophotometer measure transmit light and compute from - pron - the absorption .
by extract pigment from leaf and place these sample into a spectrophotometer , scientist can identify which wavelength of light an organism can absorb .
additional method for the identification of plant pigment include various type of chromatography that separate the pigment by - pron - relative affinity to solid and mobile phase .
how light - dependent reaction work
the overall function of light - dependent reaction be to convert solar energy into chemical energy in the form of nadph and atp .
this chemical energy support the light - independent reaction and fuel the assembly of sugar molecule .
the light - dependent reaction be depict in figure eight  .  one  five .
protein complex and pigment molecule work together to produce nadph and atp .
a photosystem consist of a light - harvesting complex and a reaction center .
pigment in the lightharvesting complex pass light energy to two special chlorophyll a molecule in the reaction center .
the light excite an electron from the chlorophyll a pair , which pass to the primary electron acceptor .
the excited electron must then be replace .
in ( a ) photosystem ii , the electron come from the splitting of water , which release oxygen as a waste product .
in ( b ) photosystem
i , the electron come from the chloroplast electron transport chain discuss below .
the actual step that convert light energy into chemical energy take place in a multiprotein complex call a photosystem , two type of which be find embed in the thylakoid membrane , photosystem ii ( psii ) and photosystem i ( psi )
( figure eight  .  one  six ) .
the two complex differ on the basis of what - pron - oxidize ( that is , the source of the low - energy electron supply ) and what - pron - reduce ( the place to which - pron - deliver - pron - energized electron ) .
both photosystem have the same basic structure  a number of antenna protein to which the chlorophyll molecule be bind surround the reaction center where the photochemistry take place .
each photosystem be service by the lightharvesting complex , which pass energy from sunlight to the reaction center  - pron - consist of multiple antenna protein that contain a mixture of three  zero  zero – four  zero  zero chlorophyll a and b molecule as well as other pigment like carotenoid .
the absorption of a single photon or distinct quantity or " packet " of light by any of the chlorophyll push that molecule into an excited state .
in short , the light energy have now be capture by biological molecule but be not store in any useful form yet .
the energy be transfer from chlorophyll to chlorophyll until eventually ( after about a millionth of a second ) , - pron - be deliver to the reaction center .
up to this point , only energy have be transfer between molecule , not electron .
the reaction center contain a pair of chlorophyll a molecule with a special property .
those two chlorophyll can undergo oxidation upon excitation  - pron - can actually give up an electron in a process call a photoact .
- pron - be at this step in the reaction center , this step in photosynthesis , that light energy be convert into an excited electron .
all of the subsequent step involve get that electron onto the energy carrier nadph for delivery to the calvin cycle where the electron be deposit onto carbon for long - term storage in the form of a carbohydrate .
psii and psi be two major component of the photosynthetic electron transport chain , which also include the cytochrome complex .
the cytochrome complex , an enzyme compose of two protein complex , transfer the electron from the carrier molecule plastoquinone ( pq ) to the protein plastocyanin ( pc ) , thus enable both the transfer of proton across the thylakoid membrane and the transfer of electron from psii to psi .
the reaction center of psii ( call p six  eight  zero ) deliver - pron - high - energy electron , one at the time , to the primary electron acceptor , and through the electron transport chain ( pq to cytochrome complex to plastocyanine ) to psi .
p six  eight  zero 's miss electron be replace by extract a low - energy electron from water  thus , water be split and psii be re - reduce after every photoact .
splitting one h two o molecule release two electron , two hydrogen atom , and one atom of oxygen .
splitting two molecule be require to form one molecule of diatomic o two gas .
about one  zero percent of the oxygen be use by mitochondria in the leaf to support oxidative phosphorylation .
the remainder escape to the atmosphere where - pron - be use by aerobic organism to support respiration .
as electron move through the protein that reside between psii and psi , - pron - lose energy .
that energy be use to move hydrogen atom from the stromal side of the membrane to the thylakoid luman .
those hydrogen atom , plus the one produce by splitting water , accumulate in the thylakoid luman and will be use synthesize atp in a later step .
because the electron have lose energy prior to - pron - arrival at psi , - pron - must be re - energize by psi , hence , another photon be absorb by the psi antenna .
that energy be relay to the psi reaction center ( call p seven  zero  zero ) .
p seven  zero  zero be oxidize and send a highenergy electron to nadp+ to form nadph .
thus , psii capture the energy to create proton gradient to make atp , and psi capture the energy to reduce nadp+ into nadph .
the two photosystem work in concert , in part , to guarantee that the production of nadph will roughly equal the production of atp .
other mechanism exist to fine tune that ratio to exactly match the chloroplast 's constantly change energy need .
generate an energy carrier 
atp as in the intermembrane space of the mitochondria during cellular respiration , the buildup of hydrogen ion inside the thylakoid luman create a concentration gradient .
the passive diffusion of hydrogen ion from high concentration ( in the thylakoid luman ) to low concentration ( in the stroma ) be harness to create atp , just as in the electron transport chain of cellular respiration .
the ion build up energy because of diffusion and because - pron - all have the same electrical charge , repel each other .
to release this energy , hydrogen ion will rush through any opening , similar to water jetting through a hole in a dam .
in the thylakoid , that opening be a passage through a specialized protein channel call the atp synthase .
the energy release by the hydrogen ion stream allow atp synthase to attach a third phosphate group to adp , which form a molecule of atp ( figure eight  .  one  six ) .
the flow of hydrogen ion through atp synthase be call chemiosmosis because the ion move from an area of high to an area of low concentration through a semi - permeable structure .
after the energy from the sun be convert into chemical energy and temporarily store in atp and nadph molecule , the cell have the fuel need to build carbohydrate molecule for long - term energy storage .
the product of the light - dependent reaction , atp and nadph , have lifespan in the range of millionth of second , whereas the product of the lightindependent reaction ( carbohydrate and other form of reduced carbon ) can survive for hundred of million of year .
the carbohydrate molecule make will have a backbone of carbon atom .
where do the carbon come from ?
- pron - come from carbon dioxide , the gas that be a waste product of respiration in microbe , fungus , plant , and animal .
the calvin cycle
in plant , carbon dioxide ( co two ) enter the leaf through stoma , where - pron - diffuse over short distance through intercellular space until - pron - reach the mesophyll cell .
once in the mesophyll cell , co two diffuse into the stroma of the chloroplast —
the site of light - independent reaction of photosynthesis .
these reaction actually have several name associate with - pron - .
another term , the calvin cycle , be name for the man who discover - pron - , and because these reaction function as a cycle .
other call - pron - the calvin - benson cycle to include the name of another scientist involve in - pron - discovery .
the most outdated name be dark reaction , because light be not directly require ( figure eight  .  one  seven ) .
however , the term dark reaction can be mislead because - pron - imply incorrectly that the reaction only occur at night or be independent of light , which be why most scientist and instructor no longer use - pron - .
light reaction harness energy from the sun to produce chemical bond , atp , and nadph .
these energycarrying molecule be make in the stroma where carbon fixation take place .
the light - independent reaction of the calvin cycle can be organize into three basic stage  fixation , reduction , and regeneration .
stage one 
fixation
in the stroma , in addition to co two , two other component be present to initiate the light - independent reaction  an enzyme call ribulose -  one  ,  five  - bisphosphate carboxylase / oxygenase ( rubisco ) , and three molecule of ribulose bisphosphate ( rubp ) , as show in figure eight  .  one  eight .
rubp have five atom of carbon , flank by two phosphate .
rubisco catalyze a reaction between co two and rubp .
for each co two molecule that react with one rubp , two molecule of another compound ( three  - pga ) form .
pga have three carbon and one phosphate .
each turn of the cycle involve only one rubp and one carbon dioxide and form two molecule of three  - pga .
the number of carbon atom remain the same , as the atom move to form new bond during the reaction ( three atom from three co two + one  five atom from three rubp = one  eight atom in three atom of three  - pga ) .
this process be call carbon fixation , because co two be " fix " from an inorganic form into organic molecule .
stage two 
reduction atp and nadph be use to convert the six molecule of three  - pga into six molecule of a chemical call glyceraldehyde three  - phosphate
( g three p ) .
that be a reduction reaction because - pron - involve the gain of electron by three  - pga .
recall that a reduction be the gain of an electron by an atom or molecule .
six molecule of both atp and nadph be use .
for atp , energy be release with the loss of the terminal phosphate atom , convert - pron - into adp  for nadph , both energy and a hydrogen atom be lose , convert - pron - into nadp+ .
both of these molecule return to the nearby light - dependent reaction to be reuse and reenergiz .
stage three 
regeneration interestingly , at this point , only one of the g three p molecule leave the calvin cycle and be send to the cytoplasm to contribute to the formation of other compound need by the plant .
because the g three p export from the chloroplast have three carbon atom , - pron - take three " turn " of the calvin cycle to fix enough net carbon to export one g three p .
but each turn make two g three ps , thus three turn make six g three ps .
one be export while the remain five g three p molecule remain in the cycle and be use to regenerate rubp , which enable the system to prepare for more co two to be fix .
three more molecule of atp be use in these regeneration reaction .
the harsh condition of the desert have lead plant like these cacti to evolve variation of the lightindependent reaction of photosynthesis .
these variation increase the efficiency of water usage , help to conserve water and energy .
( credit  piotr wojtkowski )
the energy cycle
whether the organism be a bacterium , plant , or animal , all live thing access energy by break down carbohydrate molecule .
but if plant make carbohydrate molecule , why would - pron - need to break - pron - down , especially when - pron - have be show that the gas organism release as a " waste product " ( co two ) act as a substrate for the formation of more food in photosynthesis ?
remember , live thing need energy to perform life function .
in addition , an organism can either make - pron - own food or eat another organism — either way , the food still need to be break down .
finally , in the process of break down food , call cellular respiration , heterotroph release need energy and produce " waste " in the form of co two gas .
in nature , there be no such thing as waste .
every single atom of matter and energy be conserve , recycle over and over infinitely .
substance change form or move from one type of molecule to another , but - pron - constituent atom never disappear ( figure eight  .  two  zero ) .
co two be no more a form of waste than oxygen be wasteful to photosynthesis .
both be byproduct of reaction that move on to other reaction .
photosynthesis absorb light energy to build carbohydrate in chloroplast , and aerobic cellular respiration release energy by use oxygen to metabolize carbohydrate in the cytoplasm and mitochondria .
both process use electron transport chain to capture the energy necessary to drive other reaction .
these two powerhouse process , photosynthesis and cellular respiration , function in biological , cyclical harmony to allow organism to access life - sustain energy that originate million of mile away in a burn star human call the sun .
photosynthesis consume carbon dioxide and produce oxygen .
aerobic respiration consume oxygen and produce carbon dioxide .
these two process play an important role in the carbon cycle .
have - pron - ever become separate from a friend while in a crowd ?
if so , - pron - know the challenge of search for someone when surround by thousand of other people .
if - pron - and - pron - friend have cell phone , - pron - chance of find each other be good .
a cell phone 's ability to send and receive message
make - pron - an ideal communication device .
introduction imagine what life would be like if - pron - and the people around - pron - could not communicate .
- pron - would not be able to express - pron - wish to other , nor could - pron - ask question to find out more about - pron - environment .
social organization be dependent on communication between the individual that comprise that society  without communication , society would fall apart .
as with people , - pron - be vital for individual cell to be able to interact with - pron - environment .
this be true whether a cell be grow by - pron - in a pond or be one of many cell that form a large organism .
in order to properly respond to external stimulus , cell have develop complex mechanism of communication that can receive a message , transfer the information across the plasma membrane , and then produce change within the cell in response to the message .
in multicellular organism , cell send and receive chemical message constantly to coordinate the action of distant organ , tissue , and cell .
the ability to send message quickly and efficiently enable cell to coordinate and fine - tune - pron - function .
while the necessity for cellular communication in large organism seem obvious , even single - cell organism communicate with each other .
yeast cell signal each other to aid mating .
some form of bacteria coordinate - pron - action in order to form large complex call biofilm or to organize the production of toxin to remove compete organism .
the ability of cell to communicate through chemical signal originate in single cell and be essential for the evolution of multicellular organism .
the efficient and error - free function of communication system be vital for all life as - pron - know - pron - .
there be two kind of communication in the world of live cell .
communication between cell be call intercellular signaling , and communication within a cell be call intracellular signaling .
an easy way to remember the distinction be by understand the latin origin of the prefix  inter - mean " between " ( for example , intersect line be those that cross each other ) and intra - mean " inside " ( like intravenous ) .
chemical signal be release by signal cell in the form of small , usually volatile or soluble molecule call ligand .
a ligand be a molecule that bind another specific molecule , in some case , deliver a signal in the process .
ligand can thus be think of as signal molecule .
ligand interact with protein in target cell , which be cell that be affect by chemical signal  these protein be also call receptor .
ligand and receptor exist in several variety  however , a specific ligand will have a specific receptor that typically bind only that ligand .
form of signaling
there be four category of chemical signaling find in multicellular organism  paracrine signaling , endocrine signaling , autocrine signaling , and direct signaling across gap junction ( figure nine  .  two ) .
the main difference between the different category of signaling be the distance that the signal travel through the organism to reach the target cell .
not all cell be affect by the same signal .
in chemical signaling , a cell may target - pron - ( autocrine signaling ) , a cell connect by gap junction , a nearby cell ( paracrine signaling ) , or a distant cell ( endocrine signaling ) .
paracrine signaling act on nearby cell , endocrine signaling use the circulatory system to transport ligand , and autocrine signaling act on the signaling cell .
signal via gap junction involve signal molecule move directly between adjacent cell .
paracrine signaling signals that act locally between cell that be close together be call paracrine signal .
paracrine signal move by diffusion through the extracellular matrix .
these type of signal usually elicit quick response that last only a short amount of time .
in order to keep the response localize , paracrine ligand molecule be normally quickly degrade by enzyme or remove by neighbor cell .
remove the signal will reestablish the concentration gradient for the signal , allow - pron - to quickly diffuse through the intracellular space if release again .
one example of paracrine signaling be the transfer of signal across synapsis between nerve cell .
a nerve cell consist of a cell body , several short , branched extension call dendrite that receive stimulus , and a long extension call an axon , which transmit signal to other nerve cell or muscle cell .
the junction between nerve cell where signal transmission occur be call a synapse .
a synaptic signal be a chemical signal that travel between nerve cell .
signal within the nerve cell be propagate by fast - move electrical impulse .
when these impulse reach the end of the axon , the signal continue on to a dendrite of the next cell by the release of chemical ligand call neurotransmitter by the presynaptic cell ( the cell emit the signal ) .
the neurotransmitter be transport across the very small distance between nerve cell , which be call chemical synapsis ( figure nine  .  three ) .
the small distance between nerve cell allow the signal to travel quickly  this enable an immediate response , such as , take - pron - hand off the stove !
when the neurotransmitter bind the receptor on the surface of the postsynaptic cell , the electrochemical potential of the target cell change , and the next electrical impulse be launch .
the neurotransmitter that be release into the chemical synapse be degrade quickly or get reabsorb by the presynaptic cell so that the recipient nerve cell can recover quickly and be prepared to respond rapidly to the next synaptic signal .
the distance between the presynaptic cell and the postsynaptic cell — call the synaptic gap — be very small and allow for rapid diffusion of the neurotransmitter .
enzyme in the synapatic cleft degrade some type of neurotransmitter to terminate the signal .
endocrine signaling signals from distant cell be call endocrine signal , and - pron - originate from endocrine cell .
( in the body , many endocrine cell be locate in endocrine gland , such as the thyroid gland , the hypothalamus , and the pituitary gland . )
these type of signal usually produce a slow response but have a longer - last effect .
the ligand release in endocrine signaling be call hormone , signal molecule that be produce in one part of the body but affect other body region some distance away .
hormone travel the large distance between endocrine cell and - pron - target cell via the bloodstream , which be a relatively slow way to move throughout the body .
because of - pron - form of transport , hormone get dilute and be present in low concentration when - pron - act on - pron - target cell .
this be different from paracrine signaling , in which local concentration of ligand can be very high .
autocrine signaling autocrine signal be produce by signal cell that can also bind to the ligand that be release .
this mean the signal cell and the target cell can be the same or a similar cell ( the prefix auto - mean self , a reminder that the signal cell send a signal to - pron - ) .
this type of signaling often occur during the early development of an organism to ensure that cell develop into the correct tissue and take on the proper function .
autocrine signaling also regulate pain sensation and inflammatory response .
further , if a cell be infect with a virus , the cell can signal - pron - to undergo programmed cell death , kill the virus in the process .
in some case , neighbor cell of the same type be also influence by the release ligand .
in embryological development , this process of stimulate a group of neighbor cell may help to direct the differentiation of identical cell into the same cell type , thus ensure the proper developmental outcome .
direct signaling across gap junctions gap junction in animal and plasmodesma in plant be connection between the plasma membrane of neighbor cell .
these water - fill channel allow small signaling molecule , call intracellular mediator , to diffuse between the two cell .
small molecule , such as calcium ion ( ca two + ) , be able to move between cell , but large molecule like protein and dna can not fit through the channel .
the specificity of the channel ensure that the cell remain independent but can quickly and easily transmit signal .
the transfer of signal molecule communicate the current state of the cell that be directly next to the target cell  this allow a group of cell to coordinate - pron - response to a signal that only one of - pron - may have receive .
in plant , plasmodesma be ubiquitous , make the entire plant into a giant , communication network .
type of receptors receptors be protein molecule in the target cell or on - pron - surface that bind ligand .
there be two type of receptor , internal receptor and cell - surface receptor .
internal receptor internal receptor , also know as intracellular or cytoplasmic receptor , be find in the cytoplasm of the cell and respond to hydrophobic ligand molecule that be able to travel across the plasma membrane .
once inside the cell , many of these molecule bind to protein that act as regulator of mrna synthesis ( transcription ) to mediate gene expression .
gene expression be the cellular process of transform the information in a cell ' s dna into a sequence of amino acid , which ultimately form a protein .
when the ligand bind to the internal receptor , a conformational change be trigger that expose a dna - bind site on the protein .
the ligand - receptor complex move into the nucleus , then bind to specific regulatory region of the chromosomal dna and promote the initiation of transcription ( figure nine  .  four ) .
transcription be the process of copy the information in a cell dna into a special form of rna call messenger rna ( mrna )  the cell use information in the mrna ( which move out into the cytoplasm and associate with ribosome ) to link specific amino acid in the correct order , produce a protein .
internal receptor can directly influence gene expression without have to pass the signal on to other receptor or messenger .
hydrophobic signaling molecule typically diffuse across the plasma membrane and interact with intracellular receptor in the cytoplasm .
many intracellular receptor be transcription factor that interact with dna in the nucleus and regulate gene expression .
cell - surface receptors cell - surface receptor , also know as transmembrane receptor , be cell surface , membrane - anchor ( integral ) protein that bind to external ligand molecule .
this type of receptor span the plasma membrane and perform signal transduction , in which an extracellular signal be convert into an intercellular signal .
ligand that interact with cell - surface receptor do not have to enter the cell that - pron - affect .
cell - surface receptor be also call cell - specific protein or marker because - pron - be specific to individual cell type .
because cell - surface receptor protein be fundamental to normal cell functioning , - pron - should come as no surprise that a malfunction in any one of these protein could have severe consequence .
error in the protein structure of certain receptor molecule have be show to play a role in hypertension ( high blood pressure ) , asthma , heart disease , and cancer .
each cell - surface receptor have three main component  an external ligand - bind domain , a hydrophobic membrane - span region , and an intracellular domain inside the cell .
the ligand - bind domain be also call the extracellular domain .
the size and extent of each of these domain vary widely , depend on the type of receptor .
cell - surface receptor be involve in most of the signaling in multicellular organism .
there be three general category of cell - surface receptor  ion channel - link receptor , g - protein - link receptor , and enzyme - link receptor .
ion channel - link receptor bind a ligand and open a channel through the membrane that allow specific ion to pass through .
to form a channel , this type of cell - surface receptor have an extensive membrane - span region .
in order to interact with the phospholipid fatty acid tail that form the center of the plasma membrane , many of the amino acid in the membrane - span region be hydrophobic in nature .
conversely , the amino acid that line the inside of the channel be hydrophilic to allow for the passage of water or ion .
when a ligand bind to the extracellular region of the channel , there be a conformational change in the protein structure that allow ion such as sodium , calcium , magnesium , and hydrogen to pass through  gated ion channel form a pore through the plasma membrane that open when the signal molecule bind .
the open pore then allow ion to flow into or out of the cell .
g - protein - link receptor bind a ligand and activate a membrane protein call a g - protein .
the activate g - protein then interact with either an ion channel or an enzyme in the membrane ( figure nine  .  six ) .
all g - protein - link receptor have seven transmembrane domain , but each receptor have - pron - own specific extracellular domain and g - protein - bind site .
cell signaling use g - protein - link receptor occur as a cyclic series of event .
before the ligand bind , the inactive g - protein can bind to a newly reveal site on the receptor specific for - pron - binding .
once the g - protein bind to the receptor , the resultant shape change activate the g - protein , which release gdp and pick up gtp .
the subunit of the g - protein then split into the α subunit and the βγ subunit .
one or both of these g - protein fragment may be able to activate other protein as a result .
after awhile , the gtp on the active α subunit of the g - protein be hydrolyze to gdp and the βγ subunit be deactivate .
the subunit reassociate to form the inactive g - protein and the cycle begin anew .
heterotrimeric g protein have three subunit  α , β , and γ .
when a signal molecule bind to a g - protein - couple receptor in the plasma membrane , a gdp molecule associate with the α subunit be exchange for gtp .
the β and γ subunit dissociate from the α subunit , and a cellular response be trigger either by the α subunit or the dissociated βγ pair .
hydrolysis of gtp to gdp terminate the signal .
g - protein - link receptor have be extensively study and much have be learn about - pron - role in maintain health .
bacteria that be pathogenic to human can release poison that interrupt specific g - protein - link receptor function , lead to illness such as pertussis , botulism , and cholera .
in cholera ( figure nine  .  seven ) , for example , the water - bear bacterium vibrio cholerae produce a toxin , choleragen , that bind to cell line the small intestine .
the toxin then enter these intestinal cell , where - pron - modify a g - protein that control the opening of a chloride channel and cause - pron - to remain continuously active , result in large loss of fluid from the body and potentially fatal dehydration as a result .
transmit primarily through contaminate drinking water , cholera be a major because of death in the develop world and in area where natural disaster interrupt the availability of clean water .
the cholera bacterium , vibrio cholerae , create a toxin that modify g - protein - mediate cell signaling pathway in the intestine .
modern sanitation eliminate the threat of cholera outbreak , such as the one that sweep through new york city in one  eight  six  six .
this poster from that era show how , at that time , the way that the disease be transmit be not understand .
enzyme - link receptor be cell - surface receptor with intracellular domain that be associate with an enzyme .
in some case , the intracellular domain of the receptor - pron - be an enzyme .
other enzyme - link receptor have a small intracellular domain that interact directly with an enzyme .
the enzyme - link receptor normally have large extracellular and intracellular domain , but the membrane - span region consist of a single alpha - helical region of the peptide strand .
when a ligand bind to the extracellular domain , a signal be transfer through the membrane , activate the enzyme .
activation of the enzyme set off a chain of event within the cell that eventually lead to a response .
one example of this type of enzyme - link receptor be the tyrosine kinase receptor ( figure nine  .  eight ) .
a kinase be an enzyme that transfer phosphate group from atp to another protein .
the tyrosine kinase receptor transfer phosphate group to tyrosine molecule ( tyrosine residue ) .
first , signal molecule bind to the extracellular domain of two nearby tyrosine kinase receptor .
the two neighbor receptor then bond together , or dimerize .
phosphate be then add to tyrosine residue on the intracellular domain of the receptor ( phosphorylation ) .
the phosphorylat residue can then transmit the signal to the next messenger within the cytoplasm .
signaling molecules produce by signal cell and the subsequent bind to receptor in target cell , ligand act as chemical signal that travel to the target cell to coordinate response .
the type of molecule that serve as ligand be incredibly varied and range from small protein to small ion like calcium ( ca two + ) .
small hydrophobic ligands small hydrophobic ligand can directly diffuse through the plasma membrane and interact with internal receptor .
important member of this class of ligand be the steroid hormone .
steroid be lipid that have a hydrocarbon skeleton with four fused ring  different steroid have different functional group attach to the carbon skeleton .
steroid hormone include the female sex hormone , estradiol , which be a type of estrogen  the male sex hormone , testosterone  and cholesterol , which be an important structural component of biological membrane and a precursor of steriod hormone ( figure nine  .  nine ) .
other hydrophobic hormone include thyroid hormone and vitamin d .
in order to be soluble in blood , hydrophobic ligand must bind to carrier protein while - pron - be be transport through the bloodstream .
steroid hormone have similar chemical structure to - pron - precursor , cholesterol .
because these molecule be small and hydrophobic , - pron - can diffuse directly across the plasma membrane into the cell , where - pron - interact with internal receptor .
water - soluble ligands water - soluble ligand be polar and therefore can not pass through the plasma membrane unaid  sometimes , - pron - be too large to pass through the membrane at all .
instead , most water - soluble ligand bind to the extracellular domain of cell - surface receptor .
this group of ligand be quite diverse and include small molecule , peptide , and protein .
other ligands nitric oxide ( no ) be a gas that also act as a ligand .
- pron - be able to diffuse directly across the plasma membrane , and one of - pron - role be to interact with receptor in smooth muscle and induce relaxation of the tissue .
no have a very short half - life and therefore only function over short distance .
nitroglycerin , a treatment for heart disease , act by trigger the release of no , which cause blood vessel to dilate ( expand ) , thus restore blood flow to the heart .
no have become better know recently because the pathway that - pron - affect be target by prescription medication for erectile dysfunction , such as viagra ( erection involve dilate blood vessel ) .
once a ligand bind to a receptor , the signal be transmit through the membrane and into the cytoplasm .
continuation of a signal in this manner be call signal transduction .
signal transduction only occur with cell - surface receptor because internal receptor be able to interact directly with dna in the nucleus to initiate protein synthesis .
when a ligand bind to - pron - receptor , conformational change occur that affect the receptor 's intracellular domain .
conformational change of the extracellular domain upon ligand bind can propagate through the membrane region of the receptor and lead to activation of the intracellular domain or - pron - associated protein .
in some case , bind of the ligand cause dimerization of the receptor , which mean that two receptor bind to each other to form a stable complex call a dimer .
a dimer be a chemical compound form when two molecule ( often identical ) join together .
the binding of the receptor in this manner enable - pron - intracellular domain to come into close contact and activate each other .
bind initiate a signaling pathway
after the ligand bind to the cell - surface receptor , the activation of the receptor 's intracellular component set off a chain of event that be call a signaling pathway or a signaling cascade .
in a signaling pathway , second messenger , enzyme , and activate protein interact with specific protein , which be in turn activate in a chain reaction that eventually lead to a change in the cell 's environment ( figure nine  .  one  zero ) .
the event in the cascade occur in a series , much like a current flow in a river .
interaction that occur before a certain point be define as upstream event , and event after that point be call downstream event .
signaling pathway can get very complicated very quickly because most cellular protein can affect different downstream event , depend on the condition within the cell .
a single pathway can branch off toward different endpoint base on the interplay between two or more signaling pathway , and the same ligand be often use to initiate different signal in different cell type .
this variation in response be due to difference in protein expression in different cell type .
another complicate element be signal integration of the pathway , in which signal from two or more different cell - surface receptor merge to activate the same response in the cell .
this process can ensure that multiple external requirement be meet before a cell commit to a specific response .
the effect of extracellular signal can also be amplify by enzymatic cascade .
at the initiation of the signal , a single ligand bind to a single receptor .
however , activation of a receptor - link enzyme can activate many copy of a component of the signaling cascade , which amplify the signal .
method of intracellular signaling
the induction of a signal pathway depend on the modification of a cellular component by an enzyme .
there be numerous enzymatic modification that can occur , and - pron - be recognize in turn by the next component downstream .
the follow be some of the more common event in intracellular signaling .
phosphorylation one of the most common chemical modification that occur in signal pathway be the addition of a phosphate group ( po four – three ) to a molecule such as a protein in a process call phosphorylation .
the phosphate can be add to a nucleotide such as gmp to form gdp or gtp .
phosphate be also often add to serine , threonine , and tyrosine residue of protein , where - pron - replace the hydroxyl group of the amino acid ( figure nine  .  one  one ) .
the transfer of the phosphate be catalyze by an enzyme call a kinase .
various kinase be name for the substrate - pron - phosphorylate .
phosphorylation of serine and threonine residue often activate enzyme .
phosphorylation of tyrosine residue can either affect the activity of an enzyme or create a bind site that interact with downstream component in the signaling cascade .
phosphorylation may activate or inactivate enzyme , and the reversal of phosphorylation , dephosphorylation by a phosphatase , will reverse the effect .
in protein phosphorylation , a phosphate group ( po four - three ) be add to residue of the amino acid serine , threonine , and tyrosine .
second messengers second messenger be small molecule that propagate a signal after - pron - have be initiate by the binding of the signal molecule to the receptor .
these molecule help to spread a signal through the cytoplasm by alter the behavior of certain cellular protein .
calcium ion be a widely use second messenger .
the free concentration of calcium ion ( ca two + ) within a cell be very low because ion pump in the plasma membrane continuously use adenosine -  five  ' - triphosphate ( atp ) to remove - pron - .
for signaling purpose , ca two + be store in cytoplasmic vesicle , such as the endoplasmic reticulum , or access from outside the cell .
when signal occur , ligand - gate calcium ion channel allow the high level of ca two + that be present outside the cell ( or in intracellular storage compartment ) to flow into the cytoplasm , which raise the concentration of cytoplasmic ca two + .
the response to the increase in ca two + varie , depend on the cell type involve .
for example , in the β - cell of the pancrea , ca two + signaling lead to the release of insulin , and in muscle cell , an increase in ca two + lead to muscle contraction .
another second messenger utilize in many different cell type be cyclic amp ( camp ) .
cyclic amp be synthesize by the enzyme adenylyl cyclase from atp ( figure nine  .  one  two ) .
the main role of camp in cell be to bind to and activate an enzyme call camp - dependent kinase ( a - kinase ) .
a - kinase regulate many vital metabolic pathway
 - pron - phosphorylat serine and threonine residue of - pron - target protein , activate - pron - in the process .
a - kinase be find in many different type of cell , and the target protein in each kind of cell be different .
difference give rise to the variation of the response to camp in different cell .
this diagram show the mechanism for the formation of cyclic amp ( camp ) .
camp serve as a second messenger to activate or inactivate protein within the cell .
termination of the signal occur when an enzyme call phosphodiesterase convert camp into amp .
present in small concentration in the plasma membrane , inositol phospholipid be lipid that can also be convert into second messenger .
because these molecule be membrane component , - pron - be locate near membrane - bind receptor and can easily interact with - pron - .
phosphatidylinositol ( pi ) be the main phospholipid that play a role in cellular signaling .
enzyme know as kinas phosphorylate pi to form pi - phosphate ( pip ) and pi - bisphosphate ( pip two ) .
the enzyme phospholipase c cleaf pip two to form diacylglycerol ( dag ) and inositol triphosphate ( ip three ) ( figure nine  .  one  three ) .
these product of the cleavage of pip two serve as second messenger .
diacylglycerol ( dag ) remain in the plasma membrane and activate protein kinase c ( pkc ) , which then phosphorylat serine and threonine residue in - pron - target protein .
ip three diffus into the cytoplasm and bind to ligand - gate calcium channel in the endoplasmic reticulum to release ca two + that continue the signal cascade .
the enzyme phospholipase c break down pip two into ip three and dag , both of which serve as second messenger .
inside the cell , ligand bind to - pron - internal receptor , allow - pron - to directly affect the cell 's dna and protein - produce machinery .
use signal transduction pathway , receptor in the plasma membrane produce a variety of effect on the cell .
the result of signaling pathway be extremely varied and depend on the type of cell involve as well as the external and internal condition .
a small sampling of response be describe below .
gene expression
some signal transduction pathway regulate the transcription of rna .
other regulate the translation of protein from mrna .
an example of a protein that regulate translation in the nucleus be the map kinase erk .
erk be activate in a phosphorylation cascade when epidermal growth factor ( egf ) bind the egf receptor ( see figure nine  .  one  zero ) .
upon phosphorylation , erk enter the nucleus and activate a protein kinase that , in turn , regulate protein translation ( figure nine  .  one  four ) .
erk be a map kinase that activate translation when - pron - be phosphorylat .
erk phosphorylat mnk one , which in turn phosphorylate eif -  four e , an elongation initiation factor that , with other initiation factor , be associate with mrna .
when eif -  four e become phosphorylat , the mrna unfold , allow protein synthesis in the nucleus to begin .
the second kind of protein with which pkc can interact be a protein that act as an inhibitor .
an inhibitor be a molecule that bind to a protein and prevent - pron - from function or reduce - pron - function .
in this case , the inhibitor be a protein call iκ - b , which bind to the regulatory protein nf - κb . ( the symbol κ represent the greek letter kappa . )
when iκ - b be bind to nf - κb , the complex can not enter the nucleus of the cell , but when iκ - b be phosphorylat by pkc , - pron - can no longer bind nf - κb , and nf - κb ( a transcription factor ) can enter the nucleus and initiate rna transcription .
in this case , the effect of phosphorylation be to inactivate an inhibitor and thereby activate the process of transcription .
increase in cellular metabolism
the result of another signal pathway affect muscle cell .
the activation of β - adrenergic receptor in muscle cell by adrenaline lead to an increase in cyclic amp ( camp ) inside the cell .
also know as epinephrine , adrenaline be a hormone ( produce by the adrenal gland attach to the kidney ) that ready the body for short - term emergency .
cyclic amp activate pka ( protein kinase a ) , which in turn phosphorylat two enzyme .
the first enzyme promote the degradation of glycogen by activate intermediate glycogen phosphorylase kinase ( gpk ) that in turn activate glycogen phosphorylase ( gp ) that catabolize glycogen into glucose .
( recall that - pron - body convert excess glucose to glycogen for short - term storage .
when energy be need , glycogen be quickly reconvert to glucose . )
phosphorylation of the second enzyme , glycogen synthase ( gs ) , inhibit - pron - ability to form glycogen from glucose .
in this manner , a muscle cell obtain a ready pool of glucose by activate - pron - formation via glycogen degradation and by inhibit the use of glucose to form glycogen , thus prevent a futile cycle of glycogen degradation and synthesis .
the glucose be then available for use by the muscle cell in response to a sudden surge of adrenaline — the " fight or flight " reflex .
cell growth cell signaling pathway also play a major role in cell division .
cell do not normally divide unless - pron - be stimulate by signal from other cell .
the ligand that promote cell growth be call growth factor .
most growth factor bind to cell - surface receptor that be link to tyrosine kinase .
these cell - surface receptor be call receptor tyrosine kinase ( rtk ) .
activation of rtks initiate a signal pathway that include a g - protein call ras , which activate the map kinase pathway describe earlier .
the enzyme map kinase then stimulate the expression of protein that interact with other cellular component to initiate cell division .
cell death
when a cell be damage , superfluous , or potentially dangerous to an organism , a cell can initiate a mechanism to trigger program cell death , or apoptosis .
apoptosis allow a cell to die in a control manner that prevent the release of potentially damaging molecule from inside the cell .
there be many internal checkpoint that monitor a cell 's health  if abnormality be observe , a cell can spontaneously initiate the process of apoptosis .
however , in some case , such as a viral infection or uncontrolled cell division due to cancer , the cell 's normal check and balance fail .
external signaling can also initiate apoptosis .
for example , most normal animal cell have receptor that interact with the extracellular matrix , a network of glycoprotein that provide structural support for cell in an organism .
the binding of cellular receptor to the extracellular matrix initiate a signaling cascade within the cell .
however , if the cell move away from the extracellular matrix , the signaling cease , and the cell undergo apoptosis .
this system keep cell from travel through the body and proliferate out of control , as happen with tumor cell that metastasize .
another example of external signaling that lead to apoptosis occur in t - cell development .
t - cell be immune cell that bind to foreign macromolecule and particle , and target - pron - for destruction by the immune system .
normally , t - cell do not target " self " protein ( those of - pron - own organism ) , a process that can lead to autoimmune disease .
in order to develop the ability to discriminate between self and non - self , immature t - cell undergo screen to determine whether - pron - bind to so - call self protein .
if the t - cell receptor bind to self protein , the cell initiate apoptosis to remove the potentially dangerous cell .
apoptosis be also essential for normal embryological development .
in vertebrate , for example , early stage of development include the formation of web - like tissue between individual finger and toe ( figure nine  .  one  five ) .
during the course of normal development , these unneeded cell must be eliminate , enable fully separate finger and toe to form .
a cell signaling mechanism trigger apoptosis , which destroy the cell between the develop digit .
the histological section of a foot of a one  five  - day - old mouse embryo , visualize use light microscopy , reveal area of tissue between the toe , which apoptosis will eliminate before the mouse reach - pron - full gestational age at two  seven day .
( credit  modification of work by michal mañas )
termination of the signal cascade
the aberrant signaling often see in tumor cell be proof that the termination of a signal at the appropriate time can be just as important as the initiation of a signal .
one method of stop a specific signal be to degrade the ligand or remove - pron - so that - pron - can no longer access - pron - receptor .
one reason that hydrophobic hormone like estrogen and testosterone trigger long - lasting event be because - pron - bind carrier protein .
these protein allow the insoluble molecule to be soluble in blood , but - pron - also protect the hormone from degradation by circulate enzyme .
inside the cell , many different enzyme reverse the cellular modification that result from signal cascade .
for example , phosphatase be enzyme that remove the phosphate group attach to protein by kinase in a process call dephosphorylation .
cyclic amp ( camp ) be degrade into amp by phosphodiesterase , and the release of calcium store be reverse by the ca two + pump that be locate in the external and internal membrane of the cell .
within - cell signaling allow bacteria to respond to environmental cue , such as nutrient level , some single - cell organism also release molecule to signal to each other .
signal in yeast yeasts be eukaryote ( fungus ) , and the component and process find in yeast signal be similar to those of cell - surface receptor signal in multicellular organism .
bud yeast ( figure nine  .  one  six ) be able to participate in a process that be similar to sexual reproduction that entail two haploid cell ( cell with one - half the normal number of chromosome ) combine to form a diploid cell ( a cell with two set of each chromosome , which be what normal body cell contain ) .
in order to find another haploid yeast cell that be prepared to mate , bud yeast secrete a signal molecule call mating factor .
when mating factor bind to cell - surface receptor in other yeast cell that be nearby , - pron - stop - pron - normal growth cycle and initiate a cell signaling cascade that include protein kinase and gtp - bind protein that be similar to g - protein .
bud saccharomyce cerevisiae yeast cell can communicate by release a signal molecule call mating factor .
in this micrograph , - pron - be visualize use differential interference contrast microscopy , a light microscopy technique that enhance the contrast of the sample .
signal in bacteria signaling in bacteria enable bacteria to monitor extracellular condition , ensure that there be sufficient amount of nutrient , and ensure that hazardous situation be avoid .
there be circumstance , however , when bacteria communicate with each other .
the first evidence of bacterial communication be observe in a bacterium that have a symbiotic relationship with hawaiian bobtail squid .
when the population density of the bacteria reach a certain level , specific gene expression be initiate , and the bacteria produce bioluminescent protein that emit light .
because the number of cell present in the environment ( cell density ) be the determine factor for signaling , bacterial signaling be name quorum sensing .
in politic and business , a quorum be the minimum number of member require to be present to vote on an issue .
quorum sensing use autoinducer as signal molecule .
autoinducer be signal molecule secrete by bacteria to communicate with other bacteria of the same kind .
the secreted autoinducer can be small , hydrophobic molecule such as acyl - homoserine lactone , ( ahl ) or large peptide - base molecule  each type of molecule have a different mode of action .
when ahl enter target bacteria , - pron - bind to transcription factor , which then switch gene expression on or off ( figure nine  .  one  seven ) .
the peptide autoinducer stimulate more complicated signaling pathway that include bacterial kinase .
the change in bacteria follow exposure to autoinducer can be quite extensive .
the pathogenic bacterium pseudomonas aeruginosa have six  one  six different gene that respond to autoinducer .
some specie of bacteria that use quorum sense form biofilm , complex colony of bacteria ( often contain several specie ) that exchange chemical signal to coordinate the release of toxin that will attack the host .
bacterial biofilm ( figure nine  .  one  eight ) can sometimes be find on medical equipment  when biofilm invade implant such as hip or knee replacement or heart pacemaker , - pron - can because life - threaten infection .
research on the detail of quorum sensing have lead to advance in grow bacteria for industrial purpose .
recent discovery suggest that - pron - may be possible to exploit bacterial signal pathway to control bacterial growth  this process could replace or supplement antibiotic that be no longer effective in certain situation .
introduction a human , as well as every sexually reproduce organism , begin life as a fertilize egg ( embryo ) or zygote .
trillion of cell division subsequently occur in a control manner to produce a complex , multicellular human .
in other word , that original single cell be the ancestor of every other cell in the body .
once a being be fully grow , cell reproduction be still necessary to repair or regenerate tissue .
for example , new blood and skin cell be constantly be produce .
all multicellular organism use cell division for growth and the maintenance and repair of cell and tissue .
cell division be tightly regulate , and the occasional failure of regulation can have life - threaten consequence .
single - cell organism use cell division as - pron - method of reproduction .
the continuity of life from one cell to another have - pron - foundation in the reproduction of cell by way of the cell cycle .
the cell cycle be an orderly sequence of event that describe the stage of a cell 's life from the division of a single parent cell to the production of two new daughter cell .
the mechanism involve in the cell cycle be highly regulated .
genomic dna
before discuss the step a cell must undertake to replicate , a deep understanding of the structure and function of a cell 's genetic information be necessary .
a cell 's dna , package as a double - strand dna molecule , be call - pron - genome .
in prokaryote , the genome be compose of a single , double - strand dna molecule in the form of a loop or circle ( figure one  zero  .  two ) .
the region in the cell contain this genetic material be call a nucleoid .
some prokaryote also have small loop of dna call plasmid that be not essential for normal growth .
bacteria can exchange these plasmid with other bacteria , sometimes receive beneficial new gene that the recipient can add to - pron - chromosomal dna .
antibiotic resistance be one trait that often spread through a bacterial colony through plasmid exchange .
prokaryote , include bacteria and archaea , have a single , circular chromosome locate in a central region call the nucleoid .
in eukaryote , the genome consist of several double - strand linear dna molecule ( figure one  zero  .  three ) .
each specie of eukaryote have a characteristic number of chromosome in the nucleus of - pron - cell .
human body cell have four  six chromosome , while human gamete ( sperm or egg ) have two  three chromosome each .
a typical body cell , or somatic cell , contain two match set of chromosome , a configuration know as diploid .
the letter n be use to represent a single set of chromosome  therefore , a diploid organism be designate two n .
human cell that contain one set of chromosome be call gamete , or sex cell  these be egg and sperm , and be designate one n , or haploid .
there be two  three pair of homologous chromosome in a female human somatic cell .
the condense chromosome be view within the nucleus ( top ) , remove from a cell in mitosis and spread out on a slide ( right ) , and artificially arrange accord to length ( left )  an arrangement like this be call a karyotype .
in this image , the chromosome be expose to fluorescent stain for differentiation of the different chromosome .
a method of stain call " chromosome painting " employ fluorescent dye that highlight chromosome in different color .
match pair of chromosome in a diploid organism be call homologous ( " same knowledge " ) chromosome .
homologous chromosome be the same length and have specific nucleotide segment call gene in exactly the same location , or locus .
gene , the functional unit of chromosome , determine specific characteristic by cod for specific protein .
trait be the variation of those characteristic .
for example , hair color be a characteristic with trait that be blonde , brown , or black .
each copy of a homologous pair of chromosome originate from a different parent  therefore , the gene - pron - be not identical .
the variation of individual within a species be due to the specific combination of the gene inherit from both parent .
even a slightly altered sequence of nucleotide within a gene can result in an alternative trait .
for example , there be three possible gene sequence on the human chromosome that code for blood type  sequence a , sequence b , and sequence o . because all diploid human cell have two copy of the chromosome that determine blood type , the blood type ( the trait ) be determine by which two version of the marker gene be inherit .
- pron - be possible to have two copy of the same gene sequence on both homologous chromosome , with one on each ( for example , aa , bb , or oo ) , or two different sequence , such as ab .
minor variation of trait , such as blood type , eye color , and handedness , contribute to the natural variation find within a species .
however , if the entire dna sequence from any pair of human homologous chromosome be compare , the difference be less than one percent .
the sex chromosome , x and y , be the single exception to the rule of homologous chromosome uniformity 
other than a small amount of homology that be necessary to accurately produce gamete , the gene find on the x and y chromosome be different .
eukaryotic chromosomal structure and compaction
if the dna from all four  six chromosome in a human cell nucleus be lay out end to end , - pron - would measure approximately two meter  however , - pron - diameter would be only two nm .
consider that the size of a typical human cell be about one  zero μm ( one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero cell line up to equal one meter ) , dna must be tightly package to fit in the cell 's nucleus .
at the same time , - pron - must also be readily accessible for the gene to be express .
during some stage of the cell cycle , the long strand of dna be condense into compact chromosome .
there be a number of way that chromosome be compact .
in the first level of compaction , short stretch of the dna double helix wrap around a core of eight histone protein at regular interval along the entire length of the chromosome ( figure one  zero  .  four ) .
the dna - histone complex be call chromatin .
the beadlike , histone dna complex be call a nucleosome , and dna connect the nucleosome be call linker dna .
a dna molecule in this form be about seven time short than the double helix without the histone , and the bead be about one  zero nm in diameter , in contrast with the two  - nm diameter of a dna double helix .
the next level of compaction occur as the nucleosome and the linker dna between - pron - be coil into a three  zero  - nm chromatin fiber .
this coil further shorten the chromosome so that - pron - be now about five  zero time short than the extend form .
in the third level of packing , a variety of fibrous protein be use to pack the chromatin .
these fibrous protein also ensure that each chromosome in a non - divide cell occupy a particular area of the nucleus that do not overlap with that of any other chromosome .
double - strand dna wrap around histone protein to form nucleosome that have the appearance of " bead on a string .
"
the nucleosome be coil into a three  zero  - nm chromatin fiber .
when a cell undergo mitosis , the chromosome condense even further .
dna replicate in the s phase of interphase .
after replication , the chromosome be compose of two link sister chromatid .
when fully compact , the pair of identically pack chromosome be bind to each other by cohesin protein .
the connection between the sister chromatid be close in a region call the centromere .
the conjoined sister chromatid , with a diameter of about one μm , be visible under a light microscope .
the centromeric region be highly condense and thus will appear as a constrict area .
the cell cycle be an order series of event involve cell growth and cell division that produce two new daughter cell .
cell on the path to cell division proceed through a series of precisely time and carefully regulate stage of growth , dna replication , and division that produce two identical ( clone ) cell .
the cell cycle have two major phase  interphase and the mitotic phase ( figure one  zero  .  five ) .
during interphase , the cell grow and dna be replicate .
during the mitotic phase , the replicate dna and cytoplasmic content be separate , and the cell divide .
the cell cycle consist of interphase and the mitotic phase .
during interphase , the cell grow and the nuclear dna be duplicate .
interphase be follow by the mitotic phase .
during the mitotic phase , the duplicate chromosome be segregate and distribute into daughter nucleus .
the cytoplasm be usually divide as well , result in two daughter cell .
interphase
during interphase , the cell undergo normal growth process while also prepare for cell division .
in order for a cell to move from interphase into the mitotic phase , many internal and external condition must be meet .
the three stage of interphase be call g one , s , and g two .
g one phase ( first gap )
the first stage of interphase be call the g one phase ( first gap ) because , from a microscopic aspect , little change be visible .
however , during the g one stage , the cell be quite active at the biochemical level .
the cell be accumulate the building block of chromosomal dna and the associated protein as well as accumulate sufficient energy reserve to complete the task of replicate each chromosome in the nucleus .
s phase ( synthesis of dna )
throughout interphase , nuclear dna remain in a semi - condense chromatin configuration .
in the s phase , dna replication can proceed through the mechanism that result in the formation of identical pair of dna molecule
—
sister chromatid — that be firmly attach to the centromeric region .
the centrosome be duplicate during the s phase .
the two centrosome will give rise to the mitotic spindle , the apparatus that orchestrate the movement of chromosome during mitosis .
at the center of each animal cell , the centrosome of animal cell be associate with a pair of rod - like object , the centriole , which be at right angle to each other .
centriole help organize cell division .
centriole be not present in the centrosome of other eukaryotic specie , such as plant and most fungus .
g two phase ( second gap )
in the g two phase , the cell replenish - pron - energy store and synthesize protein necessary for chromosome manipulation .
some cell organelle be duplicate , and the cytoskeleton be dismantle to provide resource for the mitotic phase .
there may be additional cell growth during g two .
the final preparation for the mitotic phase must be complete before the cell be able to enter the first stage of mitosis .
the mitotic phase
the mitotic phase be a multistep process during which the duplicate chromosome be align , separate , and move into two new , identical daughter cell .
the first portion of the mitotic phase be call karyokinesis , or nuclear division .
the second portion of the mitotic phase , call cytokinesis , be the physical separation of the cytoplasmic component into the two daughter cell .
karyokinesis ( mitosis ) karyokinesis , also know as mitosis , be divide into a series of phase — prophase , prometaphase , metaphase , anaphase , and telophase — that result in the division of the cell nucleus ( figure one  zero  .  six ) .
karyokinesis be also call mitosis .
during prophase , the " first phase , " the nuclear envelope start to dissociate into small vesicle , and the membranous organelle ( such as the golgi complex or golgi apparatus , and endoplasmic reticulum ) , fragment and disperse toward the periphery of the cell .
the nucleolus disappear ( dispers ) .
the centrosome begin to move to opposite pole of the cell .
microtubule that will form the mitotic spindle extend between the centrosome , push - pron - farther apart as the microtubule fiber lengthen .
the sister chromatid begin to coil more tightly with the aid of condensin protein and become visible under a light microscope .
during prometaphase , the " first change phase , " many process that be begin in prophase continue to advance .
the remnant of the nuclear envelope fragment .
the mitotic spindle continue to develop as more microtubule assemble and stretch across the length of the former nuclear area .
chromosome become more condensed and discrete .
each sister chromatid develop a protein structure call a kinetochore in the centromeric region ( figure one  zero  .  seven ) .
the protein of the kinetochore attract and bind mitotic spindle microtubule .
as the spindle microtubule extend from the centrosome , some of these microtubule come into contact with and firmly bind to the kinetochore .
once a mitotic fiber attache to a chromosome , the chromosome will be orient until the kinetochore of sister chromatid face the opposite pole .
eventually , all the sister chromatid will be attach via - pron - kinetochore to microtubule from oppose pole .
spindle microtubule that do not engage
the chromosome be call polar microtubule .
these microtubule overlap each other midway between the two pole and contribute to cell elongation .
astral microtubule be locate near the pole , aid in spindle orientation , and be require for the regulation of mitosis .
during prometaphase , mitotic spindle microtubule from opposite pole attach to each sister chromatid at the kinetochore .
in anaphase , the connection between the sister chromatid break down , and the microtubule pull the chromosome toward opposite pole .
during metaphase , the " change phase , " all the chromosome be align in a plane call the metaphase plate , or the equatorial plane , midway between the two pole of the cell .
the sister chromatid be still tightly attach to each other by cohesin protein .
at this time , the chromosome be maximally condense .
during anaphase , the " upward phase , " the cohesin protein degrade , and the sister chromatid separate at the centromere .
each chromatid , now call a chromosome , be pull rapidly toward the centrosome to which - pron - microtubule be attach .
the cell become visibly elongated ( oval shape ) as the polar microtubule slide against each other at the metaphase plate where - pron - overlap .
during telophase , the " distance phase , " the chromosome reach the opposite pole and begin to decondense ( unravel ) , relax into a chromatin configuration .
the mitotic spindle be depolymeriz into tubulin monomer that will be use to assemble cytoskeletal component for each daughter cell .
nuclear envelope form around the chromosome , and nucleosome appear within the nuclear area .
cytokinesis cytokinesis , or " cell motion , " be the second main stage of the mitotic phase during which cell division be complete via the physical separation of the cytoplasmic component into two daughter cell .
division be not complete until the cell component have be apportion and completely separate into the two daughter cell .
although the stage of mitosis be similar for most eukaryote , the process of cytokinesis be quite different for eukaryote that have cell wall , such as plant cell .
in cell such as animal cell that lack cell wall , cytokinesis follow the onset of anaphase .
a contractile ring compose of actin filament form just inside the plasma membrane at the former metaphase plate .
the actin filament pull the equator of the cell inward , form a fissure .
this fissure , or " crack , " be call the cleavage furrow .
the furrow deepen as the actin ring contract , and eventually the membrane be cleave in two ( figure one  zero  .  eight ) .
in plant cell , a new cell wall must form between the daughter cell .
during interphase , the golgi apparatus accumulate enzyme , structural protein , and glucose molecule prior to break into vesicle and disperse throughout the divide cell .
during telophase , these golgi vesicle be transport on microtubule to form a phragmoplast ( a vesicular structure ) at the metaphase plate .
there , the vesicle fuse and coalesce from the center toward the cell wall  this structure be call a cell plate .
as more vesicle fuse , the cell plate enlarge until - pron - merge with the cell wall at the periphery of the cell .
enzyme use the glucose that have accumulate between the membrane layer to build a new cell wall .
the golgi membrane become part of the plasma membrane on either side of the new cell wall .
during cytokinesis in animal cell , a ring of actin filament form at the metaphase plate .
the ring contract , form a cleavage furrow , which divide the cell in two .
in plant cell , golgi vesicle coalesce at the former metaphase plate , form a phragmoplast .
a cell plate form by the fusion of the vesicle of the phragmoplast grow from the center toward the cell wall , and the membrane of the vesicle fuse to form a plasma membrane that divide the cell in two .
g zero phase
not all cell adhere to the classic cell cycle pattern in which a newly form daughter cell immediately enter the preparatory phase of interphase , closely follow by the mitotic phase .
cell in g zero phase be not actively prepare to divide .
the cell be in a quiescent ( inactive ) stage that occur when cell exit the cell cycle .
some cell enter g zero temporarily until an external signal trigger the onset of g one .
other cell that never or rarely divide , such as mature cardiac muscle and nerve cell , remain in g zero permanently .
the length of the cell cycle be highly variable , even within the cell of a single organism .
in human , the frequency of cell turnover range from a few hour in early embryonic development , to an average of two to five day for epithelial cell , and to an entire human lifetime spend in g zero by specialized cell , such as cortical neuron or cardiac muscle cell .
there be also variation in the time that a cell spend in each phase of the cell cycle .
when fast - divide mammalian cell be grow in culture ( outside the body under optimal grow condition ) , the length of the cycle be about two  four hour .
in rapidly divide human cell with a two  four  - hour cell cycle , the g one phase last approximately nine hour , the s phase last one  zero hour , the g two phase last about four and one - half hour , and the m phase last approximately one - half hour .
in early embryo of fruit fly , the cell cycle be complete in about eight minute .
the timing of event in the cell cycle be control by mechanism that be both internal and external to the cell .
regulation of the cell cycle by external event
both the initiation and inhibition of cell division be trigger by event external to the cell when - pron - be about to begin the replication process .
an event may be as simple as the death of a nearby cell or as sweeping as the release of growthpromot hormone , such as human growth hormone ( hgh ) .
a lack of hgh can inhibit cell division , result in dwarfism , whereas too much hgh can result in gigantism .
crowd of cell can also inhibit cell division .
another factor that can initiate cell division be the size of the cell  as a cell grow , - pron - become inefficient due to - pron - decrease surface - tovolume ratio .
the solution to this problem be to divide .
whatev the source of the message , the cell receive the signal , and a series of event within the cell allow - pron - to proceed into interphase .
move forward from this initiation point , every parameter require during each cell cycle phase must be meet or the cycle can not progress .
regulation at internal checkpoints
- pron - be essential that the daughter cell produce be exact duplicate of the parent cell .
mistake in the duplication or distribution of the chromosome lead to mutation that may be pass forward to every new cell produce from an abnormal cell .
to prevent a compromise cell from continue to divide , there be internal control mechanism that operate at three main cell cycle checkpoint .
a checkpoint be one of several point in the eukaryotic cell cycle at which the progression of a cell to the next stage in the cycle can be halt until condition be favorable .
these checkpoint occur near the end of g one , at the g two  / m transition , and during metaphase .
the cell cycle be control at three checkpoint .
the integrity of the dna be assess at the g one checkpoint .
proper chromosome duplication be assess at the g two checkpoint .
attachment of each kinetochore to a spindle fiber be assess at the m checkpoint .
the g one checkpoint the g one checkpoint determine whether all condition be favorable for cell division to proceed .
the g one checkpoint , also call the restriction point ( in yeast ) , be a point at which the cell irreversibly commit to the cell division process .
external influence , such as growth factor , play a large role in carry the cell past the g one checkpoint .
in addition to adequate reserve and cell size , there be a check for genomic dna damage at the g one checkpoint .
a cell that do not meet all the requirement will not be allow to progress into the s phase .
the cell can halt the cycle and attempt to remedy the problematic condition , or the cell can advance into g zero and await further signal when condition improve .
the g two checkpoint the g two checkpoint bar entry into the mitotic phase if certain condition be not meet .
as at the g one checkpoint , cell size and protein reserve be assess .
however , the most important role of the g two checkpoint be to ensure that all of the chromosome have be replicate and that the replicate dna be not damage .
if the checkpoint mechanism detect problem with the dna , the cell cycle be halt , and the cell attempt to either complete dna replication or repair the damage dna .
the m checkpoint the m checkpoint occur near the end of the metaphase stage of karyokinesis .
the m checkpoint be also know as the spindle checkpoint , because - pron - determine whether all the sister chromatid be correctly attach to the spindle microtubule .
because the separation of the sister chromatid during anaphase be an irreversible step , the cycle will not proceed until the kinetochore of each pair of sister chromatid be firmly anchor to at least two spindle fiber arise from opposite pole of the cell .
regulator molecules of the cell cycle
in addition to the internally control checkpoint , there be two group of intracellular molecule that regulate the cell cycle .
these regulatory molecule either promote progress of the cell to the next phase ( positive regulation ) or halt the cycle ( negative regulation ) .
regulator molecule may act individually , or - pron - can influence the activity or production of other regulatory protein .
therefore , the failure of a single regulator may have almost no effect on the cell cycle , especially if more than one mechanism control the same event .
conversely , the effect of a deficient or non - function regulator can be wide - range and possibly fatal to the cell if multiple process be affect .
positive regulation of the cell cycle
two group of protein , call cyclin and cyclin - dependent kinase ( cdks ) , be responsible for the progress of the cell through the various checkpoint .
the level of the four cyclin protein fluctuate throughout the cell cycle in a predictable pattern ( figure one  zero  .  one  one ) .
increase in the concentration of cyclin protein be trigger by both external and internal signal .
after the cell move to the next stage of the cell cycle , the cyclin that be active in the previous stage be degrade .
the concentration of cyclin protein change throughout the cell cycle .
there be a direct correlation between cyclin accumulation and the three major cell cycle checkpoint .
also note the sharp decline of cyclin level follow each checkpoint ( the transition between phase of the cell cycle ) , as cyclin be degrade by cytoplasmic enzyme .
cyclin regulate the cell cycle only when - pron - be tightly bind to cdks .
to be fully active , the cdk / cyclin complex must also be phosphorylat in specific location .
like all kinase , cdks be enzyme ( kinase ) that phosphorylate other protein .
phosphorylation activate the protein by change - pron - shape .
the protein phosphorylat by cdks be involve in advance the cell to the next phase .
( figure one  zero  .  one  two ) .
the level of cdk protein be relatively stable throughout the cell cycle  however , the concentration of cyclin fluctuate and determine when cdk / cyclin complex form .
the different cyclin and cdks bind at specific point in the cell cycle and thus regulate different checkpoint .
cyclin - dependent kinase ( cdks ) be protein kinas that , when fully activate , can phosphorylate and thus activate other protein that advance the cell cycle past a checkpoint .
to become fully activate , a cdk must bind to a cyclin protein and then be phosphorylat by another kinase .
since the cyclic fluctuation of cyclin level be base on the timing of the cell cycle and not on specific event , regulation of the cell cycle usually occur by either the cdk molecule alone or the cdk / cyclin complex .
without a specific concentration of fully activate cyclin / cdk complex , the cell cycle can not proceed through the checkpoint .
although the cyclin be the main regulatory molecule that determine the forward momentum of the cell cycle , there be several other mechanism that fine - tune the progress of the cycle with negative , rather than positive , effect .
these mechanism essentially block the progression of the cell cycle until problematic condition be resolve .
molecule that prevent the full activation of cdks be call cdk inhibitor .
many of these inhibitor molecule directly or indirectly monitor a particular cell cycle event .
the block place on cdks by inhibitor molecule will not be remove until the specific event that the inhibitor monitor be complete .
negative regulation of the cell cycle
the second group of cell cycle regulatory molecule be negative regulator .
negative regulator halt the cell cycle .
remember that in positive regulation , active molecule because the cycle to progress .
the best understand negative regulatory molecule be retinoblastoma protein ( rb ) , p five  three , and p two  one .
retinoblastoma protein be a group of tumor - suppressor protein common in many cell .
the five  three and two  one designation refer to the functional molecular mass of the protein ( p ) in kilodalton .
much of what be know about cell cycle regulation come from research conduct with cell that have lose regulatory control .
all three of these regulatory protein be discover to be damage or non - functional in cell that have begin to replicate uncontrollably
( become cancerous ) .
in each case , the main because of the unchecked progress through the cell cycle be a faulty copy of the regulatory protein .
rb , p five  three , and p two  one act primarily at the g one checkpoint .
p five  three be a multi - functional protein that have a major impact on the commitment of a cell to division because - pron - act when there be damage dna in cell that be undergo the preparatory process during g one .
if damage dna be detect , p five  three halt the cell cycle and recruit enzyme to repair the dna .
if the dna can not be repair , p five  three can trigger apoptosis , or cell suicide , to prevent the duplication of damage chromosome .
as p five  three level rise , the production of p two  one be trigger .
p two  one enforce the halt in the cycle dictate by p five  three by bind to and inhibit the activity of the cdk / cyclin complex .
as a cell be expose to more stress , high level of p five  three and p two  one accumulate , make - pron - less likely that the cell will move into the s phase .
rb exert - pron - regulatory influence on other positive regulator protein .
chiefly , rb monitor cell size .
in the active , dephosphorylat state , rb bind to protein call transcription factor , most commonly , e two f ( figure one  zero  .  one  three ) .
transcription factor " turn on " specific gene , allow the production of protein encode by that gene .
when rb be bind to e two f , production of protein necessary for the g one  / s transition be block .
as the cell increase in size , rb be slowly phosphorylat until - pron - become inactivate .
rb release e two f , which can now turn on the gene that produce the transition protein , and this particular block be remove .
for the cell to move past each of the checkpoint , all positive regulator must be " turn on , " and all negative regulator must be " turn off .
"
cancer comprise many different disease cause by a common mechanism  uncontrolled cell growth .
despite the redundancy and overlapping level of cell cycle control , error do occur .
one of the critical process monitor by the cell cycle checkpoint surveillance mechanism be the proper replication of dna during the s phase .
even when all of the cell cycle control be fully functional , a small percentage of replication error ( mutation ) will be pass on to the daughter cell .
if change to the dna nucleotide sequence occur within a coding portion of a gene and be not correct , a gene mutation result .
all cancer start when a gene mutation give rise to a faulty protein that play a key role in cell reproduction .
the change in the cell that result from the malformed protein may be minor  perhaps a slight delay in the binding of cdk to cyclin or an rb protein that detach from - pron - target dna while still phosphorylat .
even minor mistake , however , may allow subsequent mistake to occur more readily .
over and over , small uncorrected error be pass from the parent cell to the daughter cell and amplify as each generation produce more non - functional protein from uncorrected dna damage .
eventually , the pace of the cell cycle speed up as the effectiveness of the control and repair mechanism decrease .
uncontrolled growth of the mutate cell outpace the growth of normal cell in the area , and a tumor ( " - oma " ) can result .
proto - oncogen the gene that code for the positive cell cycle regulator be call proto - oncogene .
proto - oncogene be normal gene that , when mutate in certain way , become oncogene , gene that because a cell to become cancerous .
consider what may happen to the cell cycle in a cell with a recently acquire oncogene .
in most instance , the alteration of the dna sequence will result in a less functional ( or non - functional ) protein .
the result be detrimental to the cell and will likely prevent the cell from complete the cell cycle  however , the organism be not harm because the mutation will not be carry forward .
if a cell can not reproduce , the mutation be not propagate and the damage be minimal .
occasionally , however , a gene mutation cause a change that increase the activity of a positive regulator .
for example , a mutation that allow cdk to be activate without be partner with cyclin could push the cell cycle past a checkpoint before all of the require condition be meet .
if the result daughter cell be too damaged to undergo further cell division , the mutation would not be propagate and no harm would come to the organism .
however , if the atypical daughter cell be able to undergo further cell division , subsequent generation of cell will probably accumulate even more mutation , some possibly in additional gene that regulate the cell cycle .
the cdk gene in the above example be only one of many gene that be consider proto - oncogene .
in addition to the cell cycle regulatory protein , any protein that influence the cycle can be alter in such a way as to override cell cycle checkpoint .
an oncogene be any gene that , when alter , lead to an increase in the rate of cell cycle progression .
tumor suppressor genes like proto - oncogene , many of the negative cell cycle regulatory protein be discover in cell that have become cancerous .
tumor suppressor gene be segment of dna that code for negative regulator protein , the type of regulator that , when activate , can prevent the cell from undergo uncontrolled division .
the collective function of the bestunderstood tumor suppressor gene protein , rb , p five  three , and p two  one , be to put up a roadblock to cell cycle progression until certain event be complete .
a cell that carry a mutate form of a negative regulator may not be able to halt the cell cycle if there be a problem .
tumor suppressor be similar to brake in a vehicle  malfunctioning brake can contribute to a car crash .
mutate p five  three gene have be identify in more than one - half of all human tumor cell .
this discovery be not surprising in light of the multiple role that the p five  three protein play at the g one checkpoint .
a cell with a faulty p five  three may fail to detect error present in the genomic dna ( figure one  zero  .  one  four ) .
even if a partially functional p five  three do identify the mutation , - pron - may no longer be able to signal the necessary dna repair enzyme .
either way , damage dna will remain uncorrected .
at this point , a functional p five  three will deem the cell unsalvageable and trigger program cell death ( apoptosis ) .
the damaged version of p five  three find in cancer cell , however , can not trigger apoptosis .
the loss of p five  three function have other repercussion for the cell cycle .
mutate p five  three may lose - pron - ability to trigger p two  one production .
without adequate level of p two  one , there be no effective block on cdk activation .
essentially , without a fully functional p five  three , the g one checkpoint be severely compromise and the cell proceed directly from g one to s regardless of internal and external condition .
at the completion of this shortened cell cycle , two daughter cell be produce that have inherit the mutate p five  three gene .
give the non - optimal condition under which the parent cell reproduce , - pron - be likely that the daughter cell will have acquire other mutation in addition to the faulty tumor suppressor gene .
cell such as these daughter cell quickly accumulate both oncogene and non - functional tumor suppressor gene .
again , the result be tumor growth .
prokaryote , such as bacteria , propagate by binary fission .
for unicellular organism , cell division be the only method to produce new individual .
in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell , the outcome of cell reproduction be a pair of daughter cell that be genetically identical to the parent cell .
in unicellular organism , daughter cell be individual .
to achieve the outcome of clone offspring , certain step be essential .
the genomic dna must be replicate and then allocate into the daughter cell  the cytoplasmic content must also be divide to give both new cell the machinery to sustain life .
in bacterial cell , the genome consist of a single , circular dna chromosome  therefore , the process of cell division be simplify .
karyokinesis be unnecessary because there be no nucleus and thus no need to direct one copy of the multiple chromosome into each daughter cell .
this type of cell division be call binary ( prokaryotic ) fission .
binary fission due to the relative simplicity of the prokaryote , the cell division process , call binary fission , be a less complicated and much more rapid process than cell division in eukaryote .
the single , circular dna chromosome of bacteria be not enclose in a nucleus , but instead occupy a specific location , the nucleoid , within the cell ( figure one  zero  .  two ) .
although the dna of the nucleoid be associate with protein that aid in package the molecule into a compact size , there be no histone protein and thus no nucleosome in prokaryote .
the pack protein of bacteria be , however , relate to the cohesin and condensin protein involve in the chromosome compaction of eukaryote .
the bacterial chromosome be attach to the plasma membrane at about the midpoint of the cell .
the starting point of replication , the origin , be close to the bind site of the chromosome to the plasma membrane ( figure one  zero  .  one  five ) .
replication of the dna be bidirectional , move away from the origin on both strand of the loop simultaneously .
as the new double strand be form , each origin point move away from the cell wall attachment toward the opposite end of the cell .
as the cell elongate , the grow membrane aid in the transport of the chromosome .
after the chromosome have clear the midpoint of the elongated cell , cytoplasmic separation begin .
the formation of a ring compose of repeat unit of a protein call ftsz direct the partition between the nucleoid .
formation of the ftsz ring trigger the accumulation of other protein that work together to recruit new membrane and cell wall material to the site .
a septum be form between the nucleoid , extend gradually from the periphery toward the center of the cell .
when the new cell wall be in place , the daughter cell separate .
introduction
the ability to reproduce in kind be a basic characteristic of all live thing .
in kind mean that the offspring of any organism closely resemble - pron - parent or parent .
hippopotamus give birth to hippopotamus calf , joshua tree produce seed from which joshua tree seedling emerge , and adult flamingo lie egg that hatch into flamingo chick .
in kind do not generally mean exactly the same .
whereas many unicellular organism and a few multicellular organism can produce genetically identical clone of - pron - through cell division , many single - cell organism and most multicellular organism reproduce regularly use another method .
sexual reproduction be the production by parent of two haploid cell and the fusion of two haploid cell to form a single , unique diploid cell .
in most plant and animal , through ten of round of mitotic cell division , this diploid cell will develop into an adult organism .
haploid cell that be part of the sexual reproductive cycle be produce by a type of cell division call meiosis .
sexual reproduction , specifically meiosis and fertilization , introduce variation into offspring that may account for the evolutionary success of sexual reproduction .
the vast majority of eukaryotic organism , both multicellular and unicellular , can or must employ some form of meiosis and fertilization to reproduce .
sexual reproduction require fertilization , the union of two cell from two individual organism .
if those two cell each contain one set of chromosome , then the result cell contain two set of chromosome .
haploid cell contain one set of chromosome .
cell contain two set of chromosome be call diploid .
the number of set of chromosome in a cell be call - pron - ploidy level .
if the reproductive cycle be to continue , then the diploid cell must somehow reduce - pron - number of chromosome set before fertilization can occur again , or there will be a continual doubling in the number of chromosome set in every generation .
so , in addition to fertilization , sexual reproduction include a nuclear division that reduce the number of chromosome set .
most animal and plant be diploid , contain two set of chromosome .
in each somatic cell of the organism ( all cell of a multicellular organism except the gamete or reproductive cell ) , the nucleus contain two copy of each chromosome , call homologous chromosome .
somatic cell be sometimes refer to as " body " cell .
homologous chromosome be match pair contain the same gene in identical location along - pron - length .
diploid organism inherit one copy of each homologous chromosome from each parent  all together , - pron - be consider a full set of chromosome .
haploid cell , contain a single copy of each homologous chromosome , be find only within structure that give rise to either gamete or spore .
spore be haploid cell that can produce a haploid organism or can fuse with another spore to form a diploid cell .
all animal and most plant produce egg and sperm , or gamete .
some plant and all fungus produce spore .
the nuclear division that form haploid cell , which be call meiosis , be relate to mitosis .
as - pron - have learn , mitosis be the part of a cell reproduction cycle that result in identical daughter nucleus that be also genetically identical to the original parent nucleus .
in mitosis , both the parent and the daughter nucleus be at the same ploidy level — diploid for most plant and animal .
meiosis employ many of the same mechanism as mitosis .
however , the start nucleus be always diploid and the nucleus that result at the end of a meiotic cell division be haploid .
to achieve this reduction in chromosome number , meiosis consist of one round of chromosome duplication and two round of nuclear division .
because the event that occur during each of the division stage be analogous to the event of mitosis , the same stage name be assign .
however , because there be two round of division , the major process and the stage be designate with a " i " or a " ii .
"
thus , meiosis i be the first round of meiotic division and consist of prophase
i , prometaphase i , and so on .
meiosis ii , in which the second round of meiotic division take place , include prophase ii , prometaphase ii , and so on .
meiosis i meiosis be precede by an interphase consist of the g one , s , and g two phase , which be nearly identical to the phase precede mitosis .
the g one phase , which be also call the first gap phase , be the first phase of the interphase and be focus on cell growth .
the s phase be the second phase of interphase , during which the dna of the chromosome be replicate .
finally , the g two phase , also call the second gap phase , be the third and final phase of interphase  in this phase , the cell undergo the final preparation for meiosis .
during dna duplication in the s phase , each chromosome be replicate to produce two identical copy , call sister chromatid , that be hold together at the centromere by cohesin protein .
cohesin hold the chromatid together until anaphase ii .
the centrosome , which be the structure that organize the microtubule of the meiotic spindle , also replicate .
this prepare the cell to enter prophase
i , the first meiotic phase .
prophase i early in prophase
i , before the chromosome can be see clearly microscopically , the homologous chromosome be attach at - pron - tip to the nuclear envelope by protein .
as the nuclear envelope begin to break down , the protein associate with homologous chromosome bring the pair close to each other .
recall that , in mitosis , homologous chromosome do not pair together .
in mitosis , homologous chromosome line up end - to - end so that when - pron - divide , each daughter cell receive a sister chromatid from both member of the homologous pair .
the synaptonemal complex , a lattice of protein between the homologous chromosome , first form at specific location and then spread to cover the entire length of the chromosome .
the tight pairing of the homologous chromosome be call synapsis .
in synapsis , the gene on the chromatid of the homologous chromosome be align precisely with each other .
the synaptonemal complex support the exchange of chromosomal segment between non - sister homologous chromatid , a process call cross over .
crossing over can be observe visually after the exchange as chiasmata ( singular = chiasma ) ( figure one  one  .  two ) .
in specie such as human , even though the x and y sex chromosome be not homologous ( most of - pron - gene differ ) , - pron - have a small region of homology that allow the x and y chromosome to pair up during prophase i . a partial synaptonemal complex develop only between the region of homology .
early in prophase
i , homologous chromosome come together to form a synapse .
the chromosome be bind tightly together and in perfect alignment by a protein lattice call a synaptonemal complex and by cohesin protein at the centromere .
locate at interval along the synaptonemal complex be large protein assembly call recombination nodule .
these assembly mark the point of later chiasma and mediate the multistep process of crossover — or genetic recombination — between the non - sister chromatid .
near the recombination nodule on each chromatid , the double - strand dna be cleave , the cut end be modify , and a new connection be make between the non - sister chromatid .
as prophase i progress , the synaptonemal complex begin to break down and the chromosome begin to condense .
when the synaptonemal complex be go , the homologous chromosome remain attached to each other at the centromere and at chiasma .
the chiasma remain until anaphase i .
the number of chiasmata vary accord to the specie and the length of the chromosome .
there must be at least one chiasma per chromosome for proper separation of homologous chromosome during meiosis
i , but there may be as many as two  five .
follow crossover , the synaptonemal complex break down and the cohesin connection between homologous pair be also remove .
at the end of prophase i , the pair be hold together only at the chiasmata ( figure one  one  .  three ) and be call tetrad because the four sister chromatid of each pair of homologous chromosome be now visible .
the crossover event be the first source of genetic variation in the nucleus produce by meiosis .
a single crossover event between homologous non - sister chromatid lead to a reciprocal exchange of equivalent dna between a maternal chromosome and a paternal chromosome .
now , when that sister chromatid be move into a gamete cell - pron - will carry some dna from one parent of the individual and some dna from the other parent .
the sister recombinant chromatid have a combination of maternal and paternal gene that do not exist before the crossover .
multiple crossover in an arm of the chromosome have the same effect , exchange segment of dna to create recombinant chromosome .
crossover occur between non - sister chromatid of homologous chromosome .
the result be an exchange of genetic material between homologous chromosome .
prometaphase
i
the key event in prometaphase
i be the attachment of the spindle fiber microtubule to the kinetochore protein at the centromere .
kinetochore protein be multiprotein complex that bind the centromere of a chromosome to the microtubule of the mitotic spindle .
microtubule grow from centrosome place at opposite pole of the cell .
the microtubule move toward the middle of the cell and attach to one of the two fuse homologous chromosome .
the microtubule attach at each chromosome ' kinetochore .
with each member of the homologous pair attach to opposite pole of the cell , in the next phase , the microtubule can pull the homologous pair apart .
a spindle fiber that have attach to a kinetochore be call a kinetochore microtubule .
at the end of prometaphase i , each tetrad be attach to microtubule from both pole , with one homologous chromosome face each pole .
the homologous chromosome be still hold together at chiasma .
in addition , the nuclear membrane have break down entirely .
metaphase i
during metaphase
i , the homologous chromosome be arrange in the center of the cell with the kinetochore face opposite pole .
the homologous pair orient - pron - randomly at the equator .
for example , if the two homologous member of chromosome one be label a and b , then the chromosome could line up a - b , or b - a .
this be important in determine the gene carry by a gamete , as each will only receive one of the two homologous chromosome .
recall that homologous chromosome be not identical .
- pron - contain slight difference in - pron - genetic information , cause each gamete to have a unique genetic makeup .
this randomness be the physical basis for the creation of the second form of genetic variation in offspring .
consider that the homologous chromosome of a sexually reproduce organism be originally inherit as two separate set , one from each parent .
use human as an example , one set of two  three chromosome be present in the egg donate by the mother .
the father provide the other set of two  three chromosome in the sperm that fertilize the egg .
every cell of the multicellular offspring have copy of the original two set of homologous chromosome .
in prophase i of meiosis , the homologous chromosome form the tetrad .
in metaphase i , these pair line up at the midway point between the two pole of the cell to form the metaphase plate .
because there be an equal chance that a microtubule fiber will encounter a maternally or paternally inherit chromosome , the arrangement of the tetrad at the metaphase plate be random .
any maternally inherit chromosome may face either pole .
any paternally inherit chromosome may also face either pole .
the orientation of each tetrad be independent of the orientation of the other two  two tetrad .
this event — the random ( or independent ) assortment of homologous chromosome at the metaphase plate — be the second mechanism that introduce variation into the gamete or spore .
in each cell that undergo meiosis , the arrangement of the tetrad be different .
the number of variation be dependent on the number of chromosome make up a set .
there be two possibility for orientation at the metaphase plate  the possible number of alignment therefore equal two n , where n be the number of chromosome per set .
human have two  three chromosome pair , which result in over eight million ( two  two  three ) possible genetically - distinct gamete .
this number do not include the variability that be previously create in the sister chromatid by crossover .
give these two mechanism , - pron - be highly unlikely that any two haploid cell result from meiosis will have the same genetic composition ( figure one  one  .  four ) .
to summarize the genetic consequence of meiosis i , the maternal and paternal gene be recombine by crossover event that occur between each homologous pair during prophase i .
in addition , the random assortment of tetrad on the metaphase plate produce a unique combination of maternal and paternal chromosome that will make - pron - way into the gamete .
random , independent assortment during metaphase i can be demonstrate by consider a cell with a set of two chromosome ( n = two ) .
in this case , there be two possible arrangement at the equatorial plane in metaphase i .
the total possible number of different gamete be two n , where n equal the number of chromosome in a set .
in this example , there be four possible genetic combination for the gamete .
with n = two  three in human cell , there be over eight million possible combination of paternal and maternal chromosome .
anaphase
i
in anaphase
i , the microtubule pull the link chromosome apart .
the sister chromatid remain tightly bind together at the centromere .
the chiasma be break in anaphase
i as the microtubule attach to the fused kinetochore pull the homologous chromosome apart ( figure one  one  .  five ) .
telophase i and cytokinesis
in telophase , the separate chromosome arrive at opposite pole .
the remainder of the typical telophase event may or may not occur , depend on the specie .
in some organism , the chromosome decondense and nuclear envelope form around the chromatid in telophase i .
in other organism , cytokinesis —
the physical separation of the cytoplasmic component into two daughter cell — occur without reformation of the nucleus .
in nearly all specie of animal and some fungus , cytokinesis separate the cell content via a cleavage furrow ( constriction of the actin ring that lead to cytoplasmic division ) .
in plant , a cell plate be form during cell cytokinesis by golgi vesicle fuse at the metaphase plate .
this cell plate will ultimately lead to the formation of cell wall that separate the two daughter cell .
two haploid cell be the end result of the first meiotic division .
the cell be haploid because at each pole , there be just one of each pair of the homologous chromosome .
therefore , only one full set of the chromosome be present .
this be why the cell be consider haploid — there be only one chromosome set , even though each homolog still consist of two sister chromatid .
recall that sister chromatid be merely duplicate of one of the two homologous chromosome ( except for change that occur during cross over ) .
in meiosis ii , these two sister chromatid will separate , create four haploid daughter cell .
meiosis ii
in some specie , cell enter a brief interphase , or interkinesis , before enter meiosis ii .
interkinesis lack an s phase , so chromosome be not duplicate .
the two cell produce in meiosis i go through the event of meiosis ii in synchrony .
during meiosis ii , the sister chromatid within the two daughter cell separate , form four new haploid gamete .
the mechanic of meiosis ii be similar to mitosis , except that each divide cell have only one set of homologous chromosome .
therefore , each cell have half the number of sister chromatid to separate out as a diploid cell undergo mitosis .
prophase ii
if the chromosome decondens in telophase
i , - pron - condense again .
if nuclear envelope be form , - pron - fragment into vesicle .
the centrosome that be duplicate during interkinesis move away from each other toward opposite pole , and new spindle be form .
prometaphase ii
the nuclear envelope be completely break down , and the spindle be fully form .
each sister chromatid form an individual kinetochore that attach to microtubule from opposite pole .
metaphase ii
the sister chromatid be maximally condense and align at the equator of the cell .
anaphase ii
the sister chromatid be pull apart by the kinetochore microtubule and move toward opposite pole .
non - kinetochore microtubule elongate the cell .
the process of chromosome alignment differ between meiosis i and meiosis ii .
in prometaphase i , microtubule attach to the fused kinetochore of homologous chromosome , and the homologous chromosome be arrange at the midpoint of the cell in metaphase i .
in anaphase
i , the homologous chromosome be separate .
in prometaphase ii , microtubule attach to the kinetochore of sister chromatid , and the sister chromatid be arrange at the midpoint of the cell in metaphase ii .
in anaphase ii , the sister chromatid be separate .
telophase ii and cytokinesis
the chromosome arrive at opposite pole and begin to decondense .
nuclear envelope form around the chromosome .
cytokinesis separate the two cell into four unique haploid cell .
at this point , the newly form nucleus be both haploid .
the cell produce be genetically unique because of the random assortment of paternal and maternal homolog and because of the recombining of maternal and paternal segment of chromosome ( with - pron - set of gene ) that occur during crossover .
the entire process of meiosis be outline in figure one  one  .  six .
an animal cell with a diploid number of four ( two n = four ) proceed through the stage of meiosis to form four haploid daughter cell .
compare meiosis and mitosis mitosis and meiosis be both form of division of the nucleus in eukaryotic cell .
- pron - share some similarity , but also exhibit distinct difference that lead to very different outcome ( figure one  one  .  seven ) .
mitosis be a single nuclear division that result in two nucleus that be usually partition into two new cell .
the nucleus result from a mitotic division be genetically identical to the original nucleus .
- pron - have the same number of set of chromosome , one set in the case of haploid cell and two set in the case of diploid cell .
in most plant and all animal specie , - pron - be typically diploid cell that undergo mitosis to form new diploid cell .
in contrast , meiosis consist of two nuclear division result in four nucleus that be usually partition into four new cell .
the nucleus result from meiosis be not genetically identical and - pron - contain one chromosome set only .
this be half the number of chromosome set in the original cell , which be diploid .
the main difference between mitosis and meiosis occur in meiosis i , which be a very different nuclear division than mitosis .
in meiosis i , the homologous chromosome pair become associate with each other , be bind together with the synaptonemal complex , develop chiasma and undergo crossover between sister chromatid , and line up along the metaphase plate in tetrad with kinetochore fiber from opposite spindle pole attach to each kinetochore of a homolog in a tetrad .
all of these event occur only in meiosis i .
when the chiasmata resolve and the tetrad be break up with the homolog move to one pole or another , the ploidy level —
the number of set of chromosome in each future nucleus — have be reduce from two to one .
for this reason , meiosis i be refer to as a reduction division .
there be no such reduction in ploidy level during mitosis .
meiosis ii be much more analogous to a mitotic division .
in this case , the duplicate chromosome ( only one set of - pron - ) line up on the metaphase plate with divided kinetochore attach to kinetochore fiber from opposite pole .
during anaphase ii , as in mitotic anaphase , the kinetochore divide and one sister chromatid — now refer to as a chromosome — be pull to one pole while the other sister chromatid be pull to the other pole .
if - pron - be not for the fact that there have be crossover , the two product of each individual meiosis ii division would be identical ( like in mitosis ) .
instead , - pron - be different because there have always be at least one crossover per chromosome .
meiosis ii be not a reduction division because although there be few copy of the genome in the result cell , there be still one set of chromosome , as there be at the end of meiosis i . meiosis and mitosis be both precede by one round of dna replication  however , meiosis include two nuclear division .
the four daughter cell result from meiosis be haploid and genetically distinct .
the daughter cell result from mitosis be diploid and identical to the parent cell .
sexual reproduction be an early evolutionary innovation after the appearance of eukaryotic cell .
- pron - appear to have be very successful because most eukaryote be able to reproduce sexually , and in many animal , - pron - be the only mode of reproduction .
and yet , scientist recognize some real disadvantage to sexual reproduction .
on the surface , create offspring that be genetic clone of the parent appear to be a good system .
if the parent organism be successfully occupy a habitat , offspr with the same trait would be similarly successful .
there be also the obvious benefit to an organism that can produce offspring whenever circumstance be favorable by asexual budding , fragmentation , or asexual egg .
these method of reproduction do not require another organism of the opposite sex .
indeed , some organism that lead a solitary lifestyle have retain the ability to reproduce asexually .
in addition , in asexual population , every individual be capable of reproduction .
in sexual population , the male be not produce the offspring - pron - , so in theory an asexual population could grow twice as fast .
however , multicellular organism that exclusively depend on asexual reproduction be exceedingly rare .
why be sexuality ( and meiosis ) so common ?
this be one of the important unanswered question in biology and have be the focus of much research beginning in the latter half of the twentieth century .
there be several possible explanation , one of which be that the variation that sexual reproduction create among offspring be very important to the survival and reproduction of the population .
thus , on average , a sexually reproduce population will leave more descendant than an otherwise similar asexually reproduce population .
the only source of variation in asexual organism be mutation .
this be the ultimate source of variation in sexual organism , but in addition , those different mutation be continually reshuffle from one generation to the next when different parent combine - pron - unique genome and the gene be mix into different combination by crossover during prophase i and random assortment at metaphase i . life cycles of sexually reproduce organisms fertilization and meiosis alternate in sexual life cycle .
what happen between these two event depend on the organism .
the process of meiosis reduce the chromosome number by half .
fertilization , the joining of two haploid gamete , restore the diploid condition .
there be three main category of life cycle in multicellular organism  diploid - dominant , in which the multicellular diploid stage be the most obvious life stage , such as with most animal include human  haploid - dominant , in which the multicellular haploid stage be the most obvious life stage , such as with all fungus and some algae  and alternation of generation , in which the two stage be apparent to different degree depend on the group , as with plant and some algae .
diploid - dominant life cycle
nearly all animal employ a diploid - dominant life - cycle strategy in which the only haploid cell produce by the organism be the gamete .
early in the development of the embryo , specialize diploid cell , call germ cell , be produce within the gonad , such as the testis and ovary .
germ cell be capable of mitosis to perpetuate the cell line and meiosis to produce gamete .
once the haploid gamete be form , - pron - lose the ability to divide again .
there be no multicellular haploid life stage .
fertilization occur with the fusion of two gamete , usually from different individual , restore the diploid state ( figure one  one  .  eight ) .
in animal , sexually reproduce adult form haploid gamete from diploid germ cell .
fusion of the gamete give rise to a fertilize egg cell , or zygote .
the zygote will undergo multiple round of mitosis to produce a multicellular offspring .
the germ cell be generate early in the development of the zygote .
haploid - dominant life cycle
most fungus and algae employ a life - cycle type in which the " body " of the organism — the ecologically important part of the life cycle
— be haploid .
the haploid cell that make up the tissue of the dominant multicellular stage be form by mitosis .
during sexual reproduction , specialize haploid cell from two individual , designate the ( + ) and ( − ) mating type , join to form a diploid zygote .
the zygote immediately undergo meiosis to form four haploid cell call spore .
although haploid like the " parent , " these spore contain a new genetic combination from two parent .
the spore can remain dormant for various time period .
eventually , when condition be conducive , the spore form multicellular haploid structure by many round of mitosis ( figure one  one  .  nine ) .
alternation of generations
the third life - cycle type , employ by some algae and all plant , be a blend of the haploid - dominant and diploid - dominant extreme .
specie with alternation of generation have both haploid and diploid multicellular organism as part of - pron - life cycle .
the haploid multicellular plant be call gametophyte , because - pron - produce gamete from specialized cell .
meiosis be not directly involve in the production of gamete in this case , because the organism that produce the gamete be already a haploid .
fertilization between the gamete form a diploid zygote .
the zygote will undergo many round of mitosis and give rise to a diploid multicellular plant call a sporophyte .
specialized cell of the sporophyte will undergo meiosis and produce haploid spore .
the spore will subsequently develop into the gametophyte ( figure one  one  .  one  zero ) .
plant have a life cycle that alternate between a multicellular haploid organism and a multicellular diploid organism .
in some plant , such as fern , both the haploid and diploid plant stage be free - living .
the diploid plant be call a sporophyte because - pron - produce haploid spore by meiosis .
the spore develop into multicellular , haploid plant call gametophyte because - pron - produce gamete .
the gamete of two individual will fuse to form a diploid zygote that become the sporophyte .
although all plant utilize some version of the alternation of generation , the relative size of the sporophyte and the gametophyte and the relationship between - pron - vary greatly .
in plant such as moss , the gametophyte organism be the free - live plant , and the sporophyte be physically dependent on the gametophyte .
in other plant , such as fern , both the gametophyte and sporophyte plant be free - living  however , the sporophyte be much large .
in seed plant , such as magnolia tree and daisy , the gametophyte be compose of only a few cell and , in the case of the female gametophyte , be completely retain within the sporophyte .
sexual reproduction take many form in multicellular organism .
however , at some point in each type of life cycle , meiosis produce haploid cell that will fuse with the haploid cell of another organism .
the mechanism of variation — crossover , random assortment of homologous chromosome , and random fertilization — be present in all version of sexual reproduction .
the fact that nearly every multicellular organism on earth employ sexual reproduction be strong evidence for the benefit of produce offspring with unique gene combination , though there be other possible benefit as well .
experiment with thousand of garden pea , mendel uncover the fundamental of genetic .
introduction genetics be the study of heredity .
johann gregor mendel set the framework for genetic long before chromosome or gene have be identify , at a time when meiosis be not well understand .
mendel select a simple biological system and conduct methodical , quantitative analysis use large sample size .
because of mendel 's work , the fundamental principle of heredity be reveal .
- pron - now know that gene , carry on chromosome , be the basic functional unit of heredity with the capability to be replicate , express , or mutate .
today , the postulate put forth by mendel form the basis of classical , or mendelian , genetic .
not all gene be transmit from parent to offspring accord to mendelian genetic , but mendel 's experiment serve as an excellent starting point for think about inheritance .
johann gregor mendel be consider the father of genetic .
johann gregor mendel ( one  eight  two  two – one  eight  eight  four ) ( figure one  two  .  two ) be a lifelong learner , teacher , scientist , and man of faith .
as a young adult , - pron - join the augustinian abbey of st . thomas in brno in what be now the czech republic .
support by the monastery , - pron - teach physics , botany , and natural science course at the secondary and university level .
in one  eight  five  six , - pron - begin a decade - long research pursuit involve inheritance pattern in honeybee and plant , ultimately settle on pea plant as - pron - primary model system ( a system with convenient characteristic use to study a specific biological phenomenon to be apply to other system ) .
in one  eight  six  five , mendel present the result of - pron - experiment with nearly three  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero pea plant to the local natural history society .
- pron - demonstrate that trait be transmit faithfully from parent to offspring independently of other trait and in dominant and recessive pattern .
in one  eight  six  six , - pron - publish - pron - work , experiments in plant hybridization , in the proceeding of the natural history society of brünn .
mendel 's work go virtually unnoticed by the scientific community that believe , incorrectly , that the process of inheritance involve a blending of parental trait that produce an intermediate physical appearance in offspring  this hypothetical process appear to be correct because of what - pron - know now as continuous variation .
continuous variation result from the action of many gene to determine a characteristic like human height .
offspring appear to be a " blend " of - pron - parents' trait when - pron - look at characteristic that exhibit continuous variation .
the blend theory of inheritance assert that the original parental trait be lose or absorb by the blend in the offspring , but - pron - now know that this be not the case .
mendel be the first researcher to see - pron - .
instead of continuous characteristic , mendel work with trait that be inherit in distinct class ( specifically , violet versus white flower )  this be refer to as discontinuous variation .
mendel 's choice of these kind of trait allow - pron - to see experimentally that the trait be not blend in the offspring , nor be - pron - absorb , but rather that - pron - keep - pron - distinctness and could be pass on .
in one  eight  six  eight , mendel become abbot of the monastery and exchange - pron - scientific pursuit for - pron - pastoral duty .
- pron - be not recognize for - pron - extraordinary scientific contribution during - pron - lifetime .
in fact , - pron - be not until one  nine  zero  zero that - pron - work be rediscover , reproduce , and revitalize by scientist on the brink of discover the chromosomal basis of heredity .
mendel 's
model system mendel 's seminal work be accomplish use the garden pea , pisum sativum , to study inheritance .
this specie naturally self - fertilize , such that pollen encounter ova within individual flower .
the flower petal remain sealed tightly until after pollination , prevent pollination from other plant .
the result be highly inbreed , or " true - breeding , " pea plant .
these be plant that always produce offspring that look like the parent .
by experiment with true - breed pea plant , mendel avoid the appearance of unexpected trait in offspring that may occur if the plant be not true breeding .
the garden pea also grow to maturity within one season , mean that several generation could be evaluate over a relatively short time .
finally , large quantity of garden pea could be cultivate simultaneously , allow mendel to conclude that - pron - result do not come about simply by chance .
mendelian crosses mendel perform hybridization , which involve mat two true - breed individual that have different trait .
in the pea , which be naturally self - pollinate , this be do by manually transfer pollen from the anther of a mature pea plant of one variety to the stigma of a separate mature pea plant of the second variety .
in plant , pollen carry the male gamete ( sperm ) to the stigma , a sticky organ that trap pollen and allow the sperm to move down the pistil to the female gamete ( ova ) below .
to prevent the pea plant that be receive pollen from self - fertilize and confound - pron - result , mendel painstakingly remove all of the anther from the plant 's flower before - pron - have a chance to mature .
plant use in first - generation cross be call p zero , or parental generation one , plant ( figure one  two  .  three ) .
mendel collect the seed belong to the p zero plant that result from each cross and grow - pron - the follow season .
these offspring be call the f one , or the first filial ( filial = offspring , daughter or son ) , generation .
once mendel examine the characteristic in the f one generation of plant , - pron - allow - pron - to self - fertilize naturally .
- pron - then collect and grow the seed from the f one plant to produce the f two , or second filial , generation .
mendel 's experiment extend beyond the f two generation to the f three and f four generation , and so on , but - pron - be the ratio of characteristic in the p zero −f one −f two generation that be the most intriguing and become the basis for mendel 's postulate .
in one of - pron - experiment on inheritance pattern , mendel cross plant that be true - breeding for violet flower color with plant true - breeding for white flower color ( the p generation ) .
the result hybrid in the f one generation all have violet flower .
in the f two generation , approximately three quarter of the plant have violet flower , and one quarter have white flower .
garden pea characteristics reveal the basics of heredity
in - pron - one  eight  six  five publication , mendel report the result of - pron - cross involve seven different characteristic , each with two contrast trait .
a trait be define as a variation in the physical appearance of a heritable characteristic .
the characteristic include plant height , seed texture , seed color , flower color , pea pod size , pea pod color , and flower position .
for the characteristic of flower color , for example , the two contrast trait be white versus violet .
to fully examine each characteristic , mendel generate large number of f one and f two plant , report result from one  nine  ,  nine  five  nine f two plant alone .
- pron - finding be consistent .
what result do mendel find in - pron - cross for flower color ?
first , mendel confirm that - pron - have plant that breed true for white or violet flower color .
regardless of how many generation mendel examine , all self - cross offspring of parent with white flower have white flower , and all self - cross offspring of parent with violet flower have violet flower .
in addition , mendel confirm that , other than flower color , the pea plant be physically identical .
once these validation be complete , mendel apply the pollen from a plant with violet flower to the stigma of a plant with white flower .
after gather and sow the seed that result from this cross , mendel find that one  zero  zero percent of the f one hybrid generation have violet flower .
conventional wisdom at that time would have predict the hybrid flower to be pale violet or for hybrid plant to have equal number of white and violet flower .
in other word , the contrast parental trait be expect to blend in the offspring .
instead , mendel 's result demonstrate that the white flower trait in the f one generation have completely disappear .
importantly , mendel do not stop - pron - experimentation there .
- pron - allow the f one plant to self - fertilize and find that , of f two  - generation plant , seven  zero  five have violet flower and two  two  four have white flower .
this be a ratio of three  .  one  five violet flower per one white flower , or approximately three   one .
when mendel transfer pollen from a plant with violet flower to the stigma of a plant with white flower and vice versa , - pron - obtain about the same ratio regardless of which parent , male or female , contribute which trait .
this be call a reciprocal cross — a pair cross in which the respective trait of the male and female in one cross become the respective trait of the female and male in the other cross .
for the other six characteristic mendel examine , the f one and f two generation behave in the same way as - pron - have for flower color .
one of the two trait would disappear completely from the f one generation only to reappear in the f two generation at a ratio of approximately three   one upon compile - pron - result for many thousand of plant , mendel conclude that the characteristic could be divide into express and latent trait .
- pron - call these , respectively , dominant and recessive trait .
dominant trait be those that be inherit unchanged in a hybridization .
recessive trait become latent , or disappear , in the offspring of a hybridization .
the recessive trait do , however , reappear in the progeny of the hybrid offspring .
an example of a dominant trait be the violet - flower trait .
for this same characteristic ( flower color ) , white - color flower be a recessive trait .
the fact that the recessive trait reappear in the f two generation mean that the trait remain separate ( not blended ) in the plant of the f one generation .
mendel also propose that plant possess two copy of the trait for the flower - color characteristic , and that each parent transmit one of - pron - two copy to - pron - offspring , where - pron - come together .
moreover , the physical observation of a dominant trait could mean that the genetic composition of the organism include two dominant version of the characteristic or that - pron - include one dominant and one recessive version .
conversely , the observation of a recessive trait mean that the organism lack any dominant version of this characteristic .
so why do mendel repeatedly obtain three   one ratio in - pron - cross ?
to understand how mendel deduce the basic mechanism of inheritance that lead to such ratio , - pron - must first review the law of probability .
probability basics probabilities be mathematical measure of likelihood .
the empirical probability of an event be calculate by divide the number of time the event occur by the total number of opportunity for the event to occur .
- pron - be also possible to calculate theoretical probability by divide the number of time that an event be expect to occur by the number of time that - pron - could occur .
empirical probability come from observation , like those of mendel .
theoretical probability come from know how the event be produce and assume that the probability of individual outcome be equal .
a probability of one for some event indicate that - pron - be guarantee to occur , whereas a probability of zero indicate that - pron - be guarantee not to occur .
an example of a genetic event be a round seed produce by a pea plant .
in - pron - experiment , mendel demonstrate that the probability of the event " round seed " occur be one in the f one offspring of true - breed parent , one of which have round seed and one of which have wrinkle seed .
when the f one plant be subsequently self - cross , the probability of any give f two offspring have round seed be now three out of four .
in other word , in a large population of f two offspring choose at random , seven  five percent be expect to have round seed , whereas two  five percent be expect to have wrinkle seed .
use large number of cross , mendel be able to calculate probability and use these to predict the outcome of other cross .
the product rule and sum rule mendel demonstrate that the pea - plant characteristic - pron - study be transmit as discrete unit from parent to offspring .
as will be discuss , mendel also determine that different characteristic , like seed color and seed texture , be transmit independently of one another and could be consider in separate probability analysis .
for instance , perform a cross between a plant with green , wrinkle seed and a plant with yellow , round seed still produce offspring that have a three   one ratio of green  yellow seed ( ignore seed texture ) and a three   one ratio of round  wrinkle seed ( ignore seed color ) .
the characteristic of color and texture do not influence each other .
the product rule of probability can be apply to this phenomenon of the independent transmission of characteristic .
the product rule state that the probability of two independent event occur together can be calculate by multiply the individual probability of each event occur alone .
to demonstrate the product rule , imagine that - pron - be roll a sixsid die ( d ) and flip a penny ( p ) at the same time .
the die may roll any number from one – six ( d # ) , whereas the penny may turn up head ( ph ) or tail ( pt ) .
the outcome of roll the die have no effect on the outcome of flip the penny and vice versa .
there be one  two possible outcome of this action ( table one  two  .  two ) , and each event be expect to occur with equal probability .
of the one  two possible outcome , the die have a two  /  one  two ( or one  /  six ) probability of roll a two , and the penny have a six  /  one  two ( or one  /  two ) probability of come up head .
by the product rule , the probability that - pron - will obtain the combine outcome two and head be  ( d two ) x ( ph ) = ( one  /  six ) x ( one  /  two ) or one  /  one  two ( table one  two  .  three ) .
notice the word " and " in the description of the probability .
the " and " be a signal to apply the product rule .
for example , consider how the product rule be apply to the dihybrid cross  the probability of have both dominant trait in the f two progeny be the product of the probability of have the dominant trait for each characteristic , as show here  on the other hand , the sum rule of probability be apply when consider two mutually exclusive outcome that can come about by more than one pathway .
the sum rule state that the probability of the occurrence of one event or the other event , of two mutually exclusive event , be the sum of - pron - individual probability .
notice the word " or " in the description of the probability .
the " or " indicate that - pron - should apply the sum rule .
in this case , let - pron - imagine - pron - be flip a penny ( p ) and a quarter ( q ) .
what be the probability of one coin come up head and one coin come up tail ?
this outcome can be achieve by two case  the penny may be head ( ph ) and the quarter may be tail ( qt ) , or the quarter may be head ( qh ) and the penny may be tail ( pt ) .
either case fulfill the outcome .
by the sum rule , - pron - calculate the probability of obtain one head and one tail as [ ( ph ) × ( qt ) ] + [ ( qh ) × ( pt ) ] =
[ ( one  /  two ) × ( one  /  two ) ]
+ [ ( one  /  two ) × ( one  /  two ) ] =
one  /  two
( table one  two  .  three ) .
- pron - should also notice that - pron - use the product rule to calculate the probability of ph and qt , and also the probability of pt and qh , before - pron - sum - pron - .
again , the sum rule can be apply to show the probability of have just one dominant trait in the f two generation of a dihybrid cross  to use probability law in practice , - pron - be necessary to work with large sample size because small sample size be prone to deviation cause by chance .
the large quantity of pea plant that mendel examine allow - pron - calculate the probability of the trait appear in - pron - f two generation .
as - pron - will learn , this discovery mean that when parental trait be know , the offspring 's trait could be predict accurately even before fertilization .
the seven characteristic that mendel evaluate in - pron - pea plant be each express as one of two version , or trait .
the physical expression of characteristic be accomplish through the expression of gene carry on chromosome .
the genetic makeup of pea consist of two similar or homologous copy of each chromosome , one from each parent .
each pair of homologous chromosome have the same linear order of gene .
in other word , pea be diploid organism in that - pron - have two copy of each chromosome .
the same be true for many other plant and for virtually all animal .
diploid organism utilize meiosis to produce haploid gamete , which contain one copy of each homologous chromosome that unite at fertilization to create a diploid zygote .
for case in which a single gene control a single characteristic , a diploid organism have two genetic copy that may or may not encode the same version of that characteristic .
gene variant that arise by mutation and exist at the same relative location on homologous chromosome be call allele .
mendel examine the inheritance of gene with just two allele form , but - pron - be common to encounter more than two allele for any give gene in a natural population .
phenotypes and genotypes
two allele for a give gene in a diploid organism be express and interact to produce physical characteristic .
the observable trait express by an organism be refer to as - pron - phenotype .
an organism 's underlying genetic makeup , consist of both physically visible and non - express allele , be call - pron - genotype .
mendel 's hybridization experiment demonstrate the difference between phenotype and genotype .
when true - breed plant in which one parent have yellow pod and one have green pod be cross - fertilize , all of the f one hybrid offspring have yellow pod .
that is , the hybrid offspring be phenotypically identical to the true - breed parent with yellow pod .
however , - pron - know that the allele donate by the parent with green pod be not simply lose because - pron - reappear in some of the f two offspring .
therefore , the f one plant must have be genotypically different from the parent with yellow pod .
the p one plant that mendel use in - pron - experiment be each homozygous for the trait - pron - be study .
diploid organism that be homozygous at a give gene , or locus , have two identical allele for that gene on - pron - homologous chromosome .
mendel 's parental pea plant always breed true because both of the gamete produce carry the same trait .
when p one plant with contrast trait be cross - fertilize , all of the offspring be heterozygous for the contrast trait , mean that - pron - genotype reflect that - pron - have different allele for the gene be examine .
dominant and recessive allele
- pron - discussion of homozygous and heterozygous organism bring - pron - to why the f one heterozygous offspring be identical to one of the parent , rather than express both allele .
in all seven pea - plant characteristic , one of the two contrast allele be dominant , and the other be recessive .
mendel call the dominant allele the express unit factor  the recessive allele be refer to as the latent unit factor .
- pron - now know that these so - call unit factor be actually gene on homologous chromosome pair .
for a gene that be express in a dominant and recessive pattern , homozygous dominant and heterozygous organism will look identical ( that is , - pron - will have different genotype but the same phenotype ) .
the recessive allele will only be observe in homozygous recessive individual .
several convention exist for refer to gene and allele .
for the purpose of this chapter , - pron - will abbreviate gene use the first letter of the gene 's correspond dominant trait .
for example , violet be the dominant trait for a pea plant 's flower color , so the flower - color gene would be abbreviate as v ( note that - pron - be customary to italicize gene designation ) .
furthermore , - pron - will use uppercase and lowercase letter to represent dominant and recessive allele , respectively .
therefore , - pron - would refer to the genotype of a homozygous dominant pea plant with violet flower as vv , a homozygous recessive pea plant with white flower as vv , and a heterozygous pea plant with violet flower as vv .
the punnett square approach for a monohybrid cross
when fertilization occur between two true - breed parent that differ in only one characteristic , the process be call a monohybrid cross , and the result offspring be monohybrid .
mendel perform seven monohybrid cross involve contrast trait for each characteristic .
on the basis of - pron - result in f one and f two generation , mendel postulate that each parent in the monohybrid cross contribute one of two pair unit factor to each offspring , and every possible combination of unit factor be equally likely .
to demonstrate a monohybrid cross , consider the case of true - breed pea plant with yellow versus green pea seed .
the dominant seed color be yellow  therefore , the parental genotype be yy for the plant with yellow seed and yy for the plant with green seed , respectively .
a punnett square , devise by the british geneticist reginald punnett , can be draw that apply the rule of probability to predict the possible outcome of a genetic cross or mating and - pron - expect frequency .
to prepare a punnett square , all possible combination of the parental allele be list along the top ( for one parent ) and side ( for the other parent ) of a grid , represent - pron - meiotic segregation into haploid gamete .
then the combination of egg and sperm be make in the box in the table to show which allele be combine .
each box then represent the diploid genotype of a zygote , or fertilize egg , that could result from this mating .
because each possibility be equally likely , genotypic ratio can be determine from a punnett square .
if the pattern of inheritance ( dominant or recessive ) be know , the phenotypic ratio can be infer as well .
for a monohybrid cross of two true - breed parent , each parent contribute one type of allele .
in this case , only one genotype be possible .
all offspring be yy and have yellow seed .
in the p generation , pea plant that be true - breeding for the dominant yellow phenotype be cross with plant with the recessive green phenotype .
this cross produce f one heterozygote with a yellow phenotype .
punnett square analysis can be use to predict the genotype of the f two generation .
a self - cross of one of the yy heterozygous offspring can be represent in a two × two punnett square because each parent can donate one of two different allele .
therefore , the offspring can potentially have one of four allele combination  yy , yy , yy , or yy ( figure one  two  .  four ) .
notice that there be two way to obtain the yy genotype  a y from the egg and a y from the sperm , or a y from the egg and a y from the sperm .
both of these possibility must be count .
recall that mendel 's peaplant characteristic behave in the same way in reciprocal cross .
therefore , the two possible heterozygous combination produce offspring that be genotypically and phenotypically identical despite - pron - dominant and recessive allele derive from different parent .
- pron - be group together .
because fertilization be a random event , - pron - expect each combination to be equally likely and for the offspring to exhibit a ratio of yy  yy  yy genotype of one   two   one ( figure one  two  .  four ) .
furthermore , because the yy and yy offspring have yellow seed and be phenotypically identical , apply the sum rule of probability , - pron - expect the offspring to exhibit a phenotypic ratio of three yellow  one green .
indeed , work with large sample size , mendel observe approximately this ratio in every f two generation result from cross for individual trait .
mendel validate these result by perform an f three cross in which - pron - self - cross the dominant - and recessive - express f two plant .
when - pron - self - cross the plant express green seed , all of the offspring have green seed , confirm that all green seed have homozygous genotype of yy .
when - pron - self - cross the f two plant express yellow seed , - pron - find that one - third of the plant breed true , and two - third of the plant segregate at a three   one ratio of yellow  green seed .
in this case , the true - breed plant have homozygous ( yy ) genotype , whereas the segregating plant correspond to the heterozygous ( yy ) genotype .
when these plant self - fertilize , the outcome be just like the f one self - fertilize cross .
the test cross distinguish the dominant phenotype beyond predict the offspring of a cross between know homozygous or heterozygous parent , mendel also develop a way to determine whether an organism that express a dominant trait be a heterozygote or a homozygote .
call the test cross , this technique be still use by plant and animal breeder .
in a test cross , the dominant - express organism be cross with an organism that be homozygous recessive for the same characteristic .
if the dominant - express organism be a homozygote , then all f one offspring will be heterozygote express the dominant trait ( figure one  two  .  five ) .
alternatively , if the dominant express organism be a heterozygote , the f one offspring will exhibit a one   one ratio of heterozygote and recessive homozygote ( figure one  two  .  five ) .
the test cross further validate mendel 's postulate that pair of unit factor segregate equally .
a test cross can be perform to determine whether an organism express a dominant trait be a homozygote or a heterozygote .
in pea plant , round pea ( r ) be dominant to wrinkle pea ( r ) .
- pron - do a test cross between a pea plant with wrinkle pea ( genotype rr ) and a plant of unknown genotype that have round pea .
- pron - end up with three plant , all which have round pea .
from this datum , can - pron - tell if the round pea parent plant be homozygous dominant or heterozygous ?
if the round pea parent plant be heterozygous , what be the probability that a random sample of three progeny pea will all be round ?
many human disease be genetically inherit .
a healthy person in a family in which some member suffer from a recessive genetic disorder may want to know if - pron - or - pron - have the disease - cause gene and what risk exist of pass the disorder on to - pron - or - pron - offspring .
of course , do a test cross in human be unethical and impractical .
instead , geneticist use pedigree analysis to study the inheritance pattern of human genetic disease .
alkaptonuria be a recessive genetic disorder in which two amino acid , phenylalanine and tyrosine , be not properly metabolize .
affected individual may have darken skin and brown urine , and may suffer joint damage and other complication .
in this pedigree , individual with the disorder be indicate in blue and have the genotype aa .
unaffected individual be indicate in yellow and have the genotype aa or aa .
note that - pron - be often possible to determine a person 's genotype from the genotype of - pron - offspring .
for example , if neither parent have the disorder but - pron - child do , - pron - must be heterozygous .
two individual on the pedigree have an unaffected phenotype but unknown genotype .
because - pron - do not have the disorder , - pron - must have at least one normal allele , so - pron - genotype get the " a ? " designation .
alternative to dominance and recessiveness mendel 's experiment with pea plant suggest that  ( one ) two " unit " or allele exist for every gene  ( two ) allele maintain - pron - integrity in each generation ( no blend )  and ( three ) in the presence of the dominant allele , the recessive allele be hide and make no contribution to the phenotype .
therefore , recessive allele can be " carry " and not express by individual .
such heterozygous individual be sometimes refer to as " carrier .
"
further genetic study in other plant and animal have show that much more complexity exist , but that the fundamental principle of mendelian genetic still hold true .
in the section to follow , - pron - consider some of the extension of mendelism .
if mendel have choose an experimental system that exhibit these genetic complexity , - pron - ' possible that - pron - would not have understand what - pron - result mean .
incomplete dominance mendel 's result , that trait be inherit as dominant and recessive pair , contradict the view at that time that offspring exhibit a blend of - pron - parents' trait .
however , the heterozygote phenotype occasionally do appear to be intermediate between the two parent .
for example , in the snapdragon , antirrhinum maju ( figure one  two  .  seven ) , a cross between a homozygous parent with white flower ( cwcw ) and a homozygous parent with red flower ( crcr ) will produce offspring with pink flower ( crcw ) .
( note that different genotypic abbreviation be use for mendelian extension to distinguish these pattern from simple dominance and recessiveness . )
this pattern of inheritance be describe as incomplete dominance , denote the expression of two contrast allele such that the individual display an intermediate phenotype .
the allele for red flower be incompletely dominant over the allele for white flower .
however , the result of a heterozygote self - cross can still be predict , just as with mendelian dominant and recessive cross .
in this case , the genotypic ratio would be one crcr  two crcw  one cwcw , and the phenotypic ratio would be one   two   one for red  pink  white .
codominance a variation on incomplete dominance be codominance , in which both allele for the same characteristic be simultaneously express in the heterozygote .
an example of codominance be the mn blood group of human .
the m and n allele be express in the form of an m or n antigen present on the surface of red blood cell .
homozygotes ( lmlm and lnln ) express either the m or the n allele , and heterozygote ( lmln ) express both allele equally .
in a self - cross between heterozygote express a codominant trait , the three possible offspring genotype be phenotypically distinct .
however , the one   two   one genotypic ratio characteristic of a mendelian monohybrid cross still apply .
multiple alleles mendel imply that only two allele , one dominant and one recessive , could exist for a give gene .
- pron - now know that this be an oversimplification .
although individual human ( and all diploid organism ) can only have two allele for a give gene , multiple allele may exist at the population level such that many combination of two allele be observe .
note that when many allele exist for the same gene , the convention be to denote the most common phenotype or genotype among wild animal as the wild type ( often abbreviate " + " )  this be consider the standard or norm .
all other phenotype or genotype be consider variant of this standard , mean that - pron - deviate from the wild type .
the variant may be recessive or dominant to the wild - type allele .
an example of multiple allele be coat color in rabbit ( figure one  two  .  eight ) .
here , four allele exist for the c gene .
the wild - type version , c+c+ , be express as brown fur .
the chinchilla phenotype , cchcch , be express as black - tipped white fur .
the himalayan phenotype , chch , have black fur on the extremity and white fur elsewhere .
finally , the albino , or " colorless " phenotype , cc , be express as white fur .
in case of multiple allele , dominance hierarchy can exist .
in this case , the wildtype allele be dominant over all the other , chinchilla be incompletely dominant over himalayan and albino , and himalayan be dominant over albino .
this hierarchy , or allelic series , be reveal by observe the phenotype of each possible heterozygote offspring .
the complete dominance of a wild - type phenotype over all other mutant often occur as an effect of " dosage " of a specific gene product , such that the wild - type allele supply the correct amount of gene product whereas the mutant allele can not .
for the allelic series in rabbit , the wild - type allele may supply a give dosage of fur pigment , whereas the mutant supply a less dosage or none at all .
interestingly , the himalayan phenotype be the result of an allele that produce a temperaturesensitive gene product that only produce pigment in the cool extremity of the rabbit 's body .
alternatively , one mutant allele can be dominant over all other phenotype , include the wild type .
this may occur when the mutant allele somehow interfere with the genetic message so that even a heterozygote with one wild - type allele copy express the mutant phenotype .
one way in which the mutant allele can interfere be by enhance the function of the wildtype gene product or change - pron - distribution in the body .
one example of this be the antennapedia mutation in drosophila ( figure one  two  .  nine ) .
in this case , the mutant allele expand the distribution of the gene product , and as a result , the antennapedia heterozygote develop leg on - pron - head where - pron - antennae should be .
as see in compare the wild - type drosophila ( left ) and the antennapedia mutant ( right ) , the antennapedia mutant have leg on - pron - head in place of antennae .
multiple alleles confer drug resistance in the malaria parasite malaria be a parasitic disease in human that be transmit by infected female mosquito , include anopheles gambiae ( figure one  two  .  one  zero a ) , and be characterize by cyclic high fever , chill , flu - like symptom , and severe anemia .
plasmodium falciparum and p . vivax be the most common causative agent of malaria , and p . falciparum be the most deadly ( figure one  two  .  one  zero b ) .
when promptly and correctly treat , p . falciparum malaria have a mortality rate of zero  .  one percent .
however , in some part of the world , the parasite have evolve resistance to commonly use malaria treatment , so the most effective malarial treatment can vary by geographic region .
the ( a ) anopheles gambiae , or african malaria mosquito , act as a vector in the transmission to human of the malaria - cause parasite ( b ) plasmodium falciparum , here visualize use false - color transmission electron microscopy .
( credit a 
james d . gathany  credit b 
ute frevert  false color by margaret shear  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
in southeast asia , africa , and south america , p . falciparum have develop resistance to the anti - malarial drug chloroquine , mefloquine , and sulfadoxine - pyrimethamine .
p . falciparum , which be haploid during the life stage in which - pron - be infectious to human , have evolve multiple drug - resistant mutant allele of the dhps gene .
vary degree of sulfadoxine resistance be associate with each of these allele .
be haploid , p . falciparum need only one drug - resistant allele to express this trait .
in southeast asia , different sulfadoxine - resistant allele of the dhps gene be localize to different geographic region .
this be a common evolutionary phenomenon that occur because drug - resistant mutant arise in a population and interbre with other p . falciparum isolate in close proximity .
sulfadoxineresistant parasite because considerable human hardship in region where this drug be widely use as an over - the - counter malaria remedy .
as be common with pathogen that multiply to large number within an infection cycle , p . falciparum evolf relatively rapidly ( over a decade or so ) in response to the selective pressure of commonly use anti - malarial drug .
for this reason , scientist must constantly work to develop new drug or drug combination to combat the worldwide malaria burden .
x - link traits
in human , as well as in many other animal and some plant , the sex of the individual be determine by sex chromosome .
the sex chromosome be one pair of non - homologous chromosome .
until now , - pron - have only consider inheritance pattern among non - sex chromosome , or autosome .
in addition to two  two homologous pair of autosome , human female have a homologous pair of x chromosome , whereas human male have an xy chromosome pair .
although the y chromosome contain a small region of similarity to the x chromosome so that - pron - can pair during meiosis , the y chromosome be much short and contain many few gene .
when a gene be examine be present on the x chromosome , but not on the y chromosome , - pron - be say to be x - link .
eye color in drosophila be one of the first x - link trait to be identify .
thomas hunt morgan map this trait to the x chromosome in one  nine  one  zero .
like human , drosophila male have an xy chromosome pair , and female be xx .
in fly , the wild - type eye color be red ( xw ) and - pron - be dominant to white eye color ( xw ) ( figure one  two  .  one  one ) .
because of the location of the eye - color gene , reciprocal cross do not produce the same offspring ratio .
male be say to be hemizygous , because - pron - have only one allele for any x - link characteristic .
hemizygosity make the description of dominance and recessiveness irrelevant for xy male .
drosophila male lack a second allele copy on the y chromosome  that is , - pron - genotype can only be xwy or xwy .
in contrast , female have two allele copy of this gene and can be xwxw , xwxw , or xwxw .
in drosophila , several gene determine eye color .
the gene for white and vermilion eye color be locate on the x chromosome .
other be locate on the autosome .
clockwise from top leave be brown , cinnabar , sepia , vermilion , white , and red .
red eye color be wild - type and be dominant to white eye color .
in an x - link cross , the genotype of f one and f two offspring depend on whether the recessive trait be express by the male or the female in the p one generation .
with regard to drosophila eye color , when the p one male express the white - eye phenotype and the female be homozygous red - eyed , all member of the f one generation exhibit red eye ( figure one  two  .  one  two ) .
the f one female be heterozygous ( xwxw ) , and the male be all xwy , have receive - pron - x chromosome from the homozygous dominant p one female and - pron - y chromosome from the p one male .
a subsequent cross between the xwxw female and the xwy male would produce only red - eyed female ( with xwxw or xwxw genotype ) and both red - and white - eyed male ( with xwy or xwy genotype ) .
now , consider a cross between a homozygous white - eyed female and a male with red eye .
the f one generation would exhibit only heterozygous red - eyed female ( xwxw ) and only white - eyed male ( xwy ) .
half of the f two female would be red - eyed ( xwxw ) and half would be white - eyed ( xwxw ) .
similarly , half of the f two male would be red - eyed ( xwy ) and half would be white - eyed ( xwy ) .
punnett square analysis be use to determine the ratio of offspring from a cross between a red - eyed male fruit fly and a white - eyed female fruit fly .
discovery in fruit fly genetic can be apply to human genetic .
when a female parent be homozygous for a recessive xlink trait , - pron - will pass the trait on to one  zero  zero percent of - pron - offspring .
- pron - male offspring be , therefore , destine to express the trait , as - pron - will inherit - pron - father ' s y chromosome .
in human , the allele for certain condition ( some form of color blindness , hemophilia , and muscular dystrophy ) be x - link .
female who be heterozygous for these disease be say to be carrier and may not exhibit any phenotypic effect .
these female will pass the disease to half of - pron - son and will pass carrier status to half of - pron - daughter  therefore , recessive x - link trait appear more frequently in male than female .
in some group of organism with sex chromosome , the gender with the non - homologous sex chromosome be the female rather than the male .
this be the case for all bird .
in this case , sex - link trait will be more likely to appear in the female , in which - pron - be hemizygous .
human sex - link disorders sex - linkage study in morgan 's laboratory provide the fundamental for understand x - link recessive disorder in human , which include red - green color blindness , and types a and b hemophilia .
because human male need to inherit only one recessive mutant x allele to be affect , x - link disorder be disproportionately observe in male .
female must inherit recessive x - link allele from both of - pron - parent in order to express the trait .
when - pron - inherit one recessive x - link mutant allele and one dominant x - link wild - type allele , - pron - be carrier of the trait and be typically unaffected .
carrier female can manifest mild form of the trait due to the inactivation of the dominant allele locate on one of the x chromosome .
however , female carrier can contribute the trait to - pron - son , result in the son exhibit the trait , or - pron - can contribute the recessive allele to - pron - daughter , result in the daughter be carrier of the trait ( figure one  two  .  one  three ) .
although some y - link recessive disorder exist , typically - pron - be associate with infertility in male and be therefore not transmit to subsequent generation .
the son of a woman who be a carrier of a recessive x - link disorder will have a five  zero percent chance of be affect .
a daughter will not be affect , but - pron - will have a five  zero percent chance of be a carrier like - pron - mother .
lethality a large proportion of gene in an individual 's genome be essential for survival .
occasionally , a nonfunctional allele for an essential gene can arise by mutation and be transmit in a population as long as individual with this allele also have a wild - type , functional copy .
the wild - type allele function at a capacity sufficient to sustain life and be therefore consider to be dominant over the nonfunctional allele .
however , consider two heterozygous parent that have a genotype of wildtype / nonfunctional mutant for a hypothetical essential gene .
in one quarter of - pron - offspring , - pron - would expect to observe individual that be homozygous recessive for the nonfunctional allele .
because the gene be essential , these individual may fail to develop past fertilization , die in utero , or die later in life , depend on what life stage require this gene .
an inheritance pattern in which an allele be only lethal in the homozygous form and in which the heterozygote may be normal or have some altered non - lethal phenotype be refer to as recessive lethal .
for cross between heterozygous individual with a recessive lethal allele that cause death before birth when homozygous , only wild - type homozygote and heterozygote would be observe .
the genotypic ratio would therefore be two   one .
in other instance , the recessive lethal allele may also exhibit a dominant ( but not lethal ) phenotype in the heterozygote .
for instance , the recessive lethal curly allele in drosophila affect wing shape in the heterozygote form but be lethal in the homozygote .
a single copy of the wild - type allele be not always sufficient for normal functioning or even survival .
the dominant lethal inheritance pattern be one in which an allele be lethal both in the homozygote and the heterozygote  this allele can only be transmit if the lethality phenotype occur after reproductive age .
individual with mutation that result in dominant lethal allele fail to survive even in the heterozygote form .
dominant lethal allele be very rare because , as - pron - may expect , the allele only last one generation and be not transmit .
however , just as the recessive lethal allele may not immediately manifest the phenotype of death , dominant lethal allele also may not be express until adulthood .
once the individual reach reproductive age , the allele may be unknowingly pass on , result in a delay death in both generation .
an example of this in human be huntington 's disease , in which the nervous system gradually waste away ( figure one  two  .  one  four ) .
people who be heterozygous for the dominant huntington allele ( hh ) will inevitably develop the fatal disease .
however , the onset of huntington 's disease may not occur until age four  zero , at which point the afflict person may have already pass the allele to five  zero percent of - pron - offspring .
the neuron in the center of this micrograph ( yellow ) have nuclear inclusion characteristic of huntington 's disease ( orange area in the center of the neuron ) .
huntington 's disease occur when an abnormal dominant allele for the huntington gene be present .
( credit  dr . steven finkbeiner , gladstone institute of neurological disease , the taube - koret center for huntington ' s disease research , and the university of california san francisco / wikimedia )
mendel generalize the result of - pron - pea - plant experiment into four postulate , some of which be sometimes call " law , " that describe the basis of dominant and recessive inheritance in diploid organism .
as - pron - have learn , more complex extension of mendelism exist that do not exhibit the same f two phenotypic ratio ( three   one ) .
nevertheless , these law summarize the basic of classical genetic .
pair of unit factors , or genes mendel propose first that pair unit factor of heredity be transmit faithfully from generation to generation by the dissociation and reassociation of pair factor during gametogenesis and fertilization , respectively .
after - pron - cross pea with contrast trait and find that the recessive trait resurface in the f two generation , mendel deduce that hereditary factor must be inherit as discrete unit .
this finding contradict the belief at that time that parental trait be blend in the offspring .
allele can be dominant or recessive mendel 's law of dominance state that in a heterozygote , one trait will conceal the presence of another trait for the same characteristic .
rather than both allele contribute to a phenotype , the dominant allele will be express exclusively .
the recessive allele will remain " latent " but will be transmit to offspring by the same manner in which the dominant allele be transmit .
the recessive trait will only be express by offspring that have two copy of this allele ( figure one  two  .  one  five ) , and these offspring will breed true when self - cross .
since mendel 's experiment with pea plant , other researcher have find that the law of dominance do not always hold true .
instead , several different pattern of inheritance have be find to exist .
equal segregation of alleles observe that true - breed pea plant with contrast trait give rise to f one generation that all express the dominant trait and f two generation that express the dominant and recessive trait in a three   one ratio , mendel propose the law of segregation .
this law state that pair unit factor ( gene ) must segregate equally into gamete such that offspring have an equal likelihood of inherit either factor .
for the f two generation of a monohybrid cross , the follow three possible combination of genotype could result  homozygous dominant , heterozygous , or homozygous recessive .
because heterozygote could arise from two different pathway ( receive one dominant and one recessive allele from either parent ) , and because heterozygote and homozygous dominant individual be phenotypically identical , the law support mendel 's observed three   one phenotypic ratio .
the equal segregation of allele be the reason - pron - can apply the punnett square to accurately predict the offspring of parent with know genotype .
the physical basis of mendel 's law of segregation be the first division of meiosis , in which the homologous chromosome with - pron - different version of each gene be segregate into daughter nucleus .
the role of the meiotic segregation of chromosome in sexual reproduction be not understand by the scientific community during mendel 's lifetime .
independent assortment mendel 's law of independent assortment state that gene do not influence each other with regard to the sorting of allele into gamete , and every possible combination of allele for every gene be equally likely to occur .
the independent assortment of gene can be illustrate by the dihybrid cross , a cross between two true - breed parent that express different trait for two characteristic .
consider the characteristic of seed color and seed texture for two pea plant , one that have green , wrinkle seed ( yyrr ) and another that have yellow , round seed ( yyrr ) .
because each parent be homozygous , the law of segregation indicate that the gamete for the green / wrinkle plant all be yr , and the gamete for the yellow / round plant be all yr .
therefore , the f one generation of offspring all be yyrr .
for the f two generation , the law of segregation require that each gamete receive either an r allele or an r allele along with either a y allele or a y allele .
the law of independent assortment state that a gamete into which an r allele sort would be equally likely to contain either a y allele or a y allele .
thus , there be four equally likely gamete that can be form when the yyrr heterozygote be self - cross , as follow  yr , yr , yr , and yr .
arrange these gamete along the top and leave of a four × four punnett square ( figure one  two  .  one  six ) give - pron - one  six equally likely genotypic combination .
from these genotype , - pron - infer a phenotypic ratio of nine round / yellow  three round / green  three wrinkle / yellow  one wrinkle / green ( figure one  two  .  one  six ) .
these be the offspring ratio - pron - would expect , assume - pron - perform the cross with a large enough sample size .
because of independent assortment and dominance , the nine   three   three   one dihybrid phenotypic ratio can be collapse into two three   one ratio , characteristic of any monohybrid cross that follow a dominant and recessive pattern .
ignore seed color and consider only seed texture in the above dihybrid cross , - pron - would expect that three quarter of the f two generation offspring would be round , and one quarter would be wrinkle .
similarly , isolate only seed color , - pron - would assume that three quarter of the f two offspring would be yellow and one quarter would be green .
the sorting of allele for texture and color be independent event , so - pron - can apply the product rule .
therefore , the proportion of round and yellow f two offspring be expect to be ( three  /  four ) × ( three  /  four ) = nine  /  one  six , and the proportion of wrinkled and green offspring be expect to be ( one  /  four )
× ( one  /  four ) = one  /  one  six .
these proportion be identical to those obtain use a punnett square .
round , green and wrinkle , yellow offspring can also be calculate use the product rule , as each of these genotype include one dominant and one recessive phenotype .
therefore , the proportion of each be calculate as ( three  /  four ) × ( one  /  four ) =
three  /  one  six .
the law of independent assortment also indicate that a cross between yellow , wrinkle ( yyrr ) and green , round ( yyrr ) parent would yield the same f one and f two offspring as in the yyrr x yyrr cross .
the physical basis for the law of independent assortment also lie in meiosis i , in which the different homologous pair line up in random orientation .
each gamete can contain any combination of paternal and maternal chromosome ( and therefore the gene on - pron - ) because the orientation of tetrad on the metaphase plane be random .
fork - line method
when more than two gene be be consider , the punnett - square method become unwieldy .
for instance , examine a cross involve four gene would require a one  six × one  six grid contain two  five  six box .
- pron - would be extremely cumbersome to manually enter each genotype .
for more complex cross , the forked - line and probability method be prefer .
to prepare a forked - line diagram for a cross between f one heterozygote result from a cross between aabbcc and aabbcc parent , - pron - first create row equal to the number of gene be consider , and then segregate the allele in each row on forked line accord to the probability for individual monohybrid cross ( figure one  two  .  one  seven ) .
- pron - then multiply the value along each forked path to obtain the f two offspring probability .
note that this process be a diagrammatic version of the product rule .
the value along each forked pathway can be multiply because each gene assort independently .
for a trihybrid cross , the f two phenotypic ratio be two  seven   nine   nine   nine   three   three   three   one .
the forked - line method can be use to analyze a trihybrid cross .
here , the probability for color in the f two generation occupy the top row ( three yellow  one green ) .
the probability for shape occupy the second row ( three round  one wrink ) , and the probability for height occupy the third row ( three tall  one dwarf ) .
the probability for each possible combination of trait be calculate by multiply the probability for each individual trait .
thus , the probability of f two offspring have yellow , round , and tall trait be three × three × three , or two  seven .
probability method
while the forked - line method be a diagrammatic approach to keep track of probability in a cross , the probability method give the proportion of offspring expect to exhibit each phenotype ( or genotype ) without the add visual assistance .
both method make use of the product rule and consider the allele for each gene separately .
earlier , - pron - examine the phenotypic proportion for a trihybrid cross use the forked - line method  now - pron - will use the probability method to examine the genotypic proportion for a cross with even more gene .
for a trihybrid cross , write out the forked - line method be tedious , albeit not as tedious as use the punnett - square method .
to fully demonstrate the power of the probability method , however , - pron - can consider specific genetic calculation .
for instance , for a tetrahybrid cross between individual that be heterozygote for all four gene , and in which all four gene be sort independently and in a dominant and recessive pattern , what proportion of the offspring will be expect to be homozygous recessive for all four allele ?
rather than write out every possible genotype , - pron - can use the probability method .
- pron - know that for each gene , the fraction of homozygous recessive offspring will be one  /  four .
therefore , multiply this fraction for each of the four gene , ( one  /  four )
× ( one  /  four )
× ( one  /  four )
× ( one  /  four ) , - pron - determine that one  /  two  five  six of the offspring will be quadruply homozygous recessive .
for the same tetrahybrid cross , what be the expect proportion of offspring that have the dominant phenotype at all four locus ?
- pron - can answer this question use phenotypic proportion , but let - pron - do - pron - the hard way
— use genotypic proportion .
the question ask for the proportion of offspring that be one ) homozygous dominant at a or heterozygous at a , and two ) homozygous at b or heterozygous at b , and so on .
note the " or " and " and " in each circumstance make clear where to apply the sum and product rule .
the probability of a homozygous dominant at a be one  /  four and the probability of a heterozygote at a be one  /  two .
the probability of the homozygote or the heterozygote be one  /  four + one  /  two = three  /  four use the sum rule .
the same probability can be obtain in the same way for each of the other gene , so that the probability of a dominant phenotype at a and b and c and d be , use the product rule , equal to three  /  four × three  /  four × three  /  four × three  /  four , or two  seven  /  six  four .
if - pron - be ever unsure about how to combine probability , return to the forked - line method should make - pron - clear .
rule for multihybrid fertilization predict the genotype and phenotype of offspring from give cross be the good way to test - pron - knowledge of mendelian genetic .
give a multihybrid cross that obey independent assortment and follow a dominant and recessive pattern , several generalize rule exist  - pron - can use these rule to check - pron - result as - pron - work through genetic calculation ( table one  two  .  five ) .
to apply these rule , first - pron - must determine n , the number of heterozygous gene pair ( the number of gene segregate two allele each ) .
for example , a cross between aabb and aabb heterozygote have an n of two .
in contrast , a cross between aabb and aabb have an n of one because a be not heterozygous .
link genes violate the law of independent assortment
although all of mendel 's pea characteristic behave accord to the law of independent assortment , - pron - now know that some allele combination be not inherit independently of each other .
gene that be locate on separate nonhomologous chromosome will always sort independently .
however , each chromosome contain hundred or thousand of gene , organize linearly on chromosome like bead on a string .
the segregation of allele into gamete can be influence by linkage , in which gene that be locate physically close to each other on the same chromosome be more likely to be inherit as a pair .
however , because of the process of recombination , or " crossover , " - pron - be possible for two gene on the same chromosome to behave independently , or as if - pron - be not link .
to understand this , let - pron - consider the biological basis of gene linkage and recombination .
homologous chromosome possess the same gene in the same linear order .
the allele may differ on homologous chromosome pair , but the gene to which - pron - correspond do not .
in preparation for the first division of meiosis , homologous chromosome replicate and synapse .
like gene on the homolog align with each other .
at this stage , segment of homologous chromosome exchange linear segment of genetic material ( figure one  two  .  one  eight ) .
this process be call recombination , or crossover , and - pron - be a common genetic process .
because the gene be align during recombination , the gene order be not alter .
instead , the result of recombination be that maternal and paternal allele be combine onto the same chromosome .
across a give chromosome , several recombination event may occur , cause extensive shuffling of allele .
the process of crossover , or recombination , occur when two homologous chromosome align during meiosis and exchange a segment of genetic material .
here , the allele for gene c be exchange .
the result be two recombinant and two non - recombinant chromosome .
when two gene be locate in close proximity on the same chromosome , - pron - be consider link , and - pron - allele tend to be transmit through meiosis together .
to exemplify this , imagine a dihybrid cross involve flower color and plant height in which the gene be next to each other on the chromosome .
if one homologous chromosome have allele for tall plant and red flower , and the other chromosome have gene for short plant and yellow flower , then when the gamete be form , the tall and red allele will go together into a gamete and the short and yellow allele will go into other gamete .
these be call the parental genotype because - pron - have be inherit intact from the parent of the individual produce gamete .
but unlike if the gene be on different chromosome , there will be no gamete with tall and yellow allele and no gamete with short and red allele .
if - pron - create the punnett square with these gamete , - pron - will see that the classical mendelian prediction of a nine   three   three   one outcome of a dihybrid cross would not apply .
as the distance between two gene increase , the probability of one or more crossover between - pron - increase , and the gene behave more like - pron - be on separate chromosome .
geneticists have use the proportion of recombinant gamete ( the one not like the parent ) as a measure of how far apart gene be on a chromosome .
use this information , - pron - have construct elaborate map of gene on chromosome for well - study organism , include human .
mendel 's seminal publication make no mention of linkage , and many researcher have question whether - pron - encounter linkage but choose not to publish those cross out of concern that - pron - would invalidate - pron - independent assortment postulate .
the garden pea have seven chromosome , and some have suggest that - pron - choice of seven characteristic be not a coincidence .
however , even if the gene - pron - examine be not locate on separate chromosome , - pron - be possible that - pron - simply do not observe linkage because of the extensive shuffle effect of recombination .
test the hypothesis of independent assortment
to better appreciate the amount of labor and ingenuity that go into mendel 's experiment , proceed through one of mendel 's dihybrid cross .
question 
what will be the offspring of a dihybrid cross ?
background  consider that pea plant mature in one grow season , and - pron - have access to a large garden in which - pron - can cultivate thousand of pea plant .
there be several true - breed plant with the follow pair of trait  tall plant with inflated pod , and dwarf plant with constrict pod .
before the plant have mature , - pron - remove the pollen - produce organ from the tall / inflate plant in - pron - cross to prevent self - fertilization .
upon plant maturation , the plant be manually cross by transfer pollen from the dwarf / constrict plant to the stigmata of the tall / inflate plant .
hypothesis  both trait pair will sort independently accord to mendelian law .
when the true - breed parent be cross , all of the f one offspring be tall and have inflate pod , which indicate that the tall and inflated trait be dominant over the dwarf and constrict trait , respectively .
a self - cross of the f one heterozygote result in two  ,  zero  zero  zero f two progeny .
test the hypothesis  because each trait pair sort independently , the ratio of tall  dwarf and inflate  constrict be each expect to be three   one .
the tall / dwarf trait pair be call t / t , and the inflated / constrict trait pair be designate i / i .
each member of the f one generation therefore have a genotype of ttii .
construct a grid analogous to figure one  two  .  one  six , in which - pron - cross two ttii individual .
each individual can donate four combination of two trait  ti , ti , ti , or ti , mean that there be one  six possibility of offspring genotype .
because the t and i allele be dominant , any individual have one or two of those allele will express the tall or inflated phenotype , respectively , regardless if - pron - also have a t or i allele .
only individual that be tt or ii will express the dwarf and constrict allele , respectively .
as show in figure one  two  .  one  nine , - pron - predict that - pron - will observe the follow offspring proportion  tall / inflated  tall / constrict  dwarf / inflate  dwarf / constrict in a nine   three   three   one ratio .
notice from the grid that when consider the tall / dwarf and inflated / constrict trait pair in isolation , - pron - be each inherit in three   one ratio .
this figure show all possible combination of offspring result from a dihybrid cross of pea plant that be heterozygous for the tall / dwarf and inflated / constricted allele .
test the hypothesis  - pron - cross the dwarf and tall plant and then self - cross the offspring .
for good result , this be repeat with hundred or even thousand of pea plant .
what special precaution should be take in the cross and in grow the plant ?
analyze - pron - datum
 - pron - observe the follow plant phenotype in the f two generation  two  seven  zero  six tall / inflated , nine  three  zero tall / constrict , eight  eight  eight dwarf / inflate , and three  zero  zero dwarf / constrict .
reduce these finding to a ratio and determine if - pron - be consistent with mendelian law .
form a conclusion  be the result close to the expect nine   three   three   one phenotypic ratio ?
do the result support the prediction ?
what may be observe if far few plant be use , give that allele segregate randomly into gamete ?
try to imagine grow that many pea plant , and consider the potential for experimental error .
for instance , what would happen if - pron - be extremely windy one day ?
epistasis mendel 's study in pea plant imply that the sum of an individual 's phenotype be control by gene ( or as - pron - call - pron - , unit factor ) , such that every characteristic be distinctly and completely control by a single gene .
in fact , single observable characteristic be almost always under the influence of multiple gene ( each with two or more allele ) act in unison .
for example , at least eight gene contribute to eye color in human .
in some case , several gene can contribute to aspect of a common phenotype without - pron - gene product ever directly interact .
in the case of organ development , for instance , gene may be express sequentially , with each gene add to the complexity and specificity of the organ .
gene may function in complementary or synergistic fashion , such that two or more gene need to be express simultaneously to affect a phenotype .
gene may also oppose each other , with one gene modify the expression of another .
in epistasis , the interaction between gene be antagonistic , such that one gene mask or interfere with the expression of another .
"
epistasis
" be a word compose of greek root that mean " stand upon .
"
the allele that be be mask or silence be say to be hypostatic to the epistatic allele that be do the masking .
often the biochemical basis of epistasis be a gene pathway in which the expression of one gene be dependent on the function of a gene that precede or follow - pron - in the pathway .
an example of epistasis be pigmentation in mouse .
the wild - type coat color , agouti ( aa ) , be dominant to solid - color fur ( aa ) .
however , a separate gene ( c ) be necessary for pigment production .
a mouse with a recessive c allele at this locus be unable to produce pigment and be albino regardless of the allele present at locus a ( figure one  two  .  two  zero ) .
therefore , the genotype aacc , aacc , and aacc all produce the same albino phenotype .
a cross between heterozygote for both gene ( aacc x aacc ) would generate offspring with a phenotypic ratio of nine agouti  three solid color  four albino ( figure one  two  .  two  zero ) .
in this case , the c gene be epistatic to the a gene .
in mouse , the mottled agouti coat color ( a ) be dominant to a solid coloration , such as black or gray .
a gene at a separate locus ( c ) be responsible for pigment production .
the recessive c allele do not produce pigment , and a mouse with the homozygous recessive cc genotype be albino regardless of the allele present at the a locus .
thus , the c gene be epistatic to the a gene .
epistasis can also occur when a dominant allele mask expression at a separate gene .
fruit color in summer squash be express in this way .
homozygous recessive expression of the w gene ( ww ) couple with homozygous dominant or heterozygous expression of the y gene ( yy or yy ) generate yellow fruit , and the wwyy genotype produce green fruit .
however , if a dominant copy of the w gene be present in the homozygous or heterozygous form , the summer squash will produce white fruit regardless of the y allele .
a cross between white heterozygote for both gene ( wwyy × wwyy ) would produce offspring with a phenotypic ratio of one  two white  three yellow  one green .
finally , epistasis can be reciprocal such that either gene , when present in the dominant ( or recessive ) form , express the same phenotype .
in the shepherd 's purse plant ( capsella bursa - pastoris ) , the characteristic of seed shape be control by two gene in a dominant epistatic relationship .
when the gene a and b be both homozygous recessive ( aabb ) , the seed be ovoid .
if the dominant allele for either of these gene be present , the result be triangular seed .
that is , every possible genotype other than aabb result in triangular seed , and a cross between heterozygote for both gene ( aabb x aabb ) would yield offspring with a phenotypic ratio of one  five triangular  one ovoid .
as - pron - work through genetic problem , keep in mind that any single characteristic that result in a phenotypic ratio that total one  six be typical of a two - gene interaction .
recall the phenotypic inheritance pattern for mendel 's dihybrid cross , which consider two non - interact genes— nine   three   three   one .
similarly , - pron - would expect interact gene pair to also exhibit ratio express as one  six part .
note that - pron - be assume the interact gene be not link  - pron - be still assort independently into gamete .
chromosome be threadlike nuclear structure consist of dna and protein that serve as the repository for genetic information .
the chromosome depict here be isolate from a fruit fly 's salivary gland , stain with dye , and visualize under a microscope .
akin to miniature bar code , chromosome absorb different dye to produce characteristic banding pattern , which allow for - pron - routine identification .
introduction
the gene be the physical unit of inheritance , and gene be arrange in a linear order on chromosome .
the behavior and interaction of chromosome during meiosis explain , at a cellular level , the pattern of inheritance that - pron - observe in population .
genetic disorder involve alteration in chromosome number or structure may have dramatic effect and can prevent a fertilize egg from develop altogether .
study heredity in one  eight  four  three  . with
the improvement of microscopic technique during the late one  eight  zero  zero , cell biologist could stain and visualize subcellular structure with dye and observe - pron - action during cell division and meiosis .
with each mitotic division , chromosome replicate , condense from an amorphous ( no constant shape ) nuclear mass into distinct x - shape body ( pair of identical sister chromatid ) , and migrate to separate cellular pole .
chromosomal theory of inheritance
the speculation that chromosome may be the key to understand heredity lead several scientist to examine mendel 's publication and re - evaluate - pron - model in term of the behavior of chromosome during mitosis and meiosis .
in one  nine  zero  two , theodor boveri observe that proper embryonic development of sea urchin do not occur unless chromosome be present .
that same year , walter sutton observe the separation of chromosome into daughter cell during meiosis ( figure one  three  .  two ) .
together , these observation lead to the development of the chromosomal theory of inheritance , which identify chromosome as the genetic material responsible for mendelian inheritance .
( a ) walter sutton and ( b ) theodor boveri be credit with develop the chromosomal theory of inheritance , which state that chromosome carry the unit of heredity ( gene ) .
the chromosomal theory of inheritance be consistent with mendel 's law and be support by the follow observation 

during meiosis , homologous chromosome pair migrate as discrete structure that be independent of other chromosome pair .

the sorting of chromosome from each homologous pair into pre - gamete appear to be random .

each parent synthesize gamete that contain only half of - pron - chromosomal complement .

even though male and female gamete ( sperm and egg ) differ in size and morphology , - pron - have the same number of chromosome , suggest equal genetic contribution from each parent .

the gametic chromosome combine during fertilization to produce offspring with the same chromosome number as - pron - parent .
despite compelling correlation between the behavior of chromosome during meiosis and mendel 's abstract law , the chromosomal theory of inheritance be propose long before there be any direct evidence that trait be carry on chromosome .
critic point out that individual have far more independently segregate trait than - pron - have chromosome .
- pron - be only after several year of carry out cross with the fruit fly , drosophila melanogaster , that thomas hunt morgan provide experimental evidence to support the chromosomal theory of inheritance .
genetic linkage and distances mendel 's work suggest that trait be inherit independently of each other .
morgan identify a one   one correspondence between a segregating trait and the x chromosome , suggest that the random segregation of chromosome be the physical basis of mendel 's model .
this also demonstrate that link gene disrupt mendel 's predict outcome .
the fact that each chromosome can carry many link gene explain how individual can have many more trait than - pron - have chromosome .
however , observation by researcher in morgan 's laboratory suggest that allele position on the same chromosome be not always inherit together .
during meiosis , link gene somehow become unlinked .
homologous recombination
in one  nine  zero  nine , frans janssen observe chiasmata — the point at which chromatid be in contact with each other and may exchange segment
— prior to the first division of meiosis .
- pron - suggest that allele become unlinked and chromosome physically exchange segment .
as chromosome condense and pair with - pron - homolog , - pron - appear to interact at distinct point .
janssen suggest that these point correspond to region in which chromosome segment be exchange .
- pron - be now know that the pairing and interaction between homologous chromosome , know as synapsis , do more than simply organize the homolog for migration to separate daughter cell .
when synaps , homologous chromosome undergo reciprocal physical exchange at - pron - arm in a process call homologous recombination , or more simply , " cross over .
"
to better understand the type of experimental result that researcher be obtain at this time , consider a heterozygous individual that inherit dominant maternal allele for two gene on the same chromosome ( such as ab ) and two recessive paternal allele for those same gene ( such as ab ) .
if the gene be link , one would expect this individual to produce gamete that be either ab or ab with a one   one ratio .
if the gene be unlinked , the individual should produce ab , ab , ab , and ab gamete with equal frequency , accord to the mendelian concept of independent assortment .
because - pron - correspond to new allele combination , the genotype
ab and ab be nonparental type that result from homologous recombination during meiosis .
parental type be progeny that exhibit the same allelic combination as - pron - parent .
morgan and - pron - colleague , however , find that when such heterozygous individual be test cross to a homozygous recessive parent ( aabb × aabb ) , both parental and nonparental case occur .
for example , nine  five  zero offspring may be recover that be either aabb or aabb , but five  zero offspring would also be obtain that be either aabb or aabb .
these result suggest that linkage occur most often , but a significant minority of offspring be the product of recombination .
inheritance pattern of unlinked and link gene be show .
in ( a ) , two gene be locate on different chromosome so independent assortment occur during meiosis .
the offspring have an equal chance of be the parental type ( inherit the same combination of trait as the parent ) or a nonparental type ( inherit a different combination of trait than the parent ) .
in ( b ) , two gene be very close together on the same chromosome so that no crossing over occur between - pron - .
the gene be therefore always inherit together and all of the offspring be the parental type .
in ( c ) , two gene be far apart on the chromosome such that crossing over occur during every meiotic event .
the recombination frequency will be the same as if the gene be on separate chromosome .
( d )
the actual recombination frequency of fruit fly wing length and body color that thomas morgan observe in one  nine  one  two be one  seven percent .
a crossover frequency between zero percent and five  zero percent indicate that the gene be on the same chromosome and crossover occur some of the time .
genetic maps janssen do not have the technology to demonstrate crossing over so - pron - remain an abstract idea that be not widely accept .
scientist think chiasma be a variation on synapsis and could not understand how chromosome could break and rejoin .
yet , the datum be clear that linkage do not always occur .
ultimately , - pron - take a young undergraduate student and an " all - nighter " to mathematically elucidate the problem of linkage and recombination .
in one  nine  one  three , alfred sturtevant , a student in morgan 's laboratory , gather result from researcher in the laboratory , and take - pron - home one night to mull - pron - over .
by the next morning , - pron - have create the first " chromosome map , " a linear representation of gene order and relative distance on a chromosome .
as show in figure one  three  .  four , by use recombination frequency to predict genetic distance , the relative order of gene on chromosome two could be infer .
the value show represent map distance in centimorgan ( cm ) , which correspond to recombination frequency ( in percent ) .
therefore , the gene for body color and wing size be six  five  .  five − four  eight  .  five = one  seven cm apart , indicate that the maternal and paternal allele for these gene recombine in one  seven percent of offspring , on average .
to construct a chromosome map , sturtevant assume that gene be order serially on threadlike chromosome .
- pron - also assume that the incidence of recombination between two homologous chromosome could occur with equal likelihood anywhere along the length of the chromosome .
operate under these assumption , sturtevant postulate that allele that be far apart on a chromosome be more likely to dissociate during meiosis simply because there be a large region over which recombination could occur .
conversely , allele that be close to each other on the chromosome be likely to be inherit together .
the average number of crossover between two allele — that is , - pron - recombination frequency — correlate with - pron - genetic distance from each other , relative to the location of other gene on that chromosome .
consider the example cross between aabb and aabb above , the frequency of recombination could be calculate as five  zero  /  one  zero  zero  zero = zero  .  zero  five .
that is , the likelihood of a crossover between gene
a / a and b / b be zero  .  zero  five , or five percent .
such a result would indicate that the gene be definitively link , but that - pron - be far enough apart for crossover to occasionally occur .
sturtevant divide - pron - genetic map into map unit , or centimorgan ( cm ) , in which a recombination frequency of zero  .  zero  one correspond to one cm . by represent allele in a linear map , sturtevant suggest that gene can range from be perfectly link ( recombination frequency = zero ) to be perfectly unlinked ( recombination frequency = zero  .  five ) when gene be on different chromosome or gene be separate very far apart on the same chromosome .
perfectly unlinked gene correspond to the frequency predict by mendel to assort independently in a dihybrid cross .
a recombination frequency of zero  .  five indicate that five  zero percent of offspring be recombinant and the other five  zero percent be parental type .
that is , every type of allele combination be represent with equal frequency .
this representation allow sturtevant to additively calculate distance between several gene on the same chromosome .
however , as the genetic distance approach zero  .  five  zero , - pron - prediction become less accurate because - pron - be not clear whether the gene be very far apart on the same chromosome or on different chromosome .
in one  nine  three  one , barbara mcclintock and harriet creighton demonstrate the crossover of homologous chromosome in corn plant .
week later , homologous recombination in drosophila be demonstrate microscopically by curt stern .
stern observe several x - link phenotype that be associate with a structurally unusual and dissimilar x chromosome pair in which one x be miss a small terminal segment , and the other x be fuse to a piece of the y chromosome .
by cross fly , observe - pron - offspring , and then visualize the offspring 's chromosome , stern demonstrate that every time the offspring allele combination deviate from either of the parental combination , there be a correspond exchange of an x chromosome segment .
use mutant fly with structurally distinct x chromosome be the key to observe the product of recombination because dna sequencing and other molecular tool be not yet available .
- pron - be now know that homologous chromosome regularly exchange segment in meiosis by reciprocally break and rejoin - pron - dna at precise location .
mendel 's
mapped traits homologous recombination be a common genetic process , yet mendel never observe - pron - .
have - pron - investigate both link and unlinked gene , - pron - would have be much more difficult for - pron - to create a unified model of - pron - datum on the basis of probabilistic calculation .
researcher who have since map the seven trait investigate by mendel onto the seven chromosome of the pea plant genome have confirm that all of the gene - pron - examine be either on separate chromosome or be sufficiently far apart as to be statistically unlinked .
some have suggest that mendel be enormously lucky to select only unlinked gene , whereas other question whether mendel discard any datum suggest linkage .
in any case , mendel consistently observe independent assortment because - pron - examine gene that be effectively unlinked .
inherit disorder can arise when chromosome behave abnormally during meiosis .
chromosome disorder can be divide into two category  abnormality in chromosome number and chromosomal structural rearrangement .
because even small segment of chromosome can span many gene , chromosomal disorder be characteristically dramatic and often fatal .
identification of chromosomes
the isolation and microscopic observation of chromosome form the basis of cytogenetic and be the primary method by which clinician detect chromosomal abnormality in human .
a karyotype be the number and appearance of chromosome , and include - pron - length , banding pattern , and centromere position .
to obtain a view of an individual 's karyotype , cytologist photograph the chromosome and then cut and paste each chromosome into a chart , or karyogram , also know as an ideogram .
this karyotype be of a female human .
notice that homologous chromosome be the same size , and have the same centromere position and band pattern .
a human male would have an xy chromosome pair instead of the xx pair show .
( credit  andreas blozer et al )
in a give specie , chromosome can be identify by - pron - number , size , centromere position , and banding pattern .
in a human karyotype , autosome or " body chromosome " ( all of the non – sex chromosome ) be generally organize in approximate order of size from large ( chromosome one ) to small ( chromosome two  two ) .
the x and y chromosome be not autosome .
however , chromosome two  one be actually short than chromosome two  two .
this be discover after the naming of down syndrome as trisomy two  one , reflect how this disease result from possess one extra chromosome two  one ( three total ) .
not want to change the name of this important disease , chromosome two  one retain - pron - numbering , despite describe the short set of chromosome .
the chromosome " arm " project from either end of the centromere may be designate as short or long , depend on - pron - relative length .
the short arm be abbreviate p ( for " petite " ) , whereas the long arm be abbreviate q ( because - pron - follow " p " alphabetically ) .
each arm be further subdivide and denote by a number .
use this name system , location on chromosome can be describe consistently in the scientific literature .
geneticists use karyograms to identify chromosomal aberrations
although mendel be refer to as the " father of modern genetic , " - pron - perform - pron - experiment with none of the tool that the geneticist of today routinely employ .
one such powerful cytological technique be karyotyp , a method in which trait characterize by chromosomal abnormality can be identify from a single cell .
to observe an individual 's karyotype , a person 's cell ( like white blood cell ) be first collect from a blood sample or other tissue .
in the laboratory , the isolated cell be stimulate to begin actively divide .
a chemical call colchicine be then apply to cell to arrest condense chromosome in metaphase .
cell be then make to swell use a hypotonic solution so the chromosome spread apart .
finally , the sample be preserve in a fixative and apply to a slide .
the geneticist then stain chromosome with one of several dye to better visualize the distinct and reproducible band pattern of each chromosome pair .
follow stain , the chromosome be view use bright - field microscopy .
a common stain choice be the giemsa stain .
giemsa stain result in approximately four  zero  zero – eight  zero  zero band ( of tightly coil dna and condense protein ) arrange along all of the two  three chromosome pair  an experienced geneticist can identify each band .
in addition to the band pattern , chromosome be further identify on the basis of size and centromere location .
to obtain the classic depiction of the karyotype in which homologous pair of chromosome be align in numerical order from long to short , the geneticist obtain a digital image , identify each chromosome , and manually arrange the chromosome into this pattern ( figure one  three  .  five ) .
at - pron - most basic , the karyogram may reveal genetic abnormality in which an individual have too many or too few chromosome per cell .
example of this be down syndrome , which be identify by a third copy of chromosome two  one , and turner syndrome , which be characterize by the presence of only one x chromosome in woman instead of the normal two .
geneticist can also identify large deletion or insertion of dna .
for instance , jacobsen syndrome — which involve distinctive facial feature as well as heart and bleeding defect — be identify by a deletion on chromosome one  one .
finally , the karyotype can pinpoint translocation , which occur when a segment of genetic material break from one chromosome and reattach to another chromosome or to a different part of the same chromosome .
translocation be implicate in certain cancer , include chronic myelogenous leukemia .
during mendel 's lifetime , inheritance be an abstract concept that could only be infer by perform cross and observe the trait express by offspring .
by observe a karyogram , today 's geneticist can actually visualize the chromosomal composition of an individual to confirm or predict genetic abnormality in offspring , even before birth .
disorder in chromosome number of all of the chromosomal disorder , abnormality in chromosome number be the most obviously identifiable from a karyogram .
disorder of chromosome number include the duplication or loss of entire chromosome , as well as change in the number of complete set of chromosome .
- pron - be cause by nondisjunction , which occur when pair of homologous chromosome or sister chromatid fail to separate during meiosis .
misaligned or incomplete synapsis , or a dysfunction of the spindle apparatus that facilitate chromosome migration , can because nondisjunction .
the risk of nondisjunction occur increase with the age of the parent .
nondisjunction can occur during either meiosis i or ii , with differ result ( figure one  three  .  six ) .
if homologous chromosome fail to separate during meiosis i , the result be two gamete that lack that particular chromosome and two gamete with two copy of the chromosome .
if sister chromatid fail to separate during meiosis ii , the result be one gamete that lack that chromosome , two normal gamete with one copy of the chromosome , and one gamete with two copy of the chromosome .
aneuploidy an individual with the appropriate number of chromosome for - pron - specie be call euploid  in human , euploidy correspond to two  two pair of autosome and one pair of sex chromosome .
an individual with an error in chromosome number be describe as aneuploid , a term that include monosomy ( loss of one chromosome ) or trisomy ( gain of an extraneous chromosome ) .
monosomic human zygote miss any one copy of an autosome invariably fail to develop to birth because - pron - lack essential gene .
this underscore the importance of " gene dosage " in human .
most autosomal trisomy also fail to develop to birth  however , duplication of some of the small chromosome ( one  three , one  five , one  eight , two  one , or two  two ) can result in offspring that survive for several week to many year .
trisomic individual suffer from a different type of genetic imbalance  an excess in gene dose .
individual with an extra chromosome may synthesize an abundance of the gene product encode by that chromosome .
this extra dose ( one  five  zero percent ) of specific gene can lead to a number of functional challenge and often preclude development .
the most common trisomy among viable birth be that of chromosome two  one , which correspond to down syndrome .
individual with this inherit disorder be characterize by short stature and stunt digit , facial distinction that include a broad skull and large tongue , and significant developmental delay .
the incidence of down syndrome be correlate with maternal age  old woman be more likely to become pregnant with fetus carry the trisomy two  one genotype .
an individual with more than the correct number of chromosome set ( two for diploid specie ) be call polyploid .
for instance , fertilization of an abnormal diploid egg with a normal haploid sperm would yield a triploid zygote .
polyploid animal be extremely rare , with only a few example among the flatworm , crustacean , amphibian , fish , and lizard .
polyploid animal be sterile because meiosis can not proceed normally and instead produce mostly aneuploid daughter cell that can not yield viable zygote .
rarely , polyploid animal can reproduce asexually by haplodiploidy , in which an unfertilized egg divide mitotically to produce offspring .
in contrast , polyploidy be very common in the plant kingdom , and polyploid plant tend to be large and more robust than euploid of - pron - specie ( figure one  three  .  eight ) .
the incidence of have a fetus with trisomy two  one increase dramatically with maternal age .
as with many polyploid plant , this triploid orange daylily ( hemerocallis fulva ) be particularly large and robust , and grow flower with triple the number of petal of - pron - diploid counterpart .
( credit  steve karg )
sex chromosome nondisjunction in humans humans display dramatic deleterious effect with autosomal trisomy and monosomy .
therefore , - pron - may seem counterintuitive that human female and male can function normally , despite carry different number of the x chromosome .
rather than a gain or loss of autosome , variation in the number of sex chromosome be associate with relatively mild effect .
in part , this occur because of a molecular process call x inactivation .
early in development , when female mammalian embryo consist of just a few thousand cell ( relative to trillion in the newborn ) , one x chromosome in each cell inactivate by tightly condense into a quiescent ( dormant ) structure call a barr body .
the chance that an x chromosome ( maternally or paternally derive ) be inactivate in each cell be random , but once the inactivation occur , all cell derive from that one will have the same inactive x chromosome or barr body .
by this process , female compensate for - pron - double genetic dose of x chromosome .
in so - call " tortoiseshell " cat , embryonic x inactivation be observe as color variegation ( figure one  three  .  nine ) .
female that be heterozygous for an x - link coat color gene will express one of two different coat color over different region of - pron - body , correspond to whichev x chromosome be inactivate in the embryonic cell progenitor of that region .
in cat , the gene for coat color be locate on the x chromosome .
in the embryonic development of female cat , one of the two x chromosome be randomly inactivate in each cell , result in a tortoiseshell pattern if the cat have two different allele for coat color .
male cat , have only one x chromosome , never exhibit a tortoiseshell coat color .
( credit  michael bodega )
an individual carry an abnormal number of x chromosome will inactivate all but one x chromosome in each of - pron - cell .
however , even inactivate x chromosome continue to express a few gene , and x chromosome must reactivate for the proper maturation of female ovary .
as a result , x - chromosomal abnormality be typically associate with mild mental and physical defect , as well as sterility .
if the x chromosome be absent altogether , the individual will not develop in utero .
several error in sex chromosome number have be characterize .
individual with three x chromosome , call triplo - x , be phenotypically female but express developmental delay and reduced fertility .
the xxy genotype , correspond to one type of klinefelter syndrome , correspond to phenotypically male individual with small testis , enlarged breast , and reduce body hair .
more complex type of klinefelter syndrome exist in which the individual have as many as five x chromosome .
in all type , every x chromosome except one undergoe inactivation to compensate for the excess genetic dosage .
this can be see as several barr body in each cell nucleus .
turner syndrome , characterize as an x zero genotype ( i . e . , only a single sex chromosome ) , correspond to a phenotypically female individual with short stature , webbed skin in the neck region , hearing and cardiac impairment , and sterility .
duplication and deletions
in addition to the loss or gain of an entire chromosome , a chromosomal segment may be duplicate or lose .
duplication and deletion often produce offspring that survive but exhibit physical and mental abnormality .
duplicated chromosomal segment may fuse to exist chromosome or may be free in the nucleus .
cri - du - chat ( from the french for " cry of the cat " ) be a syndrome associate with nervous system abnormality and identifiable physical feature that result from a deletion of most of five p ( the small arm of chromosome five ) (
figure one  three  .  one  zero ) .
infant with this genotype emit a characteristic high - pitch cry on which the disorder 's name be base .
this individual with cri - du - chat syndrome be show at two , four , nine , and one  two year of age .
chromosomal structural rearrangements cytologists have characterize numerous structural rearrangement in chromosome , but chromosome inversion and translocation be the most common .
both be identify during meiosis by the adaptive pairing of rearrange chromosome with - pron - former homolog to maintain appropriate gene alignment .
if the gene carry on two homolog be not orient correctly , a recombination event could result in the loss of gene from one chromosome and the gain of gene on the other .
this would produce aneuploid gamete .
chromosome inversions
a chromosome inversion be the detachment , one  eight  zero ° rotation , and reinsertion of part of a chromosome .
inversion may occur in nature as a result of mechanical shear , or from the action of transposable element ( special dna sequence capable of facilitate the rearrangement of chromosome segment with the help of enzyme that cut and paste dna sequence ) .
unless - pron - disrupt a gene sequence , inversion only change the orientation of gene and be likely to have more mild effect than aneuploid error .
however , alter gene orientation can result in functional change because regulator of gene expression could be move out of position with respect to - pron - target , cause aberrant level of gene product .
an inversion can be pericentric and include the centromere , or paracentric and occur outside of the centromere ( figure one  three  .  one  one ) .
a pericentric inversion that be asymmetric about the centromere can change the relative length of the chromosome arm , make these inversion easily identifiable .
pericentric inversion include the centromere , and paracentric inversion do not .
a pericentric inversion can change the relative length of the chromosome arm  a paracentric inversion can not .
when one homologous chromosome undergo an inversion but the other do not , the individual be describe as an inversion heterozygote .
to maintain point - for - point synapsis during meiosis , one homolog must form a loop , and the other homolog must mold around - pron - .
although this topology can ensure that the gene be correctly align , - pron - also force the homolog to stretch and can be associate with region of imprecise synapsis .
when one chromosome undergo an inversion but the other do not , one chromosome must form an inverted loop to retain point - for - point interaction during synapsis .
this inversion pair be essential to maintain gene alignment during meiosis and to allow for recombination .
the chromosome one  eight inversion not all structural rearrangement of chromosome produce nonviable , impaired , or infertile individual .
in rare instance , such a change can result in the evolution of a new specie .
in fact , a pericentric inversion in chromosome one  eight appear to have contribute to the evolution of human .
this inversion be not present in - pron - close genetic relative , the chimpanzee .
human and chimpanzee differ cytogenetically by pericentric inversion on several chromosome and by the fusion of two separate chromosome in chimpanzee that correspond to chromosome two in human .
the pericentric chromosome one  eight inversion be believe to have occur in early human follow - pron - divergence from a common ancestor with chimpanzee approximately five million year ago .
researcher characterize this inversion have suggest that approximately one  nine  ,  zero  zero  zero nucleotide base be duplicate on one  eight p , and the duplicated region invert and reinsert on chromosome one  eight of an ancestral human .
a comparison of human and chimpanzee gene in the region of this inversion indicate that two gene — rock one and usp one  four —that be adjacent on chimpanzee chromosome one  seven ( which correspond to human chromosome one  eight ) be more distantly position on human chromosome one  eight .
this suggest that one of the inversion breakpoint occur between these two gene .
interestingly , human and chimpanzee express usp one  four at distinct level in specific cell type , include cortical cell and fibroblast .
perhaps the chromosome one  eight inversion in an ancestral human reposition specific gene and reset - pron - expression level in a useful way .
because both rock one and usp one  four encode cellular enzyme , a change in - pron - expression could alter cellular function .
- pron - be not know how this inversion contribute to hominid evolution , but - pron - appear to be a significant factor in the divergence of human from other primate .
translocation
a translocation occur when a segment of a chromosome dissociate and reattach to a different , nonhomologous chromosome .
translocation can be benign or have devastating effect depend on how the position of gene be alter with respect to regulatory sequence .
notably , specific translocation have be associate with several cancer and with schizophrenia .
reciprocal translocation result from the exchange of chromosome segment between two nonhomologous chromosome such that there be no gain or loss of genetic information .
a reciprocal translocation occur when a segment of dna be transfer from one chromosome to another , nonhomologous chromosome . 
introduction the three letter " dna " have now become synonymous with crime solve , paternity testing , human identification , and genetic testing .
dna can be retrieve from hair , blood , or saliva .
each person 's dna be unique , and - pron - be possible to detect difference between individual within a species on the basis of these unique feature .
dna analysis have many practical application beyond forensic .
in human , dna testing be apply to numerous us  determine paternity , trace genealogy , identify pathogen , archeological research , trace disease outbreak , and study human migration pattern .
in the medical field , dna be use in diagnostic , new vaccine development , and cancer therapy .
- pron - be now possible to determine predisposition to disease by look at gene .
each human cell have two  three pair of chromosome  one set of chromosome be inherit from the mother and the other set be inherit from the father .
there be also a mitochondrial genome , inherit exclusively from the mother , which can be involve in inherit genetic disorder .
on each chromosome , there be thousand of gene that be responsible for determine the genotype and phenotype of the individual .
a gene be define as a sequence of dna that code for a functional product .
the human haploid genome contain three billion base pair and have between two  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero and two  five  ,  zero  zero  zero functional gene .
modern understanding of dna have evolve from the discovery of nucleic acid to the development of the double - helix model .
in the one  eight  six  zero , friedrich miescher ( figure one  four  .  two ) , a physician by profession , be the first person to isolate phosphaterich chemical from white blood cell or leukocyte .
- pron - name these chemical ( which would eventually be know as rna and dna ) nuclein because - pron - be isolate from the nucleus of the cell .
a half century later , british bacteriologist frederick griffith be perhaps the first person to show that hereditary information could be transfer from one cell to another " horizontally , " rather than by descent .
in one  nine  two  eight , - pron - report the first demonstration of bacterial transformation , a process in which external dna be take up by a cell , thereby change morphology and physiology .
- pron - be work with streptococcus pneumoniae , the bacterium that cause pneumonia .
griffith work with two strain , rough ( r ) and smooth ( s ) .
the r strain be non - pathogenic ( do not because disease ) and be call rough because - pron - outer surface be a cell wall and lack a capsule  as a result , the cell surface appear uneven under the microscope .
the s strain be pathogenic ( disease - causing ) and have a capsule outside - pron - cell wall .
as a result , - pron - have a smooth appearance under the microscope .
griffith inject the live r strain into mouse and - pron - survive .
in another experiment , when - pron - inject mouse with the heat - kill s strain , - pron - also survive .
in a third set of experiment , a mixture of live r strain and heat - kill s strain be inject into mouse , and — to - pron - surprise — the mouse die .
upon isolate the live bacteria from the dead mouse , only the s strain of bacteria be recover .
when this isolate s strain be inject into fresh mouse , the mouse die .
griffith conclude that something have pass from the heat - kill s strain into the live r strain and transform - pron - into the pathogenic s strain , and - pron - call this the transform principle ( figure one  four  .  three ) .
these experiment be now famously know as griffith ' s transformation experiment .
two strain of s . pneumoniae be use in griffith 's transformation experiment .
the r strain be nonpathogenic .
the s strain be pathogenic and cause death .
when griffith inject a mouse with the heat - kill s strain and a live r strain , the mouse die .
the s strain be recover from the dead mouse .
thus , griffith conclude that something have pass from the heat - kill s strain to the r strain , transform the r strain into s strain in the process .
( credit " living mouse "  modification of work by nih  credit " dead mouse "  modification of work by sarah marriage )
scientist oswald avery , colin macleod , and maclyn mccarty ( one  nine  four  four ) be interested in explore this transform principle further .
- pron - isolate the s strain from the dead mouse and isolate the protein and nucleic acid , namely rna and dna , as these be possible candidate for the molecule of heredity .
- pron - conduct a systematic elimination study .
- pron - use enzyme that specifically degrade each component and then use each mixture separately to transform the r strain .
- pron - find that when dna be degrade , the result mixture be no longer able to transform the bacteria , whereas all of the other combination be able to transform the bacteria .
this lead - pron - to conclude that dna be the transform principle .
forensic scientists and dna analysis dna evidence be use for the first time to solve an immigration case .
the story start with a teenage boy return to london from ghana to be with - pron - mother .
immigration authority at the airport be suspicious of - pron - , think that - pron - be travel on a forge passport .
after much persuasion , - pron - be allow to go live with - pron - mother , but the immigration authority do not drop the case against - pron - .
all type of evidence , include photograph , be provide to the authority , but deportation proceeding be start nevertheless .
around the same time , dr . alec jeffreys of leicester university in the united kingdom have invent a technique know as dna fingerprinting .
the immigration authority approach dr . jeffreys for help .
- pron - take dna sample from the mother and three of - pron - child , plus an unrelated mother , and compare the sample with the boy 's dna .
because the biological father be not in the picture , dna from the three child be compare with the boy 's dna .
- pron - find a match in the boy 's dna for both the mother and - pron - three sibling .
- pron - conclude that the boy be indeed the mother 's son .
forensic scientist analyze many item , include document , handwriting , firearm , and biological sample .
- pron - analyze the dna content of hair , seman , saliva , and blood , and compare - pron - with a database of dna profile of know criminal .
analysis include dna isolation , sequencing , and sequence analysis  most forensic dna analysis involve polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) amplification of short tandem repeat ( str ) loci and electrophoresis to determine the length of the pcr - amplified fragment .
only mitochondrial dna be sequence for forensic .
forensic scientist be expect to appear at court hearing to present - pron - finding .
- pron - be usually employ in crime lab of city and state government agency .
geneticist experiment with dna technique also work for scientific and research organization , pharmaceutical industry , and college and university lab .
student wish to pursue a career as a forensic scientist should have at least a bachelor ' s degree in chemistry , biology , or physics , and preferably some experience work in a laboratory .
material , either dna or rna .
the bacteriophage infect the host bacterial cell by attach to - pron - surface , and then - pron - inject - pron - nucleic acid inside the cell .
the phage dna make multiple copy of - pron - use the host machinery , and eventually the host cell burst , release a large number of bacteriophage .
hershey and chase label one batch of phage with radioactive sulfur , three  five s , to label the protein coat .
another batch of phage be label with radioactive phosphoru , three  two p . because phosphorous be find in dna , but not protein , the dna and not the protein would be tag with radioactive phosphoru .
each batch of phage be allow to infect the cell separately .
after infection , the phage bacterial suspension be put in a blender , which cause the phage coat to be detach from the host cell .
the phage and bacterial suspension be spin down in a centrifuge .
the heavy bacterial cell settle down and form a pellet , whereas the light phage particle stay in the supernatant .
in the tube that contain phage label with three  five s , the supernatant contain the radioactively label phage , whereas no radioactivity be detect in the pellet .
in the tube that contain the phage label with three  two p , the radioactivity be detect in the pellet that contain the heavy bacterial cell , and no radioactivity be detect in the supernatant .
hershey and chase conclude that - pron - be the phage dna that be inject into the cell and carry information to produce more phage particle , thus provide evidence that dna be the genetic material and not protein .
in hershey and chase ' s experiment , bacteria be infect with phage radiolabel with either three  five s , which label protein , or three  two p , which label dna .
only three  two p enter the bacterial cell , indicate that dna be the genetic material .
around this same time , austrian biochemist erwin chargaff examine the content of dna in different specie and find that the amount of adenine , thymine , guanine , and cytosine be not find in equal quantity , and that - pron - vary from specie to specie , but not between individual of the same specie .
- pron - find that the amount of adenine equal the amount of thymine , and the amount of cytosine equal the amount of guanine , or a = t and g = c .
this be also know as chargaff 's rule .
this finding prove immensely useful when watson and crick be get ready to propose - pron - dna double helix model .
dna structure and sequencing
the building block of dna be nucleotide .
the important component of the nucleotide be a nitrogenous base , deoxyribose ( five  - carbon sugar ) , and a phosphate group ( figure one  four  .  five ) .
the nucleotide be name depend on the nitrogenous base .
the nitrogenous base can be a purine such as adenine ( a ) and guanine ( g ) , or a pyrimidine such as cytosine ( c ) and thymine ( t ) .
the nucleotide combine with each other by covalent bond know as phosphodiester bond or linkage .
the purine have a double ring structure with a six - membered ring fuse to a five - membered ring .
pyrimidine be small in size  - pron - have a single six - membered ring structure .
the carbon atom of the five - carbon sugar be number one ' , two ' , three ' , four ' , and five ' ( one ' be read as " one prime " ) .
the phosphate residue be attach to the hydroxyl group of the five ' carbon of one sugar of one nucleotide and the hydroxyl group of the three ' carbon of the sugar of the next nucleotide , thereby form a five  ' -  three ' phosphodiester bond .
in the one  nine  five  zero , francis crick and james watson work together to determine the structure of dna at the university of cambridge , england .
other scientist like linus pauling and maurice wilkins be also actively explore this field .
pauling have discover the secondary structure of protein use x - ray crystallography .
inwilkins' lab , researcher rosalind franklin be use x - ray diffraction method to understand the structure of dna .
watson and crick be able to piece together the puzzle of the dna molecule on the basis of franklin ' s datum because crick have also study x - ray diffraction ( figure one  four  .  six ) .
in one  nine  six  two , james watson , francis crick , and maurice wilkins be award the nobel prize in medicine .
unfortunately , by then franklin have die , and nobel prize be not award posthumously .
each nucleotide be make up of a sugar , a phosphate group , and a nitrogenous base .
the sugar be deoxyribose in dna and ribose in rna .
the work of pioneering scientist ( a ) james watson , francis crick , and maclyn mccarty lead to - pron - present day understanding of dna .
scientist rosalind franklin discover ( b ) the x - ray diffraction pattern of dna , which help to elucidate - pron - double helix structure .
( credit a  modification of work by marjorie mccarty , public library of science )
watson and crick propose that dna be make up of two strand that be twist around each other to form a right - handed helix .
base pairing take place between a purine and pyrimidine  namely , a pair with t and g pair with c . adenine and thymine be complementary base pair , and cytosine and guanine be also complementary base pair .
the base pair be stabilize by hydrogen bond  adenine and thymine form two hydrogen bond and cytosine and guanine form three hydrogen bond .
the two strand be anti - parallel in nature 
that is , the three ' end of one
strand face the five ' end of the other strand .
the sugar and phosphate of the nucleotide form the backbone of the structure , whereas the nitrogenous base be stack inside .
each base pair be separate from the other base pair by a distance of zero  .  three  four nm , and each turn of the helix measure three  .  four nm .
therefore , ten base pair be present per turn of the helix .
the diameter of the dna double helix be two nm , and - pron - be uniform throughout .
only the pairing between a purine and pyrimidine can explain the uniform diameter .
the twisting of the two strand around each other result in the formation of uniformly space major and minor groove .
dna have ( a ) a double helix structure and ( b ) phosphodiester bond .
the ( c ) major and minor groove be bind site for dna bind protein during process such as transcription ( the copying of rna from dna ) and replication .
dna sequencing techniques until the one  nine  nine  zero , the sequencing of dna ( read the sequence of dna ) be a relatively expensive and long process .
use radiolabel nucleotide also compound the problem through safety concern .
with currently available technology and automate machine , the process be cheap , safe , and can be complete in a matter of hour .
fred sanger develop the sequencing method use for the human genome sequencing project , which be widely use today .
the method be know as the dideoxy chain termination method .
the sequencing method be base on the use of chain terminator , the dideoxynucleotide ( ddntps ) .
the dideoxynucleotide , or ddntpss , differ from the deoxynucleotide by the lack of a free three ' oh group on the five - carbon sugar .
if a ddntp be add to a grow a dna strand , the chain be not extend any further because the free three ' oh group need to add another nucleotide be not available .
by use a predetermined ratio of deoxyribonucleotide to dideoxynucleotide , - pron - be possible to generate dna fragment of different size .
in frederick sanger ' s dideoxy chain termination method , dye - label dideoxynucleotide be use to generate dna fragment that terminate at different point .
the dna be separate by capillary electrophoresis on the basis of size , and from the order of fragment form , the dna sequence can be read .
the dna sequence readout be show on an electropherogram that be generate by a laser scanner .
the dna sample to be sequence be denature or separate into two strand by heat - pron - to high temperature .
the dna be divide into four tube in which a primer , dna polymerase , and all four nucleotide ( a , t , g , and c ) be add .
in addition to each of the four tube , limited quantity of one of the four dideoxynucleotide be add to each tube respectively .
the tube be label as a , t , g , and c accord to the ddntp add .
for detection purpose , each of the four dideoxynucleotide carry a different fluorescent label .
chain elongation continue until a fluorescent dideoxy nucleotide be incorporate , after which no further elongation take place .
after the reaction be over , electrophoresis be perform .
even a difference in length of a single base can be detect .
the sequence be read from a laser scanner .
for - pron - work on dna sequencing , sanger receive a nobel prize in chemistry in one  nine  eight  zero .
gel electrophoresis be a technique use to separate dna fragment of different size .
usually the gel be make of a chemical call agarose .
agarose powder be add to a buffer and heated .
after cool , the gel solution be pour into a cast tray .
once the gel have solidify , the dna be load on the gel and electric current be apply .
the dna have a net negative charge and move from the negative electrode toward the positive electrode .
the electric current be apply for sufficient time to let the dna separate accord to size  the small fragment will be farth from the well ( where the dna be load ) , and the heavy molecular weight fragment will be close to the well .
once the dna be separate , the gel be stain with a dna - specific dye for view - pron - .
dna can be separate on the basis of size use gel electrophoresis .
neanderthal genome 
how be - pron - related ?
the first draft sequence of the neanderthal genome be recently publish by richard e . green et al .
in two  zero  one  zero .
[ one
] neanderthal be the close ancestor of present - day human .
- pron - be know to have live in europe and western asia before - pron - disappear from fossil record approximately three  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago .
green 's team study almost four  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  - year - old fossil remain that be select from site across the world .
extremely sophisticated mean of sample preparation and dna sequencing be employ because of the fragile nature of the bone and heavy microbial contamination .
in - pron - study , the scientist be able to sequence some four billion base pair .
the neanderthal sequence be compare with that of present - day human from across the world .
after compare the sequence , the researcher find that the neanderthal genome have two to three percent great similarity to people live outside africa than to people in africa .
while current theory have suggest that all present - day human can be trace to a small ancestral population in africa , the datum from the neanderthal genome may contradict this view .
green and - pron - colleague also discover dna segment among people in europe and asia that be more similar to neanderthal sequence than to other contemporary human sequence .
another interesting observation be that neanderthals be as closely related to people from papua new guinea as to those from china or france .
this be surprising because neanderthal fossil remain have be locate only in europe and west asia .
most likely , genetic exchange take place between neanderthals and modern human as modern human emerge out of africa , before the divergence of europeans , east asians , and papua new guineans .
several gene seem to have undergo change from neanderthals during the evolution of presentday human .
these gene be involve in cranial structure , metabolism , skin morphology , and cognitive development .
one of the gene that be of particular interest be runx two , which be different in modern day human and neanderthals .
this gene be responsible for the prominent frontal bone , bell - shape rib cage , and dental difference see in neanderthals .
- pron - be speculate that an evolutionary change in runx two be important in the origin of modern - day human , and this affect the cranium and the upper body .
dna packaging in cell when compare prokaryotic cell to eukaryotic cell , prokaryote be much simple than eukaryote in many of - pron - feature ( figure one  four  .  one  zero ) .
most prokaryote contain a single , circular chromosome that be find in an area of the cytoplasm call the nucleoid .
a eukaryote contain a well - define nucleus , whereas in prokaryote , the chromosome lie in the cytoplasm in an area call the nucleoid .
in eukaryotic cell , dna and rna synthesis occur in a separate compartment from protein synthesis .
in prokaryotic cell , both process occur together .
what advantage may there be to separate the process ?
what advantage may there be to have - pron - occur together ?
the size of the genome in one of the most well - study prokaryote , e . coli , be four  .  six million base pair ( approximately one  .  one mm , if cut and stretch out ) .
so how do this fit inside a small bacterial cell ?
the dna be twist by what be know as supercoil .
supercoil mean that dna be either under - wound ( less than one turn of the helix per one  zero base pair ) or over - wound ( more than one turn per one  zero base pair ) from - pron - normal relaxed state .
some protein be know to be involve in the supercoiling  other protein and enzyme such as dna gyrase help in maintain the supercoil structure .
eukaryote , whose chromosome each consist of a linear dna molecule , employ a different type of pack strategy to fit - pron - dna inside the nucleus ( figure one  four  .  one  one ) .
at the most basic level , dna be wrap around protein know as histone to form structure call nucleosome .
the histone be evolutionarily conserve protein that be rich in basic amino acid and form an octamer .
the dna ( which be negatively charge because of the phosphate group ) be wrap tightly around the histone core .
this nucleosome be link to the next one with the help of a linker dna .
this be also know as the " bead on a string " structure .
this be further compact into a three  zero nm fiber , which be the diameter of the structure .
at the metaphase stage , the chromosome be at - pron - most compact , be approximately seven  zero  zero nm in width , and be find in association with scaffold protein .
in interphase , eukaryotic chromosome have two distinct region that can be distinguish by stain .
the tightly package region be know as heterochromatin , and the less dense region be know as euchromatin .
heterochromatin usually contain gene that be not express , and be find in the region of the centromere and telomere .
the euchromatin usually contain gene that be transcribe , with dna package around nucleosome but not further compact .
basic of dna replication
the elucidation of the structure of the double helix provide a hint as to how dna divide and make copy of - pron - .
this model suggest that the two strand of the double helix separate during replication , and each strand serve as a template from which the new complementary strand be copy .
what be not clear be how the replication take place .
there be three model suggest ( figure one  four  .  one  two )  conservative , semi - conservative , and dispersive .
the three suggest model of dna replication .
grey indicate the original dna strand , and blue indicate newly synthesize dna .
in conservative replication , the parental dna remain together , and the newly form daughter strand be together .
the semi - conservative method suggest that each of the two parental dna strand act as a template for new dna to be synthesize  after replication , each double - strand dna include one parental or " old " strand and one " new " strand .
in the dispersive model , both copy of dna have double - strand segment of parental dna and newly synthesize dna intersperse .
meselson and stahl be interested in understand how dna replicate .
- pron - grow e . coli for several generation in a medium contain a " heavy " isotope of nitrogen ( one  five n ) that get incorporate into nitrogenous base , and eventually into the dna .
meselson and stahl experiment with e . coli grow first in heavy nitrogen ( one  five n ) then in one  four n . dna grow in one  five n ( red band ) be heavy than dna grow in one  four n ( orange band ) , and sediment to a low level in cesium chloride solution in an ultracentrifuge .
when dna grow in one  five n be switch to medium contain one  four n , after one round of cell division the dna sediment halfway between the one  five n and one  four n level , indicate that - pron - now contain fifty percent one  four n . in subsequent cell division , an increase amount of dna contain one  four n only .
this data support the semi - conservative replication model .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
the e . coli culture be then shift into medium contain one  four n and allow to grow for one generation .
the cell be harvest and the dna be isolate .
the dna be centrifuge at high speed in an ultracentrifuge .
some cell be allow to grow for one more life cycle in one  four n and spin again .
during the density gradient centrifugation , the dna be load into a gradient ( typically a salt such as cesium chloride or sucrose ) and spin at high speed of five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero to six  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero rpm .
under these circumstance , the dna will form a band accord to - pron - density in the gradient .
dna grow in one  five n will band at a high density position than that grow in one  four n . meselson and stahl note that after one generation of growth in one  four n after - pron - have be shift from one  five n , the single band observe be intermediate in position in between dna of cell grow exclusively in one  five n and one  four n .
this suggest either a semi - conservative or dispersive mode of replication .
the dna harvest from cell grow for two generation in one  four n form two band  one dna band be at the intermediate position between one  five n and one  four n , and the other correspond to the band of one  four n dna .
these result could only be explain if dna replicate in a semi - conservative manner .
therefore , the other two mode be rule out .
during dna replication , each of the two strand that make up the double helix serve as a template from which new strand be copy .
the new strand will be complementary to the parental or "
old " strand .
when two daughter dna copy be form , - pron - have the same sequence and be divide equally into the two daughter cell .
dna replication in prokaryotes dna replication have be extremely well study in prokaryote primarily because of the small size of the genome and the mutant that be available .
e . coli have four  .  six million base pair in a single circular chromosome and all of - pron - get replicate in approximately four  two minute , start from a single origin of replication and proceed around the circle in both direction .
this mean that approximately one  zero  zero  zero nucleotide be add per second .
the process be quite rapid and occur without many mistake .
dna replication employ a large number of protein and enzyme , each of which play a critical role during the process .
one of the key player be the enzyme dna polymerase , also know as dna pol , which add nucleotides one by one to the grow dna chain that be complementary to the template strand .
the addition of nucleotide require energy  this energy be obtain from the nucleotide that have three phosphate attach to - pron - , similar to atp which have three phosphate group attach .
when the bond between the phosphate be break , the energy release be use to form the phosphodiester bond between the incoming nucleotide and the grow chain .
in prokaryote , three main type of polymerase be know 
dna pol
i , dna pol ii , and dna pol iii .
- pron - be now know that dna pol iii be the enzyme require for dna synthesis  dna pol i and dna pol ii be primarily require for repair .
how do the replication machinery know where to begin ?
- pron - turn out that there be specific nucleotide sequence call origin of replication where replication begin .
in e . coli , which have a single origin of replication on - pron - one chromosome ( as do most prokaryote ) , - pron - be approximately two  four  five base pair long and be rich in at sequence .
the origin of replication be recognize by certain protein that bind to this site .
an enzyme call helicase unwind the dna by break the hydrogen bond between the nitrogenous base pair .
atp hydrolysis be require for this process .
as the dna open up , y - shape structure call replication fork be form .
two replication fork be form at the origin of replication and these get extend bi - directionally as replication proceed .
single - strand binding protein coat the single strand of dna near the replication fork to prevent the single - strand dna from wind back into a double helix .
dna polymerase be able to add nucleotide only in the five ' to three ' direction ( a new dna strand can be only extend in this direction ) .
- pron - also require a free three  ' - oh group to which - pron - can add nucleotide by form a phosphodiester bond between the three  ' - oh end and the five ' phosphate of the next nucleotide .
this essentially mean that - pron - can not add nucleotide if a free three  ' - oh group be not available .
then how do - pron - add the first nucleotide ?
the problem be solve with the help of a primer that provide the free three  ' - oh end .
another enzyme , rna primase , synthesize an rna primer that be about five to ten nucleotide long and complementary to the dna .
because this sequence prim the dna synthesis , - pron - be appropriately call the primer .
dna polymerase can now extend this rna primer , add nucleotide one by one that be complementary to the template strand .
a replication fork be form when helicase separate the dna strand at the origin of replication .
the dna tend to become more highly coil ahead of the replication fork .
topoisomerase break and reform dna 's
phosphate backbone ahead of the replication fork , thereby relieve the pressure that result from this supercoil .
single - strand binding protein bind to the single - strand dna to prevent the helix from re - form .
primase synthesize an rna primer .
dna polymerase iii use this primer to synthesize the daughter dna strand .
on the lead strand , dna be synthesize continuously , whereas on the lagging strand , dna be synthesize in short stretch call okazaki fragment .
dna polymerase
i replace the rna primer with dna .
dna ligase seal the gap between the okazaki fragment , join the fragment into a single dna molecule .
the replication fork move at the rate of one  zero  zero  zero nucleotide per second .
dna polymerase can only extend in the five ' to three ' direction , which pose a slight problem at the replication fork .
as - pron - know , the dna double helix be anti - parallel  that is , one strand be in the five ' to three ' direction and the other be orient in the three ' to five ' direction .
one strand , which be complementary to the three ' to five ' parental dna strand , be synthesize continuously towards the replication fork because the polymerase can add nucleotide in this direction .
this continuously synthesize strand be know as the lead strand .
the other strand , complementary to the five ' to three ' parental dna , be extend away from the replication fork , in small fragment know as okazaki fragment , each require a primer to start the synthesis .
okazaki fragment be name after the japanese scientist who first discover - pron - .
the strand with the okazaki fragment be know as the lag strand .
the lead strand can be extend by one primer alone , whereas the lag strand need a new primer for each of the short okazaki fragment .
the overall direction of the lagging strand will be three ' to five ' , and that of the lead strand five ' to three ' .
a protein call the slide clamp hold the dna polymerase in place as - pron - continue to add nucleotide .
the slide clamp be a ring - shape protein that bind to the dna and hold the polymerase in place .
topoisomerase prevent the over - winding of the dna double helix ahead of the replication fork as the dna be open up  - pron - do so by cause temporary nick in the dna helix and then reseal - pron - .
as synthesis proceed , the rna primer be replace by dna .
the primer be remove by the exonuclease activity of dna pol i , and the gap be fill in by deoxyribonucleotide .
the nick that remain between the newly synthesize dna ( that replace the rna primer ) and the previously synthesize dna be seal by the enzyme dna ligase that catalyze the formation of phosphodiester linkage between the three  ' - oh end of one nucleotide and the five ' phosphate end of the other fragment .
once the chromosome have be completely replicate , the two dna copy move into two different cell during cell division .
the process of dna replication can be summarize as follow 
one . dna unwind at the origin of replication .
two .
helicase open up the dna - form replication fork  these be extend bidirectionally .
three .
single - strand binding protein coat the dna around the replication fork to prevent rewinding of the dna .
four .
topoisomerase bind at the region ahead of the replication fork to prevent supercoiling .
five .
primase synthesize rna primer complementary to the dna strand .
dna polymerase start add nucleotide to the three  ' - oh end of the primer .
seven .
elongation of both the lagging and the lead strand continue .
eight .
rna primer be remove by exonuclease activity .
nine .
gap be fill by dna pol by add dntps .
one  zero .
the gap between the two dna fragment be seal by dna ligase , which help in the formation of phosphodiester bond .
dna replication in eukaryotes eukaryotic genome be much more complex and large in size than prokaryotic genome .
the human genome have three billion base pair per haploid set of chromosome , and six billion base pair be replicate during the s phase of the cell cycle .
there be multiple origin of replication on the eukaryotic chromosome  human can have up to one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero origin of replication .
the rate of replication be approximately one  zero  zero nucleotide per second , much slow than prokaryotic replication .
in yeast , which be a eukaryote , special sequence know as autonomously replicating sequences ( ars ) be find on the chromosome .
these be equivalent to the origin of replication in e . coli .
the number of dna polymerase in eukaryote be much more than prokaryote  one  four be know , of which five be know to have major role during replication and have be well study .
- pron - be know as pol α , pol β , pol γ , pol δ , and pol ε .
the essential step of replication be the same as in prokaryote .
before replication can start , the dna have to be make available as template .
eukaryotic dna be bind to basic protein know as histone to form structure call nucleosome .
the chromatin ( the complex between dna and protein ) may undergo some chemical modification , so that the dna may be able to slide off the protein or be accessible to the enzyme of the dna replication machinery .
at the origin of replication , a pre - replication complex be make with other initiator protein .
other protein be then recruit to start the replication process ( table one  four  .  two ) .
a helicase use the energy from atp hydrolysis open up the dna helix .
replication fork be form at each replication origin as the dna unwind .
the opening of the double helix cause over - winding , or supercoil , in the dna ahead of the replication fork .
these be resolve with the action of topoisomeras .
primer be form by the enzyme primase , and use the primer , dna pol can start synthesis .
while the lead strand be continuously synthesize by the enzyme pol δ , the lagging strand be synthesize by pol ε .
a slide clamp protein know as pcna ( proliferating cell nuclear antigen ) hold the dna pol in place so that - pron - do not slide off the dna .
rnase h remove the rna primer , which be then replace with dna nucleotide .
the okazaki fragment in the lagging strand be join together after the replacement of the rna primer with dna .
the gap that remain be seal by dna ligase , which form the phosphodiester bond .
telomere replication unlike prokaryotic chromosome , eukaryotic chromosome be linear .
as - pron - have learn , the enzyme dna pol can add nucleotide only in the five ' to three ' direction .
in the lead strand , synthesis continue until the end of the chromosome be reach .
on the lagging strand , dna be synthesize in short stretch , each of which be initiate by a separate primer .
when the replication fork reach the end of the linear chromosome , there be no place for a primer to be make for the dna fragment to be copy at the end of the chromosome .
these end thus remain unpaired , and over time these end may get progressively short as cell continue to divide .
the end of the linear chromosome be know as telomere , which have repetitive sequence that code for no particular gene .
in a way , these telomere protect the gene from get delete as cell continue to divide .
in human , a six base pair sequence , ttaggg , be repeat one  zero  zero to one  zero  zero  zero time .
the discovery of the enzyme telomerase ( figure one  four  .  one  six ) help in the understanding of how chromosome end be maintain .
the telomerase enzyme contain a catalytic part and a build - in rna template .
- pron - attach to the end of the chromosome , and complementary base to the rna template be add on the three ' end of the dna strand .
once the three ' end of the lag strand template be sufficiently elongate , dna polymerase can add the nucleotide complementary to the end of the chromosome .
thus , the end of the chromosome be replicate .
the end of linear chromosome be maintain by the action of the telomerase enzyme .
telomerase be typically active in germ cell and adult stem cell .
- pron - be not active in adult somatic cell .
for - pron - discovery of telomerase and - pron - action , elizabeth blackburn ( figure one  four  .  one  six ) receive the nobel prize for medicine and physiology in two  zero  zero  nine .
elizabeth blackburn , two  zero  zero  nine nobel laureate , be the scientist who discover how telomerase work .
( credit  us embassy sweden )
telomerase and age cell that undergo cell division continue to have - pron - telomere shorten because most somatic cell do not make telomerase .
this essentially mean that telomere shorten be associate with age .
with the advent of modern medicine , preventative health care , and healthy lifestyle , the human life span have increase , and there be an increase demand for people to look young and have a good quality of life as - pron - grow old .
in two  zero  one  zero , scientist find that telomerase can reverse some age - relate condition in mouse .
this may have potential in regenerative medicine .
[ two ] telomerase - deficient mouse be use in these study  these mouse have tissue atrophy , stem cell depletion , organ system failure , and impaired tissue injury response .
telomerase reactivation in these mouse cause extension of telomere , reduce dna damage , reversed neurodegeneration , and improve the function of the testis , spleen , and intestine .
thus , telomere reactivation may have potential for treat age - relate disease in human .
cancer be characterize by uncontrolled cell division of abnormal cell .
the cell accumulate mutation , proliferate uncontrollably , and can migrate to different part of the body through a process call metastasis .
scientist have observe that cancerous cell have considerably shorten telomere and that telomerase be active in these cell .
interestingly , only after the telomere be shorten in the cancer cell do the telomerase become active .
if the action of telomerase in these cell can be inhibit by drug during cancer therapy , then the cancerous cell could potentially be stop from further division .
dna repair dna replication be a highly accurate process , but mistake can occasionally occur , such as a dna polymerase insert a wrong base .
uncorrected mistake may sometimes lead to serious consequence , such as cancer .
repair mechanism correct the mistake .
in rare case , mistake be not correct , lead to mutation  in other case , repair enzyme be - pron - mutate or defective .
most of the mistake during dna replication be promptly correct by dna polymerase by proofread the base that have be just add ( figure one  four  .  one  seven ) .
in proofreading , the dna pol read the newly add base before add the next one , so a correction can be make .
the polymerase check whether the newly add base have pair correctly with the base in the template strand .
if - pron - be the right base , the next nucleotide be add .
if an incorrect base have be add , the enzyme make a cut at the phosphodiester bond and release the wrong nucleotide .
this be perform by the exonuclease action of dna pol iii .
once the incorrect nucleotide have be remove , a new one will be add again .
some error be not correct during replication , but be instead correct after replication be complete  this type of repair be know as mismatch repair ( figure one  four  .  one  eight ) .
the enzyme recognize the incorrectly add nucleotide and excise - pron -  this be then replace by the correct base .
if this remain uncorrected , - pron - may lead to more permanent damage .
how do mismatch repair enzyme recognize which of the two base be the incorrect one ?
in e . coli , after replication , the nitrogenous base adenine acquire a methyl group  the parental dna strand will have methyl group , whereas the newly synthesize strand lack - pron - .
thus , dna polymerase be able to remove the wrongly incorporate base from the newly synthesize , nonmethylated strand .
in eukaryote , the mechanism be not very well understand , but - pron - be believe to involve recognition of unsealed nick in the new strand , as well as a short - term continue association of some of the replication protein with the new daughter
strand after replication have complete .
in mismatch repair , the incorrectly add base be detect after replication .
the mismatch repair protein detect this base and remove - pron - from the newly synthesize strand by nuclease action .
the gap be now fill with the correctly pair base .
in another type of repair mechanism , nucleotide excision repair , enzyme replace incorrect base by make a cut on both the three ' and five ' end of the incorrect base ( figure one  four  .  one  nine ) .
the segment of dna be remove and replace with the correctly pair nucleotide by the action of dna pol .
once the base be fill in , the remain gap be seal with a phosphodiester linkage catalyze by dna ligase .
this repair mechanism be often employ when uv exposure cause the formation of pyrimidine dimer .
nucleotide excision repair thymine dimer .
when expose to uv , thymine lie adjacent to each other can form thymine dimer .
in normal cell , - pron - be excise and replace .
a well - study example of mistake not be correct be see in people suffer from xeroderma pigmentosa ( figure one  four  .  two  zero ) .
affect individual have skin that be highly sensitive to uv ray from the sun .
when individual be expose to uv , pyrimidine dimer , especially those of thymine , be form  people with xeroderma pigmentosa be not able to repair the damage .
these be not repair because of a defect in the nucleotide excision repair enzyme , whereas in normal individual , the thymine dimer be excise and the defect be correct .
the thymine dimer distort the structure of the dna double helix , and this may because problem during dna replication .
people with xeroderma pigmentosa may have a high risk of contract skin cancer than those who do not have the condition .
xeroderma pigmentosa be a condition in which thymine dimerization from exposure to uv be not repair .
exposure to sunlight result in skin lesion .
( credit  james halpern et al . )
error during dna replication be not the only reason why mutation arise in dna .
mutation , variation in the nucleotide sequence of a genome , can also occur because of damage to dna .
such mutation may be of two type  induce or spontaneous .
induced mutation be those that result from an exposure to chemical , uv ray , x - ray , or some other environmental agent .
spontaneous mutation occur without any exposure to any environmental agent  - pron - be a result of natural reaction take place within the body .
mutation may have a wide range of effect .
some mutation be not express  these be know as silent mutation .
point mutation be those mutation that affect a single base pair .
the most common nucleotide mutation be substitution , in which one base be replace by another .
these can be of two type , either transition or transversion .
transition substitution refer to a purine or pyrimidine be replace by a base of the same kind  for example , a purine such as adenine may be replace by the purine guanine .
transversion substitution refer to a purine be replace by a pyrimidine , or vice versa  for example , cytosine , a pyrimidine , be replace by adenine , a purine .
mutation can also be the result of the addition of a base , know as an insertion , or the removal of a base , also know as deletion .
sometimes a piece of dna from one chromosome may get translocate to another chromosome or to another region of the same chromosome  this be also know as translocation .
these mutation type be show in .
mutation in repair gene have be know to because cancer .
many mutate repair gene have be implicate in certain form of pancreatic cancer , colon cancer , and colorectal cancer .
mutation can affect either somatic cell or germ cell .
if many mutation accumulate in a somatic cell , - pron - may lead to problem such as the uncontrolled cell division observe in cancer .
if a mutation take place in germ cell , the mutation will be pass on to the next generation , as in the case of hemophilia and xeroderma pigmentosa . 
genes and proteins genes , which be carry on ( a ) chromosome , be linearly organized instruction for make the rna and protein molecule that be necessary for all of process of life .
the ( b ) interleukin -  two protein and ( c ) alpha -  two uglobulin protein be just two example of the array of different molecular structure that be encode by gene .
introduction since the rediscovery of mendel 's work in one  nine  zero  zero , the definition of the gene have progress from an abstract unit of heredity to a tangible molecular entity capable of replication , expression , and mutation ( figure one  five  .  one ) .
gene be compose of dna and be linearly arrange on chromosome .
gene specify the sequence of amino acid , which be the building block of protein .
in turn , protein be responsible for orchestrate nearly every function of the cell .
both gene and the protein - pron - encode be absolutely essential to life as - pron - know - pron - .
the genetic code
the cellular process of transcription generate messenger rna ( mrna ) , a mobile molecular copy of one or more gene with an alphabet of a , c , g , and uracil ( u ) .
translation of the mrna template convert nucleotide - base genetic information into a protein product .
protein sequence consist of two  zero commonly occur amino acid  therefore , - pron - can be say that the protein alphabet consist of two  zero letter ( figure one  five  .  two ) .
each amino acid be define by a three - nucleotide sequence call the triplet codon .
different amino acid have different chemistry ( such as acidic versus basic , or polar and nonpolar ) and different structural constraint .
variation in amino acid sequence give rise to enormous variation in protein structure and function .
structure of the two  zero amino acid find in protein be show .
each amino acid be compose of an amino group ( nh three + ) , a carboxyl group ( coo - ) , and a side chain ( blue ) .
the side chain may be nonpolar , polar , or charge , as well as large or small .
- pron - be the variety of amino acid side chain that give rise to the incredible variation of protein structure and function .
the central dogma  dna encode rna  rna encodes
protein
the flow of genetic information in cell from dna to mrna to protein be describe by the central dogma ( figure one  five  .  three ) , which state that gene specify the sequence of mrnas , which in turn specify the sequence of protein .
the decoding of one molecule to another be perform by specific protein and rna .
because the information store in dna be so central to cellular function , - pron - make intuitive sense that the cell would make mrna copy of this information for protein synthesis , while keep the dna - pron - intact and protect .
the copying of dna to rna be relatively straightforward , with one nucleotide be add to the mrna strand for every nucleotide read in the dna strand .
the translation to protein be a bit more complex because three mrna nucleotide correspond to one amino acid in the polypeptide sequence .
however , the translation to protein be still systematic and colinear , such that nucleotide one to three correspond to amino acid one , nucleotide four to six correspond to amino acid two , and so on .
instruction on dna be transcribe onto messenger rna .
ribosome be able to read the genetic information inscribe on a strand of messenger rna and use this information to string amino acid together into a protein .
the genetic code be degenerate and universal
given the different number of " letter " in the mrna and protein
" alphabet , " scientist theorize that combination of nucleotide correspond to single amino acid .
nucleotide doublet would not be sufficient to specify every amino acid because there be only one  six possible two - nucleotide combination ( four  two ) .
in contrast , there be six  four possible nucleotide triplet ( four  three ) , which be far more than the number of amino acid .
scientist theorize that amino acid be encode by nucleotide triplet and that the genetic code be degenerate .
in other word , a give amino acid could be encode by more than one nucleotide triplet .
this be later confirm experimentally  francis crick and sydney brenner use the chemical mutagen proflavin to insert one , two , or three nucleotide into the gene of a virus .
when one or two nucleotide be insert , protein synthesis be completely abolish .
when three nucleotide be insert , the protein be synthesize and functional .
this demonstrate that three nucleotide specify each amino acid .
these nucleotide triplet be call codon .
the insertion of one or two nucleotide completely change the triplet read frame , thereby alter the message for every subsequent amino acid ( figure one  five  .  five ) .
though insertion of three nucleotide cause an extra amino acid to be insert during translation , the integrity of the rest of the protein be maintain .
scientist painstakingly solve the genetic code by translate synthetic mrnas in vitro and sequence the protein - pron - specify ( figure one  five  .  four ) .
this figure show the genetic code for translate each nucleotide triplet in mrna into an amino acid or a termination signal in a nascent protein .
( credit  modification of work by nih )
in addition to instruct the addition of a specific amino acid to a polypeptide chain , three of the six  four codon terminate protein synthesis and release the polypeptide from the translation machinery .
these triplet be call nonsense codon , or stop codon .
another codon , aug , also have a special function .
in addition to specify the amino acid methionine , - pron - also serve as the start codon to initiate translation .
the reading frame for translation be set by the aug start codon near the five ' end of the mrna .
the genetic code be universal .
with a few exception , virtually all specie use the same genetic code for protein synthesis .
conservation of codon mean that a purified mrna encode the globin protein in horse could be transfer to a tulip cell , and the tulip would synthesize horse globin .
that there be only one genetic code be powerful evidence that all of life on earth share a common origin , especially consider that there be about one  zero  eight  four possible combination of two  zero amino acid and six  four triplet codon .
the deletion of two nucleotide shift the read frame of an mrna and change the entire protein message , create a nonfunctional protein or terminate protein synthesis altogether .
degeneracy be believe to be a cellular mechanism to reduce the negative impact of random mutation .
codon that specify the same amino acid typically only differ by one nucleotide .
in addition , amino acid with chemically similar side chain be encode by similar codon .
this nuance of the genetic code ensure that a single - nucleotide substitution mutation may either specify the same amino acid but have no effect or specify a similar amino acid , prevent the protein from be render completely nonfunctional .
question 
would a kiwifruit and strawberry
that be approximately the same size ( figure one  five  .  six ) also have approximately the same amount of dna ?
background 
gene be carry on chromosome and be make of dna .
all mammal be diploid , mean - pron - have two copy of each chromosome .
however , not all plant be diploid .
the common strawberry be octoploid ( eight n ) and the cultivate kiwi be hexaploid ( six n ) .
research the total number of chromosome in the cell of each of these fruit and think about how this may correspond to the amount of dna in these fruits' cell nucleus .
read about the technique of dna isolation to understand how each step in the isolation protocol help liberate and precipitate dna .
hypothesis  hypothesize whether - pron - would be able to detect a difference in dna quantity from similarly sized strawberry and kiwi .
which fruit do - pron - think would yield more dna ?
test - pron - hypothesis  isolate the dna from a strawberry and a kiwi that be similarly sized .
perform the experiment in at least triplicate for each fruit .
one .
prepare a bottle of dna extraction buffer from nine  zero  zero ml water , five  zero ml dish detergent , and two teaspoon of table salt .
mix by inversion (
cap - pron - and turn - pron - upside down a few time ) .
two .
grind a strawberry and a kiwifruit by hand in a plastic bag , or use a mortar and pestle , or with a metal bowl and the end of a blunt instrument .
grind for at least two minute per fruit .
three .
add one  zero ml of the dna extraction buffer to each fruit , and mix well for at least one minute .
four .
remove cellular debris by filter each fruit mixture through cheesecloth or porous cloth and into a funnel place in a test tube or an appropriate container .
five .
pour ice - cold ethanol or isopropanol ( rub alcohol ) into the test tube .
- pron - should observe white , precipitate dna .
six .
gather the dna from each fruit by wind - pron - around separate glass rod .
record - pron - observation  because - pron - be not quantitatively measure dna volume , - pron - can record for each trial whether the two fruit produce the same or different amount of dna as observe by eye .
if one or the other fruit produce noticeably more dna , record this as well .
determine whether - pron - observation be consistent with several piece of each fruit .
analyze - pron - datum 
do - pron - notice an obvious difference in the amount of dna produce by each fruit ?
be - pron - result reproducible ?
draw a conclusion
 give what - pron - know about the number of chromosome in each fruit , can - pron - conclude that chromosome number necessarily correlate to dna amount ?
can - pron - identify any drawback to this procedure ?
if - pron - have access to a laboratory , how could - pron - standardize - pron - comparison and make - pron - more quantitative ?
prokaryotic transcription
the prokaryote , which include bacteria and archaea , be mostly single - cell organism that , by definition , lack membranebound nucleus and other organelle .
a bacterial chromosome be a covalently closed circle that , unlike eukaryotic chromosome , be not organize around histone protein .
the central region of the cell in which prokaryotic dna reside be call the nucleoid .
in addition , prokaryote often have abundant plasmid , which be short circular dna molecule that may only contain one or a few gene .
plasmid can be transfer independently of the bacterial chromosome during cell division and often carry trait such as antibiotic resistance .
transcription in prokaryote ( and in eukaryote ) require the dna double helix to partially unwind in the region of mrna synthesis .
the region of unwinding be call a transcription bubble .
transcription always proceed from the same dna strand for each gene , which be call the template strand .
the mrna product be complementary to the template strand and be almost identical to the other dna strand , call the nontemplate strand .
the only difference be that in mrna , all of the t nucleotide be replace with u nucleotide .
in an rna double helix , a can bind u via two hydrogen bond , just as in a – t pairing in a dna double helix .
the nucleotide pair in the dna double helix that correspond to the site from which the first five ' mrna nucleotide be transcribe be call the + one site , or the initiation site .
nucleotide precede the initiation site be give negative number and be designate upstream .
conversely , nucleotide follow the initiation site be denote with " + " numbering and be call downstream nucleotide .
initiation of transcription in prokaryotes prokaryotes do not have membrane - enclose nucleus .
therefore , the process of transcription , translation , and mrna degradation can all occur simultaneously .
the intracellular level of a bacterial protein can quickly be amplify by multiple transcription and translation event occur concurrently on the same dna template .
prokaryotic transcription often cover more than one gene and produce polycistronic mrnas that specify more than one protein .
- pron - discussion here will exemplify transcription by describe this process in escherichia coli , a well - study bacterial specie .
although some difference exist between transcription in e . coli and transcription in archaea , an understanding of e . coli transcription can be apply to virtually all bacterial specie .
prokaryotic rna polymerase prokaryotes use the same rna polymerase to transcribe all of - pron - gene .
in e . coli , the polymerase be compose of five polypeptide subunit , two of which be identical .
four of these subunit , denote α , α , β , and β ' comprise the polymerase core enzyme .
these subunit assemble every time a gene be transcribe , and - pron - disassemble once transcription be complete .
each subunit have a unique role  the two α - subunit be necessary to assemble the polymerase on the dna  the β - subunit bind to the ribonucleoside triphosphate that will become part of the nascent " recently bear " mrna molecule  and the β ' bind the dna template strand .
the fifth subunit , σ , be involve only in transcription initiation .
- pron - confer transcriptional specificity such that the polymerase begin to synthesize mrna from an appropriate initiation site .
without σ , the core enzyme would transcribe from random site and would produce mrna molecule that specify protein gibberish .
the polymerase comprise of all five subunit be call the holoenzyme .
prokaryotic promoters
a promoter be a dna sequence onto which the transcription machinery bind and initiate transcription .
in most case , promoter exist upstream of the gene - pron - regulate .
the specific sequence of a promoter be very important because - pron - determine whether the correspond gene be transcribe all the time , some of the time , or infrequently .
although promoter vary among prokaryotic genome , a few element be conserve .
at the -  one  zero and -  three  five region upstream of the initiation site , there be two promoter consensus sequence , or region that be similar across all promoter and across various bacterial specie ( figure one  five  .  seven ) .
the -  one  zero consensus sequence , call the -  one  zero region , be tataat .
the -  three  five sequence , ttgaca , be recognize and bind by σ .
once this interaction be make , the subunit of the core enzyme bind to the site .
the a – t - rich -  one  zero region facilitate unwinding of the dna template , and several phosphodiester bond be make .
the transcription initiation phase end with the production of abortive transcript , which be polymer of approximately one  zero nucleotide that be make and release .
the σ subunit of prokaryotic rna polymerase recognize consensus sequence find in the promoter region upstream of the transcription start sight .
the σ subunit dissociate from the polymerase after transcription have be initiate .
elongation and termination in prokaryotes
the transcription elongation phase begin with the release of the σ subunit from the polymerase .
the dissociation of σ allow the core enzyme to proceed along the dna template , synthesize mrna in the five ' to three ' direction at a rate of approximately four  zero nucleotide per second .
as elongation proceed , the dna be continuously unwound ahead of the core enzyme and rewound behind - pron - ( figure one  five  .  eight ) .
the base pair between dna and rna be not stable enough to maintain the stability of the mrna synthesis component .
instead , the rna polymerase act as a stable linker between the dna template and the nascent rna strand to ensure that elongation be not interrupt prematurely .
during elongation , the prokaryotic rna polymerase track along the dna template , synthesize mrna in the five ' to three ' direction , and unwind and rewind the dna as - pron - be read .
prokaryotic termination signals once a gene be transcribe , the prokaryotic polymerase need to be instruct to dissociate from the dna template and liberate the newly make mrna .
depend on the gene being transcribe , there be two kind of termination signal .
one be protein - base and the other be rna - base .
rho - dependent termination be control by the rho protein , which track along behind the polymerase on the grow mrna chain .
near the end of the gene , the polymerase encounter a run of g nucleotide on the dna template and - pron - stall .
as a result , the rho protein collide with the polymerase .
the interaction with rho release the mrna from the transcription bubble .
rho - independent termination be control by specific sequence in the dna template strand .
as the polymerase near the end of the gene being transcribe , - pron - encounter a region rich in c – g nucleotide .
the mrna fold back on - pron - , and the complementary c – g nucleotide bind together .
the result be a stable hairpin that cause the polymerase to stall as soon as - pron - begin to transcribe a region rich in a – t nucleotide .
the complementary u –
a region of the mrna transcript form only a weak interaction with the template dna .
this , couple with the stall polymerase , induce enough instability for the core enzyme to break away and liberate the new mrna transcript .
upon termination , the process of transcription be complete .
by the time termination occur , the prokaryotic transcript would already have be use to begin synthesis of numerous copy of the encode protein because these process can occur concurrently .
the unification of transcription , translation , and even mrna degradation be possible because all of these process occur in the same five ' to three ' direction , and because there be no membranous compartmentalization in the prokaryotic cell ( figure one  five  .  nine ) .
in contrast , the presence of a nucleus in eukaryotic cell preclude simultaneous transcription and translation .
multiple polymerase can transcribe a single bacterial gene while numerous ribosome concurrently translate the mrna transcript into polypeptide .
in this way , a specific protein can rapidly reach a high concentration in the bacterial cell .
prokaryote and eukaryote perform fundamentally the same process of transcription , with a few key difference .
the most important difference between prokaryote and eukaryote be the latter 's membrane - bind nucleus and organell .
with the gene bind in a nucleus , the eukaryotic cell must be able to transport - pron - mrna to the cytoplasm and must protect - pron - mrna from degrade before - pron - be translate .
eukaryote also employ three different polymerase that each transcribe a different subset of gene .
eukaryotic mrnas be usually monogenic , mean that - pron - specify a single protein .
initiation of transcription in eukaryotes unlike the prokaryotic polymerase that can bind to a dna template on - pron - own , eukaryote require several other protein , call transcription factor , to first bind to the promoter region and then help recruit the appropriate polymerase .
the three eukaryotic rna polymerases the feature of eukaryotic mrna synthesis be markedly more complex those of prokaryote .
instead of a single polymerase comprise five subunit , the eukaryote have three polymerase that be each make up of one  zero subunit or more .
each eukaryotic polymerase also require a distinct set of transcription factor to bring - pron - to the dna template .
rna polymerase i be locate in the nucleolus , a specialize nuclear substructure in which ribosomal rna ( rrna ) be transcribe , process , and assemble into ribosome ( table one  five  .  one ) .
the rrna molecule be consider structural rna because - pron - have a cellular role but be not translate into protein .
the rrna be component of the ribosome and be essential to the process of translation .
rna polymerase
i synthesize all of the rrnas except for the five s rrna molecule .
the " s " designation apply to " svedberg
" unit , a nonadditive value that characterize the speed at which a particle sediment during centrifugation .
rna polymerase ii be locate in the nucleus and synthesize all protein - cod nuclear pre - mrnas .
eukaryotic premrnas undergo extensive processing after transcription but before translation .
for clarity , this module 's discussion of transcription and translation in eukaryote will use the term " mrnas " to describe only the mature , process molecule that be ready to be translate .
rna polymerase ii be responsible for transcribe the overwhelming majority of eukaryotic gene .
rna polymerase iii be also locate in the nucleus .
this polymerase transcribe a variety of structural rna that include the five s pre - rrna , transfer pre - rna ( pre - trnas ) , and small nuclear pre - rna .
the trnas have a critical role in translation  - pron - serve as the adaptor molecule between the mrna template and the grow polypeptide chain .
small nuclear rna have a variety of function , include " splice " pre - mrnas and regulating transcription factor .
a scientist characterize a new gene can determine which polymerase transcribe - pron - by test whether the gene be express in the presence of a particular mushroom poison , α - amanitin ( table one  five  .  one ) .
interestingly , α - amanitin produce by amanita phalloide , the death cap mushroom , affect the three polymerase very differently .
rna polymerase
i be completely insensitive to α - amanitin , mean that the polymerase can transcribe dna in vitro in the presence of this poison .
in contrast , rna polymerase ii be extremely sensitive to α - amanitin , and rna polymerase iii be moderately sensitive .
know the transcribing polymerase can clue a researcher into the general function of the gene be study .
because rna polymerase ii transcribe the vast majority of gene , - pron - will focus on this polymerase in - pron - subsequent discussion about eukaryotic transcription factor and promoter .
structure of an rna polymerase ii promoter eukaryotic promoter be much large and more complex than prokaryotic promoter , but both have a tata box .
for example , in the mouse thymidine kinase gene , the tata box be locate at approximately -  three  zero relative to the initiation ( + one ) site ( figure one  five  .  one  zero ) .
for this gene , the exact tata box sequence be tataaaa , as read in the five ' to three ' direction on the nontemplate strand .
this sequence be not identical to the e . coli tata box , but - pron - conserve the a – t rich element .
the thermostability of a – t bond be low and this help the dna template to locally unwind in preparation for transcription .
a generalize promoter of a gene transcribe by rna polymerase ii be show .
transcription factor recognize the promoter .
rna polymerase ii then bind and form the transcription initiation complex .
the mouse genome include one gene and two pseudogene for cytoplasmic thymidine kinase .
pseudogene be gene that have lose - pron - protein - cod ability or be no longer express by the cell .
these pseudogene be copy from mrna and incorporate into the chromosome .
for example , the mouse thymidine kinase promoter also have a conserve caat box ( ggccaatct ) at approximately -  eight  zero .
this sequence be essential and be involve in binding transcription factor .
further upstream of the tata box , eukaryotic promoter may also contain one or more gc - rich box ( ggcg ) or octamer box ( atttgcat ) .
these element bind cellular factor that increase the efficiency of transcription initiation and be often identify in more " active " gene that be constantly be express by the cell .
transcription factors for rna polymerase ii
the complexity of eukaryotic transcription do not end with the polymerase and promoter .
an army of basal transcription factor , enhancer , and silencer also help to regulate the frequency with which pre - mrna be synthesize from a gene .
enhancer and silencer affect the efficiency of transcription but be not necessary for transcription to proceed .
basal transcription factor be crucial in the formation of a preinitiation complex on the dna template that subsequently recruit rna polymerase ii for transcription initiation .
the name of the basal transcription factor begin with " tfii
"
( this be the transcription factor for rna polymerase ii ) and be specify with the letter a – j . the transcription factor systematically fall into place on the dna template , with each one further stabilize the preinitiation complex and contribute to the recruitment of rna polymerase ii .
the process of bring rna polymerase i and iii to the dna template involve slightly less complex collection of transcription factor , but the general theme be the same .
eukaryotic transcription be a tightly regulated process that require a variety of protein to interact with each other and with the dna strand .
although the process of transcription in eukaryote involve a great metabolic investment than in prokaryote , - pron - ensure that the cell transcribe precisely the pre - mrnas that - pron - need for protein synthesis .
the evolution of promoters
the evolution of gene may be a familiar concept .
mutation can occur in gene during dna replication , and the result may or may not be beneficial to the cell .
by alter an enzyme , structural protein , or some other factor , the process of mutation can transform function or physical feature .
however , eukaryotic promoter and other gene regulatory sequence may evolve as well .
for instance , consider a gene that , over many generation , become more valuable to the cell .
maybe the gene encode a structural protein that the cell need to synthesize in abundance for a certain function .
if this be the case , - pron - would be beneficial to the cell for that gene 's promoter to recruit transcription factor more efficiently and increase gene expression .
scientist examine the evolution of promoter sequence have report vary result .
in part , this be because - pron - be difficult to infer exactly where a eukaryotic promoter begin and end .
some promoter occur within gene  other be locate very far upstream , or even downstream , of the gene - pron - be regulate .
however , when researcher limit - pron - examination to human core promoter sequence that be define experimentally as sequence that bind the preinitiation complex , - pron - find that promoter evolve even faster than protein - cod gene .
- pron - be still unclear how promoter evolution may correspond to the evolution of human or other high organism .
however , the evolution of a promoter to effectively make more or less of a give gene product be an intriguing alternative to the evolution of the gene - pron - .
promoter structures for rna polymerases i and iii
in eukaryote , the conserved promoter element differ for gene transcribe by rna polymerase i , ii , and iii .
rna polymerase
i transcribe gene that have two gc - rich promoter sequence in the -  four  five to + two  zero region .
these sequence alone be sufficient for transcription initiation to occur , but promoter with additional sequence in the region from -  one  eight  zero to -  one  zero  five upstream of the initiation site will further enhance initiation .
gene that be transcribe by rna polymerase iii have upstream promoter or promoter that occur within the gene - pron - .
eukaryotic elongation and termination
follow the formation of the preinitiation complex , the polymerase be release from the other transcription factor , and elongation be allow to proceed as - pron - do in prokaryote with the polymerase synthesize pre - mrna in the five ' to three ' direction .
as discuss previously , rna polymerase ii transcribe the major share of eukaryotic gene , so this section will focus on how this polymerase accomplish elongation and termination .
although the enzymatic process of elongation be essentially the same in eukaryote and prokaryote , the dna template be more complex .
when eukaryotic cell be not divide , - pron - gene exist as a diffuse mass of dna and protein call chromatin .
the dna be tightly package around charge histone protein at repeat interval .
these dna – histone histone like thread around a spool .
for polynucleotide synthesis to occur , the transcription machinery need to move histone out of the way every time - pron - encounter a nucleosome .
this be accomplish by a special protein complex call fact , which stand for " facilitate chromatin transcription .
"
this complex pull histone away from the dna template as the polymerase move along - pron - .
once the pre - mrna be synthesize , the fact complex replace the histone to recreate the nucleosome .
the termination of transcription be different for the different polymerase .
unlike in prokaryote , elongation by rna polymerase ii in eukaryote take place one  ,  zero  zero  zero – two  ,  zero  zero  zero nucleotide beyond the end of the gene be transcribe .
this premrna tail be subsequently remove by cleavage during mrna processing .
on the other hand , rna polymeras i and iii require termination signal .
gene transcribe by rna polymerase i contain a specific one  eight  - nucleotide sequence that be recognize by a termination protein .
the process of termination in rna polymerase iii involve an mrna hairpin similar to rho - independent termination of transcription in prokaryote .
rna processing in eukaryotes
after transcription , eukaryotic pre - mrnas must undergo several processing step before - pron - can be translate .
eukaryotic ( and prokaryotic ) trnas and rrnas also undergo processing before - pron - can function as component in the protein synthesis machinery .
mrna process the eukaryotic pre - mrna undergoe extensive processing before - pron - be ready to be translate .
the additional step involve in eukaryotic mrna maturation create a molecule with a much long half - life than a prokaryotic mrna .
eukaryotic mrnas last for several hour , whereas the typical e . coli mrna last no more than five second .
pre - mrnas be first coat in rna - stabilize protein  these protect the pre - mrna from degradation while - pron - be process and export out of the nucleus .
the three most important step of pre - mrna processing be the addition of stabilize and signaling factor at the five ' and three ' end of the molecule , and the removal of intervene sequence that do not specify the appropriate amino acid .
in rare case , the mrna transcript can be "
edit " after - pron - be transcribe .
rna editing in trypanosomes
the trypanosome be a group of protozoa that include the pathogen trypanosoma brucei , which cause sleep sickness in human ( figure one  five  .  one  two ) .
trypanosome , and virtually all other eukaryote , have organelle call mitochondria that supply the cell with chemical energy .
mitochondrion be organelle that express - pron - own dna and be believe to be the remnant of a symbiotic relationship between a eukaryote and an engulf prokaryote .
the mitochondrial dna of trypanosome exhibit an interesting exception to the central dogma  - pron - pre - mrnas do not have the correct information to specify a functional protein .
usually , this be because the mrna be miss several u nucleotide .
the cell perform an additional rna processing step call rna editing to remedy this .
trypanosoma brucei be the causative agent of sleep sickness in human .
the mrnas of this pathogen must be modify by the addition of nucleotide before protein synthesis can occur .
( credit  modification of work by torsten ochsenreiter )
other gene in the mitochondrial genome encode four  zero  - to eight  zero  - nucleotide guide rna .
one or more of these molecule interact by complementary base pair with some of the nucleotide in the pre - mrna transcript .
however , the guide rna have more a nucleotide than the pre - mrna have u nucleotide to bind with .
in these region , the guide rna loop out .
the three ' end of guide rna have a long poly - u tail , and these u base be insert in region of the pre - mrna transcript at which the guide rna be loop .
this process be entirely mediate by rna molecule .
that is , guide rna — rather than protein — serve as the catalyst in rna editing .
rna editing be not just a phenomenon of trypanosome .
in the mitochondria of some plant , almost all pre - mrnas be edit .
rna editing have also be identify in mammal such as rat , rabbit , and even human .
what could be the evolutionary reason for this additional step in pre - mrna processing ?
one possibility be that the mitochondria , be remnant of ancient prokaryote , have an equally ancient rnabased method for regulate gene expression .
in support of this hypothesis , edit make to pre - mrnas differ depend on cellular condition .
although speculative , the process of rna editing may be a holdover from a primordial time when rna molecule , instead of protein , be responsible for catalyze reaction .
five ' cap while the pre - mrna be still be synthesize , a seven  - methylguanosine cap be add to the five ' end of the grow transcript by a phosphate linkage .
this moiety ( functional group ) protect the nascent mrna from degradation .
in addition , factor involve in protein synthesis recognize the cap to help initiate translation by ribosome .
three ' poly - a tail once elongation be complete , the pre - mrna be cleave by an endonuclease between an aauaaa consensus sequence and a gu - rich sequence , leave the aauaaa sequence on the pre - mrna .
an enzyme call poly - a polymerase then add a string of approximately two  zero  zero a residue , call the poly - a tail .
this modification further protect the pre - mrna from degradation and signal the export of the cellular factor that the transcript need to the cytoplasm .
pre - mrna splicing eukaryotic gene be compose of exon , which correspond to protein - cod sequence ( ex - on signifie that - pron - be express ) , and intervene sequence call intron ( int - ron denote - pron - intervene role ) , which may be involve in gene regulation but be remove from the pre - mrna during processing .
intron sequence in mrna do not encode functional protein .
the discovery of intron come as a surprise to researcher in the one  nine  seven  zero who expect that pre - mrnas would specify protein sequence without further processing , as - pron - have observe in prokaryote .
the gene of high eukaryote very often contain one or more intron .
these region may correspond to regulatory sequence  however , the biological significance of have many intron or have very long intron in a gene be unclear .
- pron - be possible that intron slow down gene expression because - pron - take long to transcribe pre - mrnas with lot of intron .
alternatively , intron may be nonfunctional sequence remnant leave over from the fusion of ancient gene throughout evolution .
this be support by the fact that separate exon often encode separate protein subunit or domain .
for the most part , the sequence of intron can be mutate without ultimately affect the protein product .
all of a pre - mrna 's intron must be completely and precisely remove before protein synthesis .
if the process err by even a single nucleotide , the read frame of the rejoin exon would shift , and the result protein would be dysfunctional .
the process of remove intron and reconnect exon be call splicing ( figure one  five  .  one  three ) .
intron be remove and degrade while the pre - mrna be still in the nucleus .
splicing occur by a sequence - specific mechanism that ensure intron will be remove and exon rejoin with the accuracy and precision of a single nucleotide .
the splicing of pre - mrnas be conduct by complex of protein and rna molecule call spliceosome .
pre - mrna splicing involve the precise removal of intron from the primary rna transcript .
the splicing process be catalyze by protein complex call spliceosome that be compose of protein and rna molecule call snrnas .
spliceosome recognize sequence at the five ' and three ' end of the intron .
error in splicing be implicate in cancer and other human disease .
what kind of mutation may lead to splicing error ?
think of different possible outcome if splicing error occur .
note that more than seven  zero individual intron can be present , and each have to undergo the process of splicing — in addition to five ' capping and the addition of a poly - a tail — just to generate a single , translatable mrna molecule .
processing of trnas and rrnas
the trnas and rrna be structural molecule that have role in protein synthesis  however , these rna be not - pron - translate .
pre - rrnas be transcribe , process , and assemble into ribosome in the nucleolus .
pre - trnas be transcribe and process in the nucleus and then release into the cytoplasm where - pron - be link to free amino acid for protein synthesis .
most of the trnas and rrnas in eukaryote and prokaryote be first transcribe as a long precursor molecule that span multiple rrnas or trnas .
enzyme then cleave the precursor into subunit correspond to each structural rna .
some of the base of pre - rrnas be methylat  that is , a –ch three moiety ( methyl functional group ) be add for stability .
pretrna molecule also undergo methylation .
as with pre - mrnas , subunit excision occur in eukaryotic pre - rna destine to become trnas or rrnas .
mature rrnas make up approximately five  zero percent of each ribosome .
some of a ribosome 's rna molecule be purely structural , whereas other have catalytic or bind activity .
mature
trnas take on a three - dimensional structure through intramolecular hydrogen bonding to position the amino acid bind site at one end and the anticodon at the other end ( figure one  five  .  one  four ) .
the anticodon be a three - nucleotide sequence in a trna that interact with an mrna codon through complementary base pairing .
this be a space - fill model of a trna molecule that add the amino acid phenylalanine to a grow polypeptide chain .
the anticodon aag bind the codon uuc on the mrna .
the amino acid phenylalanine be attach to the other end of the trna .
the synthesis of protein consume more of a cell 's energy than any other metabolic process .
in turn , protein account for more mass than any other component of live organism ( with the exception of water ) , and protein perform virtually every function of a cell .
the process of translation , or protein synthesis , involve the decoding of an mrna message into a polypeptide product .
amino acid be covalently strung together by interlink peptide bond in length range from approximately five  zero amino acid residue to more than one  ,  zero  zero  zero .
each individual amino acid have an amino group ( nh two ) and a carboxyl ( cooh ) group .
polypeptide be form when the amino group of one amino acid form an amide ( i . e . , peptide ) bond with the carboxyl group of another amino acid ( figure one  five  .  one  five ) .
this reaction be catalyze by ribosome and generate one water molecule .
a peptide bond link the carboxyl end of one amino acid with the amino end of another , expel one water molecule .
for simplicity in this image , only the functional group involve in the peptide bond be show .
the r and r ' designation refer to the rest of each amino acid structure .
the protein synthesis machinery
in addition to the mrna template , many molecule and macromolecule contribute to the process of translation .
the composition of each component may vary across specie  for instance , ribosome may consist of different number of rrnas and polypeptide depend on the organism .
however , the general structure and function of the protein synthesis machinery be comparable from bacteria to human cell .
translation require the input of an mrna template , ribosome , trnas , and various enzymatic factor .
ribosome even before an mrna be translate , a cell must invest energy to build each of - pron - ribosome .
in e . coli , there be between one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero and seven  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero ribosome present in each cell at any give time .
a ribosome be a complex macromolecule compose of structural and catalytic rrnas , and many distinct polypeptide .
in eukaryote , the nucleolus be completely specialized for the synthesis and assembly of rrnas .
ribosome exist in the cytoplasm in prokaryote and in the cytoplasm and rough endoplasmic reticulum in eukaryote .
mitochondrion and chloroplast also have - pron - own ribosome in the matrix and stroma , which look more similar to prokaryotic ribosome ( and have similar drug sensitivity ) than the ribosome just outside - pron - outer membrane in the cytoplasm .
ribosome dissociate into large and small subunit when - pron - be not synthesize protein and reassociate during the initiation of translation .
in e . coli , the small subunit be describe as three  zero s , and the large subunit be five  zero s , for a total of seven  zero s ( recall that svedberg unit be not additive ) .
mammalian ribosome have a small four  zero s subunit and a large six  zero s subunit , for a total of eight  zero s .
the small subunit be responsible for bind the mrna template , whereas the large subunit sequentially bind trnas .
each mrna molecule be simultaneously translate by many ribosome , all synthesize protein in the same direction  read the mrna from five ' to three ' and synthesize the polypeptide from the n terminus to the c terminus .
the complete mrna / poly - ribosome structure be call a polysome .
trnas
the trnas be structural rna molecule that be transcribe from gene by rna polymerase iii .
depend on the specie , four  zero to six  zero type of trnas exist in the cytoplasm .
serve as adaptor , specific trnas bind to sequence on the mrna template and add the correspond amino acid to the polypeptide chain .
therefore , trnas be the molecule that actually " translate " the language of rna into the language of protein .
of the six  four possible mrna codon — or triplet combination of a , u , g , and c — three specify the termination of protein synthesis and six  one specify the addition of amino acid to the polypeptide chain .
of these six  one , one codon ( aug ) also encode the initiation of translation .
each trna anticodon can base pair with one of the mrna codon and add an amino acid or terminate translation , accord to the genetic code .
for instance , if the sequence cua occur on an mrna template in the proper reading frame , - pron - would bind a trna express the complementary sequence , gau , which would be link to the amino acid leucine .
as the adaptor molecule of translation , - pron - be surprising that trnas can fit so much specificity into such a small package .
consider that trnas need to interact with three factor  one ) - pron - must be recognize by the correct aminoacyl synthetase ( see below )  two ) - pron - must be recognize by ribosome  and three ) - pron - must bind to the correct sequence in mrna .
aminoacyl trna synthetases the process of pre - trna synthesis by rna polymerase iii only create the rna portion of the adaptor molecule .
the correspond amino acid must be add later , once the trna be process and export to the cytoplasm .
through the process of trna " charge , " each trna molecule be link to - pron - correct amino acid by a group of enzyme call aminoacyl trna synthetas .
at least one type of aminoacyl trna synthetase exist for each of the two  zero amino acid  the exact number of aminoacyl trna synthetas varie by specie .
these enzyme first bind and hydrolyze atp to catalyze a high - energy bond between an amino acid and adenosine monophosphate ( amp )  a pyrophosphate molecule be expel in this reaction .
the activate amino acid be then transfer to the trna , and amp be release .
the mechanism of protein synthesis
as with mrna synthesis , protein synthesis can be divide into three phase  initiation , elongation , and termination .
the process of translation be similar in prokaryote and eukaryote .
here - pron - will explore how translation occur in e . coli , a representative prokaryote , and specify any difference between prokaryotic and eukaryotic translation .
initiation of translation protein synthesis begin with the formation of an initiation complex .
in e . coli , this complex involve the small three  zero s ribosome , the mrna template , three initiation factor ( if  if -  one , if -  two , and if -  three ) , and a special initiator trna , call trnaf met .
the initiator trna interact with the start codon aug ( or rarely , gug ) , link to a formylat methionine call fmet , and can also bind if -  two .
formylat methionine be insert by fmet − trnaf met at the beginning of every polypeptide chain synthesize by e . coli , but - pron - be usually clip off after translation be complete .
when an in - frame aug be encounter during translation elongation , a non - formylat methionine be insert by a regular met - trnamet .
in e . coli mrna , a sequence upstream of the first aug codon , call the shine - dalgarno sequence ( aggagg ) , interact with the rrna molecule that compose the ribosome .
this interaction anchor the three  zero s ribosomal subunit at the correct location on the mrna template .
guanosine triphosphate ( gtp ) , which be a purine nucleotide triphosphate , act as an energy source during translation — both at the start of elongation and during the ribosome 's translocation .
in eukaryote , a similar initiation complex form , comprise mrna , the four  zero s small ribosomal subunit , if , and nucleoside triphosphate ( gtp and atp ) .
the charge initiator trna , call met - trnai , do not bind fmet in eukaryote , but be distinct from other met - trnas in that - pron - can bind if .
instead of deposit at the shine - dalgarno sequence , the eukaryotic initiation complex recognize the seven  - methylguanosine cap at the five ' end of the mrna .
a cap - bind protein ( cbp ) and several other if assist the movement of the ribosome to the five ' cap .
once at the cap , the initiation complex track along the mrna in the five ' to three ' direction , search for the aug start codon .
many eukaryotic mrna be translate from the first aug , but this be not always the case .
accord to kozak 's rule , the nucleotide around the aug indicate whether - pron - be the correct start codon .
kozak 's rule state that the follow consensus sequence must appear around the aug of vertebrate gene  five  ' - gccrccaugg -  three ' .
the r ( for purine ) indicate a site that can be either a or g , but can not be c or u .
essentially , the close the sequence be to this consensus , the high the efficiency of translation .
once the appropriate aug be identify , the other protein and cbp dissociate , and the six  zero s subunit bind to the complex of met - trnai , mrna , and the four  zero s subunit .
this step complete the initiation of translation in eukaryote .
translation , elongation , and termination
in prokaryote and eukaryote , the basic of elongation be the same , so - pron - will review elongation from the perspective of e . coli .
the five  zero s ribosomal subunit of e . coli consist of three compartment  the a ( aminoacyl ) site bind incoming charge aminoacyl trnas .
the p ( peptidyl ) site bind charge trnas carry amino acid that have form peptide bond with the grow polypeptide chain but have not yet dissociate from - pron - corresponding trna .
the e ( exit ) site release dissociate trnas so that - pron - can be recharge with free amino acid .
there be one exception to this assembly line of trnas  in e . coli , fmet − trnaf met be capable of enter the p site directly without first enter the a site .
similarly , the eukaryotic met - trnai , with help from other protein of the initiation complex , bind directly to the p site .
in both case , this create an initiation complex with a free a site ready to accept the trna correspond to the first codon after the aug .
during translation elongation , the mrna template provide specificity .
as the ribosome move along the mrna , each mrna codon come into register , and specific bind with the correspond charge trna anticodon be ensure .
if mrna be not present in the elongation complex , the ribosome would bind trnas nonspecifically .
elongation proceed with charge trnas enter the a site and then shift to the p site follow by the e site with each single - codon " step " of the ribosome .
ribosomal step be induce by conformational change that advance the ribosome by three base in the three ' direction .
the energy for each step of the ribosome be donate by an elongation factor that hydrolyze gtp .
peptide bond form between the amino group of the amino acid attach to the a - site trna and the carboxyl group of the amino acid attach to the p - site trna .
the formation of each peptide bond be catalyze by peptidyl transferase , an rna - base enzyme that be integrate into the five  zero s ribosomal subunit .
the energy for each peptide bond formation be derive from gtp hydrolysis , which be catalyze by a separate elongation factor .
the amino acid bind to the p - site trna be also link to the grow polypeptide chain .
as the ribosome step across the mrna , the former p - site trna enter the e site , detach from the amino acid , and be expel ( figure one  five  .  one  six ) .
amazingly , the e . coli translation apparatus take only zero  .  zero  five second to add each amino acid , mean that a two  zero  zero  - amino acid protein can be translate in just one  zero second .
translation begin when an initiator trna anticodon recognize a codon on mrna .
the large ribosomal subunit join the small subunit , and a second trna be recruit .
as the mrna move relative to the ribosome , the polypeptide chain be form .
entry of a release factor into the a site terminate translation and the component dissociate .
many antibiotic inhibit bacterial protein synthesis .
for example , tetracycline block the a site on the bacterial ribosome , and chloramphenicol block peptidyl transfer .
what specific effect would - pron - expect each of these antibiotic to have on protein synthesis ?
termination of translation occur when a nonsense codon ( uaa , uag , or uga ) be encounter .
upon align with the a site , these nonsense codon be recognize by release factor in prokaryote and eukaryote that instruct peptidyl transferase to add a water molecule to the carboxyl end of the p - site amino acid .
this reaction force the p - site amino acid to detach from - pron - trna , and the newly make protein be release .
the small and large ribosomal subunit dissociate from the mrna and from each other  - pron - be recruit almost immediately into another translation initiation complex .
after many ribosome have complete translation , the mrna be degrade so the nucleotide can be reuse in another transcription reaction .
protein folding , modification , and targeting during and after translation , individual amino acid may be chemically modify , signal sequence may be append , and the new protein " fold " into a distinct three - dimensional structure as a result of intramolecular interaction .
a signal sequence be a short tail of amino acid that direct a protein to a specific cellular compartment .
these sequence at the amino end or the carboxyl end of the protein can be think of as the protein 's " train ticket " to - pron - ultimate destination .
other cellular factor recognize each signal sequence and help transport the protein from the cytoplasm to - pron - correct compartment .
for instance , a specific sequence at the amino terminus will direct a protein to the mitochondria or chloroplast ( in plant ) .
once the protein reach - pron - cellular destination , the signal sequence be usually clip off .
many protein fold spontaneously , but some protein require helper molecule , call chaperone , to prevent - pron - from aggregate during the complicated process of fold .
even if a protein be properly specify by - pron - correspond mrna , - pron - could take on a completely dysfunctional shape if abnormal temperature or ph condition prevent - pron - from fold correctly .
gene expression the genetic content of each somatic cell in an organism be the same , but not all gene be express in every cell .
the control of which gene be express dictate whether a cell be ( a ) an eye cell or ( b ) a liver cell .
- pron - be the differential gene expression pattern that arise in different cell that give rise to ( c ) a complete organism .
introduction
each somatic cell in the body generally contain the same dna .
a few exception include red blood cell , which contain no dna in - pron - mature state , and some immune system cell that rearrange - pron - dna while produce antibody .
in general , however , the gene that determine whether - pron - have green eye , brown hair , and how fast - pron - metabolize food be the same in the cell in - pron - eye and - pron - liver , even though these organ function quite differently .
if each cell have the same dna , how be - pron - that cell or organ be different ?
why do cell in the eye differ so dramatically from cell in the liver ?
whereas each cell share the same genome and dna sequence , each cell do not turn on , or express , the same set of gene .
each cell type need a different set of protein to perform - pron - function .
therefore , only a small subset of protein be express in a cell .
for the protein to be express , the dna must be transcribe into rna and the rna must be translate into protein .
in a give cell type , not all gene encode in the dna be transcribe into rna or translate into protein because specific cell in - pron - body have specific function .
specialized protein that make up the eye ( iris , lens , and cornea ) be only express in the eye , whereas the specialized protein in the heart ( pacemaker cell , heart muscle , and valve ) be only express in the heart .
at any give time , only a subset of all of the gene encode by - pron - dna be express and translate into protein .
the expression of specific gene be a highly regulated process with many level and stage of control .
this complexity ensure the proper expression in the proper cell at the proper time .
regulation of gene expression
for a cell to function properly , necessary protein must be synthesize at the proper time .
all cell control or regulate the synthesis of protein from information encode in - pron - dna .
the process of turn on a gene to produce rna and protein be call gene expression .
whether in a simple unicellular organism or a complex multi - cellular organism , each cell control when and how - pron - gene be express .
for this to occur , there must be a mechanism to control when a gene be express to make rna and protein , how much of the protein be make , and when - pron - be time to stop make that protein because - pron - be no longer need .
the regulation of gene expression conserve energy and space .
- pron - would require a significant amount of energy for an organism to express every gene at all time , so - pron - be more energy efficient to turn on the gene only when - pron - be require .
in addition , only express a subset of gene in each cell save space because dna must be unwound from - pron - tightly coil structure to transcribe and translate the dna .
cell would have to be enormous if every protein be express in every cell all the time .
the control of gene expression be extremely complex .
malfunction in this process be detrimental to the cell and can lead to the development of many disease , include cancer .
prokaryotic versus eukaryotic gene expression to understand how gene expression be regulate , - pron - must first understand how a gene code for a functional protein in a cell .
the process occur in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell , just in slightly different manner .
prokaryotic organism be single - cell organism that lack a cell nucleus , and - pron - dna therefore float freely in the cell cytoplasm .
to synthesize a protein , the process of transcription and translation occur almost simultaneously .
when the result protein be no longer need , transcription stop .
as a result , the primary method to control what type of protein and how much of each protein be express in a prokaryotic cell be the regulation of dna transcription .
all of the subsequent step occur automatically .
when more protein be require , more transcription occur .
therefore , in prokaryotic cell , the control of gene expression be mostly at the transcriptional level .
eukaryotic cell , in contrast , have intracellular organelle that add to - pron - complexity .
in eukaryotic cell , the dna be contain inside the cell 's nucleus and there - pron - be transcribe into rna .
the newly synthesize rna be then transport out of the nucleus into the cytoplasm , where ribosome translate the rna into protein .
the process of transcription and translation be physically separate by the nuclear membrane  transcription occur only within the nucleus , and translation occur only outside the nucleus in the cytoplasm .
the regulation of gene expression can occur at all stage of the process ( figure one  six  .  two ) .
regulation may occur when the dna be uncoil and loosen from nucleosome to bind transcription factor ( epigenetic level ) , when the rna be transcribe ( transcriptional level ) , when the rna be process and export to the cytoplasm after - pron - be transcribe ( post - transcriptional level ) , when the rna be translate into protein ( translational level ) , or after the protein have be make ( post - translational level ) .
prokaryotic transcription and translation occur simultaneously in the cytoplasm , and regulation occur at the transcriptional level .
eukaryotic gene expression be regulate during transcription and rna processing , which take place in the nucleus , and during protein translation , which take place in the cytoplasm .
further regulation may occur through post - translational modification of protein .
the difference in the regulation of gene expression between prokaryote and eukaryote be summarize in table one  six  .  one .
the regulation of gene expression be discuss in detail in subsequent module .
evolution of gene regulation prokaryotic cell can only regulate gene expression by control the amount of transcription .
as eukaryotic cell evolve , the complexity of the control of gene expression increase .
for example , with the evolution of eukaryotic cell come compartmentalization of important cellular component and cellular process .
a nuclear region that contain the dna be form .
transcription and translation be physically separate into two different cellular compartment .
- pron - therefore become possible to control gene expression by regulate transcription in the nucleus , and also by control the rna level and protein translation present outside the nucleus .
some cellular process arise from the need of the organism to defend - pron - .
cellular process such as gene silencing develop to protect the cell from viral or parasitic infection .
if the cell could quickly shut off gene expression for a short period of time , - pron - would be able to survive an infection when other organism could not .
therefore , the organism evolve a new process that help - pron - survive , and - pron - be able to pass this new development to offspring .
prokaryotic gene regulation
the dna of prokaryote be organize into a circular chromosome supercoil in the nucleoid region of the cell cytoplasm .
protein that be need for a specific function , or that be involve in the same biochemical pathway , be encode together in block call operon .
for example , all of the gene need to use lactose as an energy source be cod next to each other in the lactose ( or lac ) operon .
in prokaryotic cell , there be three type of regulatory molecule that can affect the expression of operon  repressor , activator , and inducer .
repressor be protein that suppress transcription of a gene in response to an external stimulus , whereas activator be protein that increase the transcription of a gene in response to an external stimulus .
finally , inducer be small molecule that either activate or repress transcription depend on the need of the cell and the availability of substrate .
the trp operon 
a repressor operon bacteria such as e . coli need amino acid to survive .
tryptophan be one such amino acid that e . coli can ingest from the environment .
e . coli can also synthesize tryptophan use enzyme that be encode by five gene .
these five gene be next to each other in what be call the tryptophan ( trp ) operon
( figure one  six  .  three ) .
if tryptophan be present in the environment , then e . coli do not need to synthesize - pron - and the switch control the activation of the gene in the trp operon be switch off .
however , when tryptophan availability be low , the switch control the operon be turn on , transcription be initiate , the gene be express , and tryptophan be synthesize .
the five gene that be need to synthesize tryptophan in e . coli be locate next to each other in the trp operon .
when tryptophan be plentiful , two tryptophan molecule bind the repressor protein at the operator sequence .
this physically block the rna polymerase from transcribe the tryptophan gene .
when tryptophan be absent , the repressor protein do not bind to the operator and the gene be transcribe .
a dna sequence that code for protein be refer to as the coding region .
the five coding region for the tryptophan biosynthesis enzyme be arrange sequentially on the chromosome in the operon .
just before the coding region be the transcriptional start site .
this be the region of dna to which rna polymerase bind to initiate transcription .
the promoter sequence be upstream of the transcriptional start site  each operon have a sequence within or near the promoter to which protein ( activator or repressor ) can bind and regulate transcription .
a dna sequence call the operator sequence be encode between the promoter region and the first trp cod gene .
this operator contain the dna code to which the repressor protein can bind .
when tryptophan be present in the cell , two tryptophan molecule bind to the trp repressor , which change shape to bind to the trp operator .
bind of the tryptophan – repressor complex at the operator physically prevent the rna polymerase from bind , and transcribe the downstream gene .
when tryptophan be not present in the cell , the repressor by - pron - do not bind to the operator  therefore , the operon be active and tryptophan be synthesize .
because the repressor protein actively bind to the operator to keep the gene turn off , the trp operon be negatively regulate and the protein that bind to the operator to silence trp expression be negative regulator .
catabolite activator protein ( cap ) 
an activator regulator just as the trp operon be negatively regulate by tryptophan molecule , there be protein that bind to the operator sequence that act as a positive regulator to turn gene on and activate - pron - .
for example , when glucose be scarce , e . coli bacteria can turn to other sugar source for fuel .
to do this , new gene to process these alternate gene must be transcribe .
when glucose level drop , cyclic amp ( camp ) begin to accumulate in the cell .
the camp molecule be a signal molecule that be involve in glucose and energy metabolism in e . coli .
when glucose level decline in the cell , accumulate camp bind to the positive regulator catabolite activator protein ( cap ) , a protein that bind to the promoter of operon that control the processing of alternative sugar .
when camp bind to cap , the complex bind to the promoter region of the gene that be need to use the alternate sugar source ( figure one  six  .  four ) .
in these operon , a cap bind site be locate upstream of the rna polymerase bind site in the promoter .
this increase the bind ability of rna polymerase to the promoter region and the transcription of the gene .
when glucose level fall , e . coli may use other sugar for fuel but must transcribe new gene to do so .
as glucose supply become limited , camp level increase .
this camp bind to the cap protein , a positive regulator that bind to an operator region upstream of the gene require to use other sugar source .
the lac operon 
an inducer operon
the third type of gene regulation in prokaryotic cell occur through inducible operon , which have protein that bind to activate or repress transcription depend on the local environment and the need of the cell .
the lac operon be a typical inducible operon .
as mention previously , e . coli be able to use other sugar as energy source when glucose concentration be low .
to do so , the camp – cap protein complex serve as a positive regulator to induce transcription .
one such sugar source be lactose .
the lac operon encode the gene necessary to acquire and process the lactose from the local environment .
cap bind to the operator sequence upstream of the promoter that initiate transcription of the lac operon .
however , for the lac operon to be activate , two condition must be meet .
first , the level of glucose must be very low or non - existent .
second , lactose must be present .
only when glucose be absent and lactose be present will the lac operon be transcribe ( figure one  six  .  five ) .
this make sense for the cell , because - pron - would be energetically wasteful to create the protein to process lactose if glucose be plentiful or lactose be not available .
transcription of the lac operon be carefully regulate so that - pron - expression only occur when glucose be limit and lactose be present to serve as an alternative fuel source .
if glucose be absent , then cap can bind to the operator sequence to activate transcription .
if lactose be absent , then the repressor bind to the operator to prevent transcription .
if either of these requirement be meet , then transcription remain off .
only when both condition be satisfied be the lac operon transcribe .
eukaryotic epigenetic gene regulation eukaryotic gene expression be more complex than prokaryotic gene expression because the process of transcription and translation be physically separate .
unlike prokaryotic cell , eukaryotic cell can regulate gene expression at many different level .
eukaryotic gene expression begin with control of access to the dna .
this form of regulation , call epigenetic regulation , occur even before transcription be initiate .
epigenetic control  regulating access to genes within the chromosome
the human genome encode over two  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero gene  each of the two  three pair of human chromosome encode thousand of gene .
the dna in the nucleus be precisely wind , fold , and compact into chromosome so that - pron - will fit into the nucleus .
- pron - be also organize so that specific segment can be access as need by a specific cell type .
the first level of organization , or pack , be the winding of dna strand around histone protein .
histone package and order dna into structural unit call nucleosome complex , which can control the access of protein to the dna region ( figure one  six  .  six a ) .
under the electron microscope , this winding of dna around histone protein to form nucleosome look like small bead on a string ( figure one  six  .  six b ) .
these bead ( histone protein ) can move along the string ( dna ) and change the structure of the molecule .
dna be fold around histone protein to create ( a ) nucleosome complex .
these nucleosome control the access of protein to the underlying dna .
when view through an electron microscope ( b ) , the nucleosome look like bead on a string .
( credit " micrograph " 
modification of work by chris woodcock )
if dna encode a specific gene be to be transcribe into rna , the nucleosome surround that region of dna can slide down the dna to open that specific chromosomal region and allow for the transcriptional machinery ( rna polymerase ) to initiate transcription ( figure one  six  .  seven ) .
nucleosome can move to open the chromosome structure to expose a segment of dna , but do so in a very control manner .
nucleosome can slide along dna .
when nucleosome be space closely together ( top ) , transcription factor can not bind and gene expression be turn off .
when the nucleosome be space far apart ( bottom ) , the dna be expose .
transcription factor can bind , allow gene expression to occur .
modification to the histone and dna affect nucleosome space .
in female , one of the two x chromosome be inactivate during embryonic development because of epigenetic change to the chromatin .
what impact do - pron - think these change would have on nucleosome packing ?
how the histone protein move be dependent on signal find on both the histone protein and on the dna .
these signal be tag add to histone protein and dna that tell the histone if a chromosomal region should be open or closed ( figure one  six  .  eight depict modification to histone protein and dna ) .
these tag be not permanent , but may be add or remove as need .
- pron - be chemical modification ( phosphate , methyl , or acetyl group ) that be attach to specific amino acid in the protein or to the nucleotide of the dna .
the tag do not alter the dna base sequence , but - pron - do alter how tightly wind the dna be around the histone protein .
dna be a negatively charge molecule  therefore , change in the charge of the histone will change how tightly wind the dna molecule will be .
when unmodified , the histone protein have a large positive charge  by add chemical modification like acetyl group , the charge become less positive .
the dna molecule - pron - can also be modify .
this occur within very specific region call cpg island .
these be stretch with a high frequency of cytosine and guanine dinucleotide dna pair ( cg ) find in the promoter region of gene .
when this configuration exist , the cytosine member of the pair can be methylat ( a methyl group be add ) .
this modification change how the dna interact with protein , include the histone protein that control access to the region .
highly methylated ( hypermethylat ) dna region with deacetylat histone be tightly coil and transcriptionally inactive .
histone protein and dna nucleotide can be modify chemically .
modification affect nucleosome spacing and gene expression .
( credit  modification of work by nih )
this type of gene regulation be call epigenetic regulation .
epigenetic mean " around genetic .
"
the change that occur to the histone protein and dna do not alter the nucleotide sequence and be not permanent .
instead , these change be temporary ( although - pron - often persist through multiple round of cell division ) and alter the chromosomal structure ( open or closed ) as need .
a gene can be turn on or off depend upon the location and modification to the histone protein and dna .
if a gene be to be transcribe , the histone protein and dna be modify surround the chromosomal region encoding that gene .
this open the chromosomal region to allow access for rna polymerase and other protein , call transcription factor , to bind to the promoter region , locate just upstream of the gene , and initiate transcription .
if a gene be to remain turn off , or silence , the histone protein and dna have different modification that signal a closed chromosomal configuration .
in this closed configuration , the rna polymerase and transcription factor do not have access to the dna and transcription can not occur ( figure one  six  .  seven ) .
eukaryotic transcription gene regulation
like prokaryotic cell , the transcription of gene in eukaryote require the action of an rna polymerase to bind to a sequence upstream of a gene to initiate transcription .
however , unlike prokaryotic cell , the eukaryotic rna polymerase require other protein , or transcription factor , to facilitate transcription initiation .
transcription factor be protein that bind to the promoter sequence and other regulatory sequence to control the transcription of the target gene .
rna polymerase by - pron - can not initiate transcription in eukaryotic cell .
transcription factor must bind to the promoter region first and recruit rna polymerase to the site for transcription to be establish .
the promoter and the transcription machinery genes be organize to make the control of gene expression easy .
the promoter region be immediately upstream of the coding sequence .
this region can be short ( only a few nucleotide in length ) or quite long ( hundred of nucleotide long ) .
the longer the promoter , the more available space for protein to bind .
this also add more control to the transcription process .
the length of the promoter be gene - specific and can differ dramatically between gene .
consequently , the level of control of gene expression can also differ quite dramatically between gene .
the purpose of the promoter be to bind transcription factor that control the initiation of transcription .
within the promoter region , just upstream of the transcriptional start site , reside the tata box .
this box be simply a repeat of thymine and adenine dinucleotide ( literally , tata repeat ) .
rna polymerase bind to the transcription initiation complex , allow transcription to occur .
to initiate transcription , a transcription factor ( tfiid ) be the first to bind to the tata box .
binding of tfiid recruit other transcription factor , include tfiib , tfiie , tfiif , and tfiih to the tata box .
once this complex be assemble , rna polymerase can bind to - pron - upstream sequence .
when bind along with the transcription factor , rna polymerase be phosphorylat .
this release part of the protein from the dna to activate the transcription initiation complex and place rna polymerase in the correct orientation to begin transcription  dna - bend protein bring the enhancer , which can be quite a distance from the gene , in contact with transcription factor and mediator protein ( figure one  six  .  nine ) .
an enhancer be a dna sequence that promote transcription .
each enhancer be make up of short dna sequence call distal control element .
activator bind to the distal control element interact with mediator protein and transcription factor .
two different gene may have the same promoter but different distal control element , enable differential gene expression .
in addition to the general transcription factor , other transcription factor can bind to the promoter to regulate gene transcription .
these transcription factor bind to the promoter of a specific set of gene .
- pron - be not general transcription factor that bind to every promoter complex , but be recruit to a specific sequence on the promoter of a specific gene .
there be hundred of transcription factor in a cell that each bind specifically to a particular dna sequence motif .
when transcription factor bind to the promoter just upstream of the encode gene , - pron - be refer to as a cis - act element , because - pron - be on the same chromosome just next to the gene .
the region that a particular transcription factor bind to be call the transcription factor bind site .
transcription factor respond to environmental stimulus that because the protein to find - pron - bind site and initiate transcription of the gene that be need .
enhancer and transcription
in some eukaryotic gene , there be region that help increase or enhance transcription .
these region , call enhancer , be not necessarily close to the gene - pron - enhance .
- pron - can be locate upstream of a gene , within the cod region of the gene , downstream of a gene , or may be thousand of nucleotide away .
enhancer region be bind sequence , or site , for transcription factor .
when a dna - bend protein bind , the shape of the dna change ( figure one  six  .  nine ) .
this shape change allow for the interaction of the activator bind to the enhancer with the transcription factor bind to the promoter region and the rna polymerase .
whereas dna be generally depict as a straight line in two dimension , - pron - be actually a three - dimensional object .
therefore , a nucleotide sequence thousand of nucleotide away can fold over and interact with a specific promoter .
turn genes
off  transcriptional repressors like prokaryotic cell , eukaryotic cell also have mechanism to prevent transcription .
transcriptional repressor can bind to promoter or enhancer region and block transcription .
like the transcriptional activator , repressor respond to external stimulus to prevent the binding of activate transcription factor .
eukaryotic post - transcriptional gene regulation rna be transcribe , but must be process into a mature form before translation can begin .
this processing after an rna molecule have be transcribe , but before - pron - be translate into a protein , be call post - transcriptional modification .
as with the epigenetic and transcriptional stage of processing , this post - transcriptional step can also be regulate to control gene expression in the cell .
if the rna be not process , shuttle , or translate , then no protein will be synthesize .
rna splicing , the first stage of post - transcriptional control
in eukaryotic cell , the rna transcript often contain region , call intron , that be remove prior to translation .
the region of rna that code for protein be call exon ( figure one  six  .  one  zero ) .
after an rna molecule have be transcribe , but prior to - pron - departure from the nucleus to be translate , the rna be process and the intron be remove by splicing .
alternative rna splicing
in the one  nine  seven  zero , gene be first observe that exhibit alternative rna splicing .
alternative rna splicing be a mechanism that allow different protein product to be produce from one gene when different combination of intron , and sometimes exon , be remove from the transcript ( figure one  six  .  one  one ) .
this alternative splicing can be haphazard , but more often - pron - be control and act as a mechanism of gene regulation , with the frequency of different splicing alternative control by the cell as a way to control the production of different protein product in different cell or at different stage of development .
alternative splicing be now understand to be a common mechanism of gene regulation in eukaryote  accord to one estimate , seven  zero percent of gene in human be express as multiple protein through alternative splicing .
how could alternative splicing evolve ?
intron have a beginning and end recognition sequence  - pron - be easy to imagine the failure of the splicing mechanism to identify the end of an intron and instead find the end of the next intron , thus remove two intron and the intervene exon .
in fact , there be mechanism in place to prevent such intron skipping , but mutation be likely to lead to - pron - failure .
such " mistake " would more than likely produce a nonfunctional protein .
indeed , the because of many genetic disease be alternative splicing rather than mutation in a sequence .
however , alternative splicing would create a protein variant without the loss of the original protein , open up possibility for adaptation of the new variant to new function .
gene duplication have play an important role in the evolution of new function in a similar way by provide gene that may evolve without eliminate the original , functional protein .
control of rna stability before the mrna leave the nucleus , - pron - be give two protective " cap " that prevent the end of the strand from degrade during - pron - journey .
the five ' cap , which be place on the five ' end of the mrna , be usually compose of a methylat guanosine triphosphate molecule ( gtp ) .
the poly - a tail , which be attach to the three ' end , be usually compose of a series of adenine nucleotide .
once the rna be transport to the cytoplasm , the length of time that the rna reside there can be control .
each rna molecule have a define lifespan and decay at a specific rate .
this rate of decay can influence how much protein be in the cell .
if the decay rate be increase , the rna will not exist in the cytoplasm as long , shorten the time for translation to occur .
conversely , if the rate of decay be decrease , the rna molecule will reside in the cytoplasm longer and more protein can be translate .
this rate of decay be refer to as the rna stability .
if the rna be stable , - pron - will be detect for long period of time in the cytoplasm .
bind of protein to the rna can influence - pron - stability .
protein , call rna - bind protein , or rbp , can bind to the region of the rna just upstream or downstream of the protein - cod region .
these region in the rna that be not translate into protein be call the untranslated region , or utr .
- pron - be not intron ( those have be remove in the nucleus ) .
rather , these be region that regulate mrna localization , stability , and protein translation .
the region just before the protein - cod region be call the five ' utr , whereas the region after the coding region be call the three ' utr ( figure one  six  .  one  two ) .
the binding of rbp to these region can increase or decrease the stability of an rna molecule , depend on the specific rbp that bind .
the protein - cod region of mrna be flank by five ' and three ' untranslated region ( utrs ) .
the presence of rna - bind protein at the five ' or three ' utr influence the stability of the rna molecule .
rna stability and micrornas
in addition to rbp that bind to and control ( increase or decrease )
rna stability , other element call micrornas can bind to the rna molecule .
these micrornas , or mirnas , be short rna molecule that be only two  one – two  four nucleotide in length .
the mirnas be make in the nucleus as long pre - mirnas .
these pre - mirnas be chop into mature mirnas by a protein call dicer .
like transcription factor and rbp , mature mirnas recognize a specific sequence and bind to the rna  however , mirnas also associate with a ribonucleoprotein complex call the rna - induce silence complex ( risc ) .
risc bind along with the mirna to degrade the target mrna .
together , mirnas and the risc complex rapidly destroy the rna molecule .
eukaryotic translational and post - translational gene regulation
after the rna have be transport to the cytoplasm , - pron - be translate into protein .
control of this process be largely dependent on the rna molecule .
as previously discuss , the stability of the rna will have a large impact on - pron - translation into a protein .
as the stability change , the amount of time that - pron - be available for translation also change .
the initiation complex and translation rate like transcription , translation be control by protein that bind and initiate the process .
in translation , the complex that assemble to start the process be refer to as the initiation complex .
the first protein to bind to the rna to initiate translation be the eukaryotic initiation factor -  two ( eif -  two ) .
the eif -  two protein be active when - pron - bind to the high - energy molecule guanosine triphosphate ( gtp ) .
gtp provide the energy to start the reaction by give up a phosphate and become guanosine diphosphate ( gdp ) .
the eif -  two protein bind to gtp bind to the small four  zero s ribosomal subunit .
when bind , the methionine initiator trna associate with the eif -  two  /  four  zero s ribosome complex , bring along with - pron - the mrna to be translate .
at this point , when the initiator complex be assemble , the gtp be convert into gdp and energy be release .
the phosphate and the eif -  two protein be release from the complex and the large six  zero s ribosomal subunit bind to translate the rna .
the binding of eif -  two to the rna be control by phosphorylation .
if eif -  two be phosphorylat , - pron - undergo a conformational change and can not bind to gtp .
therefore , the initiation complex can not form properly and translation be impede ( figure one  six  .  one  three ) .
when eif -  two remain unphosphorylated , - pron - bind the rna and actively translate the protein .
chemical modifications , protein activity , and longevity proteins can be chemically modify with the addition of group include methyl , phosphate , acetyl , and ubiquitin group .
the addition or removal of these group from protein regulate - pron - activity or the length of time - pron - exist in the cell .
sometimes these modification can regulate where a protein be find in the cell — for example , in the nucleus , the cytoplasm , or attach to the plasma membrane .
chemical modification occur in response to external stimulus such as stress , the lack of nutrient , heat , or ultraviolet light exposure .
these change can alter epigenetic accessibility , transcription , mrna stability , or translation — all result in change in expression of various gene .
this be an efficient way for the cell to rapidly change the level of specific protein in response to the environment .
because protein be involve in every stage of gene regulation , the phosphorylation of a protein ( depend on the protein that be modify ) can alter accessibility to the chromosome , can alter translation ( by alter transcription factor bind or function ) , can change nuclear shuttling ( by influence modification to the nuclear pore complex ) , can alter rna stability ( by bind or not bind to the rna to regulate - pron - stability ) , can modify translation ( increase or decrease ) , or can change post - translational modification ( add or remove phosphate or other chemical modification ) .
the addition of an ubiquitin group to a protein mark that protein for degradation .
ubiquitin act like a flag indicate that the protein lifespan be complete .
these protein be move to the proteasome , an organelle that function to remove protein , to be degrade ( figure one  six  .  one  four ) .
one way to control gene expression , therefore , be to alter the longevity of the protein .
cancer be not a single disease but include many different disease .
in cancer cell , mutation modify cell - cycle control and cell do not stop grow as - pron - normally would .
mutation can also alter the growth rate or the progression of the cell through the cell cycle .
one example of a gene modification that alter the growth rate be increase phosphorylation of cyclin b , a protein that control the progression of a cell through the cell cycle and serve as a cell - cycle checkpoint protein .
for cell to move through each phase of the cell cycle , the cell must pass through checkpoint .
this ensure that the cell have properly complete the step and have not encounter any mutation that will alter - pron - function .
many protein , include cyclin b , control these checkpoint .
the phosphorylation of cyclin b , a post - translational event , alter - pron - function .
as a result , cell can progress through the cell cycle unimped , even if mutation exist in the cell and - pron - growth should be terminate .
this post - translational change of cyclin b prevent - pron - from control the cell cycle and contribute to the development of cancer .
cancer  disease of altered gene expression cancer can be describe as a disease of altered gene expression .
there be many protein that be turn on or off ( gene activation or gene silencing ) that dramatically alter the overall activity of the cell .
a gene that be not normally express in that cell can be switch on and express at high level .
this can be the result of gene mutation or change in gene regulation ( epigenetic , transcription , post - transcription , translation , or post - translation ) .
change in epigenetic regulation , transcription , rna stability , protein translation , and post - translational control can be detect in cancer .
while these change do not occur simultaneously in one cancer , change at each of these level can be detect when observe cancer at different site in different individual .
therefore , change in histone acetylation ( epigenetic modification that lead to gene silencing ) , activation of transcription factor by phosphorylation , increase rna stability , increase translational control , and protein modification can all be detect at some point in various cancer cell .
scientist be work to understand the common change that give rise to certain type of cancer or how a modification may be exploit to destroy a tumor cell .
tumor suppressor genes , oncogenes , and cancer
in normal cell , some gene function to prevent excess , inappropriate cell growth .
these be tumor suppressor gene , which be active in normal cell to prevent uncontrolled cell growth .
there be many tumor suppressor gene in cell .
the most studied tumor suppressor gene be p five  three , which be mutate in over five  zero percent of all cancer type .
the p five  three protein - pron - function as a transcription factor .
- pron - can bind to site in the promoter of gene to initiate transcription .
therefore , the mutation of p five  three in cancer will dramatically alter the transcriptional activity of - pron - target gene .
proto - oncogene be positive cell - cycle regulator .
when mutate , proto - oncogene can become oncogene and because cancer .
overexpression of the oncogene can lead to uncontrolled cell growth .
this be because oncogene can alter transcriptional activity , stability , or protein translation of another gene that directly or indirectly control cell growth .
an example of an oncogene involve in cancer be a protein call myc .
myc be a transcription factor that be aberrantly activate in burkett 's lymphoma , a cancer of the lymph system .
overexpression of myc transform normal b cell into cancerous cell that continue to grow uncontrollably .
high b - cell number can result in tumor that can interfere with normal bodily function .
patient with burkett 's lymphoma can develop tumor on - pron - jaw or in - pron - mouth that interfere with the ability to eat .
cancer and epigenetic alterations silencing gene through epigenetic mechanism be also very common in cancer cell .
there be characteristic modification to histone protein and dna that be associate with silence gene .
in cancer cell , the dna in the promoter region of silence gene be methylat on cytosine dna residue in cpg island .
histone protein that surround that region lack the acetylation modification that be present when the gene be express in normal cell .
this combination of dna methylation and histone deacetylation ( epigenetic modification that lead to gene silencing ) be commonly find in cancer .
when these modification occur , the gene present in that chromosomal region be silence .
increasingly , scientist understand how epigenetic change be alter in cancer .
because these change be temporary and can be reverse — for example , by prevent the action of the histone deacetylase protein that remove acetyl group , or by dna methyl transferase enzyme that add methyl group to cytosin in dna
— - pron - be possible to design new drug and new therapy to take advantage of the reversible nature of these process .
indeed , many researcher be test how a silence gene can be switch back on in a cancer cell to help re - establish normal growth pattern .
gene involve in the development of many other illness , range from allergy to inflammation to autism , be think to be regulate by epigenetic mechanism .
as - pron - knowledge of how gene be control deepen , new way to treat disease like cancer will emerge .
cancer and transcriptional control alterations in cell that give rise to cancer can affect the transcriptional control of gene expression .
mutation that activate transcription factor , such as increase phosphorylation , can increase the binding of a transcription factor to - pron - bind site in a promoter .
this could lead to increase transcriptional activation of that gene that result in modify cell growth .
alternatively , a mutation in the dna of a promoter or enhancer region can increase the bind ability of a transcription factor .
this could also lead to the increase transcription and aberrant gene expression that be see in cancer cell .
researcher have be investigate how to control the transcriptional activation of gene expression in cancer .
identify how a transcription factor bind , or a pathway that activate where a gene can be turn off , have lead to new drug and new way to treat cancer .
in breast cancer , for example , many protein be overexpress .
this can lead to increase phosphorylation of key transcription factor that increase transcription .
one such example be the overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor ( egfr ) in a subset of breast cancer .
the egfr pathway activate many protein kinas that , in turn , activate many transcription factor that control gene involve in cell growth .
new drug that prevent the activation of egfr have be develop and be use to treat these cancer .
cancer and post - transcriptional control changes in the post - transcriptional control of a gene can also result in cancer .
recently , several group of researcher have show that specific cancer have alter expression of mirnas .
because mirnas bind to the three ' utr of rna molecule to degrade - pron - , overexpression of these mirnas could be detrimental to normal cellular activity .
too many mirnas could dramatically decrease the rna population lead to a decrease in protein expression .
several study have demonstrate a change in the mirna population in specific cancer type .
- pron - appear that the subset of mirnas express in breast cancer cell be quite different from the subset express in lung cancer cell or even from normal breast cell .
this suggest that alteration in mirna activity can contribute to the growth of breast cancer cell .
these type of study also suggest that if some mirnas be specifically express only in cancer cell , - pron - could be potential drug target .
- pron - would , therefore , be conceivable that new drug that turn off mirna expression in cancer could be an effective method to treat cancer .
cancer and translational / post - translational control
there be many example of how translational or post - translational modification of protein arise in cancer .
modification be find in cancer cell from the increase translation of a protein to change in protein phosphorylation to alternative splice variant of a protein .
an example of how the expression of an alternative form of a protein can have dramatically different outcome be see in colon cancer cell .
the c - flip protein , a protein involve in mediate the cell death pathway , come in two form  long ( c - flipl ) and short ( c - flips ) .
both form appear to be involve in initiate control cell death mechanism in normal cell .
however , in colon cancer cell , expression of the long form result in increase cell growth instead of cell death .
clearly , the expression of the wrong protein dramatically alter cell function and contribute to the development of cancer .
new drug to combat cancer 
targeted therapies scientist be use what be know about the regulation of gene expression in disease state , include cancer , to develop new way to treat and prevent disease development .
many scientist be design drug on the basis of the gene expression pattern within individual tumor .
this idea , that therapy and medicine can be tailor to an individual , have give rise to the field of personalize medicine .
with an increase understanding of gene regulation and gene function , medicine can be design to specifically target diseased cell without harm healthy cell .
some new medicine , call target therapy , have exploit the overexpression of a specific protein or the mutation of a gene to develop a new medication to treat disease .
one such example be the use of anti - egf receptor medication to treat the subset of breast cancer tumor that have very high level of the egf protein .
undoubtedly , more target therapy will be develop as scientist learn more about how gene expression change can because cancer .
clinical trial coordinator a clinical trial coordinator be the person manage the proceeding of the clinical trial .
this job include coordinate patient schedule and appointment , maintain detailed note , build the database to track patient ( especially for long - term follow - up study ) , ensure proper documentation have be acquire and accept , and work with the nurse and doctor to facilitate the trial and publication of the result .
a clinical trial coordinator may have a science background , like a nursing degree , or other certification .
people who have work in science lab or in clinical office be also qualified to become a clinical trial coordinator .
these job be generally in hospital  however , some clinic and doctor 's office also conduct clinical trial and may hire a coordinator .
biotechnology and genomics
in genomic , the dna of different organism be compare , enable scientist to create map with which to navigate the dna of different organism .
introduction
the study of nucleic acid begin with the discovery of dna , progress to the study of gene and small fragment , and have now explode to the field of genomic .
genomic be the study of entire genome , include the complete set of gene , - pron - nucleotide sequence and organization , and - pron - interaction within a species and with other specie .
the advance in genomic have be make possible by dna sequencing technology .
just as information technology have lead to google map that enable people to get detailed information about location around the globe , genomic information be use to create similar map of the dna of different organism .
these finding have help anthropologist to better understand human migration and have aid the field of medicine through the mapping of human genetic disease .
the way in which genomic information can contribute to scientific understanding be varied and quickly grow .
biotechnology biotechnology be the use of biological agent for technological advancement .
biotechnology be use for breed livestock and crop long before the scientific basis of these technique be understand .
since the discovery of the structure of dna in one  nine  five  three , the field of biotechnology have grow rapidly through both academic research and private company .
the primary application of this technology be in medicine ( production of vaccine and antibiotic ) and agriculture ( genetic modification of crop , such as to increase yield ) .
biotechnology also have many industrial application , such as fermentation , the treatment of oil spill , and the production of biofuel ( figure one  seven  .  two ) .
antibiotic be chemical produce by fungus , bacteria , and other organism that have antimicrobial property .
the first antibiotic discover be penicillin .
antibiotic be now commercially produce and test for - pron - potential to inhibit bacterial growth .
( credit " advertisement " 
modification of work by nih  credit " test plate " 
modification of work by don stalons / cdc  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
basic techniques to manipulate genetic material ( dna and rna )
to understand the basic technique use to work with nucleic acid , remember that nucleic acid be macromolecule make of nucleotide ( a sugar , a phosphate , and a nitrogenous base ) link by phosphodiester bond .
the phosphate group on these molecule each have a net negative charge .
an entire set of dna molecule in the nucleus be call the genome .
dna have two complementary strand link by hydrogen bond between the pair base .
the two strand can be separate by exposure to high temperature ( dna denaturation ) and can be reanneal by cool .
the dna can be replicate by the dna polymerase enzyme .
unlike dna , which be locate in the nucleus of eukaryotic cell , rna molecule leave the nucleus .
the most common type of rna that be analyze be the messenger rna ( mrna ) because - pron - represent the proteincod gene that be actively express .
however , rna molecule present some other challenge to analysis , as - pron - be often less stable than dna .
dna and rna extraction to study or manipulate nucleic acid , the dna or rna must first be isolate or extract from the cell .
various technique be use to extract different type of dna ( figure one  seven  .  three ) .
most nucleic acid extraction technique involve step to break open the cell and use enzymatic reaction to destroy all macromolecule that be not desire ( such as degradation of unwanted molecule and separation from the dna sample ) .
cell be break use a lysis buffer ( a solution which be mostly a detergent )  lysis mean " to split .
"
these enzyme break apart lipid molecule in the cell membrane and nuclear membrane .
macromolecule be inactivate use enzyme such as protease that break down protein , and ribonucleas ( rnases ) that break down rna .
the dna be then precipitate use alcohol .
human genomic dna be usually visible as a gelatinous , white mass .
the dna sample can be store frozen at – eight  zero ° c for several year .
this diagram show the basic method use for extraction of dna .
rna analysis be perform to study gene expression pattern in cell .
rna be naturally very unstable because rnase be commonly present in nature and very difficult to inactivate .
similar to dna , rna extraction involve the use of various buffer and enzyme to inactivate macromolecule and preserve the rna .
gel electrophoresis because nucleic acid be negatively charge ion at neutral or basic ph in an aqueous environment , - pron - can be mobilize by an electric field .
gel electrophoresis be a technique use to separate molecule on the basis of size , use this charge .
the nucleic acid can be separate as whole chromosome or fragment .
the nucleic acid be load into a slot near the negative electrode of a semisolid , porous gel matrix and pull toward the positive electrode at the opposite end of the gel .
small molecule move through the pore in the gel faster than large molecule  this difference in the rate of migration separate the fragment on the basis of size .
there be molecular weight standard sample that can be run alongside the molecule to provide a size comparison .
nucleic acid in a gel matrix can be observe use various fluorescent or color dye .
distinct nucleic acid fragment appear as band at specific distance from the top of the gel ( the negative electrode end ) on the basis of - pron - size ( figure one  seven  .  four ) .
a mixture of genomic dna fragment of vary size appear as a long smear , whereas uncut genomic dna be usually too large to run through the gel and form a single large band at the top of the gel .
show be dna fragment from seven sample run on a gel , stain with a fluorescent dye , and view under uv light .
( credit  james jacob , tompkins cortland community college ) amplification of nucleic acid fragments by polymerase chain reaction
although genomic dna be visible to the naked eye when - pron - be extract in bulk , dna analysis often require focus on one or more specific region of the genome .
polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) be a technique use to amplify specific region of dna for further analysis ( figure one  seven  .  five ) .
pcr be use for many purpose in laboratory , such as the cloning of gene fragment to analyze genetic disease , identification of contaminant foreign dna in a sample , and the amplification of dna for sequencing .
more practical application include the determination of paternity and detection of genetic disease .
polymerase chain reaction , or pcr , be use to amplify a specific sequence of dna .
primer — short piece of dna complementary to each end of the target sequence — be combine with genomic dna , taq polymerase , and deoxynucleotide .
taq polymerase be a dna polymerase isolate from the thermostable bacterium thermus aquaticus that be able to withstand the high temperature use in pcr .
thermus aquaticus grow in the lower geyser basin of yellowstone national park .
reverse transcriptase pcr ( rt - pcr ) be similar to pcr , but cdna be make from an rna template before pcr begin .
dna fragment can also be amplify from an rna template in a process call reverse transcriptase pcr ( rt - pcr ) .
the first step be to recreate the original dna template strand ( call cdna ) by apply dna nucleotide to the mrna .
this process be call reverse transcription .
this require the presence of an enzyme call reverse transcriptase .
after the cdna be make , regular pcr can be use to amplify - pron - .
hybridization , southern blotting , and northern blotting nucleic acid sample , such as fragmented genomic dna and rna extract , can be probe for the presence of certain sequence .
short dna fragment call probe be design and label with radioactive or fluorescent dye to aid detection .
gel electrophoresis separate the nucleic acid fragment accord to - pron - size .
the fragment in the gel be then transfer onto a nylon membrane in a procedure call blotting ( figure one  seven  .  six ) .
the nucleic acid fragment that be bind to the surface of the membrane can then be probe with specific radioactively or fluorescently label probe sequence .
when dna be transfer to a nylon membrane , the technique be call southern blotting , and when rna be transfer to a nylon membrane , - pron - be call northern blotting .
southern blot be use to detect the presence of certain dna sequence in a give genome , and northern blot be use to detect gene expression .
southern blotting be use to find a particular sequence in a sample of dna .
dna fragment be separate on a gel , transfer to a nylon membrane , and incubate with a dna probe complementary to the sequence of interest .
northern blotting be similar to southern blotting , but rna be run on the gel instead of dna .
in western blotting , protein be run on a gel and detect use antibody .
molecular clone
in general , the word " clone " mean the creation of a perfect replica  however , in biology , the re - creation of a whole organism be refer to as " reproductive cloning .
"
long before attempt be make to clone an entire organism , researcher learn how to reproduce desire region or fragment of the genome , a process that be refer to as molecular clone .
clone small fragment of the genome allow for the manipulation and study of specific gene ( and - pron - protein product ) , or noncod region in isolation .
a plasmid ( also call a vector ) be a small circular dna molecule that replicate independently of the chromosomal dna .
in clone , the plasmid molecule can be use to provide a " folder " in which to insert a desire dna fragment .
plasmid be usually introduce into a bacterial host for proliferation .
in the bacterial context , the fragment of dna from the human genome ( or the genome of another organism that be be study ) be refer to as foreign dna , or a transgene , to differentiate - pron - from the dna of the bacterium , which be call the host dna .
plasmid occur naturally in bacterial population ( such as escherichia coli ) and have gene that can contribute favorable trait to the organism , such as antibiotic resistance ( the ability to be unaffected by antibiotic ) .
plasmid have be repurpos and engineer as vector for molecular clone and the large - scale production of important reagent , such as insulin and human growth hormone .
an important feature of plasmid vector be the ease with which a foreign dna fragment can be introduce via the multiple clone site ( mcs ) .
the mcs be a short dna sequence contain multiple site that can be cut with different commonly available restriction endonuclease .
restriction endonuclease recognize specific dna sequence and cut - pron - in a predictable manner  - pron - be naturally produce by bacteria as a defense mechanism against foreign dna .
many restriction endonuclease make stagger cut in the two strand of dna , such that the cut end have a two  - or four  - base single - strand overhang .
because these overhang be capable of anneal with complementary overhang , these be call " sticky end .
"
addition of an enzyme call dna ligase permanently join the dna fragment via phosphodiester bond .
in this way , any dna fragment generate by restriction endonuclease cleavage can be splice between the two end of a plasmid dna that have be cut with the same restriction endonuclease ( figure one  seven  .  seven ) .
recombinant dna molecules plasmids with foreign dna insert into - pron - be call recombinant dna molecule because - pron - be create artificially and do not occur in nature .
- pron - be also call chimeric molecule because the origin of different part of the molecule can be trace back to different specie of biological organism or even to chemical synthesis .
protein that be express from recombinant dna molecule be call recombinant protein .
not all recombinant plasmid be capable of express gene .
the recombinant dna may need to be move into a different vector ( or host ) that be better design for gene expression .
plasmid may also be engineer to express protein only when stimulate by certain environmental factor , so that scientist can control the expression of the recombinant protein .
cellular clone unicellular organism , such as bacteria and yeast , naturally produce clone of - pron - when - pron - replicate asexually by binary fission  this be know as cellular cloning .
the nuclear dna duplicate by the process of mitosis , which create an exact replica of the genetic material .
reproductive clone reproductive cloning be a method use to make a clone or an identical copy of an entire multicellular organism .
most multicellular organism undergo reproduction by sexual mean , which involve genetic hybridization of two individual ( parent ) , make - pron - impossible for generation of an identical copy or a clone of either parent .
recent advance in biotechnology have make - pron - possible to artificially induce asexual reproduction of mammal in the laboratory .
parthenogenesis , or " virgin birth , " occur when an embryo grow and develop without the fertilization of the egg occur  this be a form of asexual reproduction .
an example of parthenogenesis occur in specie in which the female lay an egg and if the egg be fertilize , - pron - be a diploid egg and the individual develop into a female  if the egg be not fertilize , - pron - remain a haploid egg and develop into a male .
the unfertilized egg be call a parthenogenic , or virgin , egg .
some insect and reptile lie parthenogenic egg that can develop into adult .
sexual reproduction require two cell  when the haploid egg and sperm cell fuse , a diploid zygote result .
the zygote nucleus contain the genetic information to produce a new individual .
however , early embryonic development require the cytoplasmic material contain in the egg cell .
this idea form the basis for reproductive cloning .
therefore , if the haploid nucleus of an egg cell be replace with a diploid nucleus from the cell of any individual of the same specie ( call a donor ) , - pron - will become a zygote that be genetically identical to the donor .
somatic cell nuclear transfer be the technique of transfer a diploid nucleus into an enucleated egg .
- pron - can be use for either therapeutic cloning or reproductive cloning .
the first clone animal be dolly , a sheep who be bear in one  nine  nine  six .
the success rate of reproductive clone at the time be very low .
dolly live for seven year and die of respiratory complication ( figure one  seven  .  eight ) .
there be speculation that because the cell dna belong to an old individual , the age of the dna may affect the life expectancy of a clone individual .
since dolly , several animal such as horse , bull , and goat have be successfully clone , although these individual often exhibit facial , limb , and cardiac abnormality .
there have be attempt at produce clone human embryo as source of embryonic stem cell , sometimes refer to as clone for therapeutic purpose .
therapeutic cloning produce stem cell to attempt to remedy detrimental disease or defect ( unlike reproductive cloning , which aim to reproduce an organism ) .
still , therapeutic clone effort have meet with resistance because of bioethical consideration .
dolly the sheep be the first mammal to be clone .
to create dolly , the nucleus be remove from a donor egg cell .
the nucleus from a second sheep be then introduce into the cell , which be allow to divide to the blastocyst stage before be implant in a surrogate mother .
genetic engineering genetic engineering be the alteration of an organism 's genotype use recombinant dna technology to modify an organism 's dna to achieve desirable trait .
the addition of foreign dna in the form of recombinant dna vector generate by molecular cloning be the most common method of genetic engineering .
the organism that receive the recombinant dna be call a genetically modify organism ( gmo ) .
if the foreign dna that be introduce come from a different specie , the host organism be call transgenic .
bacteria , plant , and animal have be genetically modify since the early one  nine  seven  zero for academic , medical , agricultural , and industrial purpose .
in the us , gmo such as roundup - ready soybean and borer - resistant corn be part of many common process food .
gene targeting
although classical method of study the function of gene begin with a give phenotype and determine the genetic basis of that phenotype , modern technique allow researcher to start at the dna sequence level and ask  " what do this gene or dna element do ? "
this technique , call reverse genetic , have result in reverse the classic genetic methodology .
this method would be similar to damage a body part to determine - pron - function .
an insect that lose a wing can not fly , which mean that the function of the wing be flight .
the classical genetic method would compare insect that can not fly with insect that can fly , and observe that the non - fly insect have lose wing .
similarly , mutate or delete gene provide researcher with clue about gene function .
the method use to disable gene function be collectively call gene targeting .
gene targeting be the use of recombinant dna vector to alter the expression of a particular gene , either by introduce mutation in a gene , or by eliminate the expression of a certain gene by delete a part or all of the gene sequence from the genome of an organism .
biotechnology in medicine and agriculture
- pron - be easy to see how biotechnology can be use for medicinal purpose .
knowledge of the genetic makeup of - pron - specie , the genetic basis of heritable disease , and the invention of technology to manipulate and fix mutant gene provide method to treat the disease .
biotechnology in agriculture can enhance resistance to disease , pest , and environmental stress , and improve both crop yield and quality .
genetic diagnosis and gene therapy
the process of test for suspect genetic defect before administer treatment be call genetic diagnosis by genetic testing .
depend on the inheritance pattern of a disease - cause gene , family member be advise to undergo genetic testing .
for example , woman diagnose with breast cancer be usually advise to have a biopsy so that the medical team can determine the genetic basis of cancer development .
treatment plan be base on the finding of genetic test that determine the type of cancer .
if the cancer be cause by inherit gene mutation , other female relative be also advise to undergo genetic testing and periodic screening for breast cancer .
genetic testing be also offer for fetus ( or embryo with in vitro fertilization ) to determine the presence or absence of disease - cause gene in family with specific debilitate disease .
gene therapy be a genetic engineering technique use to cure disease .
in - pron - simple form , - pron - involve the introduction of a good gene at a random location in the genome to aid the cure of a disease that be cause by a mutate gene .
the good gene be usually introduce into diseased cell as part of a vector transmit by a virus that can infect the host cell and deliver the foreign dna ( figure one  seven  .  nine ) .
more advanced form of gene therapy try to correct the mutation at the original site in the genome , such as be the case with treatment of severe combined immunodeficiency ( scid ) .
production of vaccines , antibiotics , and hormones traditional vaccination strategy use weaken or inactive form of microorganism to mount the initial immune response .
modern technique use the gene of microorganism clone into vector to mass produce the desire antigen .
the antigen be then introduce into the body to stimulate the primary immune response and trigger immune memory .
gene clone from the influenza virus have be use to combat the constantly change strain of this virus .
antibiotic be a biotechnological product .
- pron - be naturally produce by microorganism , such as fungus , to attain an advantage over bacterial population .
antibiotic be produce on a large scale by cultivate and manipulate fungal cell .
recombinant dna technology be use to produce large - scale quantity of human insulin in e . coli as early as one  nine  seven  eight .
previously , - pron - be only possible to treat diabete with pig insulin , which cause allergic reaction in human because of difference in the gene product .
in addition , human growth hormone ( hgh ) be use to treat growth disorder in child .
the hgh gene be clone from a cdna library and insert into e . coli cell by clone - pron - into a bacterial vector .
transgenic animals
although several recombinant protein use in medicine be successfully produce in bacteria , some protein require a eukaryotic animal host for proper processing .
for this reason , the desire gene be clone and express in animal , such as sheep , goat , chicken , and mouse .
animal that have be modify to express recombinant dna be call transgenic animal .
several human protein be express in the milk of transgenic sheep and goat , and some be express in the egg of chicken .
mouse have be use extensively for express and study the effect of recombinant gene and mutation .
transgenic plant manipulate the dna of plant ( i . e . , create gmo ) have help to create desirable trait , such as disease resistance , herbicide and pesticide resistance , good nutritional value , and good shelf - life ( figure one  seven  .  one  zero ) .
plant be the most important source of food for the human population .
farmer develop way to select for plant variety with desirable trait long before modern - day biotechnology practice be establish .
plant that have receive recombinant dna from other specie be call transgenic plant .
because - pron - be not natural , transgenic plant and other gmo be closely monitor by government agency to ensure that - pron - be fit for human consumption and do not endanger other plant and animal life .
because foreign gene can spread to other specie in the environment , extensive testing be require to ensure ecological stability .
staple like corn , potato , and tomato be the first crop plant to be genetically engineer .
transformation of plants use agrobacterium tumefacien gene transfer occur naturally between specie in microbial population .
many virus that because human disease , such as cancer , act by incorporate - pron - dna into the human genome .
in plant , tumor cause by the bacterium agrobacterium tumefacien occur by transfer of dna from the bacterium to the plant .
although the tumor do not kill the plant , - pron - make the plant stunt and more susceptible to harsh environmental condition .
many plant , such as walnut , grape , nut tree , and beet , be affect by a . tumefacien .
the artificial introduction of dna into plant cell be more challenging than in animal cell because of the thick plant cell wall .
researcher use the natural transfer of dna from agrobacterium to a plant host to introduce dna fragment of - pron - choice into plant host .
in nature , the disease - cause a . tumefacien have a set of plasmid , call the ti plasmid ( tumorinducing plasmid ) , that contain gene for the production of tumor in plant .
dna from the ti plasmid integrate into the infected plant cell
's genome .
researcher manipulate the ti plasmid to remove the tumor - cause gene and insert the desire dna fragment for transfer into the plant genome .
the ti plasmid carry antibiotic resistance gene to aid selection and can be propagate in e . coli cell as well .
the organic insecticide bacillus thuringiensis bacillus thuringiensis ( bt ) be a bacterium that produce protein crystal during sporulation that be toxic to many insect specie that affect plant .
bt toxin have to be ingest by insect for the toxin to be activate .
insect that have eat bt toxin stop feed on the plant within a few hour .
after the toxin be activate in the intestine of the insect , death occur within a couple of day .
modern biotechnology have allow plant to encode - pron - own crystal bt toxin that act against insect .
the crystal toxin gene have be clone from bt and introduce into plant .
bt toxin have be find to be safe for the environment , non - toxic to human and other mammal , and be approve for use by organic farmer as a natural insecticide .
flavr savr tomato the first gm crop to be introduce into the market be the flavr savr tomato produce in one  nine  nine  four .
antisense rna technology be use to slow down the process of soften and rotting cause by fungal infection , which lead to increase shelf life of the gm tomato .
additional genetic modification improve the flavor of this tomato .
the flavr savr tomato do not successfully stay in the market because of problem maintain and ship the crop .
mapping genomes genomics be the study of entire genome , include the complete set of gene , - pron - nucleotide sequence and organization , and - pron - interaction within a species and with other specie .
genome mapping be the process of find the location of gene on each chromosome .
the map create by genome mapping be comparable to the map that - pron - use to navigate street .
a genetic map be an illustration that list gene and - pron - location on a chromosome .
genetic map provide the big picture ( similar to a map of interstate highway ) and use genetic marker ( similar to landmark ) .
a genetic marker be a gene or sequence on a chromosome that co - segregate ( show genetic linkage ) with a specific trait .
early geneticist call this linkage analysis .
physical map present the intimate detail of small region of the chromosome ( similar to a detailed road map ) .
a physical map be a representation of the physical distance , in nucleotide , between gene or genetic marker .
both genetic linkage map and physical map be require to build a complete picture of the genome .
have a complete map of the genome make - pron - easy for researcher to study individual gene .
human genome map help researcher in - pron - effort to identify human disease - cause gene relate to illness like cancer , heart disease , and cystic fibrosis .
genome mapping can be use in a variety of other application , such as use live microbe to clean up pollutant or even prevent pollution .
research involve plant genome mapping may lead to produce high crop yield or develop plant that better adapt to climate change .
genetic maps
the study of genetic map begin with linkage analysis , a procedure that analyze the recombination frequency between gene to determine if - pron - be link or show independent assortment .
the term linkage be use before the discovery of dna .
early geneticist rely on the observation of phenotypic change to understand the genotype of an organism .
shortly after gregor mendel ( the father of modern genetic ) propose that trait be determine by what be now know as gene , other researcher observe that different trait be often inherit together , and thereby deduce that the gene be physically link by be locate on the same chromosome .
the mapping of gene relative to each other base on linkage analysis lead to the development of the first genetic map .
observation that certain trait be always link and certain other be not link come from study the offspring of cross between parent with different trait .
for example , in experiment perform on the garden pea , - pron - be discover that the color of the flower and shape of the plant 's pollen be link trait , and therefore the gene encode these trait be in close proximity on the same chromosome .
the exchange of dna between homologous pair of chromosome be call genetic recombination , which occur by the crossing over of dna between homologous strand of dna , such as nonsister chromatid .
linkage analysis involve study the recombination frequency between any two gene .
the great the distance between two gene , the high the chance that a recombination event will occur between - pron - , and the high the recombination frequency between - pron - .
two possibility for recombination between two nonsister chromatid during meiosis be show in figure one  seven  .  one  one .
if the recombination frequency between two gene be less than five  zero percent , - pron - be say to be link .
crossover may occur at different location on the chromosome .
recombination between gene
a and b be more frequent than recombination between gene b and c because gen a and b be farther apart  a crossover be therefore more likely to occur between - pron - .
the generation of genetic map require marker , just as a road map require landmark ( such as river and mountain ) .
early genetic map be base on the use of know gene as marker .
more sophisticated marker , include those base on non - cod dna , be now use to compare the genome of individual in a population .
although individual of a give specie be genetically similar , - pron - be not identical  every individual have a unique set of trait .
these minor difference in the genome between individual in a population be useful for the purpose of genetic mapping .
in general , a good genetic marker be a region on the chromosome that show variability or polymorphism ( multiple form ) in the population .
some genetic marker use in generate genetic map be restriction fragment length polymorphism ( rflp ) , variable number of tandem repeat ( vntrs ) , microsatellite polymorphism , and the single nucleotide polymorphism ( snps ) .
rflp ( sometimes pronounce " rif - lip
" ) be detect when the dna of an individual be cut with a restriction endonuclease that recognize specific sequence in the dna to generate a series of dna fragment , which be then analyze by gel electrophoresis .
the dna of every individual will give rise to a unique pattern of band when cut with a particular set of restriction endonuclease  this be sometimes refer to as an individual 's dna " fingerprint .
"
certain region of the chromosome that be subject to polymorphism will lead to the generation of the unique banding pattern .
vntr be repeat set of nucleotide present in the non - cod region of dna .
non - coding , or " junk , " dna have no know biological function  however , research show that much of this dna be actually transcribe .
while - pron - function be uncertain , - pron - be certainly active , and - pron - may be involve in the regulation of cod gene .
the number of repeat may vary in individual organism of a population .
microsatellite polymorphism be similar to vntrs , but the repeat unit be very small .
snp be variation in a single nucleotide .
because genetic map rely completely on the natural process of recombination , mapping be affect by natural increase or decrease in the level of recombination in any give area of the genome .
some part of the genome be recombination hotspot , whereas other do not show a propensity for recombination .
for this reason , - pron - be important to look at mapping information develop by multiple method .
physical maps
a physical map provide detail of the actual physical distance between genetic marker , as well as the number of nucleotide .
there be three method use to create a physical map  cytogenetic mapping , radiation hybrid mapping , and sequence mapping .
cytogenetic mapping use information obtain by microscopic analysis of stain section of the chromosome ( figure one  seven  .  one  two ) .
- pron - be possible to determine the approximate distance between genetic marker use cytogenetic mapping , but not the exact distance ( number of base pair ) .
radiation hybrid mapping use radiation , such as x - ray , to break the dna into fragment .
the amount of radiation can be adjust to create small or large fragment .
this technique overcome the limitation of genetic mapping and be not affect by increase or decrease recombination frequency .
sequence mapping result from dna sequencing technology that allow for the creation of detailed physical map with distance measure in term of the number of base pair .
the creation of genomic library and complementary dna ( cdna ) library ( collection of clone sequence or all dna from a genome ) have speed up the process of physical mapping .
a genetic site use to generate a physical map with sequence technology ( a sequence - tag site , or sts ) be a unique sequence in the genome with a know exact chromosomal location .
an express sequence tag ( est ) and a single sequence length polymorphism ( sslp ) be common sts .
an est be a short sts that be identify with cdna library , while sslp be obtain from know genetic marker and provide a link between genetic map and physical map .
cytogenetic map show the appearance of a chromosome after - pron - be stain and examine under a microscope .
( credit  national human genome research institute ) integration of genetic and physical maps genetic map
provide the outline and physical map provide the detail .
- pron - be easy to understand why both type of genome mapping technique be important to show the big picture .
information obtain from each technique be use in combination to study the genome .
genomic mapping be be use with different model organism that be use for research .
genome mapping be still an ongoing process , and as more advanced technique be develop , more advance be expect .
genome mapping be similar to complete a complicated puzzle use every piece of available datum .
mapping information generate in laboratory all over the world be enter into central database , such as genbank at the national center for biotechnology information ( ncbi ) .
effort be be make to make the information more easily accessible to researcher and the general public .
just as - pron - use global positioning system instead of paper map to navigate through roadway , ncbi have create a genome viewer tool to simplify the data - mining process .
whole - genome sequencing
although there have be significant advance in the medical science in recent year , doctor be still confound by some disease , and - pron - be use whole - genome sequencing to get to the bottom of the problem .
whole - genome sequencing be a process that determine the dna sequence of an entire genome .
whole - genome sequencing be a brute - force approach to problem solve when there be a genetic basis at the core of a disease .
several laboratory now provide service to sequence , analyze , and interpret entire genome .
for example , whole - exome sequencing be a low - cost alternative to whole genome sequencing .
in exome sequencing , only the coding , exon - produce region of the dna be sequence .
in two  zero  one  zero , whole - exome sequencing be use to save a young boy whose intestine have multiple mysterious abscess .
the child have several colon operation with no relief .
finally , whole - exome sequencing be perform , which reveal a defect in a pathway that control apoptosis ( program cell death ) .
a bone - marrow transplant be use to overcome this genetic disorder , lead to a cure for the boy .
- pron - be the first person to be successfully treat base on a diagnosis make by whole - exome sequencing .
today , human genome sequencing be more readily available and can be complete in a day or two for about $ one  zero  zero  zero .
strategy use in sequencing projects
the basic sequencing technique use in all modern day sequencing project be the chain termination method ( also know as the dideoxy method ) , which be develop by fred sanger in the one  nine  seven  zero .
the chain termination method involve dna replication of a single - strand template with the use of a primer and a regular deoxynucleotide ( dntp ) , which be a monomer , or a single unit , of dna .
the primer and dntp be mix with a small proportion of fluorescently label dideoxynucleotide ( ddntps ) .
the ddntps be monomer that be miss a hydroxyl group ( –oh ) at the site at which another nucleotide usually attach to form a chain ( figure one  seven  .  one  three ) .
each ddntp be label with a different color of fluorophore .
every time a ddntp be incorporate in the grow complementary strand , - pron - terminate the process of dna replication , which result in multiple short strand of replicated dna that be each terminate at a different point during replication .
when the reaction mixture be process by gel electrophoresis after be separate into single strand , the multiple newly replicate dna strand form a ladder because of the differ size .
because the ddntps be fluorescently label , each band on the gel reflect the size of the dna strand and the ddntp that terminate the reaction .
the different color of the fluorophore - label ddntps help identify the ddntp incorporate at that position .
read the gel on the basis of the color of each band on the ladder produce the sequence of the template strand
( figure one  seven  .  one  four ) .
a dideoxynucleotide be similar in structure to a deoxynucleotide , but be miss the three ' hydroxyl group ( indicate by the box ) .
when a dideoxynucleotide be incorporate into a dna strand , dna synthesis stop .
frederick sanger ' s dideoxy chain termination method be illustrate .
use dideoxynucleotide , the dna fragment can be terminate at different point .
the dna be separate on the basis of size , and these band , base on the size of the fragment , can be read .
early strategies  shotgun sequencing and pair - wise end sequencing in shotgun sequencing method , several copy of a dna fragment be cut randomly into many small piece ( somewhat like what happen to a round shot cartridge when fire from a shotgun ) .
all of the segment be then sequence use the chain - sequencing method .
then , with the help of a computer , the fragment be analyze to see where - pron - sequence overlap .
by match up overlapping sequence at the end of each fragment , the entire dna sequence can be reform .
a large sequence that be assemble from overlap short sequence be call a contig .
as an analogy , consider that someone have four copy of a landscape photograph that - pron - have never see before and know nothing about how - pron - should appear .
the person then rip up each photograph with - pron - hand , so that different size piece be present from each copy .
the person then mix all of the piece together and ask - pron - to reconstruct the photograph .
in one of the small piece - pron - see a mountain .
in a large piece , - pron - see that the same mountain be behind a lake .
a third fragment show only the lake , but - pron - reveal that there be a cabin on the shore of the lake .
therefore , from look at the overlap information in these three fragment , - pron - know that the picture contain a mountain behind a lake that have a cabin on - pron - shore .
this be the principle behind reconstruct entire dna sequence use shotgun sequencing .
originally , shotgun sequence only analyze one end of each fragment for overlap .
this be sufficient for sequence small genome .
however , the desire to sequence large genome , such as that of a human , lead to the development of doublebarrel shotgun sequencing , more formally know as pairwise - end sequencing .
in pairwise - end sequencing , both end of each fragment be analyze for overlap .
pairwise - end sequencing be , therefore , more cumbersome than shotgun sequencing , but - pron - be easy to reconstruct the sequence because there be more available information .
next - generation sequencing since two  zero  zero  five , automate sequencing technique use by laboratory be under the umbrella of next - generation sequencing , which be a group of automate technique use for rapid dna sequencing .
these automate low - cost sequencer can generate sequence of hundred of thousand or million of short fragment ( two  five to five  zero  zero base pair ) in the span of one day .
these sequencer use sophisticated software to get through the cumbersome process of put all the fragment in order .
compare sequence
a sequence alignment be an arrangement of protein , dna , or rna  - pron - be use to identify region of similarity between cell type or specie , which may indicate conservation of function or structure .
sequence alignment may be use to construct phylogenetic tree .
the follow website use a software program call blast ( basic local alignment search tool ) ( http / / blast . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / blast . cgi ) .
under " basic blast , " click " nucleotide blast .
"
input the follow sequence into the large " query sequence " box  attgcttcgattgca .
below the box , locate the " specie " field and type " human " or " homo sapiens " .
then click " blast " to compare the inputt sequence against know sequence of the human genome .
the result be that this sequence occur in over a hundred place in the human genome .
scroll down below the graphic with the horizontal bar and - pron - will see short description of each of the matching hit .
pick one of the hit near the top of the list and click on " graphics " .
this will bring - pron - to a page that show where the sequence be find within the entire human genome .
- pron - can move the slider that look like a green flag back and forth to view the sequence immediately around the select gene .
- pron - can then return to - pron - select sequence by click the " atg " button .
use of whole - genome sequences of model organisms
the first genome to be completely sequence be of a bacterial virus , the bacteriophage fx one  seven  four ( five  three  six  eight base pair )  this be accomplish by fred sanger use shotgun sequencing .
several other organelle and viral genome be later sequence .
the first organism whose genome be sequence be the bacterium haemophilus influenzae  this be accomplish by craig venter in the one  nine  eight  zero .
approximately seven  four different laboratory collaborate on the sequencing of the genome of the yeast saccharomyce cerevisiae , which begin in one  nine  eight  nine and be complete in one  nine  nine  six , because - pron - be six  zero time big than any other genome that have be sequence .
by one  nine  nine  seven , the genome sequence of two important model organism be available  the bacterium escherichia coli k one  two and the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae .
genome of other model organism , such as the mouse mus musculus , the fruit fly drosophila melanogaster , the nematode caenorhabditis . elegan , and
human homo sapiens be now know .
a lot of basic research be perform in model organism because the information can be apply to genetically similar organism .
a model organism be a species that be study as a model to understand the biological process in other specie represent by the model organism .
have entire genome sequence help with the research effort in these model organism .
the process of attach biological information to gene sequence be call genome annotation .
annotation of gene sequence help with basic experiment in molecular biology , such as design pcr primer and rna target .
us of genome sequences dna microarray be method use to detect gene expression by analyze an array of dna fragment that be fix to a glass slide or a silicon chip to identify active gene and identify sequence .
almost one million genotypic abnormality can be discover use microarray , whereas whole - genome sequencing can provide information about all six billion base pair in the human genome .
although the study of medical application of genome sequencing be interesting , this discipline tend to dwell on abnormal gene function .
knowledge of the entire genome will allow future onset disease and other genetic disorder to be discover early , which will allow for more informed decision to be make about lifestyle , medication , and have child .
genomic be still in - pron - infancy , although someday - pron - may become routine to use whole - genome sequencing to screen every newborn to detect genetic abnormality .
in addition to disease and medicine , genomic can contribute to the development of novel enzyme that convert biomass to biofuel , which result in high crop and fuel production , and low cost to the consumer .
this knowledge should allow good method of control over the microbe that be use in the production of biofuel .
genomic could also improve the method use to monitor the impact of pollutant on ecosystem and help clean up environmental contaminant .
genomic have allow for the development of agrochemical and pharmaceutical that could benefit medical science and agriculture .
- pron - sound great to have all the knowledge - pron - can get from whole - genome sequencing  however , human have a responsibility to use this knowledge wisely .
otherwise , - pron - could be easy to misuse the power of such knowledge , lead to discrimination base on a person ' s genetic , human genetic engineering , and other ethical concern .
this information could also lead to legal issue regard health and privacy .
apply genomic
the introduction of dna sequencing and whole genome sequencing project , particularly the human genome project , have expand the applicability of dna sequence information .
genomic be now be use in a wide variety of field , such as metagenomic , pharmacogenomic , and mitochondrial genomic .
the most commonly know application of genomic be to understand and find cure for disease .
predict disease risk at the individual level predict the risk of disease involve screening currently healthy individual by genome analysis at the individual level .
intervention with lifestyle change and drug can be recommend before disease onset .
however , this approach be most applicable when the problem reside within a single gene defect .
such defect only account for approximately five percent of disease in developed country .
most of the common disease , such as heart disease , be multi - factored or polygenic , which be a phenotypic characteristic that involve two or more gene , and also involve environmental factor such as diet .
in april two  zero  one  zero , scientist at stanford university publish the genome analysis of a healthy individual ( stephen quake , a scientist at stanford university , who have - pron - genome sequenced )  the analysis predict - pron - propensity to acquire various disease .
a risk assessment be perform to analyze quake 's percentage of risk for five  five different medical condition .
a rare genetic mutation be find , which show - pron - to be at risk for sudden heart attack .
- pron - be also predict to have a two  three percent risk of develop prostate cancer and a one  .  four percent risk of develop alzheimer 's .
the scientist use database and several publication to analyze the genomic datum .
even though genomic sequencing be become more affordable and analytical tool be become more reliable , ethical issue surround genomic analysis at a population level remain to be address .
pca three be a gene that be express in prostate epithelial cell and overexpress in cancerous cell .
a high concentration of pca three in urine be indicative of prostate cancer .
the pca three test be consider to be a good indicator of cancer than the more well know psa test , which measure the level of psa ( prostate - specific antigen ) in the blood .
in two  zero  one  one , the united states preventative services task force recommend against use the psa test to screen healthy man for prostate cancer .
- pron - recommendation be base on evidence that screening do not reduce the risk of death from prostate cancer .
prostate cancer often develop very slowly and do not because problem , while the cancer treatment can have severe side effect .
the pca three test be consider to be more accurate , but screening may still result in man who would not have be harm by the cancer - pron - suffer side effect from treatment .
what do - pron - think ?
should all healthy man be screen for prostate cancer use the pca three or psa test ?
should people in general be screen to find out if - pron - have a genetic risk for cancer or other diseases ? pharmacogenomic and toxicogenomics pharmacogenomics , also call toxicogenomic , involve evaluate the effectiveness and safety of drug on the basis of information from an individual ' s genomic sequence .
genomic response to drug can be study use experimental animal ( such as laboratory rat or mouse ) or live cell in the laboratory before embark on study with human .
study change in gene expression could provide information about the transcription profile in the presence of the drug , which can be use as an early indicator of the potential for toxic effect .
for example , gene involve in cellular growth and control cell death , when disturb , could lead to the growth of cancerous cell .
genome - wide study can also help to find new gene involve in drug toxicity .
personal genome sequence information can be use to prescribe medication that will be most effective and least toxic on the basis of the individual patient 's genotype .
the gene signature may not be completely accurate , but can be test further before pathologic symptom arise .
microbial genomics 
metagenomics traditionally , microbiology have be teach with the view that microorganism be best study under pure culture condition , which involve isolate a single type of cell and culture - pron - in the laboratory .
because microorganism can go through several generation in a matter of hour , - pron - gene expression profile adapt to the new laboratory environment very quickly .
in addition , the vast majority of bacterial specie resist be culture in isolation .
most microorganism do not live as isolated entity , but in microbial community know as biofilm .
for all of these reason , pure culture be not always the good way to study microorganism .
metagenomics be the study of the collective genome of multiple specie that grow and interact in an environmental niche .
metagenomics can be use to identify new specie more rapidly and to analyze the effect of pollutant on the environment ( figure one  seven  .  one  six ) .
microbial genomics  creation of new biofuels knowledge of the genomic of microorganism be be use to find good way to harness biofuel from algae and cyanobacteria .
the primary source of fuel today be coal , oil , wood , and other plant product , such as ethanol .
although plant be renewable resource , there be still a need to find more alternative renewable source of energy to meet - pron - population 's energy demand .
the microbial world be one of the large resource for gene that encode new enzyme and produce new organic compound , and - pron - remain largely untapped .
microorganism be use to create product , such as enzyme that be use in research , antibiotic , and other anti - microbial mechanism .
microbial genomic be help to develop diagnostic tool , improve vaccine , new disease treatment , and advanced environmental cleanup technique .
mitochondrial genomics mitochondria be intracellular organelle that contain - pron - own dna .
mitochondrial dna mutate at a rapid rate and be often use to study evolutionary relationship .
another feature that make study the mitochondrial genome interesting be that the mitochondrial dna in most multicellular organism be pass on from the mother during the process of fertilization .
for this reason , mitochondrial genomic be often use to trace genealogy .
information and clue obtain from dna sample find at crime scene have be use as evidence in court case , and genetic marker have be use in forensic analysis .
genomic analysis have also become useful in this field .
in two  zero  zero  one , the first use of genomic in forensic be publish .
- pron - be a collaborative attempt between academic research institution and the fbi to solve the mysterious case of anthrax communicate via the us postal service .
use microbial genomic , researcher determine that a specific strain of anthrax be use in all the mailing .
genomic in agriculture genomics can reduce the trial and failure involve in scientific research to a certain extent , which could improve the quality and quantity of crop yield in agriculture .
link trait to gene or gene signature help to improve crop breeding to generate hybrid with the most desirable quality .
scientist use genomic datum to identify desirable trait , and then transfer those trait to a different organism .
scientist be discover how genomic can improve the quality and quantity of agricultural production .
for example , scientist could use desirable trait to create a useful product or enhance an exist product , such as make a drought - sensitive crop more tolerant of the dry season .
protein be the final product of gene , which help perform the function encode by the gene .
protein be compose of amino acid and play important role in the cell .
all enzyme ( except ribozyme ) be protein that act as catalyst to affect the rate of reaction .
protein be also regulatory molecule , and some be hormone .
transport protein , such as hemoglobin , help transport oxygen to various organ .
antibody that defend against foreign particle be also protein .
in the diseased state , protein function can be impair because of change at the genetic level or because of direct impact on a specific protein .
a proteome be the entire set of protein produce by a cell type .
proteome can be study use the knowledge of genome because gene code for mrnas , and the mrnas encode protein .
although mrna analysis be a step in the right direction , not all mrnas be translate into protein .
the study of the function of proteome be call proteomic .
proteomic complement genomic and be useful when scientist want to test - pron - hypothesis that be base on gene .
even though all cell of a multicellular organism have the same set of gene , the set of protein produce in different tissue be different and dependent on gene expression .
thus , the genome be constant , but the proteome vary and be dynamic within an organism .
in addition , rna can be alternately splice ( cut and paste to create novel combination and novel protein ) and many protein be modify after translation by process such as proteolytic cleavage , phosphorylation , glycosylation , and ubiquitination .
there be also protein - protein interaction , which complicate the study of proteome .
although the genome provide a blueprint , the final architecture depend on several factor that can change the progression of event that generate the proteome .
metabolomics be relate to genomic and proteomic .
metabolomic involve the study of small molecule metabolite find in an organism .
the metabolome be the complete set of metabolite that be relate to the genetic makeup of an organism .
metabolomics offer an opportunity to compare genetic makeup and physical characteristic , as well as genetic makeup and environmental factor .
the goal of metabolome research be to identify , quantify , and catalogue all of the metabolite that be find in the tissue and fluid of live organism .
basic techniques in protein analysis
the ultimate goal of proteomic be to identify or compare the protein express from a give genome under specific condition , study the interaction between the protein , and use the information to predict cell behavior or develop drug target .
just as the genome be analyze use the basic technique of dna sequencing , proteomic require technique for protein analysis .
the basic technique for protein analysis , analogous to dna sequencing , be mass spectrometry .
mass spectrometry be use to identify and determine the characteristic of a molecule .
advance in spectrometry have allow researcher to analyze very small sample of protein .
x - ray crystallography , for example , enable scientist to determine the three - dimensional structure of a protein crystal at atomic resolution .
another protein imaging technique , nuclear magnetic resonance ( nmr ) , use the magnetic property of atom to determine the three - dimensional structure of protein in aqueous solution .
protein microarray have also be use to study interaction between protein .
large - scale adaptation of the basic two - hybrid screen ( figure one  seven  .  one  seven ) have provide the basis for protein microarray .
computer software be use to analyze the vast amount of datum generate for proteomic analysis .
genomic - and proteomic - scale analysis be part of system biology .
system biology be the study of whole biological system ( genome and proteome ) base on interaction within the system .
the european bioinformatics institute and the human proteome organization ( hupo ) be develop and establish effective tool to sort through the enormous pile of system biology datum .
because protein be the direct product of gene and reflect activity at the genomic level , - pron - be natural to use proteome to compare the protein profile of different cell to identify protein and gene involve in disease process .
most pharmaceutical drug trial target protein .
information obtain from proteomic be be use to identify novel drug and understand - pron - mechanism of action .
two - hybrid screening be use to determine whether two protein interact .
in this method , a transcription factor be split into a dna - bind domain ( bd ) and an activator domain ( ad ) .
the binding domain be able to bind the promoter in the absence of the activator domain , but - pron - do not turn on transcription .
a protein call the bait be attach to the bd , and a protein call the prey be attach to the ad .
transcription occur only if the prey " catch " the bait .
the challenge of technique use for proteomic analysis be the difficulty in detect small quantity of protein .
although mass spectrometry be good for detect small amount of protein , variation in protein expression in diseased state can be difficult to discern .
protein be naturally unstable molecule , which make proteomic analysis much more difficult than genomic analysis .
cancer proteomics genomes and proteome of patient suffer from specific disease be be study to understand the genetic basis of the disease .
the most prominent disease be study with proteomic approach be cancer .
proteomic approach be be use to improve screen and early detection of cancer  this be achieve by identify protein whose expression be affect by the disease process .
an individual protein be call a biomarker , whereas a set of protein with altered expression level be call a protein signature .
for a biomarker or protein signature to be useful as a candidate for early screening and detection of a cancer , - pron - must be secrete in body fluid , such as sweat , blood , or urine , such that largescale screening can be perform in a non - invasive fashion .
the current problem with use biomarker for the early detection of cancer be the high rate of false - negative result .
a false negative be an incorrect test result that should have be positive .
in other word , many case of cancer go undetected , which make biomarker unreliable .
some example of protein biomarker use in cancer detection be ca -  one  two  five for ovarian cancer and psa for prostate cancer .
protein signature may be more reliable than biomarker to detect cancer cell .
proteomic be also be use to develop individualized treatment plan , which involve the prediction of whether or not an individual will respond to specific drug and the side effect that the individual may experience .
proteomic be also be use to predict the possibility of disease recurrence .
the national cancer institute have develop program to improve the detection and treatment of cancer .
the clinical proteomic technologies for cancer and the early detection research network be effort to identify protein signature specific to different type of cancer .
the biomedical proteomics program be design to identify protein signature and design effective therapy for cancer patient . 
evolution and the origin of speci
all organism be product of evolution adapt to - pron - environment .
( a ) saguaro ( carnegiea gigantea ) can soak up seven  five  zero liter of water in a single rain storm , enable these cacti to survive the dry condition of the sonora desert in mexico and the southwestern united states .
( b )
the andean semiaquatic lizard ( potamites montanicola ) discover in peru in two  zero  one  zero life between one  ,  five  seven  zero to two  ,  one  zero  zero meter in elevation , and , unlike most lizard , be nocturnal and swim .
scientist still do no know how these cold - blood animal be able to move in the cold ( one  zero to one  five ° c ) temperature of the andean night .
introduction
all specie of live organism , from bacteria to baboon to blueberry , evolve at some point from a different specie .
although - pron - may seem that live thing today stay much the same , that be not the case — evolution be an ongoing process .
the theory of evolution be the unifying theory of biology , mean - pron - be the framework within which biologist ask question about the live world .
- pron - power be that - pron - provide direction for prediction about live thing that be bear out in experiment after experiment .
the ukrainian - bear american geneticist theodosius dobzhansky famously write that " nothing make sense in biology except in the light of evolution .
"
[ one ]
- pron - mean that the tenet that all life have evolve and diversify from a common ancestor be the foundation from which - pron - approach all question in biology .
understanding evolution evolution by natural selection describe a mechanism for how specie change over time .
that species change have be suggest and debate well before darwin begin to explore this idea .
the view that specie be static and unchanging be ground in the writing of plato , yet there be also ancient greeks who express evolutionary idea .
in the eighteenth century , idea about the evolution of animal be reintroduce by the naturalist georges - louis leclerc comte de buffon who observe that various geographic region have different plant and animal population , even when the environment be similar .
- pron - be also accept that there be extinct specie .
during this time , james hutton , a scottish naturalist , propose that geological change occur gradually by the accumulation of small change from process operate like - pron - be today over long period of time .
this contrast with the predominant view that the geology of the planet be a consequence of catastrophic event occur during a relatively brief past .
hutton 's view be popularize in the nineteenth century by the geologist charles lyell who become a friend to darwin .
lyell 's idea be influential on darwin 's thinking 
lyell 's notion of the great age of earth give more time for gradual change in specie , and the process of change provide an analogy for gradual change in specie .
in the early nineteenth century , jean - baptiste lamarck publish a book that detail a mechanism for evolutionary change .
this mechanism be now refer to as an inheritance of acquire characteristic by which modification in an individual be cause by - pron - environment , or the use or disuse of a structure during - pron - lifetime , could be inherit by - pron - offspring and thus bring about change in a species .
while this mechanism for evolutionary change be discredit , lamarck 's idea be an important influence on evolutionary thought .
charles darwin and natural selection
in the mid - nineteenth century , the actual mechanism for evolution be independently conceive of and describe by two naturalist  charles darwin and alfred russel wallace .
importantly , each naturalist spend time explore the natural world on expedition to the tropic .
from one  eight  three  one to one  eight  three  six , darwin travel around the world on h . m . s . beagle , include stop in south america , australia , and the southern tip of africa .
wallace travel to brazil to collect insect in the amazon rainforest from one  eight  four  eight to one  eight  five  two and to the malay archipelago from one  eight  five  four to one  eight  six  two .
darwin 's journey ,
like wallace 's later journey to the malay archipelago , include stop at several island chain ,
the last be the galápagos islands west of ecuador .
on these island , darwin observe specie of organism on different island that be clearly similar , yet have distinct difference .
for example , the ground finch inhabit the galápagos islands comprise several specie with a unique beak shape ( figure one  eight  .  two ) .
the specie on the island have a grade series of beak size and shape with very small difference between the most similar .
- pron - observe that these finch closely resemble another finch specie on the mainland of south america .
darwin imagine that the island specie may be specie modify from one of the original mainland specie .
upon further study , - pron - realize that the varied beak of each finch help the bird acquire a specific type of food .
for example , seed - eat finch have strong , thick beak for break seed , and insect - eat finch have spear - like beak for stab - pron - prey .
darwin observe that beak shape vary among finch specie .
- pron - postulate that the beak of an ancestral specie have adapt over time to equip the finch to acquire different food source .
wallace and darwin both observe similar pattern in other organism and - pron - independently develop the same explanation for how and why such change could take place .
darwin call this mechanism natural selection .
natural selection , also know as " survival of the fit , " be the more prolific reproduction of individual with favorable trait that survive environmental change because of those trait  this lead to evolutionary change .
for example , a population of giant tortoise find in the galapagos archipelago be observe by darwin to have long neck than those that live on other island with dry lowland .
these tortoise be " select " because - pron - could reach more leaf and access more food than those with short neck .
in time of drought when few leaf would be available , those that could reach more leaf have a good chance to eat and survive than those that could not reach the food source .
consequently , long - necked tortoise would be more likely to be reproductively successful and pass the long - necked trait to - pron - offspring .
over time , only long - necked tortoise would be present in the population .
natural selection , darwin argue , be an inevitable outcome of three principle that operate in nature .
first , most characteristic of organism be inherit , or pass from parent to offspring .
although no one , include darwin and wallace , know how this happen at the time , - pron - be a common understanding .
second , more offspring be produce than be able to survive , so resource for survival and reproduction be limit .
the capacity for reproduction in all organism outstrip the availability of resource to support - pron - number .
thus , there be competition for those resource in each generation .
both darwin and wallace 's understanding of this principle come from read an essay by the economist thomas malthus who discuss this principle in relation to human population .
third , offspring vary among each other in regard to - pron - characteristic and those variation be inherit .
darwin and wallace reason that offspring with inherit characteristic which allow - pron - to good compete for limited resource will survive and have more offspring than those individual with variation that be less able to compete .
because characteristic be inherit , these trait will be better represent in the next generation .
this will lead to change in population over generation in a process that darwin call descent with modification .
ultimately , natural selection lead to great adaptation of the population to - pron - local environment  - pron - be the only mechanism know for adaptive evolution .
paper by darwin and wallace ( figure one  eight  .  three ) present the idea of natural selection be read together in one  eight  five  eight before the linnean society in london .
the following year darwin 's book , on the origin of species , be publish .
- pron - book outline in considerable detail - pron - argument for evolution by natural selection .
both ( a ) charles darwin and ( b ) alfred wallace write scientific paper on natural selection that be present together before the linnean society in one  eight  five  eight .
demonstration of evolution by natural selection be time consume and difficult to obtain .
one of the good example have be demonstrate in the very bird that help to inspire darwin 's theory  the galápagos finch .
peter and rosemary grant and - pron - colleague have study galápagos finch population every year since one  nine  seven  six and have provide important demonstration of natural selection .
the grants find change from one generation to the next in the distribution of beak shape with the medium ground finch on the galápagos island of daphne major .
the bird have inherit variation in the bill shape with some bird have wide deep bill and other have thin bill .
during a period in which rainfall be high than normal because of an el niño , the large hard seed that large - bill bird eat be reduce in number  however , there be an abundance of the small soft seed which the small - bill bird eat .
therefore , survival and reproduction be much good in the following year for the small - bill bird .
in the year follow this el niño , the grants measure beak size in the population and find that the average bill size be small .
since bill size be an inherit trait , parent with small bill have more offspring and the size of bill have evolve to be small .
as condition improve in one  nine  eight  seven and large seed become more available , the trend toward small average bill size cease .
field biologist many people hike , explore cave , scuba dive , or climb mountain for recreation .
people often participate in these activity hop to see wildlife .
experience the outdoor can be incredibly enjoyable and invigorating .
what if - pron - job be to be outside in the wilderness ?
field biologist by definition work outdoors in the " field .
"
the term field in this case refer to any location outdoors , even under water .
a field biologist typically focus research on a certain specie , group of organism , or a single habitat ( figure one  eight  .  four ) .
a field biologist tranquilize a polar bear for study .
( credit  karen rhode )
one objective of many field biologist include discover new specie that have never be record .
not only do such finding expand - pron - understanding of the natural world , but - pron - also lead to important innovation in field such as medicine and agriculture .
plant and microbial specie , in particular , can reveal new medicinal and nutritive knowledge .
other organism can play key role in ecosystem or be consider rare and in need of protection .
when discover , these important specie can be use as evidence for environmental regulation and law .
process and patterns of evolution natural selection can only take place if there be variation , or difference , among individual in a population .
importantly , these difference must have some genetic basis  otherwise , the selection will not lead to change in the next generation .
this be critical because variation among individual can be cause by non - genetic reason such as an individual be tall because of good nutrition rather than different gene .
genetic diversity in a population come from two main mechanism  mutation and sexual reproduction .
mutation , a change in dna , be the ultimate source of new allele , or new genetic variation in any population .
the genetic change cause by mutation can have one of three outcome on the phenotype .
a mutation affect the phenotype of the organism in a way that give - pron - reduced fitness — low likelihood of survival or few offspring .
a mutation may produce a phenotype with a beneficial effect on fitness .
and , many mutation will also have no effect on the fitness of the phenotype  these be call neutral mutation .
mutation may also have a whole range of effect size on the fitness of the organism that express - pron - in - pron - phenotype , from a small effect to a great effect .
sexual reproduction also lead to genetic diversity  when two parent reproduce , unique combination of allele assemble to produce the unique genotype and thus phenotype in each of the offspring .
a heritable trait that help the survival and reproduction of an organism in - pron - present environment be call an adaptation .
scientist describe group of organism become adapt to - pron - environment when a change in the range of genetic variation occur over time that increase or maintain the " fit " of the population to - pron - environment .
the webbed foot of platypus be an adaptation for swimming .
the snow leopards' thick fur be an adaptation for live in the cold .
the cheetahs' fast speed be an adaptation for catch prey .
whether or not a trait be favorable depend on the environmental condition at the time .
the same trait be not always select because environmental condition can change .
for example , consider a species of plant that grow in a moist climate and do not need to conserve water .
large leaf be select because - pron - allow the plant to obtain more energy from the sun .
large leaf require more water to maintain than small leaf , and the moist environment provide favorable condition to support large leaf .
after thousand of year , the climate change , and the area no longer have excess water .
the direction of natural selection shift so that plant with small leaf be select because those population be able to conserve water to survive the new environmental condition .
the evolution of specie have result in enormous variation in form and function .
sometimes , evolution give rise to group of organism that become tremendously different from each other .
when two specie evolve in diverse direction from a common point , - pron - be call divergent evolution .
such divergent evolution can be see in the form of the reproductive organ of flower plant which share the same basic anatomy  however , - pron - can look very different as a result of selection in different physical environment and adaptation to different kind of pollinator ( figure one  eight  .  five ) .
flower plant evolve from a common ancestor .
notice that the ( a ) dense blaze star ( liatrus spicata ) and the ( b ) purple coneflower ( echinacea purpurea ) vary in appearance , yet both share a similar basic morphology .
( credit a  modification of work by drew avery  credit b  modification of work by cory zanker )
in other case , similar phenotype evolve independently in distantly relate specie .
for example , flight have evolve in both bat and insect , and - pron - both have structure - pron - refer to as wing , which be adaptation to flight .
however , the wing of bat and insect have evolve from very different original structure .
this phenomenon be call convergent evolution , where similar trait evolve independently in specie that do not share a common ancestry .
the two specie come to the same function , fly , but do so separately from each other .
these physical change occur over enormous span of time and help explain how evolution occur .
natural selection act on individual organism , which in turn can shape an entire specie .
although natural selection may work in a single generation on an individual , - pron - can take thousand or even million of year for the genotype of an entire specie to evolve .
- pron - be over these large time span that life on earth have change and continue to change .
evidence of evolution
the evidence for evolution be compelling and extensive .
look at every level of organization in living system , biologist see the signature of past and present evolution .
darwin dedicate a large portion of - pron - book , on the origin of species , to identify pattern in nature that be consistent with evolution , and since darwin , - pron - understanding have become clear and broad .
fossils fossils provide solid evidence that organism from the past be not the same as those find today , and fossil show a progression of evolution .
scientist determine the age of fossil and categorize - pron - from all over the world to determine when the organism live relative to each other .
the result fossil record tell the story of the past and show the evolution of form over million of year ( figure one  eight  .  six ) .
for example , scientist have recover highly detailed record show the evolution of human and horse ( figure one  eight  .  six ) .
the whale flipper share a similar morphology to appendage of bird and mammal ( figure one  eight  .  seven ) indicate that these specie share a common ancestor .
in this ( a ) display , fossil hominid be arrange from old ( bottom ) to new ( top ) .
as hominid evolve , the shape of the skull change .
an artist 's rendition of ( b ) extinct specie of the genus equus reveal that these ancient specie resemble the modern horse ( equus ferus ) but varied in size .
anatomy and embryology
another type of evidence for evolution be the presence of structure in organism that share the same basic form .
for example , the bone in the appendage of a human , dog , bird , and whale all share the same overall construction ( figure one  eight  .  seven ) result from - pron - origin in the appendage of a common ancestor .
over time , evolution lead to change in the shape and size of these bone in different specie , but - pron - have maintain the same overall layout .
scientist call these synonymous part homologous structure .
the similar construction of these appendage indicate that these organism share a common ancestor .
some structure exist in organism that have no apparent function at all , and appear to be residual part from a past common ancestor .
these unused structure without function be call vestigial structure .
other example of vestigial structure be wing on flightless bird , leaf on some cacti , and hind leg bone in whale .
another evidence of evolution be the convergence of form in organism that share similar environment .
for example , specie of unrelated animal , such as the arctic fox and ptarmigan , live in the arctic region have be select for seasonal white phenotype during winter to blend with the snow and ice ( figure one  eight  .  eight ab ) .
these similarity occur not because of common ancestry , but because of similar selection pressure — the benefit of not be see by predator .
the white winter coat of the ( a ) arctic fox and the ( b ) ptarmigan 's plumage be adaptation to - pron - environment .
( credit a  modification of work by keith morehouse )
embryology , the study of the development of the anatomy of an organism to - pron - adult form , also provide evidence of relatedness between now widely divergent group of organism .
mutational tweaking in the embryo can have such magnify consequence in the adult that embryo formation tend to be conserve .
as a result , structure that be absent in some group often appear in - pron - embryonic form and disappear by the time the adult or juvenile form be reach .
for example , all vertebrate embryo , include human , exhibit gill slit and tail at some point in - pron - early development .
these disappear in the adult of terrestrial group but be maintain in adult form of aquatic group such as fish and some amphibian .
great ape embryo , include human , have a tail structure during - pron - development that be lose by the time of birth .
biogeography
the geographic distribution of organism on the planet follow pattern that be best explain by evolution in conjunction with the movement of tectonic plate over geological time .
broad group that evolve before the breakup of the supercontinent pangaea ( about two  zero  zero million year ago ) be distribute worldwide .
group that evolve since the breakup appear uniquely in region of the planet , such as the unique flora and fauna of northern continent that form from the supercontinent laurasia and of the southern continent that form from the supercontinent gondwana .
the presence of member of the plant family proteaceae in australia , southern africa , and south america be good by - pron - presence prior to the southern supercontinent gondwana break up .
the great diversification of marsupial in australia and the absence of other mammal reflect australia 's long isolation .
australia have an abundance of endemic specie — specie find nowhere else — which be typical of island whose isolation by expanse of water prevent specie to migrate .
over time , these specie diverge evolutionarily into new specie that look very different from - pron - ancestor that may exist on the mainland .
the marsupial of australia , the finch on the galápagos , and many specie on the hawaiian islands be all unique to - pron - one point of origin , yet - pron - display distant relationship to ancestral specie on mainland .
molecular biology
like anatomical structure , the structure of the molecule of life reflect descent with modification .
evidence of a common ancestor for all of life be reflect in the universality of dna as the genetic material and in the near universality of the genetic code and the machinery of dna replication and expression .
fundamental division in life between the three domain be reflect in major structural difference in otherwise conservative structure such as the component of ribosome and the structure of membrane .
in general , the relatedness of group of organism be reflect in the similarity of - pron - dna sequence — exactly the pattern that would be expect from descent and diversification from a common ancestor .
dna sequence have also shed light on some of the mechanism of evolution .
for example , - pron - be clear that the evolution of new function for protein commonly occur after gene duplication event that allow the free modification of one copy by mutation , selection , or drift ( change in a population 's gene pool result from chance ) , while the second copy continue to produce a functional protein .
misconception of evolution
although the theory of evolution generate some controversy when - pron - be first propose , - pron - be almost universally accept by biologist , particularly young biologist , within two  zero year after publication of on the origin of species .
nevertheless , the theory of evolution be a difficult concept and misconception about how - pron - work abound .
evolution be just a theory critic of the theory of evolution dismiss - pron - importance by purposefully confound the everyday usage of the word " theory " with the way scientist use the word .
in science , a " theory " be understand to be a body of thoroughly test and verified explanation for a set of observation of the natural world .
scientist have a theory of the atom , a theory of gravity , and the theory of relativity , each of which describe understand fact about the world .
in the same way , the theory of evolution describe fact about the live world .
as such , a theory in science have survive significant effort to discredit - pron - by scientist .
in contrast , a " theory " in common vernacular be a word mean a guess or suggest explanation  this meaning be more akin to the scientific concept of " hypothesis .
"
when critic of evolution say evolution be " just a theory , " - pron - be imply that there be little evidence support - pron - and that - pron - be still in the process of be rigorously test .
this be a mischaracterization .
individual evolve evolution be the change in genetic composition of a population over time , specifically over generation , result from differential reproduction of individual with certain allele .
individual do change over - pron - lifetime , obviously , but this be call development and involve change program by the set of gene the individual acquire at birth in coordination with the individual 's environment .
when think about the evolution of a characteristic , - pron - be probably good to think about the change of the average value of the characteristic in the population over time .
for example , when natural selection lead to bill - size change in medium - ground finch in the galápagos , this do not mean that individual bill on the finch be change .
if one measure the average bill size among all individual in the population at one time and then measure the average bill size in the population several year later , this average value will be different as a result of evolution .
although some individual may survive from the first time to the second , - pron - will still have the same bill size  however , there will be many new individual that contribute to the shift in average bill size .
evolution explain the origin of life - pron - be a common misunderstanding that evolution include an explanation of life 's origin .
conversely , some of the theory 's critic believe that - pron - can not explain the origin of life .
the theory do not try to explain the origin of life .
the theory of evolution explain how population change over time and how life diversify the origin of specie .
- pron - do not shed light on the beginning of life include the origin of the first cell , which be how life be define .
the mechanism of the origin of life on earth be a particularly difficult problem because - pron - occur a very long time ago , and presumably - pron - just occur once .
importantly , biologist believe that the presence of life on earth preclude the possibility that the event that lead to life on earth can be repeat because the intermediate stage would immediately become food for exist live thing .
however , once a mechanism of inheritance be in place in the form of a molecule like dna either within a cell or pre - cell , these entity would be subject to the principle of natural selection .
more effective reproducer would increase in frequency at the expense of inefficient reproducer .
so while evolution do not explain the origin of life , - pron - may have something to say about some of the process operate once pre - living entity acquire certain property .
organisms evolve on purpose statement such as " organism evolve in response to a change in an environment " be quite common , but such statement can lead to two type of misunderstanding .
first , the statement must not be understand to mean that individual organism evolve .
the statement be shorthand for " a population evolf in response to a change environment .
"
however , a second misunderstanding may arise by interpret the statement to mean that the evolution be somehow intentional .
a changed environment result in some individual in the population , those with particular phenotype , benefit and therefore produce proportionately more offspring than other phenotype .
this result in change in the population if the characteristic be genetically determine .
- pron - be also important to understand that the variation that natural selection work on be already in a population and do not arise in response to an environmental change .
for example , apply antibiotic to a population of bacteria will , over time , select a population of bacteria that be resistant to antibiotic .
the resistance , which be cause by a gene , do not arise by mutation because of the application of the antibiotic .
the gene for resistance be already present in the gene pool of the bacteria , likely at a low frequency .
the antibiotic , which kill the bacterial cell without the resistance gene , strongly select individual that be resistant , since these would be the only one that survive and divide .
experiment have demonstrate that mutation for antibiotic resistance do not arise as a result of antibiotic .
in a large sense , evolution be not goal direct .
specie do not become " good " over time  - pron - simply track - pron - change environment with adaptation that maximize - pron - reproduction in a particular environment at a particular time .
evolution have no goal of make faster , big , more complex , or even smart specie , despite the commonness of this kind of language in popular discourse .
what characteristic evolve in a specie be a function of the variation present and the environment , both of which be constantly change in a non - directional way .
what trait be fit in one environment at one time may well be fatal at some point in the future .
this hold equally well for a species of insect as - pron - do the human specie .
formation of new species reproduction and have offspring that can then successfully reproduce .
scientist call such organism member of the same biological specie .
specie and the ability to reproduce a species be a group of individual organism that interbreed and produce fertile , viable offspring .
accord to this definition , one species be distinguish from another when , in nature , - pron - be not possible for mating between individual from each specie to produce fertile offspring .
member of the same specie share both external and internal characteristic , which develop from - pron - dna .
the close relationship two organism share , the more dna - pron - have in common , just like people and - pron - family .
people 's dna be likely to be more like - pron - father or mother 's dna than - pron - cousin or grandparent 's dna .
organism of the same specie have the high level of dna alignment and therefore share characteristic and behavior that lead to successful reproduction .
species' appearance can be mislead in suggest an ability or inability to mate .
for example , even though domestic dog ( canis lupus familiaris ) display phenotypic difference , such as size , build , and coat , most dog can interbreed and produce viable puppy that can mature and sexually reproduce ( figure one  eight  .  nine ) .
the ( a ) poodle and ( b ) cocker spaniel can reproduce to produce a breed know as ( c ) the cockapoo .
( credit a  modification of work by sally eller , tom reese  credit b  modification of work by jeremy mcwilliams  credit c  modification of work by kathleen conklin )
in other case , individual may appear similar although - pron - be not member of the same specie .
for example , even though bald eagle ( haliaeetus leucocephalus ) and african fish eagle ( haliaeetus vocifer ) be both bird and eagle , each belong to a separate species group ( figure one  eight  .  one  zero ) .
if human be to artificially intervene and fertilize the egg of a bald eagle with the sperm of an african fish eagle and a chick do hatch , that offspring , call a hybrid ( a cross between two specie ) , would probably be infertile — unable to successfully reproduce after - pron - reach maturity .
different specie may have different gene that be active in development  therefore , - pron - may not be possible to develop a viable offspring with two different set of direction .
thus , even though hybridization may take place , the two specie still remain separate .
the ( a ) african fish eagle be similar in appearance to the ( b ) bald eagle , but the two bird be member of different specie .
( credit a  modification of work by nigel wedge  credit b  modification of work by u . s . fish and wildlife service ) population of specie share a gene pool  a collection of all the variant of gene in the specie .
again , the basis to any change in a group or population of organism must be genetic for this be the only way to share and pass on trait .
when variation occur within a species , - pron - can only be pass to the next generation along two main pathway  asexual reproduction or sexual reproduction .
the change will be pass on asexually simply if the reproduce cell possess the change trait .
for the change trait to be pass on by sexual reproduction , a gamete , such as a sperm or egg cell , must possess the change trait .
in other word , sexually - reproduce organism can experience several genetic change in - pron - body cell , but if these change do not occur in a sperm or egg cell , the change trait will never reach the next generation .
only heritable trait can evolve .
therefore , reproduction play a paramount role for genetic change to take root in a population or specie .
in short , organism must be able to reproduce with each other to pass new trait to offspring .
speciation
the biological definition of specie , which work for sexually reproduce organism , be a group of actually or potentially interbreed individual .
there be exception to this rule .
many specie be similar enough that hybrid offspring be possible and may often occur in nature , but for the majority of specie this rule generally hold .
in fact , the presence in nature of hybrid between similar specie suggest that - pron - may have descend from a single interbreeding specie , and the speciation process may not yet be complete .
give the extraordinary diversity of life on the planet there must be mechanism for speciation  the formation of two specie from one original specie .
darwin envision this process as a branch event and diagram the process in the only illustration find in on the origin of species ( figure one  eight  .  one  one a ) .
compare this illustration to the diagram of elephant evolution ( figure one  eight  .  one  one b ) , which show that as one speci change over time , - pron - branch to form more than one new specie , repeatedly , as long as the population survive or until the organism become extinct .
the only illustration in darwin ' s on the origin of species be ( a ) a diagram show speciation event lead to biological diversity .
the diagram show similarity to phylogenetic chart that be draw today to illustrate the relationship of specie .
( b ) modern elephant evolve from the palaeomastodon , a specie that live in egypt three  five – five  zero million year ago .
for speciation to occur , two new population must be form from one original population and - pron - must evolve in such a way that - pron - become impossible for individual from the two new population to interbreed .
biologist have propose mechanism by which this could occur that fall into two broad category .
allopatric speciation ( allo - = " other "  - patric = " homeland " ) involve geographic separation of population from a parent specie and subsequent evolution .
sympatric speciation ( sym - = " same "  - patric = " homeland " ) involve speciation occur within a parent specie remain in one location .
biologist think of speciation event as the splitting of one ancestral specie into two descendant specie .
there be no reason why there may not be more than two specie form at one time except that - pron - be less likely and multiple event can be conceptualize as single split occur close in time .
allopatric speciation
a geographically continuous population have a gene pool that be relatively homogeneous .
gene flow , the movement of allele across the range of the specie , be relatively free because individual can move and then mate with individual in - pron - new location .
thus , the frequency of an allele at one end of a distribution will be similar to the frequency of the allele at the other end .
when population become geographically discontinuous , that free - flow of allele be prevent .
when that separation last for a period of time , the two population be able to evolve along different trajectory .
thus , - pron - allele frequency at numerous genetic locus gradually become more and more different as new allele independently arise by mutation in each population .
typically , environmental condition , such as climate , resource , predator , and competitor for the two population will differ cause natural selection to favor divergent adaptation in each group .
isolation of population lead to allopatric speciation can occur in a variety of way  a river form a new branch , erosion form a new valley , a group of organism travel to a new location without the ability to return , or seed float over the ocean to an island .
the nature of the geographic separation necessary to isolate population depend entirely on the biology of the organism and - pron - potential for dispersal .
if two fly insect population take up residence in separate nearby valley , chance be , individual from each population would fly back and forth continue gene flow .
however , if two rodent population become divide by the formation of a new lake , continue gene flow would be unlikely  therefore , speciation would be more likely .
biologist group allopatric process into two category  dispersal and vicariance .
dispersal be when a few member of a specie move to a new geographical area , and vicariance be when a natural situation arise to physically divide organism .
scientist have document numerous case of allopatric speciation take place .
for example , along the west coast of the united states , two separate sub - specie of spot owl exist .
the northern spotted owl have genetic and phenotypic difference from - pron - close relative  the mexican spot owl , which live in the south ( figure one  eight  .  one  two ) .
the northern spotted owl and the mexican spot owl inhabit geographically separate location with different climate and ecosystem .
the owl be an example of allopatric speciation .
( credit " northern spotted owl " 
modification of work by john and karen hollingsworth  credit " mexican spot owl " 
modification of work by bill radke )
additionally , scientist have find that the further the distance between two group that once be the same specie , the more likely - pron - be that speciation will occur .
this seem logical because as the distance increase , the various environmental factor would likely have less in common than location in close proximity .
consider the two owl  in the north , the climate be cool than in the south  the type of organism in each ecosystem differ , as do - pron - behavior and habit  also , the hunting habit and prey choice of the southern owl vary from the northern owl .
these variance can lead to evolve difference in the owl , and speciation likely will occur .
adaptive radiation
in some case , a population of one species dispers throughout an area , and each find a distinct niche or isolated habitat .
over time , the varied demand of - pron - new lifestyle lead to multiple speciation event originate from a single specie .
this be call adaptive radiation because many adaptation evolve from a single point of origin  thus , cause the specie to radiate into several new one .
island archipelago like the hawaiian islands provide an ideal context for adaptive radiation event because water surround each island which lead to geographical isolation for many organism .
the hawaiian honeycreeper illustrate one example of adaptive radiation .
from a single specie , call the founder specie , numerous specie have evolve , include the six show in figure one  eight  .  one  three .
the honeycreeper bird illustrate adaptive radiation .
from one original specie of bird , multiple other evolve , each with - pron - own distinctive characteristic .
notice the difference in the species' beak in figure one  eight  .  one  three .
evolution in response to natural selection base on specific food source in each new habitat lead to evolution of a different beak suit to the specific food source .
the seed - eat bird have a thick , strong beak which be suit to break hard nut .
the nectar - eat bird have long beak to dip into flower to reach the nectar .
the insect - eat bird have beak like sword , appropriate for stab and impaling insect .
darwin 's finch be another example of adaptive radiation in an archipelago .
sympatric speciation can divergence occur if no physical barrier be in place to separate individual who continue to live and reproduce in the same habitat ?
the answer be yes .
the process of speciation within the same space be call sympatric speciation  the prefix " sym " mean same , so " sympatric " mean " same homeland " in contrast to "
allopatric "
mean " other homeland .
"
a number of mechanism for sympatric speciation have be propose and study .
one form of sympatric speciation can begin with a serious chromosomal error during cell division .
in a normal cell division event chromosom replicate , pair up , and then separate so that each new cell have the same number of chromosome .
however , sometimes the pair separate and the end cell product have too many or too few individual chromosome in a condition call aneuploidy ( figure one  eight  .  one  four ) .
polyploidy be a condition in which a cell or organism have an extra set , or set , of chromosome .
scientist have identify two main type of polyploidy that can lead to reproductive isolation of an individual in the polyploidy state .
reproductive isolation be the inability to interbreed .
in some case , a polyploid individual will have two or more complete set of chromosome from - pron - own specie in a condition call autopolyploidy ( figure one  eight  .  one  five ) .
the prefix " auto -
" mean " self ,
" so the term mean multiple chromosome from one 's own specie .
polyploidy result from an error in meiosis in which all of the chromosome move into one cell instead of separate .
autopolyploidy result when mitosis be not follow by cytokinesis .
for example , if a plant speci with two n = six produce autopolyploid gamete that be also diploid ( two n = six , when - pron - should be n = three ) , the gamete now have twice as many chromosome as - pron - should have .
these new gamete will be incompatible with the normal gamete produce by this plant specie .
however , - pron - could either self - pollinate or reproduce with other autopolyploid plant with gamete have the same diploid number .
in this way , sympatric speciation can occur quickly by form offspring with four n call a tetraploid .
these individual would immediately be able to reproduce only with those of this new kind and not those of the ancestral specie .
the other form of polyploidy occur when individual of two different specie reproduce to form a viable offspring call an allopolyploid .
the prefix "
allo -
" mean
" other "
( recall from allopatric )  therefore , an allopolyploid occur when gamete from two different specie combine .
figure one  eight  .  one  six illustrate one possible way an allopolyploid can form .
notice how - pron - take two generation , or two reproductive act , before the viable fertile hybrid result .
alloploidy result when two specie mate to produce viable offspring .
in the example show , a normal gamete from one specie fuse with a polyploidy gamete from another .
two mating be necessary to produce viable offspring .
the cultivate form of wheat , cotton , and tobacco plant be all allopolyploid .
although polyploidy occur occasionally in animal , - pron - take place most commonly in plant .
( animal with any of the type of chromosomal aberration describe here be unlikely to survive and produce normal offspring . )
scientist have discover more than half of all plant specie study relate back to a species evolve through polyploidy .
with such a high rate of polyploidy in plant , some scientist hypothesize that this mechanism take place more as an adaptation than as an error .
reproductive isolation
give enough time , the genetic and phenotypic divergence between population will affect character that influence reproduction  if individual of the two population be to be bring together , mating would be less likely , but if mating occur , offspring would be non - viable or infertile .
many type of diverge character may affect the reproductive isolation , the ability to interbreed , of the two population .
reproductive isolation can take place in a variety of way .
scientist organize - pron - into two group  prezygotic barrier and postzygotic barrier .
recall that a zygote be a fertilized egg  the first cell of the development of an organism that reproduce sexually .
therefore , a prezygotic barrier be a mechanism that block reproduction from take place  this include barrier that prevent fertilization when organism attempt reproduction .
a postzygotic barrier occur after zygote formation  this include organism that do not survive the embryonic stage and those that be bear sterile .
some type of prezygotic barrier prevent reproduction entirely .
many organism only reproduce at certain time of the year , often just annually .
difference in breed schedule , call temporal isolation , can act as a form of reproductive isolation .
for example , two specie of frog inhabit the same area , but one reproduce from january to march , whereas the other reproduce from march to may ( figure one  eight  .  one  seven ) .
these two related frog specie exhibit temporal reproductive isolation .
( a ) rana aurora breed earlier in the year than ( b ) rana boylii .
in some case , population of a specie move or be move to a new habitat and take up residence in a place that no long overlap with the other population of the same specie .
this situation be call habitat isolation .
reproduction with the parent specie cease , and a new group exist that be now reproductively and genetically independent .
for example , a cricket population that be divide after a flood could no longer interact with each other .
over time , the force of natural selection , mutation , and genetic drift will likely result in the divergence of the two group ( figure one  eight  .  one  eight ) .
speciation can occur when two population occupy different habitat .
the habitat ne not be far apart .
the cricket ( a ) gryllus pennsylvanicus prefer sandy soil , and the cricket ( b ) gryllus firmus prefer loamy soil .
the two specie can live in close proximity , but because of - pron - different soil preference , - pron - become genetically isolate .
behavioral isolation occur when the presence or absence of a specific behavior prevent reproduction from take place .
for example , male firefly use specific light pattern to attract female .
various specie of firefly display - pron - light differently .
if a male of one specie try to attract the female of another , - pron - would not recognize the light pattern and would not mate with the male .
other prezygotic barrier work when difference in - pron - gamete cell ( egg and sperm ) prevent fertilization from take place  this be call a gametic barrier .
similarly , in some case closely related organism try to mate , but - pron - reproductive structure simply do not fit together .
for example , damselfly male of different specie have differently shape reproductive organ .
if one species try to mate with the female of another , - pron - body part simply do not fit together .
( figure one  eight  .  one  nine ) .
the shape of the male reproductive organ vary among male damselfly specie , and be only compatible with the female of that specie .
reproductive organ incompatibility keep the specie reproductively isolate .
in plant , certain structure aim to attract one type of pollinator simultaneously prevent a different pollinator from access the pollen .
the tunnel through which an animal must access nectar can vary widely in length and diameter , which prevent the plant from be cross - pollinate with a different specie ( figure one  eight  .  two  zero ) .
some flower have evolve to attract certain pollinator .
the ( a ) wide foxglove flower be adapt for pollination by bee , while the ( b ) long , tube - shape trumpet creeper flower be adapt for pollination by hum bird .
when fertilization take place and a zygote form , postzygotic barrier can prevent reproduction .
hybrid individual in many case can not form normally in the womb and simply do not survive past the embryonic stage .
this be call hybrid inviability because the hybrid organism simply be not viable .
in another postzygotic situation , reproduction lead to the birth and growth of a hybrid that be sterile and unable to reproduce offspring of - pron - own  this be call hybrid sterility .
habitat influence on speciation sympatric speciation may also take place in way other than polyploidy .
for example , consider a species of fish that live in a lake .
as the population grow , competition for food also grow .
under pressure to find food , suppose that a group of these fish have the genetic flexibility to discover and feed off another resource that be unused by the other fish .
what if this new food source be find at a different depth of the lake ?
over time , those feed on the second food source would interact more with each other than the other fish  therefore , - pron - would breed together as well .
offspring of these fish would likely behave as - pron - parent  feeding and live in the same area and keep separate from the original population .
if this group of fish continue to remain separate from the first population , eventually sympatric speciation may occur as more genetic difference accumulate between - pron - .
this scenario do play out in nature , as do other that lead to reproductive isolation .
one such place be lake victoria in africa , famous for - pron - sympatric speciation of cichlid fish .
researcher have find hundred of sympatric speciation event in these fish , which have not only happen in great number , but also over a short period of time .
figure one  eight  .  two  one show this type of speciation among a cichlid fish population in nicaragua .
in this locale , two type of cichlid live in the same geographic location but have come to have different morphology that allow - pron - to eat various food source .
cichlid fish from lake apoyeque , nicaragua , show evidence of sympatric speciation .
lake apoyeque , a crater lake , be one  eight  zero  zero year old , but genetic evidence indicate that the lake be populate only one  zero  zero year ago by a single population of cichlid fish .
nevertheless , two population with distinct morphology and diet now exist in the lake , and scientist believe these population may be in an early stage of speciation .
reconnection and rates of speciation speciation occur over a span of evolutionary time , so when a new specie arise , there be a transition period during which the closely related specie continue to interact .
reconnection
after speciation , two specie may recombine or even continue interact indefinitely .
individual organism will mate with any nearby individual who - pron - be capable of breed with .
an area where two closely related specie continue to interact and reproduce , form hybrid , be call a hybrid zone .
over time , the hybrid zone may change depend on the fitness of the hybrid and the reproductive barrier ( figure one  eight  .  two  two ) .
if the hybrid be less fit than the parent , reinforcement of speciation occur , and the specie continue to diverge until - pron - can no longer mate and produce viable offspring .
if reproductive barrier weaken , fusion occur and the two specie become one .
barrier remain the same if hybrid be fit and reproductive  stability may occur and hybridization continue .
hybrid can be either less fit than the parent , more fit , or about the same .
usually hybrid tend to be less fit  therefore , such reproduction diminish over time , nudge the two specie to diverge further in a process call reinforcement .
this term be use because the low success of the hybrid reinforce the original speciation .
if the hybrid be as fit or more fit than the parent , the two specie may fuse back into one specie ( figure one  eight  .  two  three ) .
scientist have also observe that sometimes two specie will remain separate but also continue to interact to produce some hybrid individual  this be classify as stability because no real net change be take place .
vary rates of speciation scientist around the world study speciation , document observation both of live organism and those find in the fossil record .
as - pron - idea take shape and as research reveal new detail about how life evolf , - pron - develop model to help explain rate of speciation .
in term of how quickly speciation occur , two pattern be currently observe  gradual speciation model and punctuate equilibrium model .
in the gradual speciation model , speci diverge gradually over time in small step .
in the punctuate equilibrium model , a new species undergoe change quickly from the parent specie , and then remain largely unchanged for long period of time afterward ( figure one  eight  .  two  three ) .
this early change model be call punctuate equilibrium , because - pron - begin with a punctuated or periodic change and then remain in balance afterward .
while punctuate equilibrium suggest a fast tempo , - pron - do not necessarily exclude gradualism .
the primary influence factor on change in speciation rate be environmental condition .
under some condition , selection occur quickly or radically .
consider a species of snail that have be live with the same basic form for many thousand of year .
layer of - pron - fossil would appear similar for a long time .
when a change in the environment take place — such as a drop in the water level — a small number of organism be separate from the rest in a brief period of time , essentially form one large and one tiny population .
the tiny population face new environmental condition .
because - pron - gene pool quickly become so small , any variation that surface and that aid in survive the new condition become the predominant form .
the evolution of population live thing may be single - cell or complex , multicellular organism .
- pron - may be plant , animal , fungus , bacteria , or archaea .
this diversity result from evolution .
introduction
all life on earth be relate .
evolutionary theory state that human , beetle , plant , and bacteria all share a common ancestor , but that million of year of evolution have shape each of these organism into the form see today .
scientist consider evolution a key concept to understand life .
natural selection be one of the most dominant evolutionary force .
natural selection act to promote trait and behavior that increase an organism 's chance of survival and reproduction , while eliminate those trait and behavior that be to the organism 's detriment .
but natural selection can only , as - pron - name imply , select — - pron - can not create .
the introduction of novel trait and behavior fall on the shoulder of another evolutionary force — mutation .
mutation and other source of variation among individual , as well as the evolutionary force that act upon - pron - , alter population and specie .
this combination of process have lead to the world of life - pron - see today .
population evolution
the mechanism of inheritance , or genetic , be not understand at the time charles darwin and alfred russel wallace be develop - pron - idea of natural selection .
this lack of understanding be a stumbling block to understand many aspect of evolution .
in fact , the predominant ( and incorrect ) genetic theory of the time , blend inheritance , make - pron - difficult to understand how natural selection may operate .
darwin and wallace be unaware of the genetic work by austrian monk gregor mendel , which be publish in one  eight  six  six , not long after publication of darwin ' s book , on the origin of species .
mendel 's work be rediscover in the early twentieth century at which time geneticist be rapidly come to an understanding of the basic of inheritance .
initially , the newly discover particulate nature of gene make - pron - difficult for biologist to understand how gradual evolution could occur .
but over the next few decade genetic and evolution be integrate in what become know as the modern synthesis — the coherent understanding of the relationship between natural selection and genetic that take shape by the one  nine  four  zero and be generally accept today .
in sum , the modern synthesis describe how evolutionary process , such as natural selection , can affect a population 's genetic makeup , and , in turn , how this can result in the gradual evolution of population and specie .
the theory also connect this change of a population over time , call microevolution , with the process that give rise to new specie and high taxonomic group with widely divergent character , call macroevolution .
evolution and flu vaccines
every fall , the medium start report on flu vaccination and potential outbreak .
scientist , health expert , and institution determine recommendation for different part of the population , predict optimal production and inoculation schedule , create vaccine , and set up clinic to provide inoculation .
- pron - may think of the annual flu shot as a lot of medium hype , an important health protection , or just a briefly uncomfortable prick in - pron - arm .
but do - pron - think of - pron - in term of evolution ?
the medium hype of annual flu shot be scientifically ground in - pron - understanding of evolution .
each year , scientist across the globe strive to predict the flu strain that - pron - anticipate be most widespread and harmful in the coming year .
this knowledge be base in how flu strain have evolve over time and over the past few flu season .
scientist then work to create the most effective vaccine to combat those select strain .
hundred of million of dos be produce in a short period in order to provide vaccination to key population at the optimal time .
because virus , like the flu , evolve very quickly ( especially in evolutionary time ) , this pose quite a challenge .
virus mutate and replicate at a fast rate , so the vaccine develop to protect against last year 's flu strain may not provide the protection need against the coming year
's strain .
evolution of these virus mean continue adaption to ensure survival , include adaptation to survive previous vaccine .
population genetics recall that a gene for a particular character may have several allele , or variant , that code for different trait associate with that character .
for example , in the abo blood type system in human , three allele determine the particular blood - type protein on the surface of red blood cell .
each individual in a population of diploid organism can only carry two allele for a particular gene , but more than two may be present in the individual that make up the population .
mendel follow allele as - pron - be inherit from parent to offspring .
in the early twentieth century , biologist in a field of study know as population genetic begin to study how selective force change a population through change in allele and genotypic frequency .
the allele frequency ( or gene frequency ) be the rate at which a specific allele appear within a population .
until now - pron - have discuss evolution as a change in the characteristic of a population of organism , but behind that phenotypic change be genetic change .
in population genetic , the term evolution be define as a change in the frequency of an allele in a population .
use the abo blood type system as an example , the frequency of one of the allele , ia , be the number of copy of that allele divide by all the copy of the abo gene in the population .
for example , a study in jordan [ one ] find a frequency of ia to be two  six  .  one percent .
the ib and i zero allele make up one  three  .  four percent and six  zero  .  five percent of the allele respectively , and all of the frequency add up to one  zero  zero percent .
a change in this frequency over time would constitute evolution in the population .
the allele frequency within a give population can change depend on environmental factor  therefore , certain allele become more widespread than other during the process of natural selection .
natural selection can alter the population 's genetic makeup  for example , if a give allele confer a phenotype that allow an individual to better survive or have more offspring .
because many of those offspring will also carry the beneficial allele , and often the correspond phenotype , - pron - will have more offspring of - pron - own that also carry the allele , thus , perpetuate the cycle .
over time , the allele will spread throughout the population .
some allele will quickly become fix in this way , mean that every individual of the population will carry the allele , while detrimental mutation may be swiftly eliminate if derive from a dominant allele from the gene pool .
the gene pool be the sum of all the allele in a population .
sometimes , allele frequency within a population change randomly with no advantage to the population over exist allele frequency .
this phenomenon be call genetic drift .
natural selection and genetic drift usually occur simultaneously in population and be not isolate event .
- pron - be hard to determine which process dominate because - pron - be often nearly impossible to determine the because of change in allele frequency at each occurrence .
an event that initiate an allele frequency change in an isolated part of the population , which be not typical of the original population , be call the founder effect .
natural selection , random drift , and founder effect can lead to significant change in the genome of a population .
hardy - weinberg principle of equilibrium
in the early twentieth century , english mathematician godfrey hardy and german physician wilhelm weinberg state the principle of equilibrium to describe the genetic makeup of a population .
the theory , which later become know as the hardy - weinberg principle of equilibrium , state that a population 's allele and genotype frequency be inherently stable— unless some kind of evolutionary force be act upon the population , neither the allele nor the genotypic frequency would change .
the hardy - weinberg principle assume condition with no mutation , migration , emigration , or selective pressure for or against genotype , plus an infinite population  while no population can satisfy those condition , the principle offer a useful model against which to compare real population change .
work under this theory , population geneticist represent different allele as different variable in - pron - mathematical model .
the variable p , for example , often represent the frequency of a particular allele , say y for the trait of yellow in mendel 's pea , while the variable q represent the frequency of y allele that confer the color green .
if these be the only two possible allele for a give locus in the population , p + q = one .
in other word , all the p allele and all the q allele make up all of the allele for that locus that be find in the population .
but what ultimately interest most biologist be not the frequency of different allele , but the frequency of the result genotype , know as the population 's genetic structure , from which scientist can surmise the distribution of phenotype .
if the phenotype be observe , only the genotype of the homozygous recessive allele can be know  the calculation provide an estimate of the remain genotype .
since each individual carry two allele per gene , if the allele frequency ( p and q ) be know , predict the frequency of these genotype be a simple mathematical calculation to determine the probability of get these genotype if two allele be draw at random from the gene pool .
so in the above scenario , an individual pea plant could be pp ( yy ) , and thus produce yellow pea  pq ( yy ) , also yellow  or qq ( yy ) , and thus produce green pea ( figure one  nine  .  two ) .
in other word , the frequency of pp individual be simply p two  the frequency of pq individual be two pq  and the frequency of qq individual be q two .
and , again , if p and q be the only two possible allele for a give trait in the population , these genotype frequency will sum to one  p two + two pq + q two = one .
when population be in the hardy - weinberg equilibrium , the allelic frequency be stable from generation to generation and the distribution of allele can be determine from the hardy - weinberg equation .
if the allelic frequency measure in the field differ from the predict value , scientist can make inference about what evolutionary force be at play .
in plant , violet flower color ( v ) be dominant over white ( v ) .
if p = zero  .  eight and q = zero  .  two in a population of five  zero  zero plant , how many individual would - pron - expect to be homozygous dominant ( vv ) , heterozygous ( vv ) , and homozygous recessive ( vv ) ?
how many plant would - pron - expect to have violet flower , and how many would have white flower ?
in theory , if a population be at equilibrium — that is , there be no evolutionary force act upon - pron - — generation after generation would have the same gene pool and genetic structure , and these equation would all hold true all of the time .
of course , even hardy and weinberg recognize that no natural population be immune to evolution .
population in nature be constantly change in genetic makeup due to drift , mutation , possibly migration , and selection .
as a result , the only way to determine the exact distribution of phenotype in a population be to go out and count - pron - .
but the hardy - weinberg principle give scientist a mathematical baseline of a non - evolve population to which - pron - can compare evolve population and thereby infer what evolutionary force may be at play .
if the frequency of allele or genotype deviate from the value expect from the hardy - weinberg equation , then the population be evolve .
individual of a population often display different phenotype , or express different allele of a particular gene , refer to as polymorphism .
population with two or more variation of particular characteristic be call polymorphic .
the distribution of phenotype among individual , know as the population variation , be influence by a number of factor , include the population 's genetic structure and the environment ( figure one  nine  .  three ) .
understand the source of a phenotypic variation in a population be important for determine how a population will evolve in response to different evolutionary pressure .
population genetics genetic variance natural selection and some of the other evolutionary force can only act on heritable trait , namely an organism 's genetic code .
because allele be pass from parent to offspring , those that confer beneficial trait or behavior may be select for , while deleterious allele may be select against .
acquired trait , for the most part , be not heritable .
for example , if an athlete work out in the gym every day , build up muscle strength , the athlete 's offspring will not necessarily grow up to be a body builder .
if there be a genetic basis for the ability to run fast , on the other hand , this may be pass to a child .
heritability be the fraction of phenotype variation that can be attribute to genetic difference , or genetic variance , among individual in a population .
the great the hereditability of a population 's phenotypic variation , the more susceptible - pron - be to the evolutionary force that act on heritable variation .
the diversity of allele and genotype within a population be call genetic variance .
when scientist be involve in the breeding of a specie , such as with animal in zoo and nature preserve , - pron - try to increase a population 's genetic variance to preserve as much of the phenotypic diversity as - pron - can .
this also help reduce the risk associate with inbreed , the mating of closely relate individual , which can have the undesirable effect of bring together deleterious recessive mutation that can because abnormality and susceptibility to disease .
for example , a disease that be cause by a rare , recessive allele may exist in a population , but - pron - will only manifest - pron - when an individual carry two copy of the allele .
because the allele be rare in a normal , healthy population with unrestricted habitat , the chance that two carrier will mate be low , and even then , only two  five percent of - pron - offspring will inherit the disease allele from both parent .
while - pron - be likely to happen at some point , - pron - will not happen frequently enough for natural selection to be able to swiftly eliminate the allele from the population , and as a result , the allele will be maintain at low level in the gene pool .
however , if a family of carrier begin to interbreed with each other , this will dramatically increase the likelihood of two carrier mat and eventually produce diseased offspring , a phenomenon know as inbreed depression .
change in allele frequency that be identify in a population can shed light on how - pron - be evolve .
in addition to natural selection , there be other evolutionary force that could be in play  genetic drift , gene flow , mutation , nonrandom mating , and environmental variance .
genetic drift
the theory of natural selection stem from the observation that some individual in a population be more likely to survive longer and have more offspring than other  thus , - pron - will pass on more of - pron - gene to the next generation .
a big , powerful male gorilla , for example , be much more likely than a small , weak one to become the population 's silverback , the pack 's leader who mat far more than the other male of the group .
the pack leader will father more offspring , who share half of - pron - gene , and be likely to also grow big and strong like - pron - father .
over time , the gene for big size will increase in frequency in the population , and the population will , as a result , grow large on average .
that is , this would occur if this particular selection pressure , or drive selective force , be the only one act on the population .
in other example , good camouflage or a strong resistance to drought may pose a selection pressure .
another way a population 's allele and genotype frequency can change be genetic drift ( figure one  nine  .  four ) , which be simply the effect of chance .
by chance , some individual will have more offspring than other — not due to an advantage confer by some genetically - encode trait , but just because one male happen to be in the right place at the right time ( when the receptive female walk by ) or because the other one happen to be in the wrong place at the wrong time ( when a fox be hunt ) .
genetic drift in a population can lead to the elimination of an allele from a population by chance .
in this example , rabbit with the brown coat color allele ( b ) be dominant over rabbit with the white coat color allele ( b ) .
in the first generation , the two allele occur with equal frequency in the population , result in p and q value of .  five .
only half of the individual reproduce , result in a second generation with p and q value of .  seven
and .  three , respectively .
only two individual in the second generation reproduce , and by chance these individual be homozygous dominant for brown coat color .
as a result , in the third generation the recessive b allele be lose .
small population be more susceptible to the force of genetic drift .
large population , on the other hand , be buffer against the effect of chance .
if one individual of a population of one  zero individual happen to die at a young age before - pron - leave any offspring to the next generation , all of - pron - genes— one  /  one  zero of the population 's gene pool — will be suddenly lose .
in a population of one  zero  zero , that ' only one percent of the overall gene pool  therefore , - pron - be much less impactful on the population 's genetic structure .
genetic drift can also be magnify by natural event , such as a natural disaster that kill — at random — a large portion of the population .
know as the bottleneck effect , - pron - result in a large portion of the genome suddenly be wipe out ( figure one  nine  .  five ) .
in one fell swoop , the genetic structure of the survivor become the genetic structure of the entire population , which may be very different from the pre - disaster population .
population leaf to start a new population in a new location or if a population get divide by a physical barrier of some kind .
in this situation , those individual be unlikely to be representative of the entire population , which result in the founder effect .
the founder effect occur when the genetic structure change to match that of the new population 's founding father and mother .
the founder effect be believe to have be a key factor in the genetic history of the afrikaner population of dutch settler in south africa , as evidence by mutation that be common in afrikaners but rare in most other population .
this be likely due to the fact that a high - than - normal proportion of the founding colonist carry these mutation .
as a result , the population express unusually high incidence of huntington 's disease ( hd ) and fanconi anemia ( fa ) , a genetic disorder know to because blood marrow and congenital abnormality — even cancer .
[ two ] testing the bottleneck effect question  how do natural disaster affect the genetic structure of a population ?
background  when much of a population be suddenly wipe out by an earthquake or hurricane , the individual that survive the event be usually a random sampling of the original group .
as a result , the genetic makeup of the population can change dramatically .
this phenomenon be know as the bottleneck effect .
hypothesis  repeat natural disaster will yield different population genetic structure  therefore , each time this experiment be run , the result will vary .
test the hypothesis  count out the original population use different color bead .
for example , red , blue , and yellow bead may represent red , blue , and yellow individual .
after record the number of each individual in the original population , place - pron - all in a bottle with a narrow neck that will only allow a few bead out at a time .
then , pour one  /  three of the bottle 's content into a bowl .
this represent the survive individual after a natural disaster kill a majority of the population .
count the number of the different color bead in the bowl , and record - pron - .
then , place all of the bead back in the bottle and repeat the experiment four more time .
analyze the datum 
compare the five population that result from the experiment .
do the population all contain the same number of different color bead , or do - pron - vary ?
remember , these population all come from the same exact parent population .
form a conclusion  most likely , the five result population will differ quite dramatically .
this be because natural disaster be not selective — - pron - kill and spare individual at random .
now think about how this may affect a real population .
what happen when a hurricane hit the mississippi gulf coast ?
how do the seabird that live on the beach fare ?
gene flow
another important evolutionary force be gene flow  the flow of allele in and out of a population due to the migration of individual or gamete ( figure one  nine  .  six ) .
while some population be fairly stable , other experience more flux .
many plant , for example , send - pron - pollen far and wide , by wind or by bird , to pollinate other population of the same specie some distance away .
even a population that may initially appear to be stable , such as a pride of lion , can experience - pron - fair share of immigration and emigration as develop male leave - pron - mother to seek out a new pride with genetically unrelated female .
this variable flow of individual in and out of the group not only change the gene structure of the population , but - pron - can also introduce new genetic variation to population in different geological location and habitat .
mutation mutations be change to an organism 's dna and be an important driver of diversity in population .
specie evolve because of the accumulation of mutation that occur over time .
the appearance of new mutation be the most common way to introduce novel genotypic and phenotypic variance .
some mutation be unfavorable or harmful and be quickly eliminate from the population by natural selection .
other be beneficial and will spread through the population .
whether or not a mutation be beneficial or harmful be determine by whether - pron - help an organism survive to sexual maturity and reproduce .
some mutation do not do anything and can linger , unaffected by natural selection , in the genome .
some can have a dramatic effect on a gene and the result phenotype .
nonrandom mating
if individual nonrandomly mate with - pron - peer , the result can be a change population .
there be many reason nonrandom mating occur .
one reason be simple mate choice  for example , female peahen may prefer peacock with big , bright tail .
trait that lead to more mating for an individual become select for by natural selection .
one common form of mate choice , call assortative mating , be an individual 's preference to mate with partner who be phenotypically similar to - pron - .
another because of nonrandom mating be physical location .
this be especially true in large population spread over large geographic distance where not all individual will have equal access to one another .
some may be mile apart through wood or over rough terrain , while other may live immediately nearby .
environmental variance genes be not the only player involve in determine population variation .
phenotype be also influence by other factor , such as the environment ( figure one  nine  .  seven ) .
a beachgoer be likely to have dark skin than a city dweller , for example , due to regular exposure to the sun , an environmental factor .
some major characteristic , such as gender , be determine by the environment for some specie .
for example , some turtle and other reptile have temperature - dependent sex determination ( tsd ) .
tsd mean that individual develop into male if - pron - egg be incubate within a certain temperature range , or female at a different temperature range .
the sex of the american alligator ( alligator mississippiensis ) be determine by the temperature at which the egg be incubate .
egg incubate at three  zero ° c produce female , and egg incubate at three  three ° c produce male .
( credit  steve hillebrand , usfws )
geographic separation between population can lead to difference in the phenotypic variation between those population .
such geographical variation be see between most population and can be significant .
one type of geographic variation , call a cline , can be see as population of a give specie vary gradually across an ecological gradient .
specie of warmblooded animal , for example , tend to have large body in the cooler climate closer to the earth 's pole , allow - pron - to better conserve heat .
this be consider a latitudinal cline .
alternatively , flower plant tend to bloom at different time depend on where - pron - be along the slope of a mountain , know as an altitudinal cline .
if there be gene flow between the population , the individual will likely show gradual difference in phenotype along the cline .
restrict gene flow , on the other hand , can lead to abrupt difference , even speciation .
adaptive evolution natural selection only act on the population 's heritable trait  select for beneficial allele and thus increase - pron - frequency in the population , while select against deleterious allele and thereby decrease - pron - frequency — a process know as adaptive evolution .
natural selection do not act on individual allele , however , but on entire organism .
an individual may carry a very beneficial genotype with a result phenotype that , for example , increase the ability to reproduce ( fecundity ) , but if that same individual also carry an allele that result in a fatal childhood disease , that fecundity phenotype will not be pass on to the next generation because the individual will not live to reach reproductive age .
natural selection act at the level of the individual  - pron - select for individual with great contribution to the gene pool of the next generation , know as an organism 's evolutionary ( darwinian ) fitness .
fitness be often quantifiable and be measure by scientist in the field .
however , - pron - be not the absolute fitness of an individual that count , but rather how - pron - compare to the other organism in the population .
this concept , call relative fitness , allow researcher to determine which individual be contribute additional offspring to the next generation , and thus , how the population may evolve .
there be several way selection can affect population variation  stabilize selection , directional selection , diversify selection , frequency - dependent selection , and sexual selection .
as natural selection influence the allele frequenci in a population , individual can either become more or less genetically similar and the phenotype display can become more similar or more disparate .
stabilize selection
if natural selection favor an average phenotype , select against extreme variation , the population will undergo stabilize selection ( figure one  nine  .  eight ) .
in a population of mouse that live in the wood , for example , natural selection be likely to favor individual that good blend in with the forest floor and be less likely to be spot by predator .
assume the ground be a fairly consistent shade of brown , those mouse whose fur be most closely match to that color will be most likely to survive and reproduce , pass on - pron - gene for - pron - brown coat .
mouse that carry allele that make - pron - a bit light or a bit dark will stand out against the ground and be more likely to fall victim to predation .
as a result of this selection , the population 's genetic variance will decrease .
directional selection
when the environment change , population will often undergo directional selection ( figure one  nine  .  eight ) , which select for phenotype at one end of the spectrum of exist variation .
a classic example of this type of selection be the evolution of the peppered moth in eighteenth - and nineteenth - century england .
prior to the industrial revolution , the moth be predominately light in color , which allow - pron - to blend in with the light - color tree and lichen in - pron - environment .
but as soot begin spew from factory , the tree become darken , and the light - color moth become easy for predatory bird to spot .
over time , the frequency of the melanic form of the moth increase because - pron - have a high survival rate in habitat affect by air pollution because - pron - dark coloration blend with the sooty tree .
similarly , the hypothetical mouse population may evolve to take on a different coloration if something be to because the forest floor where - pron - live to change color .
the result of this type of selection be a shift in the population 's genetic variance toward the new , fit phenotype .
diversify selection
sometimes two or more distinct phenotype can each have - pron - advantage and be select for by natural selection , while the intermediate phenotype be , on average , less fit .
know as diversify selection ( figure one  nine  .  eight ) , this be see in many population of animal that have multiple male form .
large , dominant alpha male obtain mate by brute force , while small male can sneak in for furtive copulation with the female in an alpha male 's territory .
in this case , both the alpha male and the " sneak " male will be select for , but medium - sized male , which can not overtake the alpha male and be too big to sneak copulation , be select against .
diversify selection can also occur when environmental change favor individual on either end of the phenotypic spectrum .
imagine a population of mouse live at the beach where there be light - colored sand intersperse with patch of tall grass .
in this scenario , light - colored mouse that blend in with the sand would be favor , as well as dark - colored mouse that can hide in the grass .
medium - color mouse , on the other hand , would not blend in with either the grass or the sand , and would thus be more likely to be eat by predator .
the result of this type of selection be increase genetic variance as the population become more diverse .
different type of natural selection can impact the distribution of phenotype within a population .
in ( a ) stabilize selection , an average phenotype be favor .
in ( b ) directional selection , a change in the environment shift the spectrum of phenotype observe .
in ( c ) diversify selection , two or more extreme phenotype be select for , while the average phenotype be select against .
frequency - dependent selection another type of selection , call frequency - dependent selection , favor phenotype that be either common ( positive frequency - dependent selection ) or rare ( negative frequency - dependent selection ) .
an interesting example of this type of selection be see in a unique group of lizard of the pacific northwest .
male common side - blotch lizard come in three throat - color pattern  orange , blue , and yellow .
each of these form have a different reproductive strategy  orange male be the strong and can fight other male for access to - pron - female  blue male be medium - sized and form strong pair bond with - pron - mate  and yellow male ( figure one  nine  .  nine ) be the small , and look a bit like female , which allow - pron - to sneak copulation .
like a game of rock - paper - scissor , orange beat blue , blue beat yellow , and yellow beat orange in the competition for female .
that is , the big , strong orange male can fight off the blue male to mate with the blue 's pairbonded female , the blue male be successful at guard - pron - mate against yellow sneaker male , and the yellow male can sneak copulation from the potential mate of the large , polygynous orange male .
a yellow - throat side - blotch lizard be small than either the blue - throated or orange - throat male and appear a bit like the female of the specie , allow - pron - to sneak copulation .
in this scenario , orange male will be favor by natural selection when the population be dominate by blue male , blue male will thrive when the population be mostly yellow male , and yellow male will be select for when orange male be the most populous .
as a result , population of side - blotch lizard cycle in the distribution of these phenotype — in one generation , orange may be predominant , and then yellow male will begin to rise in frequency .
once yellow male make up a majority of the population , blue male will be select for .
finally , when blue male become common , orange male will once again be favor .
negative frequency - dependent selection serve to increase the population 's genetic variance by select for rare phenotype , whereas positive frequency - dependent selection usually decrease genetic variance by select for common phenotype .
sexual selection males and female of certain specie be often quite different from one another in way beyond the reproductive organ .
male be often large , for example , and display many elaborate color and adornment , like the peacock 's tail , while female tend to be small and duller in decoration .
such difference be know as sexual dimorphism ( figure one  nine  .  one  zero ) , which arise from the fact that in many population , particularly animal population , there be more variance in the reproductive success of the male than there be of the female .
that is , some male — often the big , strong , or more decorate male — get the vast majority of the total mating , while other receive none .
this can occur because the male be good at fight off other male , or because female will choose to mate with the big or more decorate male .
in either case , this variation in reproductive success generate a strong selection pressure among male to get those mating , result in the evolution of big body size and elaborate ornament to get the females' attention .
female , on the other hand , tend to get a handful of select mating  therefore , - pron - be more likely to select more desirable male .
sexual dimorphism vary widely among specie , of course , and some specie be even sex - role reverse .
in such case , female tend to have a great variance in - pron - reproductive success than male and be correspondingly select for the big body size and elaborate trait usually characteristic of male .
sexual dimorphism be observe in ( a ) peacock and peahen , ( b ) argiope appensa spider ( the female spider be the large one ) , and in ( c ) wood duck the selection pressure on male and female to obtain mating be know as sexual selection  - pron - can result in the development of secondary sexual characteristic that do not benefit the individual 's likelihood of survival but help to maximize - pron - reproductive success .
sexual selection can be so strong that - pron - select for trait that be actually detrimental to the individual 's survival .
think , once again , about the peacock 's tail .
while - pron - be beautiful and the male with the large , most colorful tail be more likely to win the female , - pron - be not the most practical appendage .
in addition to be more visible to predator , - pron - make the male slow in - pron - attempt escape .
there be some evidence that this risk , in fact , be why female like the big tail in the first place .
the speculation be that large tail carry risk , and only the good male survive that risk  the big the tail , the more fit the male .
this idea be know as the handicap principle .
the good gene hypothesis state that male develop these impressive ornament to show off - pron - efficient metabolism or - pron - ability to fight disease .
female then choose male with the most impressive trait because - pron - signal - pron - genetic superiority , which - pron - will then pass on to - pron - offspring .
though - pron - may be argue that female should not be picky because - pron - will likely reduce - pron - number of offspring , if good male father more fit offspring , - pron - may be beneficial .
few , healthy offspring may increase the chance of survival more than many , weak offspring .
thus give female a way to find the fit mates— male that will pass the good gene to - pron - offspring .
no perfect organism natural selection be a drive force in evolution and can generate population that be better adapt to survive and successfully reproduce in - pron - environment .
but natural selection can not produce the perfect organism .
natural selection can only select on exist variation in the population  - pron - do not create anything from scratch .
thus , - pron - be limit by a population 's exist genetic variance and whatev new allele arise through mutation and gene flow .
natural selection be also limited because - pron - work at the level of individual , not allele , and some allele be link due to - pron - physical proximity in the genome , make - pron - more likely to be pass on together ( linkage disequilibrium ) .
any give individual may carry some beneficial allele and some unfavorable allele .
- pron - be the net effect of these allele , or the organism 's fitness , upon which natural selection can act .
as a result , good allele can be lose if - pron - be carry by individual that also have several overwhelmingly bad allele  likewise , bad allele can be keep if - pron - be carry by individual that have enough good allele to result in an overall fitness benefit .
furthermore , natural selection can be constrain by the relationship between different polymorphism .
one morph may confer a high fitness than another , but may not increase in frequency due to the fact that go from the less beneficial to the more beneficial trait would require go through a less beneficial phenotype .
think back to the mouse that live at the beach .
some be light - colored and blend in with the sand , while other be dark and blend in with the patch of grass .
the dark - colored mouse may be , overall , more fit than the light - colored mouse , and at first glance , one may expect the lightcolor mouse be select for a dark coloration .
but remember that the intermediate phenotype , a medium - color coat , be very bad for the mouse — - pron - can not blend in with either the sand or the grass and be more likely to be eat by predator .
as a result , the light - colored mouse would not be select for a dark coloration because those individual that begin move in that direction ( begin be select for a dark coat ) would be less fit than those that stay light .
finally , - pron - be important to understand that not all evolution be adaptive .
while natural selection select the fit individual and often result in a more fit population overall , other force of evolution , include genetic drift and gene flow , often do the opposite  introduce deleterious allele to the population 's gene pool .
evolution have no purpose — - pron - be not change a population into a preconceived ideal .
- pron - be simply the sum of the various force describe in this chapter and how - pron - influence the genetic and phenotypic variance of a population .
phylogenies and the history of life
the life of a bee be very different from the life of a flower , but the two organism be relate .
both be member the domain eukarya and have cell contain many similar organelle , gene , and protein .
introduction
this bee and echinacea flower ( figure two  zero  .  one ) could not look more different , yet - pron - be relate , as be all live organism on earth .
by follow pathway of similarity and change — both visible and genetic
—
scientist seek to map the evolutionary past of how life develop from single - cell organism to the tremendous collection of creature that have germinate , crawl , float , swam , fly , and walk on this planet .
organize life on earth
in scientific term , the evolutionary history and relationship of an organism or group of organism be call - pron - phylogeny .
a phylogeny describe the relationship of an organism , such as from which organism - pron - be think to have evolve , to which speci - pron - be most closely relate , and so forth .
phylogenetic relationship provide information on share ancestry but not necessarily on how organism be similar or different .
phylogenetic trees scientists use a tool call a phylogenetic tree to show the evolutionary pathway and connection among organism .
a phylogenetic tree be a diagram use to reflect evolutionary relationship among organism or group of organism .
scientist consider phylogenetic tree to be a hypothesis of the evolutionary past since one can not go back to confirm the propose relationship .
in other word , a " tree of life " can be construct to illustrate when different organism evolve and to show the relationship among different organism ( figure two  zero  .  two ) .
unlike a taxonomic classification diagram , a phylogenetic tree can be read like a map of evolutionary history .
many phylogenetic tree have a single lineage at the base represent a common ancestor .
scientist call such tree root , which mean there be a single ancestral lineage ( typically draw from the bottom or leave ) to which all organism represent in the diagram relate .
notice in the rooted phylogenetic tree that the three domains— bacteria , archaea , and eukarya — diverge from a single point and branch off .
the small branch that plant and animal ( include human ) occupy in this diagram show how recent and miniscule these group be compare with other organism .
unrooted tree do not show a common ancestor but do show relationship among specie .
both of these phylogenetic tree show the relationship of the three domain of life — bacteria , archaea , and eukarya — but the ( a ) root tree attempt to identify when various specie diverge from a common ancestor while the ( b ) unrooted tree do not .
( credit a  modification of work by eric gaba )
in a root tree , the branching indicate evolutionary relationship ( figure two  zero  .  three ) .
the point where a split occur , call a branch point , represent where a single lineage evolve into a distinct new one .
a lineage that evolve early from the root and remain unbranched be call basal taxon .
when two lineage stem from the same branch point , - pron - be call sister taxa .
a branch with more than two lineage be call a polytomy and serve to illustrate where scientist have not definitively determine all of the relationship .
- pron - be important to note that although sister taxa and polytomy do share an ancestor , - pron - do not mean that the group of organism split or evolve from each other .
organism in two taxa may have split apart at a specific branch point , but neither taxa give rise to the other .
the root of a phylogenetic tree indicate that an ancestral lineage give rise to all organism on the tree .
a branch point indicate where two lineage diverge .
a lineage that evolve early and remain unbranched be a basal taxon .
when two lineage stem from the same branch point , - pron - be sister taxa .
a branch with more than two lineage be a polytomy .
the diagram above can serve as a pathway to understand evolutionary history .
the pathway can be trace from the origin of life to any individual specie by navigate through the evolutionary branch between the two point .
also , by start with a single specie and trace back towards the " trunk " of the tree , one can discover that specie ' ancestor , as well as where lineage share a common ancestry .
in addition , the tree can be use to study entire group of organism .
another point to mention on phylogenetic tree structure be that rotation at branch point do not change the information .
for example , if a branch point be rotate and the taxon order change , this would not alter the information because the evolution of each taxon from the branch point be independent of the other .
many discipline within the study of biology contribute to understand how past and present life evolve over time  these discipline together contribute to building , updating , and maintain the " tree of life .
"
information be use to organize and classify organism base on evolutionary relationship in a scientific field call systematic .
datum may be collect from fossil , from study the structure of body part or molecule use by an organism , and by dna analysis .
by combine datum from many source , scientist can put together the phylogeny of an organism  since phylogenetic tree be hypothesis , - pron - will continue to change as new type of life be discover and new information be learn .
limitation of phylogenetic trees
- pron - may be easy to assume that more closely related organism look more alike , and while this be often the case , - pron - be not always true .
if two closely related lineage evolve under significantly varied surrounding or after the evolution of a major new adaptation , - pron - be possible for the two group to appear more different than other group that be not as closely relate .
for example , the phylogenetic tree in figure two  zero  .  four show that lizard and rabbit both have amniotic egg , whereas frog do not  yet lizard and frog appear more similar than lizard and rabbit .
this ladder - like phylogenetic tree of vertebrate be root by an organism that lack a vertebral column .
at each branch point , organism with different character be place in different group base on the characteristic - pron - share .
another aspect of phylogenetic tree be that , unless otherwise indicate , the branch do not account for length of time , only the evolutionary order .
in other word , the length of a branch do not typically mean more time pass , nor do a short branch mean less time passed— unless specify on the diagram .
for example , in figure two  zero  .  four , the tree do not indicate how much time pass between the evolution of amniotic egg and hair .
what the tree do show be the order in which thing take place .
again use figure two  zero  .  four , the tree show that the old trait be the vertebral column , follow by hinged jaw , and so forth .
remember that any phylogenetic tree be a part of the great whole , and like a real tree , - pron - do not grow in only one direction after a new branch develop .
so , for the organism in figure two  zero  .  four , just because a vertebral column evolve do not mean that invertebrate evolution cease , - pron - only mean that a new branch form .
also , group that be not closely relate , but evolve under similar condition , may appear more phenotypically similar to each other than to a close relative .
the levels of classification taxonomy ( which literally mean " arrangement law " ) be the science of classify organism to construct internationally share classification system with each organism place into more and more inclusive grouping .
think about how a grocery store be organize .
one large space be divide into department , such as produce , dairy , and meat .
then each department further divide into aisle , then each aisle into category and brand , and then finally a single product .
this organization from large to small , more specific category be call a hierarchical system .
the taxonomic classification system ( also call the linnaean system after - pron - inventor , carl linnaeus , a swedish botanist , zoologist , and physician ) use a hierarchical model .
move from the point of origin , the group become more specific , until one branch end as a single specie .
for example , after the common beginning of all life , scientist divide organism into three large category call a domain  bacteria , archaea , and eukarya .
within each domain be a second category call a kingdom .
after kingdom , the subsequent category of increase specificity be  phylum , class , order , family , genus , and specie ( figure two  zero  .  five ) .
the taxonomic classification system use a hierarchical model to organize live organism into increasingly specific category .
the common dog , canis lupus familiaris , be a subspecie of canis lupus , which also include the wolf and dingo .
( credit " dog "  modification of work by janneke vreugdenhil )
the kingdom animalia stem from the eukarya domain .
for the common dog , the classification level would be as show in figure two  zero  .  five .
therefore , the full name of an organism technically have eight term .
for the dog , - pron - be  eukarya , animalia , chordata , mammalia , carnivora , canidae , canis , and lupus .
notice that each name be capitalize except for specie , and the genus and specie name be italicize .
scientist generally refer to an organism only by - pron - genus and specie , which be - pron - two - word scientific name , in what be call binomial nomenclature .
therefore , the scientific name of the dog be canis lupus .
the name at each level be also call a taxon .
in other word , dog be in order carnivora .
carnivora be the name of the taxon at the order level  canidae be the taxon at the family level , and so forth .
organism also have a common name that people typically use , in this case , dog .
note that the dog be additionally a subspecie  the " familiaris " in canis lupus familiaris .
subspecie be member of the same specie that be capable of mat and reproduce viable offspring , but - pron - be consider separate subspecie due to geographic or behavioral isolation or other factor .
figure two  zero  .  six show how the level move toward specificity with other organism .
notice how the dog share a domain with the wide diversity of organism , include plant and butterfly .
at each sublevel , the organism become more similar because - pron - be more closely relate .
historically , scientist classify organism use characteristic , but as dna technology develop , more precise phylogeny have be determine .
at each sublevel in the taxonomic classification system , organism become more similar .
dog and wolf be the same specie because - pron - can breed and produce viable offspring , but - pron - be different enough to be classify as different subspecie .
recent genetic analysis and other advancement have find that some earlier phylogenetic classification do not align with the evolutionary past  therefore , change and update must be make as new discovery occur .
recall that phylogenetic tree be hypothesis and be modify as datum become available .
in addition , classification historically have focus on group organism mainly by share characteristic and do not necessarily illustrate how the various group relate to each other from an evolutionary perspective .
for example , despite the fact that a hippopotamus resemble a pig more than a whale , the hippopotamus may be the close living relative of the whale .
determine evolutionary relationships scientists must collect accurate information that allow - pron - to make evolutionary connection among organism .
similar to detective work , scientist must use evidence to uncover the fact .
in the case of phylogeny , evolutionary investigation focus on two type of evidence  morphologic ( form and function ) and genetic .
two options for similarities
in general , organism that share similar physical feature and genome tend to be more closely related than those that do not .
such feature that overlap both morphologically ( in form ) and genetically be refer to as homologous structure  - pron - stem from developmental similarity that be base on evolution .
for example , the bone in the wing of bat and bird have homologous structure .
bat and bird wing be homologous structure , indicate that bat and bird share a common evolutionary past .
notice
- pron - be not simply a single bone , but rather a grouping of several bone arrange in a similar way .
the more complex the feature , the more likely any kind of overlap be due to a common evolutionary past .
imagine two people from different country both invent a car with all the same part and in exactly the same arrangement without any previous or share knowledge .
that outcome would be highly improbable .
however , if two people both invent a hammer , - pron - would be reasonable to conclude that both could have the original idea without the help of the other .
the same relationship between complexity and share evolutionary history be true for homologous structure in organism .
mislead appearance
some organism may be very closely relate , even though a minor genetic change cause a major morphological difference to make - pron - look quite different .
similarly , unrelated organism may be distantly relate , but appear very much alike .
this usually happen because both organism be in common adaptation that evolve within similar environmental condition .
when similar characteristic occur because of environmental constraint and not due to a close evolutionary relationship , - pron - be call an analogy or homoplasy .
for example , insect use wing to fly like bat and bird , but the wing structure and embryonic origin be completely different .
these be call analogous structure ( figure two  zero  .  eight ) .
similar trait can be either homologous or analogous .
homologous structure share a similar embryonic origin  analogous organ have a similar function .
for example , the bone in the front flipper of a whale be homologous to the bone in the human arm .
these structure be not analogous .
the wing of a butterfly and the wing of a bird be analogous but not homologous .
some structure be both analogous and homologous  the wing of a bird and the wing of a bat be both homologous and analogous .
scientist must determine which type of similarity a feature exhibit to decipher the phylogeny of the organism be study .
the ( c ) wing of a honeybee be similar in shape to a ( b ) bird wing and ( a ) bat wing , and - pron - serve the same function .
however , the honeybee wing be not compose of bone and have a distinctly different structure and embryonic origin .
these wing type ( insect versus bat and bird ) illustrate an analogy — similar structure that do not share an evolutionary history .
molecular comparisons
with the advancement of dna technology , the area of molecular systematic , which describe the use of information on the molecular level include dna analysis , have blossom .
new computer program not only confirm many earlier classify organism , but also uncover previously make error .
as with physical characteristic , even the dna sequence can be tricky to read in some case .
for some situation , two very closely related organism can appear unrelated if a mutation occur that cause a shift in the genetic code .
an insertion or deletion mutation would move each nucleotide base over one place , cause two similar code to appear unrelated .
sometimes two segment of dna code in distantly relate organism randomly share a high percentage of base in the same location , cause these organism to appear closely related when - pron - be not .
for both of these situation , computer technology have be develop to help identify the actual relationship , and , ultimately , the couple use of both morphologic and molecular information be more effective in determine phylogeny .
why do phylogeny matter ?
evolutionary biologist could list many reason why understanding phylogeny be important to everyday life in human society .
for botanist , phylogeny act as a guide to discover new plant that can be use to benefit people .
think of all the way human use plant — food , medicine , and clothing be a few example .
if a plant contain a compound that be effective in treat cancer , scientist may want to examine all of the relative of that plant for other useful drug .
a research team in china identify a segment of dna think to be common to some medicinal plant in the family fabaceae ( the legume family ) and work to identify which specie have this segment ( figure two  zero  .  nine ) .
after test plant specie in this family , the team find a dna marker ( a know location on a chromosome that enable - pron - to identify the specie ) present .
then , use the dna to uncover phylogenetic relationship , the team could identify whether a newly discover plant be in this family and assess - pron - potential medicinal property .
build phylogenetic trees
how do scientist construct phylogenetic tree ?
after the homologous and analogous trait be sort , scientist often organize the homologous trait use a system call cladistic .
this system sort organism into clade  group of organism that descend from a single ancestor .
for example , in figure two  zero  .  one  zero , all of the organism in the orange region evolve from a single ancestor that have amniotic egg .
consequently , all of these organism also have amniotic egg and make a single clade , also call a monophyletic group .
clade must include all of the descendant from a branch point .
clade can vary in size depend on which branch point be be reference .
the important factor be that all of the organism in the clade or monophyletic group stem from a single point on the tree .
this can be remember because monophyletic break down into " mono , " mean one , and " phyletic , " mean evolutionary relationship .
figure two  zero  .  one  one show various example of clade .
notice how each clade come from a single point , whereas the non - clade group show branch that do not share a single point .
all the organism within a clade stem from a single point on the tree .
a clade may contain multiple group , as in the case of animal , fungus and plant , or a single group , as in the case of flagellate .
group that diverge at a different branch point , or that do not include all group in a single branch point , be not consider clade .
share characteristics organisms evolve from common ancestor and then diversify .
scientist use the phrase " descent with modification " because even though related organism have many of the same characteristic and genetic code , change occur .
this pattern repeat over and over as one go through the phylogenetic tree of life  one .
a change in the genetic makeup of an organism lead to a new trait which become prevalent in the group .
two .
many organism descend from this point and have this trait .
three .
new variation continue to arise  some be adaptive and persist , lead to new trait .
four .
with new trait , a new branch point be determine ( go back to step one and repeat ) .
if a characteristic be find in the ancestor of a group , - pron - be consider a share ancestral character because all of the organism in the taxon or clade have that trait .
the vertebrate in figure two  zero  .  one  zero be a share ancestral character .
now consider the amniotic egg characteristic in the same figure .
only some of the organism in figure two  zero  .  one  zero have this trait , and to those that do , - pron - be call a share derive character because this trait derive at some point but do not include all of the ancestor in the tree .
the tricky aspect to share ancestral and share derive character be the fact that these term be relative .
the same trait can be consider one or the other depend on the particular diagram be use .
return to figure two  zero  .  one  zero , note that the amniotic egg be a share ancestral character for the amniota clade , while have hair be a share derived character for some organism in this group .
these term help scientist distinguish between clade in the building of phylogenetic tree .
choose the right relationships imagine be the person responsible for organize all of the item in a department store properly — an overwhelming task .
organize the evolutionary relationship of all life on earth prove much more difficult  scientist must span enormous block of time and work with information from long - extinct organism .
try to decipher the proper connection , especially give the presence of homology and analogy , make the task of build an accurate tree of life extraordinarily difficult .
add to that the advancement of dna technology , which now provide large quantity of genetic sequence to be use and analyze .
taxonomy be a subjective discipline  many organism have more than one connection to each other , so each taxonomist will decide the order of connection .
to aid in the tremendous task of describe phylogeny accurately , scientist often use a concept call maximum parsimony , which mean that event occur in the simple , most obvious way .
for example , if a group of people enter a forest preserve to go hiking , base on the principle of maximum parsimony , one could predict that most of the people would hike on establish trail rather than forge new one .
for scientist decipher evolutionary pathway , the same idea be use  the pathway of evolution probably include the few major event that coincide with the evidence at hand .
start with all of the homologous trait in a group of organism , scientist look for the most obvious and simple order of evolutionary event that lead to the occurrence of those trait .
these tool and concept be only a few of the strategy scientist use to tackle the task of reveal the evolutionary history of life on earth .
recently , new technology have uncover surprising discovery with unexpected relationship , such as the fact that people seem to be more closely relate to fungus than fungus be to plant .
sound unbelievable ?
as the information about dna sequence grow , scientist will become closer to map the evolutionary history of all life on earth .
perspective on the phylogenetic tree
the concept of phylogenetic modeling be constantly change .
- pron - be one of the most dynamic field of study in all of biology .
over the last several decade , new research have challenge scientists' idea about how organism be relate .
new model of these relationship have be propose for consideration by the scientific community .
many phylogenetic tree have be show as model of the evolutionary relationship among specie .
phylogenetic tree originate with charles darwin , who sketch the first phylogenetic tree in one  eight  three  seven ( figure two  zero  .  one  two a ) , which serve as a pattern for subsequent study for more than a century .
the concept of a phylogenetic tree with a single trunk represent a common ancestor , with the branch represent the divergence of specie from this ancestor , fit well with the structure of many common tree , such as the oak ( figure two  zero  .  one  two b ) .
however , evidence from modern dna sequence analysis and newly develop computer algorithm have cause skepticism about the validity of the standard tree model in the scientific community .
the ( a ) concept of the " tree of life " go back to an one  eight  three  seven sketch by charles darwin .
like an ( b ) oak tree , the " tree of life " have a single trunk and many branch .
limitation to the classic model classical thinking about prokaryotic evolution , include in the classic tree model , be that specie evolve clonally .
that is , - pron - produce offspr - pron - with only random mutation cause the descent into the variety of modern - day and extinct specie know to science .
this view be somewhat complicated in eukaryote that reproduce sexually , but the law of mendelian genetic explain the variation in offspring , again , to be a result of a mutation within the specie .
the concept of gene be transfer between unrelated specie be not consider as a possibility until relatively recently .
horizontal gene transfer ( hgt ) , also know as lateral gene transfer , be the transfer of gene between unrelated specie .
hgt have be show to be an ever - present phenomenon , with many evolutionist postulate a major role for this process in evolution , thus complicate the simple tree model .
gene have be show to be pass between specie which be only distantly relate use standard phylogeny , thus add a layer of complexity to the understanding of phylogenetic relationship .
the various way that hgt occur in prokaryote be important to understand phylogeny .
although at present hgt be not view as important to eukaryotic evolution , hgt do occur in this domain as well .
finally , as an example of the ultimate gene transfer , theory of genome fusion between symbiotic or endosymbiotic organism have be propose to explain an event of great importance —
the evolution of the first eukaryotic cell , without which human could not have come into existence .
horizontal gene transfer horizontal gene transfer ( hgt ) be the introduction of genetic material from one specie to another specie by mechanism other than the vertical transmission from parent ( s ) to offspring .
these transfer allow even distantly relate specie to share gene , influence - pron - phenotype .
- pron - be think that hgt be more prevalent in prokaryote , but that only about two % of the prokaryotic genome may be transfer by this process .
some researcher believe such estimate be premature  the actual importance of hgt to evolutionary process must be view as a work in progress .
as the phenomenon be investigate more thoroughly , - pron - may be reveal to be more common .
many scientist believe that hgt and mutation appear to be ( especially in prokaryote ) a significant source of genetic variation , which be the raw material for the process of natural selection .
these transfer may occur between any two specie that share an intimate relationship ( table two  zero  .  one ) .
hgt in prokaryotes
the mechanism of hgt have be show to be quite common in the prokaryotic domain of bacteria and archaea , significantly change the way - pron - evolution be view .
the majority of evolutionary model , such as in the endosymbiont theory , propose that eukaryot descend from multiple prokaryote , which make hgt all the more important to understand the phylogenetic relationship of all extant and extinct specie .
the fact that gene be transfer among common bacteria be well know to microbiology student .
these gene transfer between specie be the major mechanism whereby bacteria acquire resistance to antibiotic .
classically , this type of transfer have be think to occur by three different mechanism  one .
transformation  naked dna be take up by a bacteria two .
transduction  gene be transfer use a virus three .
conjugation  the use a hollow tube call a pilus to transfer gene between organism more recently , a fourth mechanism of gene transfer between prokaryote have be discover .
small , virus - like particle call gene transfer agent ( gta ) transfer random genomic segment from one specie of prokaryote to another .
gta have be show to be responsible for genetic change , sometimes at a very high frequency compare to other evolutionary process .
the first gta be characterize in one  nine  seven  four use purple , non - sulfur bacteria .
these gta , which be think to be bacteriophage that lose the ability to reproduce on - pron - own , carry random piece of dna from one organism to another .
the ability of gta to act with high frequency have be demonstrate in control study use marine bacteria .
gene transfer event in marine prokaryote , either by gta or by virus , have be estimate to be as high as one  zero  one  three per year in the mediterranean sea alone .
gta and virus be think to be efficient hgt vehicle with a major impact on prokaryotic evolution .
as a consequence of this modern dna analysis , the idea that eukaryote evolve directly from archaea have fall out of favor .
while eukaryote share many feature that be absent in bacteria , such as the tata box ( find in the promoter region of many gene ) , the discovery that some eukaryotic gene be more homologous with bacterial dna than archaea dna make this idea less tenable .
furthermore , the fusion of genome from archaea and bacteria by endosymbiosis have be propose as the ultimate event in eukaryotic evolution .
hgt in eukaryotes
although - pron - be easy to see how prokaryote exchange genetic material by hgt , - pron - be initially think that this process be absent in eukaryote .
after all , prokaryote be but single cell expose directly to - pron - environment , whereas the sex cell of multicellular organism be usually sequester in protected part of the body .
- pron - follow from this idea that the gene transfer between multicellular eukaryote should be more difficult .
indeed , - pron - be think that this process be rare in eukaryote and have a much small evolutionary impact than in prokaryote .
in spite of this fact , hgt between distantly relate organism have be demonstrate in several eukaryotic specie , and - pron - be possible that more example will be discover in the future .
in plant , gene transfer have be observe in specie that can not cross - pollinate by normal mean .
transposon or " jump gene " have be show to transfer between rice and millet plant specie .
furthermore , fungal specie feed on yew tree , from which the anti - cancer drug taxol ® be derive from the bark , have acquire the ability to make taxol - pron - , a clear example of gene transfer .
in animal , a particularly interesting example of hgt occur within the aphid specie ( figure two  zero  .  one  three ) .
aphid be insect that vary in color base on carotenoid content .
carotenoid be pigment make by a variety of plant , fungus , and microbe , and - pron - serve a variety of function in animal , who obtain these chemical from - pron - food .
human require carotenoid to synthesize vitamin a , and - pron - obtain - pron - by eat orange fruit and vegetable  carrot , apricot , mango , and sweet potato .
on the other hand , aphid have acquire the ability to make the carotenoid on - pron - own .
accord to dna analysis , this ability be due to the transfer of fungal gene into the insect by hgt , presumably as the insect consume fungus for food .
a carotenoid enzyme call a desaturase be responsible for the red coloration see in certain aphid , and - pron - have be further show that when this gene be inactivate by mutation , the aphid revert back to - pron - more common green color ( figure two  zero  .  one  three ) .
( a ) red aphid get - pron - color from red carotenoid pigment .
gene necessary to make this pigment be present in certain fungus , and scientist speculate that aphid acquire these gene through hgt after consume fungus for food .
if gene for make carotenoid be inactivate by mutation , the aphid revert back to ( b ) - pron - green color .
red coloration make the aphid a lot more conspicuous to predator , but evidence suggest that red aphid be more resistant to insecticide than green one .
thus , red aphid may be more fit to survive in some environment than green one .
genome fusion and the evolution of eukaryotes
scientists believe the ultimate in hgt occur through genome fusion between different specie of prokaryote when two symbiotic organism become endosymbiotic .
this occur when one species be take inside the cytoplasm of another specie , which ultimately result in a genome consisting of gene from both the endosymbiont and the host .
this mechanism be an aspect of the endosymbiont theory , which be accept by a majority of biologist as the mechanism whereby eukaryotic cell obtain - pron - mitochondrion and chloroplast .
however , the role of endosymbiosis in the development of the nucleus be more controversial .
nuclear and mitochondrial dna be think to be of different ( separate ) evolutionary origin , with the mitochondrial dna be derive from the circular genome of bacteria that be engulf by ancient prokaryotic cell .
mitochondrial dna can be regard as the small chromosome .
interestingly enough , mitochondrial dna be inherit only from the mother .
the mitochondrial dna degrade in sperm when the sperm degrade in the fertilize egg or in other instance when the mitochondria locate in the flagellum of the sperm fail to enter the egg .
within the past decade , the process of genome fusion by endosymbiosis have be propose by james lake of the ucla / nasa astrobiology institute to be responsible for the evolution of the first eukaryotic cell ( figure two  zero  .  one  four a ) .
use dna analysis and a new mathematical algorithm call condition reconstruction ( cr ) , - pron - laboratory propose that eukaryotic cell develop from an endosymbiotic gene fusion between two specie , one an archaea and the other a bacteria .
as mention , some eukaryotic gene resemble those of archaea , whereas other resemble those from bacteria .
an endosymbiotic fusion event , such as lake have propose , would clearly explain this observation .
on the other hand , this work be new and the cr algorithm be relatively unsubstantiated , which cause many scientist to resist this hypothesis .
more recent work by lake ( figure two  zero  .  one  four b ) propose that gram - negative bacteria , which be unique within - pron - domain in that - pron - contain two lipid bilayer membrane , indeed result from an endosymbiotic fusion of archaeal and bacterial specie .
the double membrane would be a direct result of the endosymbiosis , with the endosymbiont pick up the second membrane from the host as - pron - be internalize .
this mechanism have also be use to explain the double membrane find in mitochondria and chloroplast .
lake 's work be not without skepticism , and the idea be still debate within the biological science community .
in addition to lake 's hypothesis , there be several other compete theory as to the origin of eukaryote .
how do the eukaryotic nucleus evolve ?
one theory be that the prokaryotic cell produce an additional membrane that surround the bacterial chromosome .
some bacteria have the dna enclose by two membrane  however , there be no evidence of a nucleolus or nuclear pore .
other proteobacteria also have membrane - bind chromosome .
if the eukaryotic nucleus evolve this way , - pron - would expect one of the two type of prokaryote to be more closely relate to eukaryote .
the theory that mitochondria and chloroplast be endosymbiotic in origin be now widely accept .
more controversial be the proposal that ( a ) the eukaryotic nucleus result from the fusion of archaeal and bacterial genome , and that ( b ) gram - negative bacteria , which have two membrane , result from the fusion of archaea and grampositive bacteria , each of which have a single membrane .
the nucleus - first hypothesis propose that the nucleus evolve in prokaryote first ( figure two  zero  .  one  five a ) , follow by a later fusion of the new eukaryote with bacteria that become mitochondria .
the mitochondria - first hypothesis propose that mitochondria be first establish in a prokaryotic host ( figure two  zero  .  one  five b ) , which subsequently acquire a nucleus , by fusion or other mechanism , to become the first eukaryotic cell .
most interestingly , the eukaryote - first hypothesis propose that prokaryote actually evolve from eukaryote by lose gene and complexity ( figure two  zero  .  one  five c ) .
all of these hypothesis be testable .
only time and more experimentation will determine which hypothesis be best support by datum .
three alternate hypothesis of eukaryotic and prokaryotic evolution be ( a ) the nucleus - first hypothesis , ( b ) the mitochondrion - first hypothesis , and ( c ) the eukaryote - first hypothesis .
web and network models
the recognition of the importance of hgt , especially in the evolution of prokaryote , have cause some to propose abandon the classic " tree of life " model .
in one  nine  nine  nine , w . ford doolittle propose a phylogenetic model that resemble a web or a network more than a tree .
the hypothesis be that eukaryote evolve not from a single prokaryotic ancestor , but from a pool of many specie that be share gene by hgt mechanism .
as show in figure two  zero  .  one  six a , some individual prokaryote be responsible for transfer the bacteria that cause mitochondrial development to the new eukaryote , whereas other specie transfer the bacteria that give rise to chloroplast .
this model be often call the " web of life .
"
in an effort to save the tree analogy , some have propose use the ficus tree ( figure two  zero  .  one  six b ) with - pron - multiple trunk as a phylogenetic to represent a diminished evolutionary role for hgt .
in the ( a ) phylogenetic model propose by w . ford doolittle , the " tree of life " arise from a community of ancestral cell , have multiple trunk , and have connection between branch where horizontal gene transfer have occur .
visually , this concept be better represent by ( b ) the multi - trunk ficus than by the single trunk of the oak similar to the tree draw by darwin figure two  zero  .  one  two .
ring of life models other have propose abandon any tree - like model of phylogeny in favor of a ring structure , the so - call " ring of life " ( figure two  zero  .  one  seven )  a phylogenetic model where all three domain of life evolve from a pool of primitive prokaryote .
lake , again use the condition reconstruction algorithm , propose a ring - like model in which specie of all three domain — archaea , bacteria , and eukarya — evolve from a single pool of gene - swap prokaryote .
- pron - laboratory propose that this structure be the good fit for datum from extensive dna analysis perform in - pron - laboratory , and that the ring model be the only one that adequately take hgt and genomic fusion into account .
however , other phylogeneticist remain highly skeptical of this model .
accord to the " ring of life " phylogenetic model , the three domain of life evolve from a pool of primitive prokaryote .
in summary , the " tree of life " model propose by darwin must be modify to include hgt .
do this mean abandon the tree model completely ?
even lake argue that all attempt should be make to discover some modification of the tree model to allow - pron - to accurately fit - pron - datum , and only the inability to do so will sway people toward - pron - ring proposal .
this do not mean a tree , web , or a ring will correlate completely to an accurate description of phylogenetic relationship of life .
a consequence of the new thinking about phylogenetic model be the idea that darwin 's original conception of the phylogenetic tree be too simple , but make sense base on what be know at the time .
however , the search for a more useful model move on  each model serve as hypothesis to be test with the possibility of develop new model .
this be how science advance .
these model be use as visualization to help construct hypothetical evolutionary relationship and understand the massive amount of datum be analyze .
viruses the tobacco mosaic virus ( leave ) , see here by transmission electron microscopy , be the first virus to be discover .
the virus cause disease in tobacco and other plant , such as the orchid .
introduction
no one know exactly when virus emerge or from where - pron - come , since virus do not leave historical footprint such as fossil .
modern virus be think to be a mosaic of bit and piece of nucleic acid pick up from various source along - pron - respective evolutionary path .
virus be acellular , parasitic entity that be not classify within any kingdom .
unlike most live organism , virus be not cell and can not divide .
instead , - pron - infect a host cell and use the host 's replication process to produce identical progeny virus particle .
virus infect organism as diverse as bacteria , plant , and animal .
- pron - exist in a netherworld between a live organism and a nonliv entity .
live thing grow , metabolize , and reproduce .
virus replicate , but to do so , - pron - be entirely dependent on - pron - host cell .
- pron - do not metabolize or grow , but be assemble in - pron - mature form .
viral evolution , morphology , and classification viruses be diverse entity .
- pron - vary in - pron - structure , - pron - replication method , and in - pron - target host .
nearly all form of life — from bacteria and archaea to eukaryote such as plant , animal , and fungus — have virus that infect - pron - .
while most biological diversity can be understand through evolutionary history , such as how specie have adapt to condition and environment , much about virus origin and evolution remain unknown .
discovery and detection viruses be first discover after the development of a porcelain filter , call the chamberland - pasteur filter , which could remove all bacteria visible in the microscope from any liquid sample .
in one  eight  eight  six , adolph meyer demonstrate that a disease of tobacco plant , tobacco mosaic disease , could be transfer from a diseased plant to a healthy one via liquid plant extract .
in one  eight  nine  two , dmitri ivanowski show that this disease could be transmit in this way even after the chamberland - pasteur filter have remove all viable bacteria from the extract .
still , - pron - be many year before - pron - be prove that these " filterable " infectious agent be not simply very small bacteria but be a new type of very small , disease - cause particle .
virion , single virus particle , be very small , about two  zero – two  five  zero nanometer in diameter .
these individual virus particle be the infectious form of a virus outside the host cell .
unlike bacteria ( which be about one  zero  zero  - times large ) , - pron - can not see virus with a light microscope , with the exception of some large virion of the poxvirus family .
- pron - be not until the development of the electron microscope in the late one  nine  three  zero that scientist get - pron - first good view of the structure of the tobacco mosaic virus ( tmv )
( figure two  one  .  one ) and other virus ( figure two  one  .  two ) .
the surface structure of virion can be observe by both scanning and transmission electron microscopy , whereas the internal structure of the virus can only be observe in image from a transmission electron microscope .
the use of these technology have allow for the discovery of many virus of all type of live organism .
- pron - be initially group by shared morphology .
later , group of virus be classify by the type of nucleic acid - pron - contain , dna or rna , and whether - pron - nucleic acid be single - or double - strand .
more recently , molecular analysis of viral replicative cycle have further refine - pron - classification .
in these transmission electron micrograph , ( a ) a virus be dwarf by the bacterial cell - pron - infect , while ( b ) these e . coli cell be dwarf by cultured colon cell .
evolution of viruses
although biologist have accumulate a significant amount of knowledge about how present - day virus evolve , much less be know about how virus originate in the first place .
when explore the evolutionary history of most organism , scientist can look at fossil record and similar historic evidence .
however , virus do not fossilize , so researcher must conjecture by investigate how today 's virus evolve and by use biochemical and genetic information to create speculative virus history .
while most finding agree that virus do not have a single common ancestor , scholar have yet to find a single hypothesis about virus origin that be fully accept in the field .
one such hypothesis , call devolution or the regressive hypothesis , propose to explain the origin of virus by suggest that virus evolve from free - live cell .
however , many component of how this process may have occur be a mystery .
a second hypothesis ( call escapist or the progressive hypothesis ) account for virus have either an rna or a dna genome and suggest that virus originate from rna and dna molecule that escape from a host cell .
a third hypothesis posit a system of self - replication similar to that of other self - replicate molecule , likely evolve alongside the cell - pron - rely on as host  study of some plant pathogen support this hypothesis .
as technology advance , scientist may develop and refine further hypothesis to explain the origin of virus .
the emerge field call virus molecular systematic attempt to do just that through comparison of sequence genetic material .
these researcher hope to one day better understand the origin of virus , a discovery that could lead to advance in the treatment for the ailment - pron - produce .
viral morphology viruses be acellular , mean - pron - be biological entity that do not have a cellular structure .
- pron - therefore lack most of the component of cell , such as organelle , ribosome , and the plasma membrane .
a virion consist of a nucleic acid core , an outer protein coating or capsid , and sometimes an outer envelope make of protein and phospholipid membrane derive from the host cell .
virus may also contain additional protein , such as enzyme .
the most obvious difference between member of viral family be - pron - morphology , which be quite diverse .
an interesting feature of viral complexity be that the complexity of the host do not correlate with the complexity of the virion .
some of the most complex virion structure be observe in bacteriophage , virus that infect the simple living organism , bacteria .
morphology viruses come in many shape and size , but these be consistent and distinct for each viral family .
all virion have a nucleic acid genome cover by a protective layer of protein , call a capsid .
the capsid be make up of protein subunit call capsomere .
some viral capsid be simple polyhedral " sphere , " whereas other be quite complex in structure .
in general , the shape of virus be classify into four group  filamentous , isometric ( or icosahedral ) , envelop , and head and tail .
filamentous virus be long and cylindrical .
many plant virus be filamentous , include tmv .
isometric virus have shape that be roughly spherical , such as poliovirus or herpesvirus .
enveloped virus have membrane surround capsid .
animal virus , such as hiv , be frequently envelop .
head and tail virus infect bacteria and have a head that be similar to icosahedral virus and a tail shape like filamentous virus .
many virus use some sort of glycoprotein to attach to - pron - host cell via molecule on the cell call viral receptor ( figure two  one  .  three ) .
for these virus , attachment be a requirement for later penetration of the cell membrane , so - pron - can complete - pron - replication inside the cell .
the receptor that virus use be molecule that be normally find on cell surface and have - pron - own physiological function .
virus have simply evolve to make use of these molecule for - pron - own replication .
for example , hiv use the cd four molecule on t lymphocyt as one of - pron - receptor .
cd four be a type of molecule call a cell adhesion molecule , which function to keep different type of immune cell in close proximity to each other during the generation of a t lymphocyte immune response .
the kshv virus bind the xct receptor on the surface of human cell .
xct
receptor protect cell against stress .
stressed cell express more xct receptor than non - stress cell .
the kshv virion cause cell to become stressed , thereby increase expression of the receptor to which - pron - bind .
among the most complex virion know , the t four bacteriophage , which infect the escherichia coli bacterium , have a tail structure that the virus use to attach to host cell and a head structure that house - pron - dna .
adenovirus , a non - envelop animal virus that cause respiratory illness in human , use glycoprotein spike protrude from - pron - capsomere to attach to host cell .
non - envelop virus also include those that because polio ( poliovirus ) , plantar wart ( papillomavirus ) , and hepatitis a ( hepatitis a virus ) .
enveloped virion like hiv , the causative agent in aids , consist of nucleic acid ( rna in the case of hiv ) and capsid protein surround by a phospholipid bilayer envelope and - pron - associated protein .
glycoprotein embed in the viral envelope be use to attach to host cell .
other envelope protein be the matrix protein that stabilize the envelope and often play a role in the assembly of progeny virion .
chicken pox , influenza , and mump be example of disease cause by virus with envelope .
because of the fragility of the envelope , non - envelop virus be more resistant to change in temperature , ph , and some disinfectant than enveloped virus .
overall , the shape of the virion and the presence or absence of an envelope tell - pron - little about what disease the virus may because or what speci - pron - may infect , but - pron - be still useful mean to begin viral classification ( figure two  one  .  four ) .
virus can be either complex in shape or relatively simple .
this figure show three relatively complex virion  the bacteriophage t four , with - pron - dna - contain head group and tail fiber that attach to host cell  adenovirus , which use spike from - pron - capsid to bind to host cell  and hiv , which use glycoprotein embed in - pron - envelope to bind to host cell .
notice that hiv have protein call matrix protein , internal to the envelope , which help stabilize virion shape .
type of nucleic acid unlike nearly all live organism that use dna as - pron - genetic material , virus may use either dna or rna as - pron - .
the virus core contain the genome or total genetic content of the virus .
viral genome tend to be small , contain only those gene that encode protein that the virus can not get from the host cell .
this genetic material may be single - or doublestrand .
- pron - may also be linear or circular .
while most virus contain a single nucleic acid , other have genome that have several , which be call segment .
in dna virus , the viral dna direct the host cell 's replication protein to synthesize new copy of the viral genome and to transcribe and translate that genome into viral protein .
dna virus because human disease , such as chickenpox , hepatitis b , and some venereal disease , like herpe and genital wart .
rna virus contain only rna as - pron - genetic material .
to replicate - pron - genome in the host cell , the rna virus encode enzyme that can replicate rna into dna , which can not be do by the host cell .
these rna polymerase enzyme be more likely to make copying error than dna polymerase , and therefore often make mistake during transcription .
for this reason , mutation in rna virus occur more frequently than in dna virus .
this cause - pron - to change and adapt more rapidly to - pron - host .
human disease cause by rna virus include hepatitis c , measl , and rabie .
virus classification
to understand the feature share among different group of virus , a classification scheme be necessary .
as most virus be not think to have evolve from a common ancestor , however , the method that scientist use to classify live thing be not very useful .
biologist have use several classification system in the past , base on the morphology and genetic of the different virus .
however , these early classification method group virus differently , base on which feature of the virus - pron - be use to classify - pron - .
the most commonly use classification method today be call the baltimore classification scheme and be base on how messenger rna ( mrna ) be generate in each particular type of virus .
past systems of classification viruses be classify in several way  by factor such as - pron - core content ( table two  one  .  one and figure two  one  .  three ) , the structure of - pron - capsid , and whether - pron - have an outer envelope .
the type of genetic material ( dna or rna ) and - pron - structure ( single - or double - strand , linear or circular , and segment or non - segmented ) be use to classify the virus core structure .
virus be classify base on - pron - core genetic material and capsid design .
( a ) rabies virus have a single - strand rna ( ssrna ) core and an enveloped helical capsid , whereas ( b ) variola virus , the causative agent of smallpox , have a double - strand dna ( dsdna ) core and a complex capsid .
rabie transmission occur when saliva from an infected mammal enter a wound .
the virus travel through neuron in the peripheral nervous system to the central nervous system where - pron - impair brain function , and then travel to other tissue .
the virus can infect any mammal , and most die within week of infection .
smallpox be a human virus transmit by inhalation of the variola virus , localize in the skin , mouth , and throat , which cause a characteristic rash .
before - pron - eradication in one  nine  seven  nine , infection result in a three  zero – three  five percent mortality rate .
virus can also be classify by the design of - pron - capsid ( figure two  one  .  four and figure two  one  .  five ) .
capsid be classify as naked icosahedral , envelop icosahedral , envelop helical , naked helical , and complex ( figure two  one  .  six and figure two  one  .  seven ) .
the type of genetic material ( dna or rna ) and - pron - structure ( single - or double - strand , linear or circular , and segmented or nonsegmented ) be use to classify the virus core structure ( table two  one  .  two ) .
adenovirus ( left ) be depict with a double - strand dna genome enclose in an icosahedral capsid that be nine  zero – one  zero  zero nm across .
the virus , show cluster in the micrograph ( right ) , be transmit orally and cause a variety of illness in vertebrate , include human eye and respiratory infection .
( transmission electron micrograph of various virus show - pron - structure .
the capsid of the ( a ) polio virus be naked icosahedral  ( b ) the epstein - barr virus capsid be envelop icosahedral  ( c ) the mump virus capsid be an enveloped helix  ( d ) the tobacco mosaic virus capsid be naked helical  and ( e ) the herpesvirus capsid be complex .
baltimore classification
the most commonly use system of virus classification be develop by nobel prize - win biologist david baltimore in the early one  nine  seven  zero s .
in addition to the difference in morphology and genetic mention above , the baltimore classification scheme group virus accord to how the mrna be produce during the replicative cycle of the virus .
group i virus contain double - strand dna ( dsdna ) as - pron - genome .
- pron - mrna be produce by transcription in much the same way as with cellular dna .
group ii virus have single - strand dna ( ssdna ) as - pron - genome .
- pron - convert - pron - single - strand genome into a dsdna intermediate before transcription to mrna can occur .
group iii virus use dsrna as - pron - genome .
the strand separate , and one of - pron - be use as a template for the generation of mrna use the rna - dependent rna polymerase encode by the virus .
group iv virus have ssrna as - pron - genome with a positive polarity .
positive polarity mean that the genomic rna can serve directly as mrna .
intermediate of dsrna , call replicative intermediate , be make in the process of copy the genomic rna .
multiple , full - length rna strand of negative polarity ( complimentary to the positive - strand genomic rna ) be form from these intermediate , which may then serve as template for the production of rna with positive polarity , include both full - length genomic rna and short viral mrnas .
group v virus contain ssrna genome with a negative polarity , mean that - pron - sequence be complementary to the mrna .
as with group iv virus , dsrna intermediate be use to make copy of the genome and produce mrna .
in this case , the negative - strand genome can be convert directly to mrna .
additionally , fulllength positive rna strand be make to serve as template for the production of the negative - strand genome .
group vi virus have diploid ( two copy ) ssrna genome that must be convert , use the enzyme reverse transcriptase , to dsdna  the dsdna be then transport to the nucleus of the host cell and insert into the host genome .
then , mrna can be produce by transcription of the viral dna that be integrate into the host genome .
group vii virus have partial dsdna genome and make ssrna intermediate that act as mrna , but be also convert back into dsdna genome by reverse transcriptase , necessary for genome replication .
the characteristic of each group in the baltimore classification be summarize in table two  one  .  three with example of each group .
virus infections and hosts certain specie of host and only certain cell within that host .
cell that a virus may use to replicate be call permissive .
for most virus , the molecular basis for this specificity be that a particular surface molecule know as the viral receptor must be find on the host cell surface for the virus to attach .
also , metabolic and host cell immune response difference see in different cell type base on differential gene expression be a likely factor in which cell a virus may target for replication .
the permissive cell must make the substance that the virus need or the virus will not be able to replicate there .
step of virus infections
a virus must use cell process to replicate .
the viral replication cycle can produce dramatic biochemical and structural change in the host cell , which may because cell damage .
these change , call cytopathic ( cause cell damage ) effect , can change cell function or even destroy the cell .
some infected cell , such as those infect by the common cold virus know as rhinovirus , die through lysis ( bursting ) or apoptosis ( program cell death or " cell suicide " ) , release all progeny virion at once .
the symptom of viral disease result from the immune response to the virus , which attempt to control and eliminate the virus from the body , and from cell damage cause by the virus .
many animal virus , such as hiv ( human immunodeficiency virus ) , leave the infected cell of the immune system by a process know as bud , where virion leave the cell individually .
during the bud process , the cell do not undergo lysis and be not immediately kill .
however , the damage to the cell that the virus infect may make - pron - impossible for the cell to function normally , even though the cell remain alive for a period of time .
most productive viral infection follow similar step in the virus replication cycle  attachment , penetration , uncoating , replication , assembly , and release ( figure two  one  .  eight ) .
attachment a virus attache to a specific receptor site on the host cell membrane through attachment protein in the capsid or via glycoprotein embed in the viral envelope .
the specificity of this interaction determine the host — and the cell within the host — that can be infect by a particular virus .
this can be illustrate by think of several key and several lock , where each key will fit only one specific lock .
entry
the nucleic acid of bacteriophage enter the host cell naked , leave the capsid outside the cell .
plant and animal virus can enter through endocytosis , in which the cell membrane surround and engulfs the entire virus .
some enveloped virus enter the cell when the viral envelope fuse directly with the cell membrane .
once inside the cell , the viral capsid be degrade , and the viral nucleic acid be release , which then become available for replication and transcription .
replication and assembly
the replication mechanism depend on the viral genome .
dna virus usually use host cell protein and enzyme to make additional dna that be transcribe to messenger rna ( mrna ) , which be then use to direct protein synthesis .
rna virus usually use the rna core as a template for synthesis of viral genomic rna and mrna .
the viral mrna direct the host cell to synthesize viral enzyme and capsid protein , and assemble new virion .
of course , there be exception to this pattern .
if a host cell do not provide the enzyme necessary for viral replication , viral gene supply the information to direct synthesis of the miss protein .
retrovirus , such as hiv , have an rna genome that must be reverse transcribe into dna , which then be incorporate into the host cell genome .
- pron - be within group vi of the baltimore classification scheme .
to convert rna into dna , retrovirus must contain gene that encode the virus - specific enzyme reverse transcriptase that transcribe an rna template to dna .
reverse transcription never occur in uninfected host cell — the need enzyme reverse transcriptase be only derive from the expression of viral gene within the infected host cell .
the fact that hiv produce some of - pron - own enzyme not find in the host have allow researcher to develop drug that inhibit these enzyme .
these drug , include the reverse transcriptase inhibitor azt , inhibit hiv replication by reduce the activity of the enzyme without affect the host 's metabolism .
this approach have lead to the development of a variety of drug use to treat hiv and have be effective at reduce the number of infectious virion ( copy of viral rna ) in the blood to non - detectable level in many hiv - infect individual .
egress the last stage of viral replication be the release of the new virion produce in the host organism , where - pron - be able to infect adjacent cell and repeat the replication cycle .
as - pron - have learn , some virus be release when the host cell die , and other virus can leave infected cell by bud through the membrane without directly kill the cell .
in influenza virus infection , glycoprotein attach to a host epithelial cell .
as a result , the virus be engulf .
rna and protein be make and assemble into new virion .
different hosts and - pron - virus
as - pron - have learn , virus be often very specific as to which host and which cell within the host - pron - will infect .
this feature of a virus make - pron - specific to one or a few specie of life on earth .
on the other hand , so many different type of virus exist on earth that nearly every live organism have - pron - own set of virus that try to infect - pron - cell .
even the small and simple of cell , prokaryotic bacteria , may be attack by specific type of virus .
this transmission electron micrograph show bacteriophage attach to a bacterial cell .
( credit  modification of work by dr . graham beards  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
bacteriophages be virus that infect bacteria ( figure two  one  .  nine ) .
when infection of a cell by a bacteriophage result in the production of new virion , the infection be say to be productive .
if the virion be release by burst the cell , the virus replicate by mean of a lytic cycle ( figure two  one  .  one  zero ) .
an example of a lytic bacteriophage be t four , which infect escherichia coli find in the human intestinal tract .
sometimes , however , a virus can remain within the cell without be release .
for example , when a temperate bacteriophage infect a bacterial cell , - pron - replicate by mean of a lysogenic cycle ( figure two  one  .  one  zero ) , and the viral genome be incorporate into the genome of the host cell .
when the phage dna be incorporate into the host cell genome , - pron - be call a prophage .
an example of a lysogenic bacteriophage be the λ ( lambda ) virus , which also infect the e . coli bacterium .
virus that infect plant or animal cell may also undergo infection where - pron - be not produce virion for long period .
an example be the animal herpesvirus , include herpe simplex virus , the because of oral and genital herpe in human .
in a process call latency , these virus can exist in nervous tissue for long period of time without produce new virion , only to leave latency periodically and because lesion in the skin where the virus replicate .
even though there be similarity between lysogeny and latency , the term lysogenic cycle be usually reserve to describe bacteriophage .
latency will be describe in more detail below .
a temperate bacteriophage have both lytic and lysogenic cycle .
in the lytic cycle , the phage replicate and lys the host cell .
in the lysogenic cycle , phage dna be incorporate into the host genome , where - pron - be pass on to subsequent generation .
environmental stressor such as starvation or exposure to toxic chemical may because the prophage to excise and enter the lytic cycle .
animal viruses animal virus , unlike the virus of plant and bacteria , do not have to penetrate a cell wall to gain access to the host cell .
non - envelop or " naked " animal virus may enter cell in two different way .
as a protein in the viral capsid bind to - pron - receptor on the host cell , the virus may be take inside the cell via a vesicle during the normal cell process of receptormediat endocytosis .
an alternative method of cell penetration use by non - envelop virus be for capsid protein to undergo shape change after bind to the receptor , create channel in the host cell membrane .
the viral genome be then " inject " into the host cell through these channel in a manner analogous to that use by many bacteriophage .
enveloped virus also have two way of enter cell after bind to - pron - receptor  receptor - mediate endocytosis , or fusion .
many enveloped virus enter the cell by receptor - mediate endocytosis in a fashion similar to some non - envelop virus .
on the other hand , fusion only occur with enveloped virion .
these virus , which include hiv among other , use special fusion protein in - pron - envelope to because the envelope to fuse with the plasma membrane of the cell , thus release the genome and capsid of the virus into the cell cytoplasm .
after make - pron - protein and copy - pron - genome , animal virus complete the assembly of new virion and exit the cell .
as - pron - have already discuss use the example of hiv , envelop animal virus may bud from the cell membrane as - pron - assemble - pron - , take a piece of the cell 's plasma membrane in the process .
on the other hand , non - envelop viral progeny , such as rhinovirus , accumulate in infected cell until there be a signal for lysis or apoptosis , and all virion be release together .
as - pron - will learn in the next module , animal virus be associate with a variety of human disease .
some of - pron - follow the classic pattern of acute disease , where symptom get increasingly bad for a short period follow by the elimination of the virus from the body by the immune system and eventual recovery from the infection .
example of acute viral disease be the common cold and influenza .
other virus because long - term chronic infection , such as the virus cause hepatitis c , whereas other , like herpe simplex virus , only because intermittent symptom .
still other virus , such as human herpesvirus six and seven , which in some case can because the minor childhood disease roseola , often successfully because productive infection without cause any symptom at all in the host , and thus - pron - say these patient have an asymptomatic infection .
in hepatitis c infection , the virus grow and reproduce in liver cell , cause low level of liver damage .
the damage be so low that infected individual be often unaware that - pron - be infect , and many infection be detect only by routine blood work on patient with risk factor such as intravenous drug use .
on the other hand , since many of the symptom of viral disease be cause by immune response , a lack of symptom be an indication of a weak immune response to the virus .
this allow for the virus to escape elimination by the immune system and persist in individual for year , all the while produce low level of progeny virion in what be know as a chronic viral disease .
chronic infection of the liver by this virus lead to a much great chance of develop liver cancer , sometimes as much as three  zero year after the initial infection .
as already discuss , herpe simplex virus can remain in a state of latency in nervous tissue for month , even year .
as the virus " hide " in the tissue and make few if any viral protein , there be nothing for the immune response to act against , and immunity to the virus slowly decline .
under certain condition , include various type of physical and psychological stress , the latent herpe simplex virus may be reactivate and undergo a lytic replication cycle in the skin , cause the lesion associate with the disease .
once virion be produce in the skin and viral protein be synthesize , the immune response be again stimulate and resolve the skin lesion in a few day by destroy virus in the skin .
as a result of this type of replicative cycle , appearance of cold sore and genital herpe outbreak only occur intermittently , even though the virus remain in the nervous tissue for life .
latent infection be common with other herpesvirus as well , include the varicellazoster virus that cause chickenpox .
after have a chickenpox infection in childhood , the varicella - zoster virus can remain latent for many year and reactivate in adult to because the painful condition know as " shingle " ( figure two  one  .  one  one ab ) .
( a ) varicella - zoster , the virus that cause chickenpox , have an envelop icosahedral capsid visible in this transmission electron micrograph .
- pron - double - strand dna genome become incorporate in the host dna and can reactivate after latency in the form of ( b ) shingle , often exhibit a rash .
some animal - infect virus , include the hepatitis c virus discuss above , be know as oncogenic virus  - pron - have the ability to because cancer .
these virus interfere with the normal regulation of the host cell cycle either by either introduce gene that stimulate unregulated cell growth ( oncogene ) or by interfere with the expression of gene that inhibit cell growth .
oncogenic virus can be either dna or rna virus .
cancer know to be associate with viral infection include cervical cancer cause by human papillomavirus ( hpv ) ( figure two  one  .  one  two ) , liver cancer cause by hepatitis b virus , t - cell leukemia , and several type of lymphoma .
hpv , or human papillomavirus , have a naked icosahedral capsid visible in this transmission electron micrograph and a double - strand dna genome that be incorporate into the host dna .
the virus , which be sexually transmit , be oncogenic and can lead to cervical cancer .
plant viruses plant virus , like other virus , contain a core of either dna or rna .
- pron - have already learn about one of these , the tobacco mosaic virus .
as plant virus have a cell wall to protect - pron - cell , these virus do not use receptor - mediate endocytosis to enter host cell as be see with animal virus .
for many plant virus to be transfer from plant to plant , damage to some of the plants' cell must occur to allow the virus to enter a new host .
this damage be often cause by weather , insect , animal , fire , or human activity like farming or landscaping .
additionally , plant offspring may inherit viral disease from parent plant .
plant virus can be transmit by a variety of vector , through contact with an infected plant 's sap , by live organism such as insect and nematode , and through pollen .
when plant virus be transfer between different plant , this be know as horizontal transmission , and when - pron - be inherit from a parent , this be call vertical transmission .
symptom of viral disease vary accord to the virus and - pron - host ( table two  one  .  four ) .
one common symptom be hyperplasia , the abnormal proliferation of cell that cause the appearance of plant tumor know as gall .
other virus induce hypoplasia , or decrease cell growth , in the leaf of plant , cause thin , yellow area to appear .
still other virus affect the plant by directly kill plant cell , a process know as cell necrosis .
other symptom of plant virus include malform leaf , black streak on the stem of the plant , altered growth of stem , leaf , or fruit , and ring spot , which be circular or linear area of discoloration find in a leaf .
plant virus can seriously disrupt crop growth and development , significantly affect - pron - food supply .
- pron - be responsible for poor crop quality and quantity globally , and can bring about huge economic loss annually .
other virus may damage plant use in landscaping .
some virus that infect agricultural food plant include the name of the plant - pron - infect , such as tomato spot wilt virus , bean common mosaic virus , and cucumber mosaic virus .
in plant use for landscaping , two of the most common virus be peony ring spot and rise mosaic virus .
there be far too many plant virus to discuss each in detail , but symptom of bean common mosaic virus result in lower bean production and stunt , unproductive plant .
in the ornamental rose , the rose mosaic disease cause wavy yellow line and colored splotch on the leaf of the plant .
prevention and treatment of viral infections viruses because a variety of disease in animal , include human , range from the common cold to potentially fatal illness like meningitis ( figure two  one  .  one  three ) .
these disease can be treat by antiviral drug or by vaccine , but some virus , such as hiv , be capable of both avoid the immune response and mutate to become resistant to antiviral drug .
virus can because dozen of ailment in human , range from mild illness to serious disease .
vaccine for prevention
while - pron - do have limit number of effective antiviral drug , such as those use to treat hiv and influenza , the primary method of control viral disease be by vaccination , which be intend to prevent outbreak by build immunity to a virus or virus family ( figure two  one  .  one  four ) .
vaccine may be prepare use live virus , kill virus , or molecular subunit of the virus .
the kill viral vaccine and subunit virus be both incapable of cause disease .
live viral vaccine be design in the laboratory to because few symptom in recipient while give - pron - protective immunity against future infection .
polio be one disease that represent a milestone in the use of vaccine .
mass immunization campaign in the one  nine  five  zero s ( kill vaccine ) and one  nine  six  zero ( live vaccine ) significantly reduce the incidence of the disease , which cause muscle paralysis in child and generate a great amount of fear in the general population when regional epidemic occur .
the success of the polio vaccine pave the way for the routine dispensation of childhood vaccine against measle , mump , rubella , chickenpox , and other disease .
the danger of use live vaccine , which be usually more effective than kill vaccine , be the low but significant danger that these virus will revert to - pron - disease - cause form by back mutation .
live vaccine be usually make by attenuate ( weaken ) the " wild - type " ( disease - causing ) virus by grow - pron - in the laboratory in tissue or at temperature different from what the virus be accustom to in the host .
adaptation to these new cell or temperature induce mutation in the genome of the virus , allow - pron - to grow good in the laboratory while inhibit - pron - ability to because disease when reintroduce into condition find in the host .
these attenuate virus thus still because infection , but - pron - do not grow very well , allow the immune response to develop in time to prevent major disease .
back mutation occur when the vaccine undergo mutation in the host such that - pron - readapt to the host and can again because disease , which can then be spread to other human in an epidemic .
this type of scenario happen as recently as two  zero  zero  seven in nigeria where mutation in a polio vaccine lead to an epidemic of polio in that country .
some vaccine be in continuous development because certain virus , such as influenza and hiv , have a high mutation rate compare to other virus and normal host cell .
with influenza , mutation in the surface molecule of the virus help the organism evade the protective immunity that may have be obtain in a previous influenza season , make - pron - necessary for individual to get vaccinated every year .
other virus , such as those that because the childhood diseas measl , mump , and rubella , mutate so infrequently that the same vaccine be use year after year .
vaccine and anti - viral drug for treatment
in some case , vaccine can be use to treat an active viral infection .
the concept behind this be that by give the vaccine , immunity be boost without add more disease - cause virus .
in the case of rabie , a fatal neurological disease transmit via the saliva of rabie virus - infect animal , the progression of the disease from the time of the animal bite to the time - pron - enter the central nervous system may be two week or long .
this be enough time to vaccinate an individual who suspect that - pron - have be bite by a rabid animal , and - pron - boost immune response be sufficient to prevent the virus from enter nervous tissue .
thus , the potentially fatal neurological consequence of the disease be avert , and the individual only have to recover from the infected bite .
this approach be also be use for the treatment of ebola , one of the fast and most deadly virus on earth .
transmit by bat and great ape , this disease can because death in seven  zero – nine  zero percent of infected human within two week .
use newly develop vaccine that boost the immune response in this way , there be hope that affect individual will be better able to control the virus , potentially save a great percentage of infected person from a rapid and very painful death .
another way of treat viral infection be the use of antiviral drug .
these drug often have limit success in cure viral disease , but in many case , - pron - have be use to control and reduce symptom for a wide variety of viral disease .
for most virus , these drug can inhibit the virus by block the action of one or more of - pron - protein .
- pron - be important that the target protein be encode by viral gene and that these molecule be not present in a healthy host cell .
in this way , viral growth be inhibit without damage the host .
there be large number of antiviral drug available to treat infection , some specific for a particular virus and other that can affect multiple virus .
antiviral have be develop to treat genital herpe ( herpe simplex ii ) and influenza .
for genital herpe , drug such as acyclovir can reduce the number and duration of episode of active viral disease , during which patient develop viral lesion in - pron - skin cell .
as the virus remain latent in nervous tissue of the body for life , this drug be not curative but can make the symptom of the disease more manageable .
for influenza , drug like tamiflu ( oseltamivir ) ( figure two  one  .  one  five ) can reduce the duration of " flu " symptom by one or two day , but the drug do not prevent symptom entirely .
tamiflu work by inhibit an enzyme ( viral neuraminidase ) that allow new virion to leave - pron - infected cell .
thus , tamiflu inhibit the spread of virus from infect to uninfected cell .
other antiviral drug , such as ribavirin , have be use to treat a variety of viral infection , although - pron - mechanism of action against certain virus remain unclear .
( a ) tamiflu inhibit a viral enzyme call neuraminidase ( na ) find in the influenza viral envelope .
( b ) neuraminidase cleave the connection between viral hemagglutinin ( ha ) , also find in the viral envelope , and glycoprotein on the host cell surface .
inhibition of neuraminidase prevent the virus from detach from the host cell , thereby block further infection .
by far , the most successful use of antiviral have be in the treatment of the retrovirus hiv , which cause a disease that , if untreated , be usually fatal within one  zero – one  two year after infection .
anti - hiv drug have be able to control viral replication to the point that individual receive these drug survive for a significantly long time than the untreated .
anti - hiv drug inhibit viral replication at many different phase of the hiv replicative cycle ( figure two  one  .  one  six ) .
drug have be develop that inhibit the fusion of the hiv viral envelope with the plasma membrane of the host cell ( fusion inhibitor ) , the conversion of - pron - rna genome into double - strand dna ( reverse transcriptase inhibitor ) , the integration of the viral dna into the host genome ( integrase inhibitor ) , and the processing of viral protein ( protease inhibitor ) .
hiv , an enveloped , icosahedral virus , attach to the cd four receptor of an immune cell and fuse with the cell membrane .
viral content be release into the cell , where viral enzyme convert the single - strand rna genome into dna and incorporate - pron - into the host genome .
( credit  niaid , nih )
when any of these drug be use individually , the high mutation rate of the virus allow - pron - to easily and rapidly develop resistance to the drug , limit the drug 's effectiveness .
the breakthrough in the treatment of hiv be the development of haart , highly active anti - retroviral therapy , which involve a mixture of different drug , sometimes call a drug " cocktail .
"
by attack the virus at different stage of - pron - replicative cycle , - pron - be much more difficult for the virus to develop resistance to multiple drug at the same time .
still , even with the use of combination haart therapy , there be concern that , over time , the virus will develop resistance to this therapy .
thus , new anti - hiv drug be constantly be develop with the hope of continue the battle against this highly fatal virus .
applied virology
the study of virus have lead to the development of a variety of new way to treat non - viral disease .
virus have be use in gene therapy .
gene therapy be use to treat genetic disease such as severe combined immunodeficiency ( scid ) , a heritable , recessive disease in which child be bear with severely compromise immune system .
one common type of scid be due to the lack of an enzyme , adenosine deaminase ( ada ) , which break down purine base .
to treat this disease by gene therapy , bone marrow cell be take from a scid patient and the ada gene be insert .
this be where virus come in , and - pron - use rely on - pron - ability to penetrate live cell and bring gene in with - pron - .
virus such as adenovirus , an upper respiratory human virus , be modify by the addition of the ada gene , and the virus then transport this gene into the cell .
the modify cell , now capable of make ada , be then give back to the patient in the hope of cure - pron - .
gene therapy use virus as carrier of gene ( viral vector ) , although still experimental , hold promise for the treatment of many genetic disease .
still , many technological problem need to be solve for this approach to be a viable method for treat genetic disease .
another medical use for virus rely on - pron - specificity and ability to kill the cell - pron - infect .
oncolytic virus be engineer in the laboratory specifically to attack and kill cancer cell .
a genetically modify adenovirus know as h one  zero  one have be use since two  zero  zero  five in clinical trial in china to treat head and neck cancer .
the result have be promise , with a great short - term response rate to the combination of chemotherapy and viral therapy than to chemotherapy treatment alone .
this ongoing research may herald the beginning of a new age of cancer therapy , where virus be engineer to find and specifically kill cancer cell , regardless of where in the body - pron - may have spread .
a third use of virus in medicine rely on - pron - specificity and involve use bacteriophage in the treatment of bacterial infection .
bacterial disease have be treat with antibiotic since the one  nine  four  zero .
however , over time , many bacteria have develop resistance to antibiotic .
a good example be methicillinresistant staphylococcus aureus ( mrsa ,
pronounce " mersa " ) , an infection commonly acquire in hospital .
this bacterium be resistant to a variety of antibiotic , make - pron - difficult to treat .
the use of bacteriophage specific for such bacteria would bypass - pron - resistance to antibiotic and specifically kill - pron - .
although phage therapy be in use in the republic of georgia to treat antibiotic - resistant bacteria , - pron - use to treat human disease have not be approve in most country .
however , the safety of the treatment be confirm in the united states when the u . s . food and drug administration approve spray meat with bacteriophage to destroy the food pathogen listeria .
as more and more antibioticresistant strain of bacteria evolve , the use of bacteriophage may be a potential solution to the problem , and the development of phage therapy be of much interest to researcher worldwide .
prion and viroid be pathogen ( agent with the ability to because disease ) that have simple structure than virus but , in the case of prion , still can produce deadly disease .
prions prions , so - call because - pron - be proteinaceous , be infectious particle
— small than virus —
that contain no nucleic acid ( neither dna nor rna ) .
historically , the idea of an infectious agent that do not use nucleic acid be consider impossible , but pioneering work by nobel prize - win biologist stanley prusiner have convince the majority of biologist that such agent do indeed exist .
fatal neurodegenerative disease , such as kuru in human and bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse ) in cattle ( commonly know as " mad cow disease " ) be show to be transmit by prion .
the disease be spread by the consumption of meat , nervous tissue , or internal organ between member of the same specie .
kuru , native to human in papua new guinea , be spread from human to human via ritualistic cannibalism .
bse , originally detect in the united kingdom , be spread between cattle by the practice of include cattle nervous tissue in feed for other cattle .
individual with kuru and bse show symptom of loss of motor control and unusual behavior , such as uncontrolled burst of laughter with kuru , follow by death .
kuru be control by induce the population to abandon - pron - ritualistic cannibalism .
on the other hand , bse be initially think to only affect cattle .
cattle die of the disease be show to have develop lesion or " hole " in the brain , cause the brain tissue to resemble a sponge .
later on in the outbreak , however , - pron - be show that a similar encephalopathy in human know as variant creutzfeldt - jakob disease ( cjd ) could be acquire from eat beef from animal with bse , spark ban by various country on the importation of british beef and cause considerable economic damage to the british beef industry ( figure two  one  .  one  seven ) .
bse still exist in various area , and although a rare disease , individual that acquire cjd be difficult to treat .
the disease can be spread from human to human by blood , so many country have ban blood donation from region associate with bse .
the because of spongiform encephalopathy , such as kuru and bse , be an infectious structural variant of a normal cellular protein call prp ( prion protein ) .
- pron - be this variant that constitute the prion particle .
prp exist in two form , prpc , the normal form of the protein , and prpsc , the infectious form .
once introduce into the body , the prpsc contain within the prion bind to prpc and convert - pron - to prpsc .
this lead to an exponential increase of the prpsc protein , which aggregate .
prpsc be fold abnormally , and the result conformation ( shape ) be directly responsible for the lesion see in the brain of infected cattle .
thus , although not without some detractor among scientist , the prion seem likely to be an entirely new form of infectious agent , the first one find whose transmission be not reliant upon gene make of dna or rna .
( a ) endogenous normal prion protein ( prpc ) be convert into the disease - cause form ( prpsc ) when - pron - encounter this variant form of the protein .
prpsc may arise spontaneously in brain tissue , especially if a mutant form of the protein be present , or - pron - may occur via the spread of misfold prion consume in food into brain tissue .
( b ) this prion - infect brain tissue , visualize use light microscopy , show the vacuole that give - pron - a spongy texture , typical of transmissible spongiform encephalopathy .
viroids viroids be plant pathogen  small , single - strand , circular rna particle that be much simple than a virus .
- pron - do not have a capsid or outer envelope , but like virus can reproduce only within a host cell .
viroid do not , however , manufacture any protein , and - pron - only produce a single , specific rna molecule .
human disease cause by viroid have yet to be identify .
viroid be know to infect plant ( figure two  one  .  one  eight ) and be responsible for crop failure and the loss of million of dollar in agricultural revenue each year .
some of the plant - pron - infect include potato , cucumber , tomato , chrysanthemum , avocado , and coconut palm .
these potato have be infect by the potato spindle tuber viroid ( pstv ) , which be typically spread when infected knife be use to cut healthy potato , which be then plant .
virologist virology be the study of virus , and a virologist be an individual train in this discipline .
training in virology can lead to many different career path .
virologist be actively involve in academic research and teaching in college and medical school .
some virologist treat patient or be involve in the generation and production of vaccine .
- pron - may participate in epidemiologic study ( figure two  one  .  one  nine ) or become science writer , to name just a few possible career .
center have department of virology , and small hospital usually have virology lab within - pron - microbiology department .
volunteer in a virology lab for a semester or work in one over the summer .
discuss the profession and get a first - hand look at the work will help - pron - decide whether a career in virology be right for - pron - .
the american society of virology 's website ( http / / openstaxcollege . org / l / asv ) be a good resource for information regard training and career in virology .
certain prokaryote can live in extreme environment such as the morning glory pool , a hot spring in yellowstone national park .
the spring 's vivid blue color be from the prokaryote that thrive in - pron - very hot water .
in the recent past , scientist group live thing into five kingdom — animal , plant , fungus , protist , and prokaryote — base on several criterion , such as the absence or presence of a nucleus and other membrane - bind organelle , the absence or presence of cell wall , multicellularity , and so on .
in the late two  zero th century , the pioneering work of carl woese and other compare sequence of small - subunit ribosomal rna ( ssu rrna ) , which result in a more fundamental way to group organism on earth .
base on difference in the structure of cell membrane and in rrna , woese and - pron - colleague propose that all life on earth evolve along three lineage , call domain .
the domain bacteria comprise all organism in the kingdom bacteria , the domain archaea comprise the rest of the prokaryote , and the domain eukarya comprise all eukaryote — include organism in the kingdom animalia , plantae , fungi , and protista .
two of the three domain — bacteria and archaea — be prokaryotic .
prokaryotes be the first inhabitant on earth , appear three  .  five to three  .  eight billion year ago .
these organism be abundant and ubiquitous  that is , - pron - be present everywhere .
in addition to inhabit moderate environment , - pron - be find in extreme condition  from boil spring to permanently frozen environment in antarctica  from salty environment like the dead sea to environment under tremendous pressure , such as the depth of the ocean  and from area without oxygen , such as a waste management plant , to radioactively contaminate region , such as chernobyl .
prokaryotes reside in the human digestive system and on the skin , be responsible for certain illness , and serve an important role in the preparation of many food .
prokaryote be ubiquitous .
- pron - cover every imaginable surface where there be sufficient moisture , and - pron - live on and inside of other live thing .
in the typical human body , prokaryotic cell outnumber human body cell by about ten to one .
- pron - comprise the majority of live thing in all ecosystem .
some prokaryote thrive in environment that be inhospitable for most live thing .
prokaryotes recycle nutrient — essential substance ( such as carbon and nitrogen ) —and
- pron - drive the evolution of new ecosystem , some of which be natural and other man - make .
prokaryote have be on earth since long before multicellular life appear .
prokaryotes , the first inhabitants of earth
when and where do life begin ?
what be the condition on earth when life begin ?
prokaryotes be the first form of life on earth , and - pron - exist for billion of year before plant and animal appear .
the earth and - pron - moon be think to be about four  .  five  four billion year old .
this estimate be base on evidence from radiometric date of meteorite material together with other substrate material from earth and the moon .
early earth have a very different atmosphere ( contain less molecular oxygen ) than - pron - do today and be subject to strong radiation  thus , the first organism would have flourish where - pron - be more protect , such as in ocean depth or beneath the surface of the earth .
at this time too , strong volcanic activity be common on earth , so - pron - be likely that these first organism — the first prokaryote — be adapt to very high temperature .
early earth be prone to geological upheaval and volcanic eruption , and be subject to bombardment by mutagenic radiation from the sun .
the first organism be prokaryote that could withstand these harsh condition .
microbial mats microbial mat or large biofilm may represent the early form of life on earth  there be fossil evidence of - pron - presence start about three  .  five billion year ago .
a microbial mat be a multi - layered sheet of prokaryote ( figure two  two  .  two ) that include mostly bacteria , but also archaea .
microbial mat be a few centimeter thick , and - pron - typically grow where different type of material interface , mostly on moist surface .
the various type of prokaryote that comprise - pron - carry out different metabolic pathway , and that be the reason for - pron - various color .
prokaryote in a microbial mat be hold together by a glue - like sticky substance that - pron - secrete call extracellular matrix .
the first microbial mat likely obtain - pron - energy from chemical find near hydrothermal vent .
a hydrothermal vent be a breakage or fissure in the earth 's surface that release geothermally heated water .
with the evolution of photosynthesis about three billion year ago , some prokaryote in microbial mat come to use a more widely available energy source — sunlight — whereas other be still dependent on chemical from hydrothermal vent for energy and food .
this ( a ) microbial mat , about one meter in diameter , grow over a hydrothermal vent in the pacific ocean in a region know as the " pacific ring of fire .
"
the mat help retain microbial nutrient .
chimney such as the one indicate by the arrow allow gas to escape .
( b )
in this micrograph , bacteria be visualize use fluorescence microscopy .
stromatolites fossilize microbial mat represent the early record of life on earth .
a stromatolite be a sedimentary structure form when mineral be precipitate out of water by prokaryote in a microbial mat ( figure two  two  .  three ) .
stromatolite form layer rock make of carbonate or silicate .
although most stromatolite be artifact from the past , there be place on earth where stromatolite be still form .
for example , grow stromatolite have be find in the anza - borrego desert state park in san diego county , california .
these living stromatolite be locate in shark bay , australia .
( b ) these fossilize stromatolite , find in glacier national park , montana , be nearly one  .  five billion year old .
the ancient atmosphere evidence indicate that during the first two billion year of earth 's existence , the atmosphere be anoxic , mean that there be no molecular oxygen .
therefore , only those organism that can grow without oxygen— anaerobic organism — be able to live .
autotrophic organism that convert solar energy into chemical energy be call phototroph , and - pron - appear within one billion year of the formation of earth .
then , cyanobacteria , also know as blue - green algae , evolve from these simple phototroph one billion year later .
cyanobacteria ( figure two  two  .  four ) begin the oxygenation of the atmosphere .
increase atmospheric oxygen allow the development of more efficient o two  - utiliz catabolic pathway .
- pron - also open up the land to increase colonization , because some o two be convert into o three ( ozone ) and ozone effectively absorb the ultraviolet light that would otherwise because lethal mutation in dna .
ultimately , the increase in o two concentration allow the evolution of other life form .
this hot spring in yellowstone national park flow toward the foreground .
cyanobacteria in the spring be green , and as water flow down the gradient , the intensity of the color increase as cell density increase .
the water be cool at the edge of the stream than in the center , cause the edge to appear green .
microbe be adaptable  life in moderate and extreme environment
some organism have develop strategy that allow - pron - to survive harsh condition .
prokaryotes thrive in a vast array of environment 
some grow in condition that would seem very normal to - pron - , whereas other be able to thrive and grow under condition that would kill a plant or animal .
almost all prokaryote have a cell wall , a protective structure that allow - pron - to survive in both hyper - and hypo - osmotic condition .
some soil bacteria be able to form endospore that resist heat and drought , thereby allow the organism to survive until favorable condition recur .
these adaptation , along with other , allow bacteria to be the most abundant life form in all terrestrial and aquatic ecosystem .
other bacteria and archaea be adapt to grow under extreme condition and be call extremophile , mean " lover of extreme .
"
extremophile have be find in all kind of environment  the depth of the ocean , hot spring , the artic and the antarctic , in very dry place , deep inside earth , in harsh chemical environment , and in high radiation environment ( figure two  two  .  five ) , just to mention a few .
these organism give - pron - a good understanding of prokaryotic diversity and open up the possibility of find new prokaryotic specie that may lead to the discovery of new therapeutic drug or have industrial application .
because - pron - have specialize adaptation that allow - pron - to live in extreme condition , many extremophile can not survive in moderate environment .
there be many different group of extremophile  - pron - be identify base on the condition in which - pron - grow best , and several habitat be extreme in multiple way .
for example , a soda lake be both salty and alkaline , so organism that live in a soda lake must be both alkaliphile and halophile ( table two  two  .  one ) .
other extremophile , like radioresistant organism , do not prefer an extreme environment ( in this case , one with high level of radiation ) , but have adapt to survive in - pron - .
deinococcus radioduran , visualize in this false color transmission electron micrograph , be a prokaryote that can tolerate very high dos of ionize radiation .
- pron - have develop dna repair mechanism that allow - pron - to reconstruct - pron - chromosome even if - pron - have be break into hundred of piece by radiation or heat .
prokaryote in the dead sea one example of a very harsh environment be the dead sea , a hypersaline basin that be locate between jordan and israel .
hypersaline environment be essentially concentrate seawater .
in the dead sea , the sodium concentration be one  zero time high than that of seawater , and the water contain high level of magnesium ( about four  zero time high than in seawater ) that would be toxic to most live thing .
iron , calcium , and magnesium , element that form divalent ion ( fe two + , ca two + , and mg two + ) , produce what be commonly refer to as " hard " water .
take together , the high concentration of divalent cation , the acidic ph ( six  .  zero ) , and the intense solar radiation flux make the dead sea a unique , and uniquely hostile , ecosystem
[ one ]
( figure two  two  .  six ) .
what sort of prokaryote do - pron - find in the dead sea ?
the extremely salt - tolerant bacterial mat include halobacterium , haloferax volcanii ( which be find in other location , not only the dead sea ) , halorubrum sodomense , and halobaculum gomorrense , and the archaea haloarcula marismortui , among other .
the dead sea be hypersaline .
nevertheless , salt - tolerant bacteria thrive in this sea .
( b )
these halobacteria cell can form salt - tolerant bacterial mat .
unculturable prokaryotes and the viable - but - non - culturable state microbiologists typically grow prokaryote in the laboratory use an appropriate culture medium contain all the nutrient need by the target organism .
the medium can be liquid , broth , or solid .
after an incubation time at the right temperature , there should be evidence of microbial growth ( figure two  two  .  seven ) .
the process of culture bacteria be complex and be one of the great discovery of modern science .
german physician robert koch be credit with discover the technique for pure culture , include stain and use growth medium .
- pron - assistant julius petri invent the petri dish whose use persist in today 's laboratory .
koch work primarily with the mycobacterium tuberculosis bacterium that cause tuberculosis and develop postulate to identify disease - cause organism that continue to be widely use in the medical community .
koch 's postulate include that an organism can be identify as the because of disease when - pron - be present in all infected sample and absent in all healthy sample , and - pron - be able to reproduce the infection after be cultured multiple time .
today , culture remain a primary diagnostic tool in medicine and other area of molecular biology .
in these agar plate , the growth medium be supplement with red blood cell .
blood agar become transparent in the presence of hemolytic streptococcus , which destroy red blood cell and be use to diagnose streptococcus infection .
the plate on the left be inoculate with non - hemolytic staphylococcus ( large white colony ) , and the plate on the right be inoculate with hemolytic streptococcus ( tiny clear colony ) .
if - pron - look closely at the right plate , - pron - can see that the agar surround the bacteria have turn clear .
some prokaryote , however , can not grow in a laboratory setting .
in fact , over nine  nine percent of bacteria and archaea be unculturable .
for the most part , this be due to a lack of knowledge as to what to feed these organism and how to grow - pron -  - pron - have special requirement for growth that remain unknown to scientist , such as need specific micronutrient , ph , temperature , pressure , co - factor , or co - metabolite .
some bacteria can not be cultured because - pron - be obligate intracellular parasite and can not be grow outside a host cell .
in other case , culturable organism become unculturable under stressful condition , even though the same organism could be culture previously .
those organism that can not be cultured but be not dead be in a viable - but - non - culturable ( vbnc ) state .
the vbnc state occur when prokaryote respond to environmental stressor by enter a dormant state that allow - pron - survival .
the criterion for enter into the vbnc state be not completely understand .
in a process call resuscitation , the prokaryote can go back to " normal " life when environmental condition improve .
be the vbnc state an unusual way of live for prokaryote ?
in fact , most of the prokaryote live in the soil or in oceanic water be non - culturable .
- pron - have be say that only a small fraction , perhaps one percent , of prokaryote can be culture under laboratory condition .
if these organism be non - culturable , then how be - pron - know whether - pron - be present and alive ?
microbiologist use molecular technique , such as the polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) , to amplify select portion of dna of prokaryote , demonstrate - pron - existence .
recall that pcr can make billion of copy of a dna segment in a process call amplification .
the ecology of biofilms until a couple of decade ago , microbiologist use to think of prokaryote as isolated entity live apart .
this model , however , do not reflect the true ecology of prokaryote , most of which prefer to live in community where - pron - can interact .
a biofilm be a microbial community ( figure two  two  .  eight ) hold together in a gummy - textur matrix that consist primarily of polysaccharide secrete by the organism , together with some protein and nucleic acid .
biofilm grow attach to surface .
some of the best - study biofilm be compose of prokaryote , although fungal biofilm have also be describe as well as some compose of a mixture of fungus and bacteria .
biofilm be present almost everywhere  - pron - can because the clogging of pipe and readily colonize surface in industrial setting .
in recent , large - scale outbreak of bacterial contamination of food , biofilm have play a major role .
- pron - also colonize household surface , such as kitchen counter , cut board , sink , and toilet , as well as place on the human body , such as the surface of - pron - tooth .
interaction among the organism that populate a biofilm , together with - pron - protective exopolysaccharidic ( eps ) environment , make these community more robust than free - living , or planktonic , prokaryote .
the sticky substance that hold bacteria together also exclude most antibiotic and disinfectant , make biofilm bacteria hardy than - pron - planktonic counterpart .
overall , biofilm be very difficult to destroy because - pron - be resistant to many common form of sterilization .
there be many difference between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell .
however , all cell have four common structure  the plasma membrane , which function as a barrier for the cell and separate the cell from - pron - environment  the cytoplasm , a jelly - like substance inside the cell  nucleic acid , the genetic material of the cell  and ribosome , where protein synthesis take place .
prokaryotes come in various shape , but many fall into three category  cocci ( spherical ) , bacilli ( rod - shaped ) , and spirilli ( spiral - shaped ) .
prokaryote fall into three basic category base on - pron - shape , visualize here use scanning electron microscopy  ( a ) cocci , or spherical ( a pair be show )  ( b ) bacilli , or rod - shape  and ( c ) spirilli , or spiral - shaped .
the prokaryotic cell recall that prokaryot ( figure two  two  .  one  zero ) be unicellular organism that lack organelle or other internal membrane - bind structure .
therefore , - pron - do not have a nucleus but instead generally have a single chromosome — a piece of circular , double - strand dna locate in an area of the cell call the nucleoid .
most prokaryote have a cell wall outside the plasma membrane .
the feature of a typical prokaryotic cell be show .
recall that prokaryote be divide into two different domain , bacteria and archaea , which together with eukarya , comprise the three domain of life .
bacteria and archaea be both prokaryote but differ enough to be place in separate domain .
an ancestor of modern archaea be believe to have give rise to eukarya , the third domain of life .
archaeal and bacterial phyla be show  the evolutionary relationship between these phyla be still open to debate .
the composition of the cell wall differ significantly between the domain bacteria and archaea .
the composition of - pron - cell wall also differ from the eukaryotic cell wall find in plant ( cellulose ) or fungus and insect ( chitin ) .
the cell wall function as a protective layer , and - pron - be responsible for the organism 's shape .
some bacteria have an outer capsule outside the cell wall .
other structure be present in some prokaryotic specie , but not in other ( table two  two  .  two ) .
for example , the capsule find in some specie enable the organism to attach to surface , protect - pron - from dehydration and attack by phagocytic cell , and make pathogen more resistant to - pron - immune response .
some specie also have flagella ( singular , flagellum ) use for locomotion , and pili ( singular , pilus ) use for attachment to surface .
plasmid , which consist of extrachromosomal dna , be also present in many specie of bacteria and archaea .
phylum proteobacteria be one of up to five  two bacteria phyla .
proteobacteria be further subdivide into five class , alpha through epsilon .
chlamydia , spirochetes , cyanobacteria , and gram - positive bacteria be describe in this table .
note that bacterial shape be not phylum - dependent  bacteria within a phylum may be cocci , rod - shape , or spiral .
archaea be separate into four phyla  the korarchaeota , euryarchaeota , crenarchaeota , and nanoarchaeota .
the plasma membrane
the plasma membrane be a thin lipid bilayer ( six to eight nanometer ) that completely surround the cell and separate the inside from the outside .
- pron - selectively permeable nature keep ion , protein , and other molecule within the cell and prevent - pron - from diffuse into the extracellular environment , while other molecule may move through the membrane .
recall that the general structure of a cell membrane be a phospholipid bilayer compose of two layer of lipid molecule .
in archaeal cell membrane , isoprene ( phytanyl ) chain link to glycerol replace the fatty acid link to glycerol in bacterial membrane .
some archaeal membrane be lipid monolayer instead of bilayer .
archaeal phospholipid differ from those find in bacteria and eukarya in two way .
first , - pron - have branch phytanyl sidechain instead of linear one .
second , an ether bond instead of an ester bond connect the lipid to the glycerol .
the cell wall the cytoplasm of prokaryotic cell have a high concentration of dissolve solute .
therefore , the osmotic pressure within the cell be relatively high .
the cell wall be a protective layer that surround some cell and give - pron - shape and rigidity .
- pron - be locate outside the cell membrane and prevent osmotic lysis ( burst due to increase volume ) .
the chemical composition of the cell wall vary between archaea and bacteria , and also vary between bacterial specie .
bacterial cell wall contain peptidoglycan , compose of polysaccharide chain that be cross - link by unusual peptide contain both l - and d - amino acid include d - glutamic acid and d - alanine .
protein normally have only l - amino acid  as a consequence , many of - pron - antibiotic work by mimic d - amino acid and therefore have specific effect on bacterial cell wall development .
there be more than one  zero  zero different form of peptidoglycan .
s - layer ( surface layer ) protein be also present on the outside of cell wall of both archaea and bacteria .
bacteria be divide into two major group  gram positive and gram negative , base on - pron - reaction to gram staining .
note that all gram - positive bacteria belong to one phylum  bacteria in the other phyla ( proteobacteria , chlamydias , spirochetes , cyanobacteria , and other ) be gram - negative .
the gram staining method be name after - pron - inventor , danish scientist hans christian gram ( one  eight  five  three – one  nine  three  eight ) .
the different bacterial response to the stain procedure be ultimately due to cell wall structure .
gram - positive organism typically lack the outer membrane find in gram - negative organism ( figure two  two  .  one  five ) .
up to nine  zero percent of the cell wall in gram - positive bacteria be compose of peptidoglycan , and most of the rest be compose of acidic substance call teichoic acid .
teichoic acid may be covalently link to lipid in the plasma membrane to form lipoteichoic acid .
lipoteichoic acid anchor the cell wall to the cell membrane .
gram - negative bacteria have a relatively thin cell wall compose of a few layer of peptidoglycan ( only one  zero percent of the total cell wall ) , surround by an outer envelope contain lipopolysaccharide ( lps ) and lipoprotein .
this outer envelope be sometimes refer to as a second lipid bilayer .
the chemistry of this outer envelope be very different , however , from that of the typical lipid bilayer that form plasma membrane .
archaean cell wall do not have peptidoglycan .
there be four different type of archaean cell wall .
one type be compose of pseudopeptidoglycan , which be similar to peptidoglycan in morphology but contain different sugar in the polysaccharide chain .
the other three type of cell wall be compose of polysaccharide , glycoprotein , or pure protein .
reproduction reproduction in prokaryote be asexual and usually take place by binary fission .
recall that the dna of a prokaryote exist as a single , circular chromosome .
prokaryote do not undergo mitosis .
rather the chromosome be replicate and the two result copy separate from one another , due to the growth of the cell .
the prokaryote , now enlarge , be pinch inward at - pron - equator and the two result cell , which be clone , separate .
binary fission do not provide an opportunity for genetic recombination or genetic diversity , but prokaryote can share gene by three other mechanism .
in transformation , the prokaryote take in dna find in - pron - environment that be shed by other prokaryote .
if a nonpathogenic bacterium take up dna for a toxin gene from a pathogen and incorporate the new dna into - pron - own chromosome , - pron - too may become pathogenic .
in transduction , bacteriophage , the virus that infect bacteria , sometimes also move short piece of chromosomal dna from one bacterium to another .
transduction result in a recombinant organism .
archaea be not affect by bacteriophage but instead have - pron - own virus that translocate genetic material from one individual to another .
in conjugation , dna be transfer from one prokaryote to another by mean of a pilus , which bring the organism into contact with one another .
the dna transfer can be in the form of a plasmid or as a hybrid , contain both plasmid and chromosomal dna .
these three process of dna exchange be show in figure two  two  .  one  seven .
reproduction can be very rapid  a few minute for some specie .
this short generation time couple with mechanism of genetic recombination and high rate of mutation result in the rapid evolution of prokaryote , allow - pron - to respond to environmental change ( such as the introduction of an antibiotic ) very quickly .
besides binary fission , there be three other mechanism by which prokaryote can exchange dna .
in ( a ) transformation , the cell take up prokaryotic dna directly from the environment .
the dna may remain separate as plasmid dna or be incorporate into the host genome .
in ( b ) transduction , a bacteriophage inject dna into the cell that contain a small fragment of dna from a different prokaryote .
in ( c ) conjugation , dna be transfer from one cell to another via a mating bridge that connect the two cell after the sex pilus draw the two bacteria close enough to form the bridge .
prokaryote be metabolically diverse organism .
there be many different environment on earth with various energy and carbon source , and variable condition .
prokaryote have be able to live in every environment by use whatev energy and carbon source be available .
prokaryote fill many niche on earth , include be involve in nutrient cycle such as nitrogen and carbon cycle , decompose dead organism , and thriving inside live organism , include human .
the very broad range of environment that prokaryot occupy be possible because - pron - have diverse metabolic process .
need of prokaryotes
the diverse environment and ecosystem on earth have a wide range of condition in term of temperature , available nutrient , acidity , salinity , and energy source .
prokaryote be very well equip to make - pron - live out of a vast array of nutrient and condition .
to live , prokaryote need a source of energy , a source of carbon , and some additional nutrient .
macronutrients cell be essentially a well - organize assemblage of macromolecule and water .
recall that macromolecule be produce by the polymerization of small unit call monomer .
for cell to build all of the molecule require to sustain life , - pron - need certain substance , collectively call nutrient .
when prokaryote grow in nature , - pron - obtain - pron - nutrient from the environment .
nutrient that be require in large amount be call macronutrient , whereas those require in small or trace amount be call micronutrient .
just a handful of element be consider macronutrient — carbon , hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , phosphoru , and sulfur .
( a mnemonic for remember these element be the acronym chonps . )
why be these macronutrient need in large amount ?
- pron - be the component of organic compound in cell , include water .
carbon be the major element in all macromolecule  carbohydrate , protein , nucleic acid , lipid , and many other compound .
carbon account for about five  zero percent of the composition of the cell .
nitrogen represent one  two percent of the total dry weight of a typical cell and be a component of protein , nucleic acid , and other cell constituent .
most of the nitrogen available in nature be either atmospheric nitrogen ( n two ) or another inorganic form .
diatomic ( n two ) nitrogen , however , can be convert into an organic form only by certain organism , call nitrogen - fix organism .
both hydrogen and oxygen be part of many organic compound and of water .
phosphorus be require by all organism for the synthesis of nucleotide and phospholipid .
sulfur be part of the structure of some amino acid such as cysteine and methionine , and be also present in several vitamin and coenzyme .
other important macronutrient be potassium ( k ) , magnesium ( mg ) , calcium ( ca ) , and sodium ( na ) .
although these element be require in small amount , - pron - be very important for the structure and function of the prokaryotic cell .
micronutrient
in addition to these macronutrient , prokaryote require various metallic element in small amount .
these be refer to as micronutrient or trace element .
for example , iron be necessary for the function of the cytochrome involve in electron - transport reaction .
some prokaryote require other element — such as boron ( b ) , chromium ( cr ) , and manganese ( mn ) —primarily as enzyme cofactor .
the ways in which prokaryotes obtain energy prokaryotes can use different source of energy to assemble macromolecule from small molecule .
phototrophs ( or phototrophic organism ) obtain - pron - energy from sunlight .
chemotroph ( or chemosynthetic organism ) obtain - pron - energy from chemical compound .
chemotroph that can use organic compound as energy source be call chemoorganotroph .
those that can also use inorganic compound as energy source be call chemolitotroph .
the ways in which prokaryotes obtain carbon prokaryotes not only can use different source of energy but also different source of carbon compound .
recall that organism that be able to fix inorganic carbon be call autotroph .
autotrophic prokaryote synthesize organic molecule from carbon dioxide .
in contrast , heterotrophic prokaryote obtain carbon from organic compound .
to make the picture more complex , the term that describe how prokaryote obtain energy and carbon can be combine .
thus , photoautotroph use energy from sunlight , and carbon from carbon dioxide and water , whereas chemoheterotroph obtain energy and carbon from an organic chemical source .
chemolitoautotroph obtain - pron - energy from inorganic compound , and - pron - build - pron - complex molecule from carbon dioxide .
the table below ( table two  two  .  three ) summarize carbon and energy source in prokaryote .
role of prokaryotes in ecosystems prokaryotes be ubiquitous 
there be no niche or ecosystem in which - pron - be not present .
prokaryotes play many role in the environment - pron - occupy .
the role - pron - play in the carbon and nitrogen cycle be vital to life on earth .
prokaryotes and the carbon cycle carbon be one of the most important macronutrient , and prokaryote play an important role in the carbon cycle ( figure two  two  .  one  eight ) .
carbon be cycle through earth 's major reservoir  land , the atmosphere , aquatic environment , sediment and rock , and biomass .
the movement of carbon be via carbon dioxide , which be remove from the atmosphere by land plant and marine prokaryote , and be return to the atmosphere via the respiration of chemoorganotrophic organism , include prokaryote , fungus , and animal .
although the large carbon reservoir in terrestrial ecosystem be in rock and sediment , that carbon be not readily available .
a large amount of available carbon be find in land plant .
plant , which be producer , use carbon dioxide from the air to synthesize carbon compound .
relate to this , one very significant source of carbon compound be humus , which be a mixture of organic material from dead plant and prokaryote that have resist decomposition .
consumer such as animal use organic compound generate by producer and release carbon dioxide to the atmosphere .
then , bacteria and fungus , collectively call decomposer , carry out the breakdown ( decomposition ) of plant and animal and - pron - organic compound .
the most important contributor of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere be microbial decomposition of dead material ( dead animal , plant , and humus ) that undergo respiration .
in aqueous environment and - pron - anoxic sediment , there be another carbon cycle take place .
in this case , the cycle be base on one - carbon compound .
in anoxic sediment , prokaryote , mostly archaea , produce methane ( ch four ) .
this methane move into the zone above the sediment , which be rich in oxygen and support bacteria call methane oxidizer that oxidize methane to carbon dioxide , which then return to the atmosphere .
prokaryotes play a significant role in continuously move carbon through the biosphere .
prokaryotes and the nitrogen cycle nitrogen be a very important element for life because - pron - be part of protein and nucleic acid .
- pron - be a macronutrient , and in nature , - pron - be recycle from organic compound to ammonia , ammonium ion , nitrate , nitrite , and nitrogen gas by myriad process , many of which be carry out only by prokaryote .
as illustrate in figure two  two  .  one  nine , prokaryote be key to the nitrogen cycle .
the large pool of nitrogen available in the terrestrial ecosystem be gaseous nitrogen from the air , but this nitrogen be not usable by plant , which be primary producer .
gaseous nitrogen be transform , or " fix " into more readily available form such as ammonia through the process of nitrogen fixation .
ammonia can be use by plant or convert to other form .
another source of ammonia be ammonification , the process by which ammonia be release during the decomposition of nitrogen - contain organic compound .
ammonia release to the atmosphere , however , represent only one  five percent of the total nitrogen release  the rest be as n two and n two o . ammonia be catabolize anaerobically by some prokaryote , yield n two as the final product .
nitrification be the conversion of ammonium to nitrite and nitrate .
nitrification in soil be carry out by bacteria belong to the genera nitrosomas , nitrobacter , and nitrospira .
the bacteria perform the reverse process , the reduction of nitrate from the soil to gaseous compound such as n two o , no , and n two , a process call denitrification .
devastating pathogen - bear disease and plague , both viral and bacterial in nature , have affect human since the beginning of human history .
the true because of these disease be not understand at the time , and some people think that disease be a spiritual punishment .
over time , people come to realize that stay apart from afflicted person , and dispose of the corps and personal belonging of victim of illness , reduce - pron - own chance of get sick .
epidemiologist study how disease affect a population .
an epidemic be a disease that occur in an unusually high number of individual in a population at the same time .
a pandemic be a widespread , usually worldwide , epidemic .
an endemic disease be a disease that be constantly present , usually at low incidence , in a population .
long history of bacterial disease
there be record about infectious disease as far back as three  zero  zero  zero b . c .
a number of significant pandemic cause by bacteria have be document over several hundred year .
some of the most memorable pandemic lead to the decline of city and nation .
in the two  one st century , infectious disease remain among the lead cause of death worldwide , despite advance make in medical research and treatment in recent decade .
a disease spread when the pathogen that cause - pron - be pass from one person to another .
for a pathogen to because disease , - pron - must be able to reproduce in the host 's body and damage the host in some way .
the plague of athens in four  three  zero b . c . , the plague of athens kill one - quarter of the athenian troop that be fight in the great peloponnesian war and weaken athens' dominance and power .
the plague impact people live in overcrowded athens as well as troop aboard ship that have to return to athens .
the source of the plague may have be identify recently when researcher from the university of athens be able to use dna from tooth recover from a mass grave .
the scientist identify nucleotide sequence from a pathogenic bacterium , salmonella enterica serovar
typhi ( figure two  two  .  two  zero ) , which cause typhoid fever .
[ three ] this disease be commonly see in overcrowded area and have cause epidemic throughout record history .
salmonella enterica serovar
typhi , the causative agent of typhoid fever , be a gram - negative , rodshap gamma protobacterium .
typhoid fever , which be spread through fece , cause intestinal hemorrhage , high fever , delirium and dehydration .
today , between one  six and three  three million case of this re - emerge disease occur annually , result in over two  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero death .
carrier of the disease can be asymptomatic .
in a famous case in the early one  nine  zero  zero s , a cook name mary mallon unknowingly spread the disease to over fifty people , three of whom die .
other salmonella serotype because food poisoning .
bubonic plagues from five  four  one to seven  five  zero , an outbreak of what be likely a bubonic plague ( the plague of justinian ) , eliminate one - quarter to onehalf of the human population in the eastern mediterranean region .
the population in europe drop by five  zero percent during this outbreak .
bubonic plague would strike europe more than once .
one of the most devastating pandemic be the black death ( one  three  four  six to one  three  six  one ) that be believe to have be another outbreak of bubonic plague cause by the bacterium yersinia pestis .
- pron - be think to have originate initially in china and spread along the silk road , a network of land and sea trade route , to the mediterranean region and europe , carry by rat flea live on black rat that be always present on ship .
the black death reduce the world 's population from an estimate four  five  zero million to about three  five  zero to three  seven  five million .
bubonic plague strike london hard again in the mid -  one  six  zero  zero ( figure two  two  .  two  one ) .
in modern time , approximately one  ,  zero  zero  zero to three  ,  zero  zero  zero case of plague arise globally each year .
although contract bubonic plague before antibiotic mean almost certain death , the bacterium respond to several type of modern antibiotic , and mortality rate from plague be now very low .
the ( a ) great plague of london kill an estimate two  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero people , or about twenty percent of the city 's population .
the causative agent , the ( b ) bacterium yersinia pestis , be a gram - negative , rod - shape bacterium from the class gamma proteobacteria .
the disease be transmit through the bite of an infected flea , which be infect by a rodent .
symptom include swollen lymph node , fever , seizure , vomiting of blood , and ( c ) gangrene migration of diseases to new populations over the century , europeans tend to develop genetic immunity to endemic infectious disease , but when european conqueror reach the western hemisphere , - pron - bring with - pron - disease - cause bacteria and virus , which trigger epidemic that completely devastate population of native americans , who have no natural resistance to many european disease .
- pron - have be estimate that up to nine  zero percent of native americans die from infectious disease after the arrival of europeans , make conquest of the new world a foregone conclusion .
emerge and re - emerge disease
the distribution of a particular disease be dynamic .
therefore , change in the environment , the pathogen , or the host population can dramatically impact the spread of a disease .
accord to the world health organization ( who ) an emerge disease ( figure two  two  .  two  two ) be one that have appear in a population for the first time , or that may have exist previously but be rapidly increase in incidence or geographic range .
this definition also include re - emerge disease that be previously under control .
approximately seven  five percent of recently emerge infectious disease affect human be zoonotic disease , zoonosis , disease that primarily infect animal and be transmit to human  some be of viral origin and some be of bacterial origin .
brucellosis be an example of a prokaryotic zoonosis that be re - emerge in some region , and necrotiz fasciitis ( commonly know as flesh - eat bacteria ) have be increase in virulence for the last eight  zero year for unknown reason .
the map show region where bacterial disease be emerge or reemerg .
some of the present emerge disease be not actually new , but be disease that be catastrophic in the past ( figure two  two  .  two  three ) .
- pron - devastate population and become dormant for a while , just to come back , sometimes more virulent than before , as be the case with bubonic plague .
other disease , like tuberculosis , be never eradicate but be under control in some region of the world until come back , mostly in urban center with high concentration of immunocompromised people .
the who have identify certain disease whose worldwide re - emergence should be monitor .
among these be two viral disease ( dengue fever and yellow fever ) , and three bacterial disease ( diphtheria , cholera , and bubonic plague ) .
the war against infectious disease have no foreseeable end .
lyme disease often , but not always , result in ( a ) a characteristic bullseye rash .
the disease be cause by a ( b ) gram - negative spirochete bacterium of the genus borrelia .
the bacteria ( c ) infect tick , which in turn infect mouse .
deer be the preferred secondary host , but the tick also may feed on human .
untreated , the disease cause chronic disorder in the nervous system , eye , joint , and heart .
the disease be name after lyme , connecticut , where an outbreak occur in one  nine  nine  five and have subsequently spread .
the disease be not new , however .
genetic evidence suggest that ötzi the iceman , a five  ,  three  zero  zero  - year - old mummy find in the alps , be infect with borrelia .
biofilms and disease recall that biofilm be microbial community that be very difficult to destroy .
- pron - be responsible for disease such as infection in patient with cystic fibrosis , legionnaires' disease , and otitis medium .
- pron - produce dental plaque and colonize catheter , prosthesis , transcutaneous and orthopedic device , contact lens , and internal device such as pacemaker .
- pron - also form in open wound and burn tissue .
in healthcare environment , biofilm grow on hemodialysis machine , mechanical ventilator , shunt , and other medical equipment .
in fact , six  five percent of all infection acquire in the hospital ( nosocomial infection ) be attribute to biofilm .
biofilm be also relate to disease contract from food because - pron - colonize the surface of vegetable leaf and meat , as well as food - processing equipment that be not adequately clean .
biofilm infection develop gradually  sometimes , - pron - do not because symptom immediately .
- pron - be rarely resolve by host defense mechanism .
once an infection by a biofilm be establish , - pron - be very difficult to eradicate , because biofilm tend to be resistant to most of the method use to control microbial growth , include antibiotic .
biofilm respond poorly or only temporarily to antibiotic  - pron - have be say that - pron - can resist up to one  ,  zero  zero  zero time the antibiotic concentration use to kill the same bacteria when - pron - be free - living or planktonic .
an antibiotic dose that large would harm the patient  therefore , scientist be work on new way to get rid of biofilm .
antibiotic  be - pron - face a crisis ?
the word antibiotic come from the greek anti mean " against " and bio mean “ life .
"
an antibiotic be a chemical , produce either by microbe or synthetically , that be hostile to the growth of other organism .
today 's news and medium often address concern about an antibiotic crisis .
be the antibiotic that easily treat bacterial infection in the past become obsolete ?
be there new " superbugs”—bacteria that have evolve to become more resistant to - pron - arsenal of antibiotic ?
be this the beginning of the end of antibiotic ?
all these question challenge the healthcare community .
one of the main cause of resistant bacteria be the abuse of antibiotic .
the imprudent and excessive use of antibiotic have result in the natural selection of resistant form of bacteria .
the antibiotic kill most of the infect bacteria , and therefore only the resistant form remain .
these resistant form reproduce , result in an increase in the proportion of resistant form over non - resistant one .
another major misuse of antibiotic be in patient with cold or the flu , for which antibiotic be useless .
another problem be the excessive use of antibiotic in livestock .
the routine use of antibiotic in animal feed promote bacterial resistance as well .
in the united states , seven  zero percent of the antibiotic produce be feed to animal .
these antibiotic be give to livestock in low dos , which maximize the probability of resistance develop , and these resistant bacteria be readily transfer to human .
one of the superbugs 
mrsa
the imprudent use of antibiotic have pave the way for bacteria to expand population of resistant form .
for example , staphylococcus aureus , often call " staph , " be a common bacterium that can live in the human body and be usually easily treat with antibiotic .
a very dangerous strain , however , methicillin - resistant staphylococcus aureus ( mrsa ) have make the news over the past few year ( figure two  two  .  two  four ) .
this strain be resistant to many commonly use antibiotic , include methicillin , amoxicillin , penicillin , and oxacillin .
mrsa can because infection of the skin , but - pron - can also infect the bloodstream , lung , urinary tract , or site of injury .
while mrsa infection be common among people in healthcare facility , - pron - have also appear in healthy people who have not be hospitalize but who live or work in tight population ( like military personnel and prisoner ) .
researcher have express concern about the way this latter source of mrsa target a much young population than those reside in care facility .
the journal of the american medical association report that , among mrsa - afflict person in healthcare facility , the average age be six  eight , whereas people with " community - associate mrsa " ( ca - mrsa ) have an average age of two  three .
this scan electron micrograph show methicillin - resistant staphylococcus aureus bacteria , commonly know as mrsa .
s . aureus be not always pathogenic , but can because disease such as food poisoning and skin and respiratory infection .
in summary , the medical community be face an antibiotic crisis .
some scientist believe that after year of be protect from bacterial infection by antibiotic , - pron - may be return to a time in which a simple bacterial infection could again devastate the human population .
researcher be develop new antibiotic , but - pron - take many year to of research and clinical trial , plus financial investment in the million of dollar , to generate an effective and approve drug .
foodborne diseases prokaryotes be everywhere  - pron - readily colonize the surface of any type of material , and food be not an exception .
most of the time , prokaryote colonize food and food - processing equipment in the form of a biofilm .
outbreak of bacterial infection relate to food consumption be common .
a foodborne disease ( colloquially call " food poisoning " ) be an illness result from the consumption the pathogenic bacteria , virus , or other parasite that contaminate food .
although the united states have one of the safe food supply in the world , the u . s . centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) have report that " seven  six million people get sick , more than three  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero be hospitalize , and five  ,  zero  zero  zero americans die each year from foodborne illness .
"
the characteristic of foodborne illness have change over time .
in the past , - pron - be relatively common to hear about sporadic case of botulism , the potentially fatal disease produce by a toxin from the anaerobic bacterium clostridium botulinum .
some of the most common source for this bacterium be non - acidic can food , homemade pickle , and process meat and sausage .
the can , jar , or package create a suitable anaerobic environment where clostridium could grow .
proper sterilization and canning procedure have reduce the incidence of this disease .
while people may tend to think of foodborne illness as associate with animal - base food , most case be now link to produce .
there have be serious , produce - relate outbreak associate with raw spinach in the united states and with vegetable sprout in germany , and these type of outbreak have become more common .
the raw spinach outbreak in two  zero  zero  six be produce by the bacterium e . coli serotype o one  five  seven  h seven .
a serotype be a strain of bacteria that carry a set of similar antigen on - pron - cell surface , and there be often many different serotype of a bacterial specie .
most e . coli be not particularly dangerous to human , but serotype o one  five  seven  h seven can because bloody diarrhea and be potentially fatal .
all type of food can potentially be contaminate with bacteria .
recent outbreak of salmonella report by the cdc occur in food as diverse as peanut butter , alfalfa sprout , and egg .
a deadly outbreak in germany in two  zero  one  zero be cause by e . coli contamination of vegetable sprout ( figure two  two  .  two  five ) .
the strain that cause the outbreak be find to be a new serotype not previously involve in other outbreak , which indicate that e . coli be continuously evolve .
vegetable sprout grow at an organic farm be the because of an ( b ) e . coli outbreak that kill three  two people and sicken three  ,  eight  zero  zero in germany in two  zero  one  one .
the strain responsible , e . coli o one  zero  four  h four , produce shiga toxin , a substance that inhibit protein synthesis in the host cell .
the toxin ( c ) destroy red blood cell result in bloody diarrhea .
deformed red blood cell clog the capillary of the kidney , which can lead to kidney failure , as happen to eight  four  five patient in the two  zero  one  one outbreak .
kidney failure be usually reversible , but some patient experience kidney problem year later .
not all prokaryote be pathogenic .
on the contrary , pathogen represent only a very small percentage of the diversity of the microbial world .
in fact , - pron - life would not be possible without prokaryote .
just think about the role of prokaryote in biogeochemical cycle .
cooperation between bacteria and eukaryotes 
nitrogen fixation nitrogen be a very important element to live thing , because - pron - be part of nucleotide and amino acid that be the building block of nucleic acid and protein , respectively .
nitrogen be usually the most limit element in terrestrial ecosystem , with atmospheric nitrogen , n two , provide the large pool of available nitrogen .
however , eukaryote can not use atmospheric , gaseous nitrogen to synthesize macromolecule .
fortunately , nitrogen can be " fix , " mean - pron - be convert into ammonia ( nh three ) either biologically or abiotically .
abiotic nitrogen fixation occur as a result of lightning or by industrial process .
biological nitrogen fixation ( bnf ) be exclusively carry out by prokaryote  soil bacteria , cyanobacteria , and frankia spp .
( filamentous bacteria interact with actinorhizal plant such as alder , bayberry , and sweet fern ) .
after photosynthesis , bnf be the second most important biological process on earth .
the equation represent the process be as follow n two + one  six atp + eight e− + eight h+ → two nh three + one  six adp + one  six pi + h two where pi stand for inorganic phosphate .
the total fix nitrogen through bnf be about one  zero  zero to one  eight  zero million metric ton per year .
biological process contribute six  five percent of the nitrogen use in agriculture .
cyanobacteria be the most important nitrogen fixer in aquatic environment .
in soil , member of the genus clostridium be example of free - living , nitrogen - fix bacteria .
other bacteria live symbiotically with legume plant , provide the most important source of bnf .
symbiont may fix more nitrogen in soil than free - live organism by a factor of one  zero .
soil bacteria , collectively call rhizobia , be able to symbiotically interact with legume to form nodule , specialized structure where nitrogen fixation occur ( figure two  two  .  two  seven ) .
nitrogenase , the enzyme that fix nitrogen , be inactivate by oxygen , so the nodule provide an oxygen - free area for nitrogen fixation to take place .
this process provide a natural and inexpensive plant fertilizer , as - pron - reduce atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia , which be easily usable by plant .
the use of legume be an excellent alternative to chemical fertilization and be of special interest to sustainable agriculture , which seek to minimize the use of chemical and conserve natural resource .
through symbiotic nitrogen fixation , the plant benefit from use an endless source of nitrogen  the atmosphere .
bacteria benefit from use photosynthate ( carbohydrate produce during photosynthesis ) from the plant and have a protect niche .
additionally , the soil benefit from be naturally fertilize .
therefore , the use of rhizobia as biofertilizer be a sustainable practice .
why be legume so important ?
some , like soybean , be key source of agricultural protein .
some of the most important grain legume be soybean , peanut , pea , chickpea , and bean .
other legume , such as alfalfa , be use to feed cattle .
soybean ( glycine max ) be a legume that interact symbiotically with the soil bacterium bradyrhizobium japonicum to form specialized structure on the root call nodule where nitrogen fixation occur .
early biotechnology 
cheese , bread , wine , beer , and yogurt
accord to the united nations convention on biological diversity , biotechnology be " any technological application that use biological system , live organism , or derivative thereof , to make or modify product or process for specific use . "
[ five ]
the concept of " specific use " involve some sort of commercial application .
genetic engineering , artificial selection , antibiotic production , and cell culture be current topic of study in biotechnology .
however , human have use prokaryote before the term biotechnology be even coin .
in addition , some of the good and service be as simple as cheese , bread , wine , beer , and yogurt , which employ both bacteria and other microbe , such as yeast , a fungus .
some of the product derive from the use of prokaryote in early biotechnology include ( a ) cheese , ( b ) wine , ( c ) beer and bread , and ( d ) yogurt .
cheese production begin around four  ,  zero  zero  zero – seven  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago when human begin to breed animal and process - pron - milk .
fermentation in this case preserve nutrient  milk will spoil relatively quickly , but when process as cheese , - pron - be more stable .
as for beer , the old record of brewing be about six  ,  zero  zero  zero year old and refer to the sumerians .
evidence indicate that the sumerians discover fermentation by chance .
wine have be produce for about four  ,  five  zero  zero year , and evidence suggest that cultured milk product , like yogurt , have exist for at least four  ,  zero  zero  zero year .
use prokaryotes to clean up - pron - planet  bioremediation microbial bioremediation be the use of prokaryote ( or microbial metabolism ) to remove pollutant .
bioremediation have be use to remove agricultural chemical ( pesticide , fertilizer ) that leach from soil into groundwater and the subsurface .
certain toxic metal and oxide , such as selenium and arsenic compound , can also be remove from water by bioremediation .
the reduction of seo four -  two to seo three -  two and to se zero ( metallic selenium ) be a method use to remove selenium ion from water .
mercury be an example of a toxic metal that can be remove from an environment by bioremediation .
as an active ingredient of some pesticide , mercury be use in industry and be also a by - product of certain process , such as battery production .
methyl mercury be usually present in very low concentration in natural environment , but - pron - be highly toxic because - pron - accumulate in living tissue .
several specie of bacteria can carry out the biotransformation of toxic mercury into nontoxic form .
these bacteria , such as pseudomonas aeruginosa , can convert hg+ two into hg zero , which be nontoxic to human .
one of the most useful and interesting example of the use of prokaryote for bioremediation purpose be the cleanup of oil spill .
the importance of prokaryote to petroleum bioremediation have be demonstrate in several oil spill in recent year , such as the exxon valdez spill in alaska ( one  nine  eight  nine ) ( figure two  two  .  two  nine ) , the prestige oil spill in spain ( two  zero  zero  two ) , the spill into the mediterranean from a lebanon power plant ( two  zero  zero  six ) , and more recently , the bp oil spill in the gulf of mexico ( two  zero  one  zero ) .
to clean up these spill , bioremediation be promote by the addition of inorganic nutrient that help bacteria to grow .
hydrocarbon - degrade bacteria feed on hydrocarbon in the oil droplet , break down the hydrocarbon .
some specie , such as alcanivorax borkumensis , produce surfactant that solubilize the oil , whereas other bacteria degrade the oil into carbon dioxide .
in the case of oil spill in the ocean , ongoing , natural bioremediation tend to occur , inasmuch as there be oil - consume bacteria in the ocean prior to the spill .
in addition to naturally occur oil - degrade bacteria , human select and engineer bacteria that possess the same capability with increase efficacy and spectrum of hydrocarbon compound that can be process .
under ideal condition , - pron - have be report that up to eight  zero percent of the nonvolatile component in oil can be degrade within one year of the spill .
other oil fraction contain aromatic and highly branched hydrocarbon chain be more difficult to remove and remain in the environment for long period of time .
clean up oil after the valdez spill in alaska , worker hose oil from beach and then use a float boom to corral the oil , which be finally skim from the water surface .
some specie of bacteria be able to solubilize and degrade the oil .
( b )
one of the most catastrophic consequence of oil spill be the damage to fauna .
protist range from the microscopic , single - cell ( a ) acanthocystis turfacea and the ( b ) ciliate tetrahymena thermophila , both visualize here use light microscopy , to the enormous , multicellular ( c ) kelps ( chromalveolata ) that extend for hundred of foot in underwater " forest .
"
human have be familiar with macroscopic organism ( organism big enough to see with the unaided eye ) since before there be a write history , and - pron - be likely that most culture distinguish between animal and land plant , and most probably include the macroscopic fungus as plant .
therefore , - pron - become an interesting challenge to deal with the world of microorganism once microscope be develop a few century ago .
many different naming scheme be use over the last couple of century , but - pron - have become the most common practice to refer to eukaryote that be not land plant , animal , or fungus as protist .
this name be first suggest by ernst haeckel in the late nineteenth century .
- pron - have be apply in many context and have be formally use to represent a kingdom - level taxon call protista .
however , many modern systematist ( biologist who study the relationship among organism ) be begin to shy away from the idea of formal rank such as kingdom and phylum .
instead , - pron - be name taxa as group of organism think to include all the descendant of a last common ancestor ( monophyletic group ) .
during the past two decade , the field of molecular genetic have demonstrate that some protist be more related to animal , plant , or fungus than - pron - be to other protist .
therefore , not include animal , plant and fungus make the kingdom protista a paraphyletic group , or one that do not include all descendent of - pron - common ancestor .
for this reason , protist lineage originally classify into the kingdom protista continue to be examine and debate .
in the meantime , the term " protist " still be use informally to describe this tremendously diverse group of eukaryote .
most protist be microscopic , unicellular organism that be abundant in soil , freshwater , brackish , and marine environment .
- pron - be also common in the digestive tract of animal and in the vascular tissue of plant .
other invade the cell of other protist , animal , and plant .
not all protist be microscopic .
some have huge , macroscopic cell , such as the plasmodia ( giant amoeba ) of myxomycete slime mold or the marine green alga caulerpa , which can have single cell that can be several meter in size .
some protist be multicellular , such as the red , green , and brown seaweed .
- pron - be among the protist that one find the wealth of way that organism can grow .
live thing fall into three large group  archaea , bacteria , and eukarya .
the first two have prokaryotic cell , and the third contain all eukaryote .
a relatively sparse fossil record be available to help discern what the first member of each of these lineage look like , so - pron - be possible that all the event that lead to the last common ancestor of extant eukaryote will remain unknown .
however , comparative biology of extant organism and the limited fossil record provide some insight into the history of eukarya .
the early fossil find appear to be bacteria , most likely cyanobacteria .
- pron - be about three  .  five billion year old and be recognizable because of - pron - relatively complex structure and , for prokaryote , relatively large cell .
most other prokaryote have small cell , one or two μm in size , and would be difficult to pick out as fossil .
most living eukaryote have cell measure one  zero μm or great .
structure this size , which may be fossil , appear in the geological record about two  .  one billion year ago .
characteristic of eukaryotes data from these fossil have lead comparative biologist to the conclusion that living eukaryote be all descendant of a single common ancestor .
map the characteristic find in all major group of eukaryote reveal that the following characteristic must have be present in the last common ancestor , because these characteristic be present in at least some of the member of each major lineage .
one .
cell with nucleus surround by a nuclear envelope with nuclear pore .
this be the single characteristic that be both necessary and sufficient to define an organism as a eukaryote .
all extant eukaryote have cell with nucleus .
two .
mitochondria .
some extant eukaryote have very reduce remnant of mitochondria in - pron - cell , whereas other member of - pron - lineage have " typical " mitochondria .
three .
a cytoskeleton contain the structural and motility component call actin microfilament and microtubule .
all extant eukaryote have these cytoskeletal element .
four .
flagella and cilium , organell associate with cell motility .
some extant eukaryote lack flagella and / or cilium , but - pron - be descend from ancestor that possess - pron - .
five .
chromosome , each consist of a linear dna molecule coil around basic ( alkaline ) protein call histone .
the few eukaryote with chromosome lack histone clearly evolve from ancestor that have - pron - .
six .
mitosis , a process of nuclear division wherein replicate chromosome be divide and separate use element of the cytoskeleton .
mitosis be universally present in eukaryote .
seven .
sex , a process of genetic recombination unique to eukaryote in which diploid nucleus at one stage of the life cycle undergo meiosis to yield haploid nucleus and subsequent karyogamy , a stage where two haploid nucleus fuse together to create a diploid zygote nucleus .
eight .
member of all major lineage have cell wall , and - pron - may be reasonable to conclude that the last common ancestor could make cell wall during some stage of - pron - life cycle .
however , not enough be know about eukaryotes' cell wall and - pron - development to know how much homology exist among - pron - .
if the last common ancestor could make cell wall , - pron - be clear that this ability must have be lose in many group .
endosymbiosis and the evolution of eukaryotes
in order to understand eukaryotic organism fully , - pron - be necessary to understand that all extant eukaryote be descendant of a chimeric organism that be a composite of a host cell and the cell ( s ) of an alpha - proteobacterium that " take up residence " inside - pron - .
this major theme in the origin of eukaryote be know as endosymbiosis , one cell engulf another such that the engulfed cell survif and both cell benefit .
over many generation , a symbiotic relationship can result in two organism that depend on each other so completely that neither could survive on - pron - own .
endosymbiotic event likely contribute to the origin of the last common ancestor of today 's eukaryote and to later diversification in certain lineage of eukaryote ( figure two  three  .  five ) .
before explain this further , - pron - be necessary to consider metabolism in prokaryote .
prokaryotic metabolism
many important metabolic process arise in prokaryote , and some of these , such as nitrogen fixation , be never find in eukaryote .
the process of aerobic respiration be find in all major lineage of eukaryote , and - pron - be localize in the mitochondria .
aerobic respiration be also find in many lineage of prokaryote , but - pron - be not present in all of - pron - , and many form of evidence suggest that such anaerobic prokaryote never carry out aerobic respiration nor do - pron - ancestor .
while today 's atmosphere be about one - fifth molecular oxygen ( o two ) , geological evidence show that - pron - originally lack o two .
without oxygen , aerobic respiration would not be expect , and live thing would have rely on fermentation instead .
at some point before , about three  .  five billion year ago , some prokaryote begin use energy from sunlight to power anabolic process that reduce carbon dioxide to form organic compound .
that is , - pron - evolve the ability to photosynthesize .
hydrogen , derive from various source , be capture use light - powered reaction to reduce fix carbon dioxide in the calvin cycle .
the group of gram - negative bacteria that give rise to cyanobacteria use water as the hydrogen source and release o two as a waste product .
eventually , the amount of photosynthetic oxygen build up in some environment to level that pose a risk to live organism , since - pron - can damage many organic compound .
various metabolic process evolve that protect organism from oxygen , one of which , aerobic respiration , also generate high level of atp .
- pron - become widely present among prokaryote , include in a group - pron - now call alpha - proteobacteria .
organism that do not acquire aerobic respiration have to remain in oxygen - free environment .
originally , oxygen - rich environment be likely localize around place where cyanobacteria be active , but by about two billion year ago , geological evidence show that oxygen be build up to high concentration in the atmosphere .
oxygen level similar to today 's level only arise within the last seven  zero  zero million year .
recall that the first fossil that - pron - believe to be eukaryote date to about two billion year old , so - pron - appear as oxygen level be increase .
also , recall that all extant eukaryote descend from an ancestor with mitochondria .
these organelle be first observe by light microscopist in the late one  eight  zero  zero , where - pron - appear to be somewhat worm - shape structure that seem to be move around in the cell .
some early observer suggest that - pron - may be bacteria live inside host cell , but these hypothesis remain unknown or reject in most scientific community .
endosymbiotic theory
as cell biology develop in the twentieth century , - pron - become clear that mitochondrion be the organelle responsible for produce atp use aerobic respiration .
in the one  nine  six  zero , american biologist lynn margulis develop endosymbiotic theory , which state that eukaryote may have be a product of one cell engulf another , one live within another , and evolve over time until the separate cell be no longer recognizable as such .
in one  nine  six  seven , margulis introduce new work on the theory and substantiate - pron - finding through microbiological evidence .
although margulis' work initially be meet with resistance , this once - revolutionary hypothesis be now widely ( but not completely ) accept , with work progress on uncover the step involve in this evolutionary process and the key player involve .
much still remain to be discover about the origin of the cell that now make up the cell in all live eukaryote .
broadly , - pron - have become clear that many of - pron - nuclear gene and the molecular machinery responsible for replication and expression appear closely relate to those in archaea .
on the other hand , the metabolic organell and gene responsible for many energy - harvesting process have - pron - origin in bacteria .
much remain to be clarify about how this relationship occur  this continue to be an exciting field of discovery in biology .
for instance , - pron - be not know whether the endosymbiotic event that lead to mitochondria occur before or after the host cell have a nucleus .
such organism would be among the extinct precursor of the last common ancestor of eukaryote .
mitochondria one of the major feature distinguish prokaryote from eukaryote be the presence of mitochondria .
eukaryotic cell may contain anywhere from one to several thousand mitochondrion , depend on the cell 's level of energy consumption .
each mitochondrion measure one to one  zero or great micrometer in length and exist in the cell as an organelle that can be ovoid to worm - shape to intricately branch ( figure two  three  .  two ) .
mitochondria arise from the division of exist mitochondrion  - pron - may fuse together  and - pron - may be move around inside the cell by interaction with the cytoskeleton .
however , mitochondria can not survive outside the cell .
as the atmosphere be oxygenate by photosynthesis , and as successful aerobic prokaryote evolve , evidence suggest that an ancestral cell with some membrane compartmentalization engulf a free - live aerobic prokaryote , specifically an alpha - proteobacterium , thereby give the host cell the ability to use oxygen to release energy store in nutrient .
alpha - proteobacteria be a large group of bacteria that include specie symbiotic with plant , disease organism that can infect human via tick , and many free - living specie that use light for energy .
several line of evidence support that mitochondria be derive from this endosymbiotic event .
most mitochondrion be shape like alpha - proteobacteria and be surround by two membrane , which would result when one membrane - bind organism be engulf into a vacuole by another membrane - bind organism .
the mitochondrial inner membrane be extensive and involve substantial infolding call cristae that resemble the textured , outer surface of alpha - proteobacteria .
the matrix and inner membrane be rich with the enzyme necessary for aerobic respiration .
in this transmission electron micrograph of mitochondria in a mammalian lung cell , the cristae , infolding of the mitochondrial inner membrane , can be see in cross - section .
mitochondria divide independently by a process that resemble binary fission in prokaryote .
specifically , mitochondrion be not form from scratch ( de novo ) by the eukaryotic cell  - pron - reproduce within - pron - and be distribute with the cytoplasm when a cell divide or two cell fuse .
therefore , although these organelle be highly integrate into the eukaryotic cell , - pron - still reproduce as if - pron - be independent organism within the cell .
however , - pron - reproduction be synchronize with the activity and division of the cell .
mitochondrion have - pron - own ( usually ) circular dna chromosome that be stabilize by attachment to the inner membrane and carry gene similar to gene express by alpha - proteobacteria .
mitochondria also have special ribosome and transfer rna that resemble these component in prokaryote .
these feature all support that mitochondria be once free - live prokaryote .
mitochondrion that carry out aerobic respiration have - pron - own genome , with gene similar to those in alpha - proteobacteria .
however , many of the gene for respiratory protein be locate in the nucleus .
when these gene be compare to those of other organism , - pron - appear to be of alpha - proteobacterial origin .
additionally , in some eukaryotic group , such gene be find in the mitochondria , whereas in other group , - pron - be find in the nucleus .
this have be interpret as evidence that gene have be transfer from the endosymbiont chromosome to the host genome .
this loss of gene by the endosymbiont be probably one explanation why mitochondria can not live without a host .
some living eukaryote be anaerobic and can not survive in the presence of too much oxygen .
some appear to lack organelle that could be recognize as mitochondria .
in the one  nine  seven  zero to the early one  nine  nine  zero , many biologist suggest that some of these eukaryote be descend from ancestor whose lineage have diverge from the lineage of mitochondrion - contain eukaryote before endosymbiosis occur .
however , later finding suggest that reduce organelle be find in most , if not all , anaerobic eukaryote , and that all eukaryote appear to carry some gene in - pron - nucleus that be of mitochondrial origin .
in addition to the aerobic generation of atp , mitochondrion have several other metabolic function .
one of these function be to generate cluster of iron and sulfur that be important cofactor of many enzyme .
such function be often associate with the reduce mitochondrion - derive organelle of anaerobic eukaryote .
therefore , most biologist accept that the last common ancestor of eukaryote have mitochondria .
plastid
some group of eukaryote be photosynthetic .
- pron - cell contain , in addition to the standard eukaryotic organelle , another kind of organelle call a plastid .
when such cell be carry out photosynthesis , - pron - plastid be rich in the pigment chlorophyll
a and a range of other pigment , call accessory pigment , which be involve in harvesting energy from light .
photosynthetic plastid be call chloroplast .
this chloroplast cross - section illustrate - pron - elaborate inner membrane organization .
stack of thylakoid membrane compartmentalize photosynthetic enzyme and provide scaffolding for chloroplast dna .
( b )
in this micrograph of elodea sp . , the chloroplast can be see as small green sphere .
like mitochondria , plastid appear to have an endosymbiotic origin .
this hypothesis be also champion by lynn margulis .
plastid be derive from cyanobacteria that live inside the cell of an ancestral , aerobic , heterotrophic eukaryote .
this be call primary endosymbiosis , and plastid of primary origin be surround by two membrane .
the good evidence be that this have happen twice in the history of eukaryote .
in one case , the common ancestor of the major lineage / supergroup archaeplastida take on a cyanobacterial endosymbiont  in the other , the ancestor of the small amoeboid rhizarian taxon , paulinella , take on a different cyanobacterial endosymbiont .
almost all photosynthetic eukaryote be descend from the first event , and only a couple of specie be derive from the other .
cyanobacteria be a group of gram - negative bacteria with all the conventional structure of the group .
however , unlike most prokaryote , - pron - have extensive , internal membrane - bind sac call thylakoid .
chlorophyll be a component of these membrane , as be many of the protein of the light reaction of photosynthesis .
cyanobacteria also have the peptidoglycan wall and lipopolysaccharide layer associate with gram - negative bacteria .
chloroplast of primary origin have thylakoid , a circular dna chromosome , and ribosom similar to those of cyanobacteria .
each chloroplast be surround by two membrane .
in the group of archaeplastida call the glaucophyte and in paulinella , a thin peptidoglycan layer be present between the outer and inner plastid membrane .
all other plastid lack this relictual cyanobacterial wall .
the outer membrane surround the plastid be think to be derive from the vacuole in the host , and the inner membrane be think to be derive from the plasma membrane of the symbiont .
there be also , as with the case of mitochondria , strong evidence that many of the gene of the endosymbiont be transfer to the nucleus .
plastid , like mitochondria , can not live independently outside the host .
in addition , like mitochondria , plastid be derive from the division of other plastid and never build from scratch .
researcher have suggest that the endosymbiotic event that lead to archaeplastida occur one to one  .  five billion year ago , at least five hundred million year after the fossil record suggest that eukaryote be present .
not all plastid in eukaryote be derive directly from primary endosymbiosis .
some of the major group of algae become photosynthetic by secondary endosymbiosis , that is , by take in either green algae or red algae ( both from archaeplastida ) as endosymbiont ( figure two  three  .  four ab ) .
numerous microscopic and genetic study have support this conclusion .
secondary plastid be surround by three or more membrane , and some secondary plastid even have clear remnant of the nucleus of endosymbiotic alga .
other have not " keep " any remnant .
there be case where tertiary or high - order endosymbiotic event be the good explanation for plastid in some eukaryote .
red algae and ( b ) green algae ( visualize by light microscopy ) share similar dna sequence with photosynthetic cyanobacteria .
scientist speculate that , in a process call endosymbiosis , an ancestral prokaryote engulf a photosynthetic cyanobacterium that evolve into modern - day chloroplast .
there be over one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero describe living specie of protist , and - pron - be unclear how many undescribed specie may exist .
since many protist live as commensal or parasite in other organism and these relationship be often species - specific , there be a huge potential for protist diversity that match the diversity of host .
as the catchall term for eukaryotic organism that be not animal , plant , or fungus , - pron - be not surprising that very few characteristic be common to all protist .
cell structure
the cell of protist be among the most elaborate of all cell .
most protist be microscopic and unicellular , but some true multicellular form exist .
a few protist live as colony that behave in some way as a group of free - live cell and in other way as a multicellular organism .
still other protist be compose of enormous , multinucleate , single cell that look like amorphous blob of slime , or in other case , like fern .
in fact , many protist cell be multinucleat  in some specie , the nucleus be different size and have distinct role in protist cell function .
single protist cell range in size from less than a micrometer to three meter in length to hectare .
protist cell may be envelop by animal - like cell membrane or plant - like cell wall .
other be encase in glassy silica - base shell or wind with pellicle of interlock protein strip .
the pellicle function like a flexible coat of armor , prevent the protist from be tear or pierce without compromise - pron - range of motion .
metabolism protist exhibit many form of nutrition and may be aerobic or anaerobic .
protist that store energy by photosynthesis belong to a group of photoautotroph and be characterize by the presence of chloroplast .
other protist be heterotrophic and consume organic material ( such as other organism ) to obtain nutrition .
amoebas and some other heterotrophic protist specie ingest particle by a process call phagocytosis , in which the cell membrane engulfs a food particle and bring - pron - inward , pinch off an intracellular membranous sac , or vesicle , call a food vacuole ( figure two  three  .  seven ) .
the vesicle contain the ingested particle , the phagosome , then fuse with a lysosome contain hydrolytic enzyme to produce a phagolysosome , and the food particle be break down into small molecule that can diffuse into the cytoplasm and be use in cellular metabolism .
undigest remain ultimately be expel from the cell via exocytosis .
the stage of phagocytosis include the engulfment of a food particle , the digestion of the particle use hydrolytic enzyme contain within a lysosome , and the expulsion of undigested material from the cell .
subtype of heterotroph , call saprobe , absorb nutrient from dead organism or - pron - organic waste .
some protist can function as mixotroph , obtain nutrition by photoautotrophic or heterotrophic route , depend on whether sunlight or organic nutrient be available .
motility
the majority of protist be motile , but different type of protist have evolve varied mode of movement ( figure two  three  .  eight ) .
some protist have one or more flagella , which - pron - rotate or whip .
other be cover in row or tuft of tiny cilium that - pron - coordinately beat to swim .
still other form cytoplasmic extension call pseudopodia anywhere on the cell , anchor the pseudopodia to a substrate , and pull - pron - forward .
some protist can move toward or away from a stimulus , a movement refer to as taxi .
movement toward light , termed phototaxi , be accomplish by couple - pron - locomotion strategy with a light - sensing organ .
protist use various method for transportation .
( a ) paramecium wave hair - like appendage call cilium to propel - pron - .
( b )
amoeba use lobe - like pseudopodia to anchor - pron - to a solid surface and pull - pron - forward .
( c )
euglena use a whip - like tail call a flagellum to propel - pron - .
life cycles protists reproduce by a variety of mechanism .
most undergo some form of asexual reproduction , such as binary fission , to produce two daughter cell .
in protist , binary fission can be divide into transverse or longitudinal , depend on the axis of orientation  sometimes paramecium exhibit this method .
some protist such as the true slime mold exhibit multiple fission and simultaneously divide into many daughter cell .
other produce tiny bud that go on to divide and grow to the size of the parental protist .
sexual reproduction , involve meiosis and fertilization , be common among protist , and many protist specie can switch from asexual to sexual reproduction when necessary .
sexual reproduction be often associate with period when nutrient be deplete or environmental change occur .
sexual reproduction may allow the protist to recombine gene and produce new variation of progeny that may be better suit to survive in the new environment .
however , sexual reproduction be often associate with resistant cyst that be a protective , rest stage .
depend on - pron - habitat , the cyst may be particularly resistant to temperature extreme , desiccation , or low ph .
this strategy also allow certain protist to " wait out "
stressor until - pron - environment become more favorable for survival or until - pron - be carry ( such as by wind , water , or transport on a large organism ) to a different environment , because cyst exhibit virtually no cellular metabolism .
protist life cycle range from simple to extremely elaborate .
certain parasitic protist have complicate life cycle and must infect different host specie at different developmental stage to complete - pron - life cycle .
some protist be unicellular in the haploid form and multicellular in the diploid form , a strategy employ by animal .
other protist have multicellular stage in both haploid and diploid form , a strategy call alternation of generation that be also use by plant .
habitats nearly all protist exist in some type of aquatic environment , include freshwater and marine environment , damp soil , and even snow .
several protist specie be parasite that infect animal or plant .
a few protist specie live on dead organism or - pron - waste , and contribute to - pron - decay .
in the span of several decade , the kingdom protista have be disassemble because sequence analysis have reveal new genetic ( and therefore evolutionary ) relationship among these eukaryote .
moreover , protist that exhibit similar morphological feature may have evolve analogous structure because of similar selective pressure — rather than because of recent common ancestry .
this phenomenon , call convergent evolution , be one reason why protist classification be so challenging .
the emerge classification scheme group the entire domain eukaryota into six " supergroup " that contain all of the protist as well as animal , plant , and fungus that evolve from a common ancestor ( figure two  three  .  nine ) .
the supergroup be believe to be monophyletic , mean that all organism within each supergroup be believe to have evolve from a single common ancestor , and thus all member be most closely related to each other than to organism outside that group .
there be still evidence lack for the monophyly of some group .
this diagram show a propose classification of the domain eukara .
currently , the domain eukarya be divide into six supergroup .
within each supergroup be multiple kingdom .
dotted line indicate suggest evolutionary relationship that remain under debate .
the classification of eukaryote be still in flux , and the six supergroup may be modify or replace by a more appropriate hierarchy as genetic , morphological , and ecological datum accumulate .
keep in mind that the classification scheme present here be just one of several hypothesis , and the true evolutionary relationship be still to be determine .
when learn about protist , - pron - be helpful to focus less on the nomenclature and more on the commonality and difference that define the group - pron - .
excavata many of the protist specie classify into the supergroup excavata be asymmetrical , single - cell organism with a feeding groove " excavate " from one side .
this supergroup include heterotrophic predator , photosynthetic specie , and parasite .
- pron - subgroup be the diplomonad , parabasalid , and euglenozoan .
diplomonad among the excavata be the diplomonad , which include the intestinal parasite , giardia lamblia ( figure two  three  .  one  zero ) .
until recently , these protist be believe to lack mitochondria .
mitochondrial remnant organelle , call mitosome , have since be identify in diplomonad , but these mitosome be essentially nonfunctional .
diplomonad exist in anaerobic environment and use alternative pathway , such as glycolysis , to generate energy .
each diplomonad cell have two identical nucleus and use several flagella for locomotion .
the mammalian intestinal parasite giardia lamblia , visualize here use scanning electron microscopy , be a waterborne protist that cause severe diarrhea when ingest .
( credit  modification of work by janice carr , cdc  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
parabasalid a second excavata subgroup , the parabasalid , also exhibit semi - functional mitochondria .
in parabasalid , these structure function anaerobically and be call hydrogenosome because - pron - produce hydrogen gas as a byproduct .
parabasalid move with flagella and membrane rippling .
trichomona vaginalis , a parabasalid that cause a sexually transmit disease in human , employ these mechanism to transit through the male and female urogenital tract .
t . vaginalis cause trichamoniasis , which appear in an estimate one  eight  zero million case worldwide each year .
whereas man rarely exhibit symptom during an infection with this protist , infected woman may become more susceptible to secondary infection with human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) and may be more likely to develop cervical cancer .
pregnant woman infect with t . vaginali be at an increase risk of serious complication , such as pre - term delivery .
euglenozoans euglenozoans include parasite , heterotroph , autotroph , and mixotroph , range in size from one  zero to five  zero  zero μm .
euglenoid move through - pron - aquatic habitat use two long flagella that guide - pron - toward light source sense by a primitive ocular organ call an eyespot .
the familiar genus , euglena , encompass some mixotrophic specie that display a photosynthetic capability only when light be present .
in the dark , the chloroplast of euglena shrink up and temporarily cease functioning , and the cell instead take up organic nutrient from - pron - environment .
the human parasite , trypanosoma brucei , belong to a different subgroup of euglenozoa , the kinetoplastid .
the kinetoplastid subgroup be name after the kinetoplast , a dna mass carry within the single , oversized mitochondrion possess by each of these cell .
this subgroup include several parasite , collectively call trypanosome , which because devastate human disease and infect an insect specie during a portion of - pron - life cycle .
t . brucei develop in the gut of the tsetse fly after the fly bite an infected human or other mammalian host .
the parasite then travel to the insect salivary gland to be transmit to another human or other mammal when the infected tsetse fly consume another blood meal .
t . brucei be common in central africa and be the causative agent of african sleep sickness , a disease associate with severe chronic fatigue , coma , and can be fatal if left untreated .
trypanosoma brucei , the causative agent of sleep sickness , spend part of - pron - life cycle in the tsetse fly and part in human .
chromalveolata current evidence suggest that specie classify as chromalveolate be derive from a common ancestor that engulf a photosynthetic red algal cell , which - pron - have already evolve chloroplast from an endosymbiotic relationship with a photosynthetic prokaryote .
therefore , the ancestor of chromalveolate be believe to have result from a secondary endosymbiotic event .
however , some chromalveolate appear to have lose red alga - derive plastid organelle or lack plastid gene altogether .
therefore , this supergroup should be consider a hypothesis - base working group that be subject to change .
chromalveolate include very important photosynthetic organism , such as diatom , brown algae , and significant disease agent in animal and plant .
the chromalveolate can be subdivide into alveolate and stramenopile .
alveolate  dinoflagellates , apicomplexians , and ciliates a large body of datum support that the alveolate be derive from a shared common ancestor .
the alveolate be name for the presence of an alveolus , or membrane - enclose sac , beneath the cell membrane .
the exact function of the alveolus be unknown , but - pron - may be involve in osmoregulation .
the alveolate be further categorize into some of the better - know protist  the dinoflagellate , the apicomplexan , and the ciliate .
dinoflagellate exhibit extensive morphological diversity and can be photosynthetic , heterotrophic , or mixotrophic .
many dinoflagellate be encase in interlock plate of cellulose .
two perpendicular flagella fit into the groove between the cellulose plate , with one flagellum extend longitudinally and a second encircle the dinoflagellate ( figure two  three  .  one  two ) .
together , the flagella contribute to the characteristic spinning motion of dinoflagellate .
these protist exist in freshwater and marine habitat , and be a component of plankton , the typically microscopic organism that drift through the water and serve as a crucial food source for large aquatic organism .
the dinoflagellate exhibit great diversity in shape .
many be encase in cellulose armor and have two flagella that fit in groove between the plate .
movement of these two perpendicular flagella cause a spin motion .
some dinoflagellate generate light , call bioluminescence , when - pron - be jarred or stressed .
large number of marine dinoflagellate ( billion or trillion of cell per wave ) can emit light and because an entire breaking wave to twinkle or take on a brilliant blue color ( figure two  three  .  one  three ) .
for approximately two  zero specie of marine dinoflagellate , population explosion ( also call bloom ) during the summer month can tint the ocean with a muddy red color .
this phenomenon be call a red tide , and - pron - result from the abundant red pigment present in dinoflagellate plastid .
in large quantity , these dinoflagellate specie secrete an asphyxiate toxin that can kill fish , bird , and marine mammal .
red tide can be massively detrimental to commercial fishery , and human who consume these protist may become poison .
bioluminescence be emit from dinoflagellate in a breaking wave , as see from the new jersey coast .
the apicomplexan protist be so name because - pron - microtubule , fibrin , and vacuole be asymmetrically distribute at one end of the cell in a structure call an apical complex ( figure two  three  .  one  four ) .
the apical complex be specialize for entry and infection of host cell .
indeed , all apicomplexan be parasitic .
this group include the genus plasmodium , which cause malaria in human .
apicomplexan life cycle be complex , involve multiple host and stage of sexual and asexual reproduction .
apicomplexan be parasitic protist .
- pron - have a characteristic apical complex that enable - pron - to infect host cell .
( b ) plasmodium , the causative agent of malaria , have a complex life cycle typical of apicomplexan .
the ciliate , which include paramecium and tetrahymena , be a group of protist one  zero to three  ,  zero  zero  zero micrometer in length that be cover in row , tuft , or spiral of tiny cilium .
by beat - pron - cilium synchronously or in wave , ciliate can coordinate direct movement and ingest food particle .
certain ciliate have fuse cilia - base structure that function like paddle , funnel , or fin .
ciliate also be surround by a pellicle , provide protection without compromise agility .
the genus paramecium include protist that have organize - pron - cilium into a plate - like primitive mouth , call an oral groove , which be use to capture and digest bacteria ( figure two  three  .  one  five ) .
food capture in the oral groove enter a food vacuole , where - pron - combine with digestive enzyme .
waste particle be expel by an exocytic vesicle that fuse at a specific region on the cell membrane , call the anal pore .
in addition to a vacuole - base digestive system , paramecium also use contractile vacuole , which be osmoregulatory vesicle that fill with water as - pron - enter the cell by osmosis and then contract to squeeze water from the cell .
paramecium have a primitive mouth ( call an oral groove ) to ingest food , and an anal pore to excrete - pron - .
contractile vacuole allow the organism to excrete excess water .
cilium enable the organism to move .
paramecium have two nucleus , a macronucleus and a micronucleus , in each cell .
the micronucleus be essential for sexual reproduction , whereas the macronucleus direct asexual binary fission and all other biological function .
the process of sexual reproduction in paramecium underscore the importance of the micronucleus to these protist .
paramecium and most other ciliate reproduce sexually by conjugation .
this process begin when two different mating type of paramecium make physical contact and join with a cytoplasmic bridge ( figure two  three  .  one  six ) .
the diploid micronucleus in each cell then undergo meiosis to produce four haploid micronucleus .
three of these degenerate in each cell , leave one micronucleus that then undergo mitosis , generate two haploid micronucleus .
the cell each exchange one of these haploid nucleus and move away from each other .
a similar process occur in bacteria that have plasmid .
fusion of the haploid micronuclei generate a completely novel diploid pre - micronucleus in each conjugative cell .
this pre - micronucleus undergoe three round of mitosis to produce eight copy , and the original macronucleus disintegrate .
four of the eight pre - micronucleus become full - fledge micronucleus , whereas the other four perform multiple round of dna replication and go on to become new macronucleus .
two cell division then yield four new paramecia from each original conjugative cell .
stramenopile  diatoms , brown algae , golden algae and oomycet
the other subgroup of chromalveolate , the stramenopile , include photosynthetic marine algae and heterotrophic protist .
the unifying feature of this group be the presence of a textur , or " hairy , " flagellum .
many stramenopile also have an additional flagellum that lack hair - like projection ( figure two  three  .  one  seven ) .
member of this subgroup range in size from singlecelled diatom to the massive and multicellular kelp .
this stramenopile cell have a single hairy flagellum and a secondary smooth flagellum .
the diatom be unicellular photosynthetic protist that encase - pron - in intricately pattern , glassy cell wall compose of silicon dioxide in a matrix of organic particle ( figure two  three  .  one  eight ) .
these protist be a component of freshwater and marine plankton .
most specie of diatom reproduce asexually , although some instance of sexual reproduction and sporulation also exist .
some diatom exhibit a slit in - pron - silica shell , call a raphe .
by expel a stream of mucopolysaccharide from the raphe , the diatom can attach to surface or propel - pron - in one direction .
assorted diatom , visualize here use light microscopy , live among annual sea ice in mcmurdo sound , antarctica .
diatoms range in size from two to two  zero  zero μm .
( credit 
prof . gordon t . taylor , stony brook university , nsf , noaa )
during period of nutrient availability , diatom population bloom to number great than can be consume by aquatic organism .
the excess diatom die and sink to the sea floor where - pron - be not easily reach by saprobe that feed on dead organism .
as a result , the carbon dioxide that the diatom have consume and incorporate into - pron - cell during photosynthesis be not return to the atmosphere .
in general , this process by which carbon be transport deep into the ocean be describe as the biological carbon pump , because carbon be " pump " to the ocean depth where - pron - be inaccessible to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide .
the biological carbon pump be a crucial component of the carbon cycle that maintain low atmospheric carbon dioxide level .
like diatom , golden algae be largely unicellular , although some specie can form large colony .
- pron - characteristic gold color result from - pron - extensive use of carotenoid , a group of photosynthetic pigment that be generally yellow or orange in color .
golden algae be find in both freshwater and marine environment , where - pron - form a major part of the plankton community .
the brown algae be primarily marine , multicellular organism that be know colloquially as seaweed .
giant kelp be a type of brown algae .
some brown algae have evolve specialize tissue that resemble terrestrial plant , with root - like holdfast , stem - like stipe , and leaf - like blade that be capable of photosynthesis .
the stipe of giant kelp be enormous , extend in some case for six  zero meter .
a variety of algal life cycle exist , but the most complex be alternation of generation , in which both haploid and diploid stage involve multicellularity .
compare this life cycle to that of human , for instance .
haploid gamete produce by meiosis ( sperm and egg ) combine in fertilization to generate a diploid zygote that undergo many round of mitosis to produce a multicellular embryo and then a fetus .
however , the individual sperm and egg - pron - never become multicellular being .
terrestrial plant also have evolve alternation of generation .
in the brown algae genus laminaria , haploid spore develop into multicellular gametophyte , which produce haploid gamete that combine to produce diploid organism that then become multicellular organism with a different structure from the haploid form ( figure two  three  .  one  nine ) .
certain other organism perform alternation of generation in which both the haploid and diploid form look the same .
the water mold , oomycet ( " egg fungus " ) , be so - name base on - pron - fungus - like morphology , but molecular datum have show that the water mold be not closely related to fungus .
the oomycete be characterize by a cellulose - base cell wall and an extensive network of filament that allow for nutrient uptake .
as diploid spore , many oomycete have two oppositely direct flagella ( one hairy and one smooth ) for locomotion .
the oomycete be nonphotosynthetic and include many saprobe and parasite .
the saprobe appear as white fluffy growth on dead organism ( figure two  three  .  two  zero ) .
most oomycete be aquatic , but some parasitize terrestrial plant .
one plant pathogen be phytophthora infestan , the causative agent of late blight of potato , such as occur in the nineteenth century irish potato famine .
a saprobic oomycete engulfs a dead insect .
( credit  modification of work by thomas bresson )
rhizaria the rhizaria supergroup include many of the amoeba , most of which have threadlike or needle - like pseudopodia ( figure two  three  .  two  one ) .
pseudopodia function to trap and engulf food particle and to direct movement in rhizarian protist .
these pseudopod project outward from anywhere on the cell surface and can anchor to a substrate .
the protist then transport - pron - cytoplasm into the pseudopod , thereby move the entire cell .
this type of motion , call cytoplasmic streaming , be use by several diverse group of protist as a means of locomotion or as a method to distribute nutrient and oxygen .
ammonia tepida , a rhizaria specie view here use phase contrast light microscopy , exhibit many threadlike pseudopodia .
forams foraminiferans , or foram , be unicellular heterotrophic protist , range from approximately two  zero micrometer to several centimeter in length , and occasionally resemble tiny snail ( figure two  three  .  two  two ) .
as a group , the foram exhibit porous shell , call test that be build from various organic material and typically harden with calcium carbonate .
the test may house photosynthetic algae , which the foram can harvest for nutrition .
foram pseudopodia extend through the pore and allow the foram to move , feed , and gather additional building material .
typically , foram be associate with sand or other particle in marine or freshwater habitat .
foraminiferan be also useful as indicator of pollution and change in global weather pattern .
these shell from foraminifera sink to the sea floor .
( credit  deep east two  zero  zero  one , noaa / oer )
radiolarians
a second subtype of rhizaria , the radiolarian , exhibit intricate exterior of glassy silica with radial or bilateral symmetry ( figure two  three  .  two  three ) .
needle - like pseudopod support by microtubule radiate outward from the cell body of these protist and function to catch food particle .
the shell of dead radiolarian sink to the ocean floor , where - pron - may accumulate in one  zero  zero meter - thick depth .
preserve , sedimented radiolarian be very common in the fossil record .
this fossilize radiolarian shell be image use a scanning electron microscope .
( credit  modification of work by hannes grobe , alfred wegener institute  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
archaeplastida red algae and green algae be include in the supergroup archaeplastida .
- pron - be from a common ancestor of these protist that the land plant evolve , since - pron - close relative be find in this group .
molecular evidence support that all archaeplastida be descendent of an endosymbiotic relationship between a heterotrophic protist and a cyanobacterium .
the red and green algae include unicellular , multicellular , and colonial form .
red algae red algae , or rhodophyte , be primarily multicellular , lack flagella , and range in size from microscopic , unicellular protist to large , multicellular form group into the informal seaweed category .
the red algae life cycle be an alternation of generation .
some specie of red algae contain phycoerythrin , photosynthetic accessory pigment that be red in color and outcompete the green tint of chlorophyll , make these specie appear as vary shade of red .
other protist classify as red algae lack phycoerythrin and be parasite .
red algae be common in tropical water where - pron - have be detect at depth of two  six  zero meter .
other red algae exist in terrestrial or freshwater environment .
green algae  chlorophytes and charophytes
the most abundant group of algae be the green algae .
the green algae exhibit similar feature to the land plant , particularly in term of chloroplast structure .
that this group of protist share a relatively recent common ancestor with land plant be well support .
the green algae be subdivide into the chlorophyte and the charophyte .
the charophyte be the close live relative to land plant and resemble - pron - in morphology and reproductive strategy .
charophyte be common in wet habitat , and - pron - presence often signal a healthy ecosystem .
the chlorophyte exhibit great diversity of form and function .
chlorophyte primarily inhabit freshwater and damp soil , and be a common component of plankton .
chlamydomonas be a simple , unicellular chlorophyte with a pear - shape morphology and two oppose , anterior flagella that guide this protist toward light sense by - pron - eyespot .
more complex chlorophyte specie exhibit haploid gamete and spore that resemble chlamydomonas .
the chlorophyte volvox be one of only a few example of a colonial organism , which behave in some way like a collection of individual cell , but in other way like the specialized cell of a multicellular organism ( figure two  three  .  two  four ) .
volvox colony contain five  zero  zero to six  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero cell , each with two flagellum , contain within a hollow , spherical matrix compose of a gelatinous glycoprotein secretion .
individual volvox cell move in a coordinated fashion and be interconnect by cytoplasmic bridge .
only a few of the cell reproduce to create daughter colony , an example of basic cell specialization in this organism .
volvox aureus be a green alga in the supergroup archaeplastida .
this species exist as a colony , consist of cell immerse in a gel - like matrix and intertwine with each other via hair - like cytoplasmic extension .
true multicellular organism , such as the sea lettuce , ulva , be represent among the chlorophyte .
in addition , some chlorophyte exist as large , multinucleate , single cell .
specie in the genus caulerpa exhibit flatten fern - like foliage and can reach length of three meter ( figure two  three  .  two  five ) .
caulerpa specie undergo nuclear division , but - pron - cell do not complete cytokinesis , remain instead as massive and elaborate single cell .
caulerpa taxifolia be a chlorophyte consist of a single cell contain potentially thousand of nucleus .
amoebozoa the amoebozoan characteristically exhibit pseudopodia that extend like tube or flat lobe , rather than the hair - like pseudopodia of rhizarian amoeba ( figure two  three  .  two  six ) .
the amoebozoa include several group of unicellular amoeba - like organism that be free - living or parasite .
amoeba with tubular and lobe - shape pseudopodia be see under a microscope .
these isolate would be morphologically classify as amoebozoan .
slime molds
a subset of the amoebozoan , the slime mold , have several morphological similarity to fungus that be think to be the result of convergent evolution .
for instance , during time of stress , some slime mold develop into spore - generate fruiting body , much like fungus .
the slime mold be categorize on the basis of - pron - life cycle into plasmodial or cellular type .
plasmodial slime mold be compose of large , multinucleate cell and move along surface like an amorphous blob of slime during - pron - feeding stage
( figure two  three  .  two  seven ) .
food particle be lift and engulf into the slime mold as - pron - glide along .
upon maturation , the plasmodium take on a net - like appearance with the ability to form fruiting body , or sporangia , during time of stress .
haploid spore be produce by meiosis within the sporangia , and spore can be disseminate through the air or water to potentially land in more favorable environment .
if this occur , the spore germinate to form ameboid or flagellate haploid cell that can combine with each other and produce a diploid zygotic slime mold to complete the life cycle .
the life cycle of the plasmodial slime mold be show .
the brightly colored plasmodium in the inset photo be a single - cell , multinucleate mass .
the cellular slime mold function as independent amoeboid cell when nutrient be abundant ( figure two  three  .  two  eight ) .
when food be deplete , cellular slime mold pile onto each other into a mass of cell that behave as a single unit , call a slug .
some cell in the slug contribute to a two – three  - millimeter stalk , dry up and die in the process .
cell atop the stalk form an asexual fruiting body that contain haploid spore .
as with plasmodial slime mold , the spore be disseminate and can germinate if - pron - land in a moist environment .
one representative genus of the cellular slime mold be dictyostelium , which commonly exist in the damp soil of forest .
cellular slime mold may exist as solitary or aggregated amoeba .
opisthokonta
the opisthokont include the animal - like choanoflagellate , which be believe to resemble the common ancestor of sponge and , in fact , all animal .
choanoflagellate include unicellular and colonial form , and number about two  four  four describe specie .
these organism exhibit a single , apical flagellum that be surround by a contractile collar compose of microvilli .
the collar use a similar mechanism to sponge to filter out bacteria for ingestion by the protist .
the morphology of choanoflagellate be recognize early on as resemble the collar cell of sponge , and suggest a possible relationship to animal .
the mesomycetozoa form a small group of parasite , primarily of fish , and at least one form that can parasitize human .
- pron - life cycle be poorly understand .
these organism be of special interest , because - pron - appear to be so closely related to animal .
in the past , - pron - be group with fungus and other protist base on - pron - morphology .
protist function in various ecological niche .
whereas some protist specie be essential component of the food chain and generator of biomass , other function in the decomposition of organic material .
still other protist be dangerous human pathogen or causative agent of devastating plant disease .
primary producers / food sources protists be essential source of nutrition for many other organism .
in some case , as in plankton , protist be consume directly .
alternatively , photosynthetic protist serve as producer of nutrition for other organism .
for instance , photosynthetic dinoflagellate call zooxanthellae use sunlight to fix inorganic carbon .
in this symbiotic relationship , these protist provide nutrient for coral polyp ( figure two  three  .  two  nine ) that house - pron - , give coral a boost of energy to secrete a calcium carbonate skeleton .
in turn , the coral provide the protist with a protected environment and the compound need for photosynthesis .
this type of symbiotic relationship be important in nutrient - poor environment .
without dinoflagellate symbiont , coral lose algal pigment in a process call coral bleaching , and - pron - eventually die .
this explain why reefbuild coral do not reside in water deep than two  zero meter  insufficient light reach those depth for dinoflagellate to photosynthesize .
coral polyp obtain nutrition through a symbiotic relationship with dinoflagellate .
the protist - pron - and - pron - product of photosynthesis be essential — directly or indirectly — to the survival of organism range from bacteria to mammal ( figure two  three  .  three  zero ) .
as primary producer , protist feed a large proportion of the world 's aquatic specie .
( on land , terrestrial plant serve as primary producer . )
in fact , approximately one - quarter of the world 's photosynthesis be conduct by protist , particularly dinoflagellate , diatom , and multicellular algae .
virtually all aquatic organism depend directly or indirectly on protist for food .
protist do not create food source only for sea - dwell organism .
for instance , certain anaerobic parabasalid specie exist in the digestive tract of termite and wood - eat cockroach , where - pron - contribute an essential step in the digestion of cellulose ingest by these insect as - pron - bear through wood .
human pathogens
a pathogen be anything that cause disease .
parasite live in or on an organism and harm the organism .
a significant number of protist be pathogenic parasite that must infect other organism to survive and propagate .
protist parasite include the causative agent of malaria , african sleep sickness , and waterborne gastroenteritis in human .
other protist pathogen prey on plant , effect massive destruction of food crop .
plasmodium species member of the genus plasmodium must colonize both a mosquito and a vertebrate to complete - pron - life cycle .
in vertebrate , the parasite develop in liver cell and go on to infect red blood cell , burst from and destroy the blood cell with each asexual replication cycle ( figure two  three  .  three  one ) .
of the four plasmodium specie know to infect human , p . falciparum account for five  zero percent of all malaria case and be the primary because of disease - relate fatality in tropical region of the world .
in two  zero  one  zero , - pron - be estimate that malaria cause between one - half and one million death , mostly in african child .
during the course of malaria , p . falciparum can infect and destroy more than one - half of a human 's circulate blood cell , lead to severe anemia .
in response to waste product release as the parasite burst from infected blood cell , the host immune system mount a massive inflammatory response with episode of delirium - inducing fever as parasite lyse red blood cell , spill parasite waste into the bloodstream .
p . falciparum be transmit to human by the african malaria mosquito , anopheles gambiae .
technique to kill , sterilize , or avoid exposure to this highly aggressive mosquito specie be crucial to malaria control .
red blood cell be show to be infect with p . falciparum , the causative agent of malaria .
in this light microscopic image take use a one  zero  zero × oil immersion lens , the ring - shape p . falciparum stain purple .
trypanosomes trypanosoma brucei , the parasite that be responsible for african sleep sickness , confound the human immune system by change - pron - thick layer of surface glycoprotein with each infectious cycle ( figure two  three  .  three  two ) .
the glycoprotein be identify by the immune system as foreign antigen , and a specific antibody defense be mount against the parasite .
however , t . brucei have thousand of possible antigen , and with each subsequent generation , the protist switch to a glycoprotein coat with a different molecular structure .
in this way , t . brucei be capable of replicate continuously without the immune system ever succeed in clear the parasite .
without treatment , t . brucei attack red blood cell , cause the patient to lapse into a coma and eventually die .
during epidemic period , mortality from the disease can be high .
great surveillance and control measure lead to a reduction in reported case  some of the low number report in five  zero year ( few than one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero case in all of sub - saharan africa ) have happen since two  zero  zero  nine .
in latin america , another species , t . cruzi , be responsible for chagas disease .
t . cruzi infection be mainly cause by a blood - suck bug .
the parasite inhabit heart and digestive system tissue in the chronic phase of infection , lead to malnutrition and heart failure due to abnormal heart rhythm .
an estimate one  zero million people be infect with chagas disease , and - pron - cause one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero death in two  zero  zero  eight .
trypanosome be show among red blood cell .
plant parasites protist parasite of terrestrial plant include agent that destroy food crop .
the oomycete plasmopara viticola parasitiz grape plant , cause a disease call downy mildew ( figure two  three  .  three  three ) .
grape plant infect with p . viticola appear stunt and have discolor , wither leaf .
the spread of downy mildew nearly collapse the french wine industry in the nineteenth century .
both downy and powdery mildew on this grape leaf be cause by an infection of p . viticola .
phytophthora infestan be an oomycete responsible for potato late blight , which cause potato stalk and stem to decay into black slime ( figure two  three  .  three  four ) .
widespread potato blight cause by p . infestan precipitate the well - know irish potato famine in the nineteenth century that claim the life of approximately one million people and lead to the emigration of at least one million more from ireland .
late blight continue to plague potato crop in certain part of the united states and russia , wipe out as much as seven  zero percent of crop when no pesticide be apply .
these unappetizing remnant result from an infection with p . infestan , the causative agent of potato late blight .
agent of decomposition
the fungus - like protist saprobe be specialize to absorb nutrient from nonliv organic matter , such as dead organism or - pron - waste .
for instance , many type of oomycete grow on dead animal or algae .
saprobic protist have the essential function of return inorganic nutrient to the soil and water .
this process allow for new plant growth , which in turn generate sustenance for other organism along the food chain .
indeed , without saprobe specie , such as protist , fungus , and bacteria , life would cease to exist as all organic carbon become " tie up " in dead organism .
many specie of fungus produce the familiar mushroom ( a ) which be a reproductive structure .
this ( b ) coral fungus display brightly colored fruiting body .
this electron micrograph show ( c ) the spore - bear structure of aspergillus , a type of toxic fungus find mostly in soil and plant .
the word fungus come from the latin word for mushroom .
indeed , the familiar mushroom be a reproductive structure use by many type of fungus .
however , there be also many fungus specie that do not produce mushroom at all .
be eukaryote , a typical fungal cell contain a true nucleus and many membrane - bind organelle .
the kingdom fungi include an enormous variety of live organism collectively refer to as eucomycota , or true fungus .
while scientist have identify about one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero specie of fungus , this be only a fraction of the one  .  five million specie of fungus likely present on earth .
edible mushroom , yeast , black mold , and the producer of the antibiotic penicillin , penicillium notatum , be all member of the kingdom fungi , which belong to the domain eukarya .
fungus , once consider plant - like organism , be more closely related to animal than plant .
fungus be not capable of photosynthesis  - pron - be heterotrophic because - pron - use complex organic compound as source of energy and carbon .
some fungal organism multiply only asexually , whereas other undergo both asexual reproduction and sexual reproduction with alternation of generation .
most fungus produce a large number of spore , which be haploid cell that can undergo mitosis to form multicellular , haploid individual .
like bacteria , fungus play an essential role in ecosystem because - pron - be decomposer and participate in the cycling of nutrient by break down organic material to simple molecule .
fungus often interact with other organism , form beneficial or mutualistic association .
for example most terrestrial plant form symbiotic relationship with fungus .
the root of the plant connect with the underground part of the fungus form mycorrhizae .
through mycorrhizae , the fungus and plant exchange nutrient and water , greatly aid the survival of both specie alternatively , lichen be an association between a fungus and - pron - photosynthetic partner ( usually an alga ) .
fungus also because serious infection in plant and animal .
for example , dutch elm disease , which be cause by the fungus ophiostoma ulmi , be a particularly devastating type of fungal infestation that destroy many native specie of elm ( ulmus sp . ) by infect the tree 's vascular system .
the elm bark beetle act as a vector , transmit the disease from tree to tree .
accidentally introduce in the one  nine  zero  zero s , the fungus decimate elm tree across the continent .
many european and asiatic elm be less susceptible to dutch elm disease than american elm .
in human , fungal infection be generally consider challenging to treat .
unlike bacteria , fungus do not respond to traditional antibiotic therapy , since - pron - be eukaryote .
fungal infection may prove deadly for individual with compromise immune system .
fungus have many commercial application .
the food industry use yeast in baking , brewing , and cheese and wine making .
many industrial compound be byproduct of fungal fermentation .
fungus be the source of many commercial enzyme and antibiotic .
although human have use yeast and mushroom since prehistoric time , until recently , the biology of fungus be poorly understand .
up until the mid -  two  zero th century , many scientist classify fungus as plant .
fungus , like plant , arise mostly sessile and seemingly root in place .
- pron - possess a stem - like structure similar to plant , as well as have a root - like fungal mycelium in the soil .
in addition , - pron - mode of nutrition be poorly understand .
progress in the field of fungal biology be the result of mycology  the scientific study of fungus .
base on fossil evidence , fungus appear in the pre - cambrian era , about four  five  zero million year ago .
molecular biology analysis of the fungal genome demonstrate that fungus be more closely related to animal than plant .
- pron - be a polyphyletic group of organism that share characteristic , rather than share a single common ancestor .
cell structure and function fungus be eukaryote , and as such , have a complex cellular organization .
as eukaryote , fungal cell contain a membranebound nucleus .
the dna in the nucleus be wrap around histone protein , as be observe in other eukaryotic cell .
a few type of fungus have structure comparable to bacterial plasmid ( loop of dna )  however , the horizontal transfer of genetic information from one mature bacterium to another rarely occur in fungus .
fungal cell also contain mitochondria and a complex system of internal membrane , include the endoplasmic reticulum and golgi apparatus .
unlike plant cell , fungal cell do not have chloroplast or chlorophyll .
many fungus display bright color arise from other cellular pigment , range from red to green to black .
the poisonous amanita muscaria ( fly agaric ) be recognizable by - pron - bright red cap with white patch ( figure two  four  .  two ) .
pigment in fungus be associate with the cell wall and play a protective role against ultraviolet radiation .
some fungal pigment be toxic .
the poisonous amanita muscaria be native to temperate and boreal region of north america .
like plant cell , fungal cell have a thick cell wall .
the rigid layer of fungal cell wall contain complex polysaccharide call chitin and glucan .
chitin , also find in the exoskeleton of insect , give structural strength to the cell wall of fungus .
the wall protect the cell from desiccation and predator .
fungus have plasma membrane similar to other eukaryote , except that the structure be stabilize by ergosterol  a steroid molecule that replace the cholesterol find in animal cell membrane .
most member of the kingdom fungus be nonmotile .
flagella be produce only by the gamete in the primitive phylum chytridiomycota .
growth
the vegetative body of a fungus be a unicellular or multicellular thallus .
dimorphic fungus can change from the unicellular to multicellular state depend on environmental condition .
unicellular fungus be generally refer to as yeast .
saccharomyce cerevisiae ( baker 's yeast ) and candida specie ( the agent of thrush , a common fungal infection ) be example of unicellular fungus .
candida albican be a yeast cell and the agent of candidiasis and thrush .
this organism have a similar morphology to coccus bacteria  however , yeast be a eukaryotic organism ( note the nucleus ) .
most fungus be multicellular organism .
- pron - display two distinct morphological stage  the vegetative and reproductive .
the vegetative stage consist of a tangle of slender thread - like structure call hyphae ( singular , hypha ) , whereas the reproductive stage can be more conspicuous .
the mass of hyphae be a mycelium ( figure two  four  .  four ) .
- pron - can grow on a surface , in soil or decay material , in a liquid , or even on live tissue .
although individual hyphae must be observe under a microscope , the mycelium of a fungus can be very large , with some specie truly be " the fungus humongous .
"
the giant armillaria solidipe ( honey mushroom ) be consider the large organism on earth , spread across more than two  ,  zero  zero  zero acre of underground soil in eastern oregon  - pron - be estimate to be at least two  ,  four  zero  zero year old .
the mycelium of the fungus neotestudina rosati can be pathogenic to human .
the fungus enter through a cut or scrape and develop a mycetoma , a chronic subcutaneous infection .
most fungal hyphae be divide into separate cell by endwall call septa ( singular , septum )
( figure two  four  .  five a , c ) .
in most phyla of fungus , tiny hole in the septa allow for the rapid flow of nutrient and small molecule from cell to cell along the hypha .
- pron - be describe as perforate septa .
the hyphae in bread mold ( which belong to the phylum zygomycota ) be not separate by septa .
instead , - pron - be form by large cell contain many nucleus , an arrangement describe as coenocytic hyphae .
fungal hyphae may be ( a ) septat or ( b ) coenocytic ( coeno - = " common "  - cytic = " cell " ) with many nucleus present in a single hypha .
a bright field light micrograph of ( c ) phialophora richardsiae show septa that divide the hyphae .
fungus thrive in environment that be moist and slightly acidic , and can grow with or without light .
- pron - vary in - pron - oxygen requirement .
most fungus be obligate aerobe , require oxygen to survive .
other specie , such as the chytridiomycota that reside in the ruman of cattle , be be obligate anaerobe , in that - pron - only use anaerobic respiration because oxygen will disrupt - pron - metabolism or kill - pron - .
yeast be intermediate , be faculative anaerobe .
this mean that - pron - grow best in the presence of oxygen use aerobic respiration , but can survive use anaerobic respiration when oxygen be not available .
the alcohol produce from yeast fermentation be use in wine and beer production .
nutrition
like animal , fungus be heterotroph  - pron - use complex organic compound as a source of carbon , rather than fix carbon dioxide from the atmosphere as do some bacteria and most plant .
in addition , fungus do not fix nitrogen from the atmosphere .
like animal , - pron - must obtain - pron - from - pron - diet .
however , unlike most animal , which ingest food and then digest - pron - internally in specialized organ , fungus perform these step in the reverse order  digestion precede ingestion .
first , exoenzyme be transport out of the hyphae , where - pron - process nutrient in the environment .
then , the small molecule produce by this external digestion be absorb through the large surface area of the mycelium .
as with animal cell , the polysaccharide of storage be glycogen , rather than starch , as find in plant .
fungus be mostly saprobe ( saprophyte be an equivalent term )  organism that derive nutrient from decay organic matter .
- pron - obtain - pron - nutrient from dead or decompose organic matter  mainly plant material .
fungal exoenzyme be able to break down insoluble polysaccharide , such as the cellulose and lignin of dead wood , into readily absorbable glucose molecule .
the carbon , nitrogen , and other element be thus release into the environment .
because of - pron - varied metabolic pathway , fungus fulfill an important ecological role and be be investigate as potential tool in bioremediation .
for example , some specie of fungus can be use to break down diesel oil and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon ( pahs ) .
other specie take up heavy metal , such as cadmium and lead .
some fungus be parasitic , infect either plant or animal .
smut and dutch elm disease affect plant , whereas athlete 's foot and candidiasis ( thrush ) be medically important fungal infection in human .
in environment poor in nitrogen , some fungus resort to predation of nematode ( small non - segment roundworm ) .
specie of arthrobotrys fungus have a number of mechanism to trap nematode .
one mechanism involve constrict ring within the network of hyphae .
the ring swell when - pron - touch the nematode , grip - pron - in a tight hold .
the fungus penetrate the tissue of the worm by extend specialized hyphae call haustoria .
many parasitic fungus possess haustoria , as these structure penetrate the tissue of the host , release digestive enzyme within the host ' s body , and absorb the digest nutrient .
reproduction fungi reproduce sexually and / or asexually .
perfect fungus reproduce both sexually and asexually , while the so - call imperfect fungus reproduce only asexually ( by mitosis ) .
in both sexual and asexual reproduction , fungus produce spore that disperse from the parent organism by either float on the wind or hitch a ride on an animal .
fungal spore be small and light than plant seed .
the giant puffball mushroom burst open and release trillion of spore .
the huge number of spore release increase the likelihood of landing in an environment that will support growth .
the ( a ) giant puff ball mushroom release ( b ) a cloud of spore when - pron - reach maturity .
the dark cell in this bright field light micrograph be the pathogenic yeast histoplasma capsulatum , see against a backdrop of light blue tissue .
histoplasma primarily infect lung but can spread to other tissue , cause histoplasmosis , a potentially fatal disease .
the most common mode of asexual reproduction be through the formation of asexual spore , which be produce by one parent only ( through mitosis ) and be genetically identical to that parent ( figure two  four  .  eight ) .
spore allow fungus to expand - pron - distribution and colonize new environment .
- pron - may be release from the parent thallus either outside or within a special reproductive sac call a sporangium .
fungus may have both asexual and sexual stage of reproduction .
there be many type of asexual spore .
conidiospore be unicellular or multicellular spore that be release directly from the tip or side of the hypha .
other asexual spore originate in the fragmentation of a hypha to form single cell that be release as spore  some of these have a thick wall surround the fragment .
yet other bud off the vegetative parent cell .
sporangiospore be produce in a sporangium .
this bright field light micrograph show the release of spore from a sporangium at the end of a hypha call a sporangiophore .
the organism be a mucor sp .
fungus , a mold often find indoor .
sexual reproduction sexual reproduction introduce genetic variation into a population of fungus .
in fungus , sexual reproduction often occur in response to adverse environmental condition .
during sexual reproduction , two mating type be produce .
when both mating type be present in the same mycelium , - pron - be call homothallic , or self - fertile .
heterothallic mycelium require two different , but compatible , mycelium to reproduce sexually .
although there be many variation in fungal sexual reproduction , all include the follow three stage ( figure two  four  .  eight ) .
first , during plasmogamy ( literally , " marriage or union of cytoplasm " ) , two haploid cell fuse , lead to a dikaryotic stage where two haploid nucleus coexist in a single cell .
during karyogamy ( " nuclear marriage " ) , the haploid nucleus fuse to form a diploid zygote nucleus .
finally , meiosis take place in the gametangia ( singular , gametangium ) organ , in which gamete of different mating type be generate .
at this stage , spore be disseminate into the environment .
the kingdom fungi contain five major phyla that be establish accord to - pron - mode of sexual reproduction or use molecular datum .
polyphyletic , unrelated fungus that reproduce without a sexual cycle , be place for convenience in a sixth group call a " form phylum " .
not all mycologist agree with this scheme .
rapid advance in molecular biology and the sequencing of one  eight s rrna ( a part of rna ) continue to show new and different relationship between the various category of fungus .
the five true phyla of fungus be the chytridiomycota ( chytrids ) , the zygomycota ( conjugate fungus ) , the ascomycota ( sac fungus ) , the basidiomycota ( club fungus ) and the recently describe phylum glomeromycota .
an old classification scheme group fungus that strictly use asexual reproduction into deuteromycota , a group that be no longer in use .
note 
" - mycota
" be use to designate a phylum while " - mycetes " formally denote a class or be use informally to refer to all member of the phylum .
chytridiomycota 
the chytrids the only class in the phylum chytridiomycota be the chytridiomycetes .
the chytrid be the simple and most primitive eumycota , or true fungus .
the evolutionary record show that the first recognizable chytrid appear during the late pre - cambrian period , more than five  zero  zero million year ago .
like all fungus , chytrid have chitin in - pron - cell wall , but one group of chytrid have both cellulose and chitin in the cell wall .
most chytrid be unicellular  a few form multicellular organism and hyphae , which have no septa between cell ( coenocytic ) .
- pron - produce gamete and diploid zoospore that swim with the help of a single flagellum .
the ecological habitat and cell structure of chytrid have much in common with protist .
chytrid usually live in aquatic environment , although some specie live on land .
some specie thrive as parasite on plant , insect , or amphibian ( figure two  four  .  one  zero ) , while other be saprobe .
the chytrid specie allomyces be well characterize as an experimental organism .
- pron - reproductive cycle include both asexual and sexual phase .
allomyce produce diploid or haploid flagellate zoospore in a sporangium .
the chytrid batrachochytrium dendrobatidis be see in these light micrograph as transparent sphere grow on ( a ) a freshwater arthropod and ( b ) algae .
this chytrid cause skin disease in many specie of amphibian , result in specie decline and extinction .
zygomycota 
the conjugated fungi
the zygomycete be a relatively small group of fungus belong to the phylum zygomycota .
- pron - include the familiar bread mold , rhizopus stolonifer , which rapidly propagate on the surface of bread , fruit , and vegetable .
most specie be saprobe , live off decay organic material  a few be parasite , particularly of insect .
zygomycete play a considerable commercial role .
the metabolic product of other specie of rhizopus be intermediate in the synthesis of semi - synthetic steroid hormone .
zygomycete have a thallus of coenocytic hyphae in which the nucleus be haploid when the organism be in the vegetative stage .
the fungus usually reproduce asexually by produce sporangiospore ( figure two  four  .  one  one ) .
the black tip of bread mold be the swollen sporangia pack with black spore ( figure two  four  .  one  two ) .
when spore land on a suitable substrate , - pron - germinate and produce a new mycelium .
sexual reproduction start when condition become unfavorable .
two oppose mating strain ( type + and type – ) must be in close proximity for gametangia from the hyphae to be produce and fuse , lead to karyogamy .
the develop diploid zygospore have thick coat that protect - pron - from desiccation and other hazard .
- pron - may remain dormant until environmental condition be favorable .
when the zygospore germinate , - pron - undergo meiosis and produce haploid spore , which will , in turn , grow into a new organism .
this form of sexual reproduction in fungus be call conjugation ( although - pron - differ markedly from conjugation in bacteria and protist ) , give rise to the name " conjugate fungus " .
zygomycete have asexual and asexual life cycle .
in the sexual life cycle , plus and minus mat type conjugate to form a zygosporangium .
sporangia grow at the end of stalk , which appear as ( a ) white fuzz see on this bread mold , rhizopus stolonifer .
the ( b ) tip of bread mold be the spore - contain sporangia .
ascomycota 
the sac fungi
the majority of know fungus belong to the phylum ascomycota , which be characterize by the formation of an ascus ( plural , asci ) , a sac - like structure that contain haploid ascospore .
many ascomycete be of commercial importance .
some play a beneficial role , such as the yeast use in baking , brewing , and wine fermentation , plus truffle and morel , which be hold as gourmet delicacy .
aspergillus oryzae be use in the fermentation of rice to produce sake .
other ascomycete parasitize plant and animal , include human .
for example , fungal pneumonia pose a significant threat to aids patient who have a compromise immune system .
ascomycete not only inf and destroy crop directly  - pron - also produce poisonous secondary metabolite that make crop unfit for consumption .
filamentous ascomycete produce hyphae divide by perforated septa , allow streaming of cytoplasm from one cell to the other .
conidia and asci , which be use respectively for asexual and sexual reproduction , be usually separate from the vegetative hyphae by block ( non - perforated ) septa .
asexual reproduction be frequent and involve the production of conidiophore that release haploid conidiospore ( figure two  four  .  one  three ) .
sexual reproduction start with the development of special hyphae from either one of two type of mat strain ( figure two  four  .  one  three ) .
the " male " strain produce an antheridium and the " female " strain develop an ascogonium .
at fertilization , the antheridium and the ascogonium combine in plasmogamy without nuclear fusion .
special ascogenous hyphae arise , in which pair of nucleus migrate  one from the " male " strain and one from the " female " strain .
in each ascus , two or more haploid ascospore fuse - pron - nucleus in karyogamy .
during sexual reproduction , thousand of asci fill a fruit body call the ascocarp .
the diploid nucleus give rise to haploid nucleus by meiosis .
the ascospore be then release , germinate , and form hyphae that be disseminate in the environment and start new mycelium .
the bright field light micrograph show ascospore be release from asci in the fungus talaromyce flavus var .
flavus .
basidiomycota 
the club fungi
the fungus in the phylum basidiomycota be easily recognizable under a light microscope by - pron - club - shape fruiting body call basidia ( singular , basidium ) , which be the swollen terminal cell of a hypha .
the basidia , which be the reproductive organ of these fungus , be often contain within the familiar mushroom , commonly see in field after rain , on the supermarket shelf , and grow on - pron - lawn ( figure two  four  .  one  five ) .
these mushroom - produce basidiomyce be sometimes refer to as " gill fungus " because of the presence of gill - like structure on the underside of the cap .
the " gill " be actually compact hyphae on which the basidia be bear .
this group also include shelf fungus , which cling to the bark of tree like small shelf .
in addition , the basidiomycota include smut and rust , which be important plant pathogen  toadstool , and shelf fungus stack on tree trunk .
most edible fungus belong to the phylum basidiomycota  however , some basidiomycete produce deadly toxin .
for example , cryptococcus neoforman cause severe respiratory illness .
the fruit body of a basidiomycete form a ring in a meadow , commonly call " fairy ring .
"
the best - know fairy ring fungus have the scientific name marasmius oreade .
the body of this fungus , - pron - mycelium , be underground and grow outward in a circle .
as - pron - grow , the mycelium deplete the soil of nitrogen , cause the mycelium to grow away from the center and lead to the " fairy ring " of fruit body where there be adequate soil nitrogen .
the lifecycle of basidiomycete include alternation of generation ( figure two  four  .  one  six ) .
spore be generally produce through sexual reproduction , rather than asexual reproduction .
the club - shape basidium carry spore call basidiospore .
in the basidium , nucleus of two different mating strain fuse ( karyogamy ) , give rise to a diploid zygote that then undergo meiosis .
the haploid nucleus migrate into basidiospore , which germinate and generate monokaryotic hyphae .
the mycelium that result be call a primary mycelium .
mycelia of different mating strain can combine and produce a secondary mycelium that contain haploid nucleus of two different mating strain .
this be the dikaryotic stage of the basidiomyce lifecyle and and - pron - be the dominant stage .
eventually , the secondary mycelium generate a basidiocarp , which be a fruit body that protrude from the ground —
this be what - pron - think of as a mushroom .
the basidiocarp bear the develop basidia on the gill under - pron - cap .
asexual ascomycota and basidiomycota imperfect fungus — those that do not display a sexual phase
— use to be classify in the form phylum deuteromycota , , a classification group no longer use in the present , ever - develop classification of organism .
while deuteromycota use to be a classification group , recent moleclular analysis have show that the member classify in this group belong to the ascomycota or the basidiomycota classification .
since - pron - do not possess the sexual structure that be use to classify other fungus , - pron - be less well describe in comparison to other member .
most member live on land , with a few aquatic exception .
- pron - form visible mycelium with a fuzzy appearance and be commonly know as mold .
reproduction of the fungus in this group be strictly asexual and occur mostly by production of asexual conidiospore ( figure two  four  .  one  seven ) .
some hyphae may recombine and form heterokaryotic hyphae .
genetic recombination be know to take place between the different nucleus .
aspergillus nig be an asexually reproduce fungus ( phylum ascomycota ) commonly find as a food contaminant .
the spherical structure in this light micrograph be a conidiophore .
the fungus in this group have a large impact on everyday human life .
the food industry rely on - pron - for ripen some cheese .
the blue vein in roquefort cheese and the white crust on camembert be the result of fungal growth .
the antibiotic penicillin be originally discover on an overgrown petri plate , on which a colony of penicillium fungus kill the bacterial growth surround - pron - .
other fungus in this group because serious disease , either directly as parasite ( which infect both plant and human ) , or as producer of potent toxic compound , as see in the aflatoxin release by fungus of the genus aspergillus .
glomeromycota
the glomeromycota be a newly establish phylum which comprise about two  three  zero specie that all live in close association with the root of tree .
fossil record indicate that tree and - pron - root symbiont share a long evolutionary history .
- pron - appear that all member of this family form arbuscular mycorrhizae  the hyphae interact with the root cell form a mutually beneficial association where the plant supply the carbon source and energy in the form of carbohydrate to the fungus , and the fungus supply essential mineral from the soil to the plant .
the glomeromycete do not reproduce sexually and do not survive without the presence of plant root .
although - pron - have coenocytic hyphae like the zygomycete , - pron - do not form zygospore .
dna analysis show that all glomeromycete probably descend from a common ancestor , make - pron - a monophyletic lineage .
fungus play a crucial role in the balance of ecosystem .
- pron - colonize most habitat on earth , prefer dark , moist condition .
- pron - can thrive in seemingly hostile environment , such as the tundra , thank to a most successful symbiosis with photosynthetic organism like algae to produce lichen .
fungus be not obvious in the way large animal or tall tree appear .
yet , like bacteria , - pron - be the major decomposer of nature .
with - pron - versatile metabolism , fungus break down organic matter , which would not otherwise be recycle .
habitat
although fungus be primarily associate with humid and cool environment that provide a supply of organic matter , - pron - colonize a surprising diversity of habitat , from seawater to human skin and mucous membrane .
chytrid be find primarily in aquatic environment .
other fungus , such as coccidioide immitis , which cause pneumonia when - pron - spore be inhale , thrive in the dry and sandy soil of the southwestern united states .
fungus that parasitize coral reef live in the ocean .
however , most member of the kingdom fungi grow on the forest floor , where the dark and damp environment be rich in decay debris from plant and animal .
in these environment , fungus play a major role as decomposer and recycler , make - pron - possible for member of the other kingdom to be supply with nutrient and live .
decomposer and recyclers
the food web would be incomplete without organism that decompose organic matter ( figure two  four  .  one  eight ) .
some element — such as nitrogen and phosphoru — be require in large quantity by biological system , and yet be not abundant in the environment .
the action of fungus release these element from decay matter , make - pron - available to other live organism .
trace element present in low amount in many habitat be essential for growth , and would remain tie up in rot organic matter if fungus and bacteria do not return - pron - to the environment via - pron - metabolic activity .
fungus be an important part of ecosystem nutrient cycle .
these bracket fungus grow on the side of a tree be the fruit structure of a basidiomycete .
- pron - receive - pron - nutrient through - pron - hyphae , which invade and decay the tree trunk .
the ability of fungus to degrade many large and insoluble molecule be due to - pron - mode of nutrition .
as see earlier , digestion precede ingestion .
fungus produce a variety of exoenzyme to digest nutrient .
the enzyme be either release into the substrate or remain bind to the outside of the fungal cell wall .
large molecule be break down into small molecule , which be transport into the cell by a system of protein carrier embed in the cell membrane .
because the movement of small molecule and enzyme be dependent on the presence of water , active growth depend on a relatively high percentage of moisture in the environment .
as saprobe , fungus help maintain a sustainable ecosystem for the animal and plant that share the same habitat .
in addition to replenish the environment with nutrient , fungus interact directly with other organism in beneficial , and sometimes damaging , way .
shelf fungus , so call because - pron - grow on tree in a stack , attack and digest the trunk or branch of a tree .
while some shelf fungus be find only on dead tree , other can parasitize living tree and because eventual death , so - pron - be consider serious tree pathogen .
mutualistic relationships symbiosis be the ecological interaction between two organism that live together .
the definition do not describe the quality of the interaction .
when both member of the association benefit , the symbiotic relationship be call mutualistic .
fungus form mutualistic association with many type of organism , include cyanobacteria , algae , plant , and animal .
fungus / plant mutualism
one of the most remarkable association between fungus and plant be the establishment of mycorrhizae .
mycorrhiza , which come from the greek word myco mean fungus and rhizo mean root , refer to the association between vascular plant root and - pron - symbiotic fungus .
somewhere between eight  zero and nine  zero percent of all plant specie have mycorrhizal partner .
in a mycorrhizal association , the fungal mycelium use - pron - extensive network of hyphae and large surface area in contact with the soil to channel water and mineral from the soil into the plant .
in exchange , the plant supply the product of photosynthesis to fuel the metabolism of the fungus .
there be a number of type of mycorrhizae .
ectomycorrhizae ( " outside " mycorrhiza ) depend on fungus envelop the root in a sheath ( call a mantle ) and a hartig net of hyphae that extend into the root between cell ( figure two  four  .  two  zero ) .
the fungal partner can belong to the ascomycota , basidiomycota or zygomycota .
in a second type , the glomeromycete fungus form vesicular – arbuscular interaction with arbuscular mycorrhiza ( sometimes call endomycorrhizae ) .
in these mycorrhiza , the fungus form arbuscul that penetrate root cell and be the site of the metabolic exchange between the fungus and the host plant ( figure two  four  .  two  zero and figure two  four  .  two  one ) .
the arbuscule ( from the latin for little tree ) have a shrub - like appearance .
orchid rely on a third type of mycorrhiza .
orchid be epiphyte that form small seed without much storage to sustain germination and growth .
- pron - seed will not germinate without a mycorrhizal partner ( usually a basidiomycete ) .
after nutrient in the seed be deplete , fungal symbiont support the growth of the orchid by provide necessary carbohydrate and mineral .
some orchid continue to be mycorrhizal throughout - pron - lifecycle .
the ( a ) infection of pinus radiata ( monterey pine ) root by the hyphae of amanita muscaria ( fly amanita ) cause the pine tree to produce many small , branched rootlet .
the amanita hyphae cover these small root with a white mantle .
( b ) spore ( round body ) and hyphae ( thread - like structure ) be evident in this light micrograph of an arbuscular mycorrhiza between a fungus and the root of a corn plant .
lichens lichens display a range of color and texture ( figure two  four  .  two  two ) and can survive in the most unusual and hostile habitat .
- pron - cover rock , gravestone , tree bark , and the ground in the tundra where plant root can not penetrate .
lichen can survive extended period of drought , when - pron - become completely desiccate , and then rapidly become active once water be available again .
lichen have many form .
- pron - may be ( a ) crust - like , ( b ) hair - like , or ( c ) leaf - like .
lichen be not a single organism , but rather an example of a mutualism , in which a fungus ( usually a member of the ascomycota or basidiomycota phyla ) live in close contact with a photosynthetic organism ( a eukaryotic alga or a prokaryotic cyanobacterium ) ( figure two  four  .  two  three ) .
generally , neither the fungus nor the photosynthetic organism can survive alone outside of the symbiotic relationship .
the body of a lichen , refer to as a thallus , be form of hyphae wrap around the photosynthetic partner .
the photosynthetic organism provide carbon and energy in the form of carbohydrate .
some cyanobacteria fix nitrogen from the atmosphere , contribute nitrogenous compound to the association .
in return , the fungus supply mineral and protection from dryness and excessive light by encase the algae in - pron - mycelium .
the fungus also attach the symbiotic organism to the substrate .
this cross - section of a lichen thallus show the ( a ) upper cortex of fungal hyphae , which provide protection  the ( b ) algal zone where photosynthesis occur , the ( c ) medulla of fungal hyphae , and the ( d ) low cortex , which also provide protection and may have ( e ) rhizine to anchor the thallus to the substrate .
the thallus of lichen grow very slowly , expand - pron - diameter a few millimeter per year .
both the fungus and the alga participate in the formation of dispersal unit for reproduction .
lichen produce soredia , cluster of algal cell surround by mycelium .
soredia be disperse by wind and water and form new lichen .
lichen be extremely sensitive to air pollution , especially to abnormal level of nitrogen and sulfur .
the u . s . forest service and national park service can monitor air quality by measure the relative abundance and health of the lichen population in an area .
lichen fulfill many ecological role .
caribou and reindeer eat lichen , and - pron - provide cover for small invertebrate that hide in the mycelium .
in the production of textile , weaver use lichen to dye wool for many century until the advent of synthetic dye .
fungus / animal mutualism fungus have evolve mutualism with numerous insect in phylum arthropoda  jointed , legged invertebrate .
arthropod depend on the fungus for protection from predator and pathogen , while the fungus obtain nutrient and a way to disseminate spore into new environment .
the association between specie of basidiomycota and scale insect be one example .
the fungal mycelium cover and protect the insect colony .
the scale insect foster a flow of nutrient from the parasitiz plant to the fungus .
in a second example , leaf - cut ant of central and south america literally farm fungus .
- pron - cut disk of leaf from plant and pile - pron - up in garden ( figure two  four  .  two  four ) .
fungus be cultivate in these disk garden , digest the cellulose in the leaf that the ant can not break down .
once small sugar molecule be produce and consume by the fungus , the fungus in turn become a meal for the ant .
the insect also patrol - pron - garden , prey on compete fungus .
both ant and fungus benefit from the association .
the fungus receive a steady supply of leaf and freedom from competition , while the ant feed on the fungus - pron - cultivate .
a leaf cut ant transport a leaf that will feed a farmed fungus .
fungivores animal dispersal be important for some fungus because an animal may carry spore considerable distance from the source .
fungal spore be rarely completely degraded in the gastrointestinal tract of an animal , and many be able to germinate when - pron - be pass in the fece .
some dung fungus actually require passage through the digestive system of herbivore to complete - pron - lifecycle .
the black truffle — a prize gourmet delicacy
— be the fruit body of an underground mushroom .
almost all truffle be ectomycorrhizal , and be usually find in close association with tree .
animal eat truffle and disperse the spore .
in italy and france , truffle hunter use female pig to sniff out truffle .
female pig be attract to truffle because the fungus release a volatile compound closely relate to a pheromone produce by male pig .
parasitism describe a symbiotic relationship in which one member of the association benefit at the expense of the other .
both parasite and pathogen harm the host  however , the pathogen cause a disease , whereas the parasite usually do not .
commensalism occur when one member benefit without affect the other .
plant parasites and pathogens
the production of sufficient good - quality crop be essential to human existence .
plant disease have ruin crop , bring widespread famine .
many plant pathogen be fungus that because tissue decay and eventual death of the host ( figure two  four  .  two  five ) .
in addition to destroy plant tissue directly , some plant pathogen spoil crop by produce potent toxin .
fungus be also responsible for food spoilage and the rotting of store crop .
for example , the fungus clavicep purpurea cause ergot , a disease of cereal crop ( especially of rye ) .
although the fungus reduce the yield of cereal , the effect of the ergot ' s alkaloid toxin on human and animal be of much great significance .
in animal , the disease be refer to as ergotism .
the most common sign and symptom be convulsion , hallucination , gangrene , and loss of milk in cattle .
the active ingredient of ergot be lysergic acid , which be a precursor of the drug lsd .
smut , rust , and powdery or downy mildew be other example of common fungal pathogen that affect crop .
some fungal pathogen include ( a ) green mold on grapefruit , ( b ) powdery mildew on a zinnia , ( c ) stem rust on a sheaf of barley , and ( d ) grey rot on grape .
in wet condition botrytis cinerea , the fungus that cause grey rot , can destroy a grape crop .
however , control infection of grape by botrytis result in noble rot , a condition that produce strong and much - prize dessert wine .
aflatoxin be toxic , carcinogenic compound release by fungus of the genus aspergillus .
periodically , harvest of nut and grain be taint by aflatoxin , lead to massive recall of produce .
this sometimes ruin producer and cause food shortage in develop country .
animal and human parasites and pathogens fungus can affect animal , include human , in several way .
a mycosis be a fungal disease that result from infection and direct damage .
fungus attack animal directly by colonize and destroy tissue .
mycotoxicosis be the poisoning of human ( and other animal ) by food contaminate by fungal toxin ( mycotoxin ) .
mycetismus describe the ingestion of preformed toxin in poisonous mushroom .
in addition , individual who display hypersensitivity to mold and spore develop strong and dangerous allergic reaction .
fungal infection be generally very difficult to treat because , unlike bacteria , fungus be eukaryote .
antibiotic only target prokaryotic cell , whereas compound that kill fungus also harm the eukaryotic animal host .
many fungal infection be superficial  that is , - pron - occur on the animal 's skin .
term cutaneous ( " skin " ) mycos , - pron - can have devastating effect .
for example , the decline of the world 's frog population in recent year may be cause by the chytrid fungus batrachochytrium dendrobatidis , which infect the skin of frog and presumably interfere with gaseous exchange .
similarly , more than a million bat in the united states have be kill by white - nose syndrome , which appear as a white ring around the mouth of the bat .
- pron - be cause by the cold - love fungus pseudogymnoascus destructan , which disseminate - pron - deadly spore in cave where bat hibernate .
mycologist be research the transmission , mechanism , and control of p . destructan to stop - pron - spread .
fungus that because the superficial mycos of the epidermis , hair , and nail rarely spread to the underlying tissue ( figure two  four  .  two  six ) .
these fungus be often misname " dermatophyte " , from the greek word dermis mean skin and phyte meaning plant , although - pron - be not plant .
dermatophyte be also call " ringworm " because of the red ring - pron - because on skin .
- pron - secrete extracellular enzyme that break down keratin ( a protein find in hair , skin , and nail ) , cause condition such as athlete 's foot and jock itch .
these condition be usually treat with over - the - counter topical cream and powder , and be easily clear .
more persistent superficial mycos may require prescription oral medication .
ringworm present as a red ring on skin  ( b ) trichophyton violaceum , show in this bright field light micrograph , cause superficial mycos on the scalp  ( c ) histoplasma capsulatum be an ascomycete that infect airway and cause symptom similar to influenza .
systemic mycos spread to internal organ , most commonly enter the body through the respiratory system .
for example , coccidioidomycosis ( valley fever ) be commonly find in the southwestern united states , where the fungus reside in the dust .
once inhale , the spore develop in the lung and because symptom similar to those of tuberculosis .
histoplasmosis be cause by the dimorphic fungus histoplasma capsulatum .
- pron - also cause pulmonary infection , and in rare case , swell of the membrane of the brain and spinal cord .
treatment of these and many other fungal disease require the use of antifungal medication that have serious side effect .
opportunistic mycos be fungal infection that be either common in all environment , or part of the normal biota .
- pron - mainly affect individual who have a compromise immune system .
patient in the late stage of aids suffer from opportunistic mycos that can be life threaten .
the yeast candida sp . , a common member of the natural biota , can grow unchecked and infect the vagina or mouth ( oral thrush ) if the ph of the surround environment , the person 's immune defense , or the normal population of bacteria be alter .
mycetismus can occur when poisonous mushroom be eat .
- pron - cause a number of human fatality during mushroompick season .
many edible fruit body of fungus resemble highly poisonous relative , and amateur mushroom hunter be caution to carefully inspect - pron - harvest and avoid eat mushroom of doubtful origin .
the adage " there be bold mushroom picker and old mushroom picker , but be there no old , bold mushroom picker " be unfortunately true .
although - pron - often think of fungus as organism that because disease and rot food , fungus be important to human life on many level .
as - pron - have see , - pron - influence the well - being of human population on a large scale because - pron - be part of the nutrient cycle in ecosystem .
- pron - have other ecosystem role as well .
as animal pathogen , fungus help to control the population of damage pest .
these fungus be very specific to the insect - pron - attack , and do not infect animal or plant .
fungus be currently under investigation as potential microbial insecticide , with several already on the market .
for example , the fungus beauveria bassiana be a pesticide be test as a possible biological control agent for the recent spread of emerald ash borer .
- pron - have be release in michigan , illinois , indiana , ohio , west virginia and maryland .
the emerald ash borer be an insect that attack ash tree .
- pron - be in turn parasitiz by a pathogenic fungus that hold promise as a biological insecticide .
the parasitic fungus appear as white fuzz on the body of the insect .
the mycorrhizal relationship between fungus and plant root be essential for the productivity of farm land .
without the fungal partner in root system , eight  zero – nine  zero percent of tree and grass would not survive .
mycorrhizal fungal inoculant be available as soil amendment from gardening supply store and be promote by supporter of organic agriculture .
- pron - also eat some type of fungus .
mushroom figure prominently in the human diet .
morel , shiitake mushroom , chanterelle , and truffle be consider delicacy ( figure two  four  .  two  eight ) .
the humble meadow mushroom , agaricus campestris , appear in many dish .
mold of the genus penicillium ripen many cheese .
- pron - originate in the natural environment such as the cave of roquefort , france , where wheel of sheep milk cheese be stack in order to capture the mold responsible for the blue vein and pungent taste of the cheese .
the morel mushroom be an ascomycete much appreciate for - pron - delicate taste .
fermentation — of grain to produce beer , and of fruit to produce wine
— be an ancient art that human in most culture have practice for millennia .
wild yeast be acquire from the environment and use to ferment sugar into co two and ethyl alcohol under anaerobic condition .
- pron - be now possible to purchase isolated strain of wild yeast from different wine - make region .
louis pasteur be instrumental in develop a reliable strain of brewer 's yeast , saccharomyces cerevisiae , for the french brewing industry in the late one  eight  five  zero .
this be one of the first example of biotechnology patenting .
many secondary metabolite of fungus be of great commercial importance .
antibiotic be naturally produce by fungus to kill or inhibit the growth of bacteria , limit - pron - competition in the natural environment .
important antibiotic , such as penicillin and the cephalosporin , be isolate from fungus .
valuable drug isolate from fungus include the immunosuppressant drug cyclosporine ( which reduce the risk of rejection after organ transplant ) , the precursor of steroid hormone , and ergot alkaloid use to stop bleed .
psilocybin be a compound find in fungus such as psilocybe semilanceata and gymnopilus junonius , which have be use for - pron - hallucinogenic property by various culture for thousand of year .
as simple eukaryotic organism , fungus be important model research organism .
many advance in modern genetic be achieve by the use of the red bread mold neurospora crassa .
additionally , many important gene originally discover in s . cerevisiae serve as a starting point in discover analogous human gene .
as a eukaryotic organism , the yeast cell produce and modify protein in a manner similar to human cell , as oppose to the bacterium escherichia coli , which lack the internal membrane structure and enzyme to tag protein for export .
this make yeast a much good organism for use in recombinant dna technology experiment .
like bacteria , yeast grow easily in culture , have a short generation time , and be amenable to genetic modification .
seedless plant , like these horsetail ( equisetum sp . ) , thrive in damp , shade environment under a tree canopy where dryness be rare .
an incredible variety of seedless plant populate the terrestrial landscape .
moss may grow on a tree trunk , and horsetail may display - pron - jointed stem and spindly leaf across the forest floor .
today , seedless plant represent only a small fraction of the plant in - pron - environment  yet , three hundred million year ago , seedless plant dominate the landscape and grow in the enormous swampy forest of the carboniferous period .
- pron - decomposition create large deposit of coal that - pron - mine today .
current evolutionary thought hold that all plant — green algae as well as land dweller — be monophyletic  that is , - pron - be descendant of a single common ancestor .
the evolutionary transition from water to land impose severe constraint on plant .
- pron - have to develop strategy to avoid dry out , to disperse reproductive cell in air , for structural support , and for capture and filtering sunlight .
while seed plant develop adaptation that allow - pron - to populate even the most arid habitat on earth , full independence from water do not happen in all plant .
most seedless plant still require a moist environment .
the kingdom plantae constitute large and varied group of organism .
there be more than three  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero specie of catalogue plant .
of these , more than two  six  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero be seed plant .
moss , fern , conifer , and flower plant be all member of the plant kingdom .
most biologist also consider green algae to be plant , although other exclude all algae from the plant kingdom .
the reason for this disagreement stem from the fact that only green algae , the charophytes , share common characteristic with land plant ( such as use chlorophyll a and b plus carotene in the same proportion as plant ) .
these characteristic be absent in other type of algae .
plant adaptations to life on land
as organism adapt to life on land , - pron - have to contend with several challenge in the terrestrial environment .
water have be describe as " the stuff of life .
"
the cell 's interior be a watery soup  in this medium , most small molecule dissolve and diffuse , and the majority of the chemical reaction of metabolism take place .
desiccation , or dry out , be a constant danger for an organism expose to air .
even when part of a plant be close to a source of water , the aerial structure be likely to dry out .
water also provide buoyancy to organism .
on land , plant need to develop structural support in a medium that do not give the same lift as water .
the organism be also subject to bombardment by mutagenic radiation , because air do not filter out ultraviolet ray of sunlight .
additionally , the male gamete must reach the female gamete use new strategy , because swimming be no longer possible .
therefore , both gamete and zygote must be protect from desiccation .
the successful land plant develop strategy to deal with all of these challenge .
not all adaptation appear at once .
some specie never move very far from the aquatic environment , whereas other go on to conquer the dry environment on earth .
to balance these survival challenge , life on land offer several advantage .
first , sunlight be abundant .
water act as a filter , alter the spectral quality of light absorb by the photosynthetic pigment chlorophyll .
second , carbon dioxide be more readily available in air than in water , since - pron - diffuse faster in air .
third , land plant evolve before land animal  therefore , until dry land be colonize by animal , no predator threaten plant life .
this situation change as animal emerge from the water and feed on the abundant source of nutrient in the establish flora .
in turn , plant develop strategy to deter predation  from spine and thorn to toxic chemical .
early land plant , like the early land animal , do not live very far from an abundant source of water and develop survival strategy to combat dryness .
one of these strategy be call tolerance .
many moss , for example , can dry out to a brown and brittle mat , but as soon as rain or a flood make water available , moss will absorb - pron - and be restore to - pron - healthy green appearance .
another strategy be to colonize environment with high humidity , where drought be uncommon .
fern , which be consider an early lineage of plant , thrive in damp and cool place such as the understory of temperate forest .
later , plant move away from moist or aquatic environment use resistance to desiccation , rather than tolerance .
these plant , like cacti , minimize the loss of water to such an extent - pron - can survive in extremely dry environment .
the most successful adaptation solution be the development of new structure that give plant the advantage when colonize new and dry environment .
four major adaptation be find in all terrestrial plant  the alternation of generation , a sporangium in which the spore be form , a gametangium that produce haploid cell , and apical meristem tissue in root and shoot .
the evolution of a waxy cuticle and a cell wall with lignin also contribute to the success of land plant .
these adaptation be noticeably lack in the closely related green algae — another reason for the debate over - pron - placement in the plant kingdom .
alternation of generations alternation of generation describe a life cycle in which an organism have both haploid and diploid multicellular stage .
alternation of generation between the one n gametophyte and two n sporophyte be show .
haplontic refer to a lifecycle in which there be a dominant haploid stage , and diplontic refer to a lifecycle in which the diploid be the dominant life stage .
human be diplontic .
most plant exhibit alternation of generation , which be describe as haplodiplodontic  the haploid multicellular form , know as a gametophyte , be follow in the development sequence by a multicellular diploid organism  the sporophyte .
the gametophyte give rise to the gamete ( reproductive cell ) by mitosis .
this can be the most obvious phase of the life cycle of the plant , as in the moss , or - pron - can occur in a microscopic structure , such as a pollen grain , in the high plant ( a common collective term for the vascular plant ) .
the sporophyte stage be barely noticeable in low plant ( the collective term for the plant group of moss , liverwort , and lichen ) .
tower tree be the diplontic phase in the lifecycle of plant such as sequoia and pine .
protection of the embryo be a major requirement for land plant .
the vulnerable embryo must be shelter from desiccation and other environmental hazard .
in both seedless and seed plant , the female gametophyte provide protection and nutrient to the embryo as - pron - develop into the new generation of sporophyte .
this distinguish feature of land plant give the group - pron - alternate name of embryophyte .
sporangia in seedless plants
the sporophyte of seedless plant be diploid and result from syngamy ( fusion ) of two gamete .
the sporophyte bear the sporangia ( singular , sporangium )  organ that first appear in the land plant .
the term " sporangia " literally mean " spore in a vessel , " as - pron - be a reproductive sac that contain spore figure two  five  .  three .
inside the multicellular sporangia , the diploid sporocyte , or mother cell , produce haploid spore by meiosis , where the two n chromosome number be reduce to one n ( note that many plant sporophyte be polyploid  for example , durum wheat be tetraploid , bread wheat be hexaploid , and some fern be one  zero  zero  zero  - ploid ) .
the spore be later release by the sporangia and disperse in the environment .
two different type of spore be produce in land plant , result in the separation of sex at different point in the lifecycle .
seedless nonvascular plant produce only one kind of spore and be call homosporous .
the gametophyte phase be dominant in these plant .
after germinate from a spore , the result gametophyte produce both male and female gametangia , usually on the same individual .
in contrast , heterosporous plant produce two morphologically different type of spore .
the male spore be call microspore , because of - pron - small size , and develop into the male gametophyte  the comparatively large megaspore develop into the female gametophyte .
heterospory be observe in a few seedless vascular plant and in all seed plant .
spore - produce sac call sporangia grow at the end of long , thin stalk in this photo of the moss esporangios bryum .
when the haploid spore germinate in a hospitable environment , - pron - generate a multicellular gametophyte by mitosis .
the gametophyte support the zygote form from the fusion of gamete and the result young sporophyte ( vegetative form ) .
the cycle then begin anew .
the spore of seedless plant be surround by thick cell wall contain a tough polymer know as sporopollenin .
this complex substance be characterize by long chain of organic molecule relate to fatty acid and carotenoid  hence the yellow color of most pollen .
sporopollenin be unusually resistant to chemical and biological degradation .
in seed plant , which use pollen to transfer the male sperm to the female egg , the toughness of sporopollenin explain the existence of well - preserve pollen fossil .
sporopollenin be once think to be an innovation of land plant  however , the green algae coleochaetes form spore that contain sporopollenin .
gametangia in seedless plant gametangia ( singular , gametangium ) be structure observe on multicellular haploid gametophyte .
in the gametangia , precursor cell give rise to gamete by mitosis .
the male gametangium ( antheridium ) release sperm .
many seedless plant produce sperm equip with flagella that enable - pron - to swim in a moist environment to the archegonia  the female gametangium .
the embryo develop inside the archegonium as the sporophyte .
gametangia be prominent in seedless plant , but be very rarely find in seed plant .
apical meristems shoots and root of plant increase in length through rapid cell division in a tissue call the apical meristem , which be a small zone of cell find at the shoot tip or root tip ( figure two  five  .  four ) .
the apical meristem be make of undifferentiated cell that continue to proliferate throughout the life of the plant .
meristematic cell give rise to all the specialize tissue of the organism .
elongation of the shoot and root allow a plant to access additional space and resource  light in the case of the shoot , and water and mineral in the case of root .
a separate meristem , call the lateral meristem , produce cell that increase the diameter of tree trunk .
addition of new cell in a root occur at the apical meristem .
subsequent enlargement of these cell cause the organ to grow and elongate .
the root cap protect the fragile apical meristem as the root tip be push through the soil by cell elongation .
additional land plant adaptations
as plant adapt to dry land and become independent from the constant presence of water in damp habitat , new organ and structure make - pron - appearance .
early land plant do not grow more than a few inch off the ground , compete for light on these low mat .
by develop a shoot and grow tall , individual plant capture more light .
because air offer substantially less support than water , land plant incorporate more rigid molecule in - pron - stem ( and later , tree trunk ) .
in small plant such as single - cell algae , simple diffusion suffice to distribute water and nutrient throughout the organism .
however , for plant to evolve large form , the evolution of vascular tissue for the distribution of water and solute be a prerequisite .
the vascular system contain xylem and phloem tissue .
xylem conduct water and mineral absorb from the soil up to the shoot , while phloem transport food derive from photosynthesis throughout the entire plant .
a root system evolve to take up water and mineral from the soil , and to anchor the increasingly tall shoot in the soil .
in land plant , a waxy , waterproof cover call a cuticle protect the leaf and stem from desiccation .
however , the cuticle also prevent intake of carbon dioxide need for the synthesis of carbohydrate through photosynthesis .
to overcome this , stoma or pore that open and close to regulate traffic of gas and water vapor appear in plant as - pron - move away from moist environment into dry habitat .
water filter ultraviolet - b ( uvb ) light , which be harmful to all organism , especially those that must absorb light to survive .
this filtering do not occur for land plant .
this present an additional challenge to land colonization , which be meet by the evolution of biosynthetic pathway for the synthesis of protective flavonoid and other compound  pigment that absorb uv wavelength of light and protect the aerial part of plant from photodynamic damage .
plant can not avoid be eat by animal .
instead , - pron - synthesize a large range of poisonous secondary metabolite  complex organic molecule such as alkaloid , whose noxious smell and unpleasant taste deter animal .
these toxic compound can also because severe disease and even death , thus discourage predation .
human have use many of these compound for century as drug , medication , or spice .
in contrast , as plant co - evolve with animal , the development of sweet and nutritious metabolite lure animal into provide valuable assistance in disperse pollen grain , fruit , or seed .
plant have be enlist animal to be - pron - helper in this way for hundred of million of year .
evolution of land plants
no discussion of the evolution of plant on land can be undertake without a brief review of the timeline of the geological era .
the early era , know as the paleozoic , be divide into six period .
- pron - start with the cambrian period , follow by the ordovician , silurian , devonian , carboniferous , and permian .
the major event to mark the ordovician , more than five  zero  zero million year ago , be the colonization of land by the ancestor of modern land plant .
fossilize cell , cuticle , and spore of early land plant have be date as far back as the ordovician period in the early paleozoic era .
the oldest - know vascular plant have be identify in deposit from the devonian .
one of the rich source of information be the rhynie chert , a sedimentary rock deposit find in rhynie , scotland ( figure two  five  .  five ) , where embed fossil of some of the early vascular plant have be identify .
this rhynie chert contain fossilize material from vascular plant .
the area inside the circle contain bulbous underground stem call corm , and root - like structure call rhizoid .
paleobotanist distinguish between extinct specie , as fossil , and extant specie , which be still live .
the extinct vascular plant , classify as zosterophyll and trimerophyte , most probably lack true leaf and root and form low vegetation mat similar in size to modern - day moss , although some trimetophyte could reach one meter in height .
the later genus cooksonia , which flourish during the silurian , have be extensively study from well - preserve example .
imprint of cooksonia show slender branching stem end in what appear to be sporangia .
from the recover specimen , - pron - be not possible to establish for certain whether cooksonia possess vascular tissue .
fossil indicate that by the end of the devonian period , fern , horsetail , and seed plant populate the landscape , give rise to tree and forest .
this luxuriant vegetation help enrich the atmosphere in oxygen , make - pron - easy for air - breathe animal to colonize dry land .
plant also establish early symbiotic relationship with fungus , create mycorrhizae  a relationship in which the fungal network of filament increase the efficiency of the plant root system , and the plant provide the fungus with byproduct of photosynthesis .
the major divisions of land plants
the green algae and land plant be group together into a subphylum call the streptophytina , and thus be call streptophytes .
in a further division , land plant be classify into two major group accord to the absence or presence of vascular tissue , as detail in figure two  five  .  six .
plant that lack vascular tissue , which be form of specialized cell for the transport of water and nutrient , be refer to as non - vascular plant .
liverwort , moss , and hornwort be seedless , non - vascular plant that likely appear early in land plant evolution .
vascular plant develop a network of cell that conduct water and solute .
the first vascular plant appear in the late ordovician and be probably similar to lycophyte , which include club moss ( not to be confuse with the moss ) and the pterophyte ( fern , horsetail , and whisk fern ) .
lycophyte and pterophyte be refer to as seedless vascular plant , because - pron - do not produce seed .
the seed plant , or spermatophyte , form the large group of all exist plant , and hence dominate the landscape .
seed plant include gymnosperm , most notably conifer ( gymnosperm ) , which produce " naked seed , " and the most successful of all plant , the flower plant ( angiosperms ) .
angiosperm protect - pron - seed inside chamber at the center of a flower  the wall of the chamber later develop into a fruit .
streptophyte until recently , all photosynthetic eukaryote be consider member of the kingdom plantae .
the brown , red , and gold algae , however , have be reassign to the protista kingdom .
this be because apart from - pron - ability to capture light energy and fix co two , - pron - lack many structural and biochemical trait that distinguish plant from protist .
the position of green algae be more ambiguous .
green algae contain the same carotenoid and chlorophyll a and b as land plant , whereas other algae have different accessory pigment and type of chlorophyll molecule in addition to chlorophyll a .
both green algae and land plant also store carbohydrate as starch .
cell in green algae divide along cell plate call phragmoplast , and - pron - cell wall be layer in the same manner as the cell wall of embryophyte .
consequently , land plant and closely related green algae be now part of a new monophyletic group call streptophyta .
the remain green algae , which belong to a group call chlorophyta , include more than seven  zero  zero  zero different specie that live in fresh or brackish water , in seawater , or in snow patch .
a few green algae even survive on soil , provide - pron - be cover by a thin film of moisture in which - pron - can live .
periodic dry spell provide a selective advantage to algae that can survive water stress .
some green algae may already be familiar , in particular spirogyra and desmid .
- pron - cell contain chloroplast that display a dizzy variety of shape , and - pron - cell wall contain cellulose , as do land plant .
some green algae be single cell , such as chlorella and chlamydomonas , which add to the ambiguity of green algae classification , because plant be multicellular .
other algae , like ulva ( commonly call sea lettuce ) , form colony .
chlorophyta include ( a ) spirogyra , ( b ) desmid , ( c ) chlamydomonas , and ( d ) ulva .
desmids and chlamydomonas be single - cell organism , spirogyra form chain of cell , and ulva form colony resemble leaf .
reproduction of green algae green algae reproduce both asexually , by fragmentation or dispersal of spore , or sexually , by produce gamete that fuse during fertilization .
in a single - cell organism such as chlamydomonas , there be no mitosis after fertilization .
in the multicellular ulva , a sporophyte grow by mitosis after fertilization .
both chlamydomonas and ulva produce flagellate gamete .
charale green algae in the order charale , and the coleochaete ( microscopic green algae that enclose - pron - spore in sporopollenin ) , be consider the close live relative of embryophyte .
the charales can be trace back four  two  zero million year .
- pron - live in a range of fresh water habitat and vary in size from a few millimeter to a meter in length .
the representative species be chara ( figure two  five  .  eight ) , often call muskgrass or skunkweed because of - pron - unpleasant smell .
large cell form the thallus  the main stem of the alga .
branch arise from the node be make of small cell .
male and female reproductive structure be find on the node , and the sperm have flagella .
unlike land plant , charale do not undergo alternation of generation in - pron - lifecycle .
charale exhibit a number of trait that be significant in - pron - adaptation to land life .
- pron - produce the compound lignin and sporopollenin , and form plasmodesma that connect the cytoplasm of adjacent cell .
the egg , and later , the zygote , form in a protected chamber on the parent plant .
the representative alga , chara , be a noxious weed in florida , where - pron - clog waterway .
new information from recent , extensive dna sequence analysis of green algae indicate that the zygnematales be more closely related to the embryophyte than the charales .
the zygnematales include the familiar genus spirogyra .
as technique in dna analysis improve and new information on comparative genomic arise , the phylogenetic connection between specie will change .
clearly , plant biologist have not yet solve the mystery of the origin of land plant .
bryophyte be the group of plant that be the close extant relative of early terrestrial plant .
the first bryophyte ( liverwort ) most likely appear in the ordovician period , about four  five  zero million year ago .
because of the lack of lignin and other resistant structure , the likelihood of bryophyte form fossil be rather small .
some spore protect by sporopollenin have survive and be attribute to early bryophyte .
by the silurian period , however , vascular plant have spread through the continent .
this compelling fact be use as evidence that non - vascular plant must have precede the silurian period .
more than two  five  ,  zero  zero  zero specie of bryophyte thrive in mostly damp habitat , although some live in desert .
- pron - constitute the major flora of inhospitable environment like the tundra , where - pron - small size and tolerance to desiccation offer distinct advantage .
- pron - generally lack lignin and do not have actual tracheid ( xylem cell specialize for water conduction ) .
rather , water and nutrient circulate inside specialize conduct cell .
although the term non - tracheophyte be more accurate , bryophyte be commonly call nonvascular plant .
in a bryophyte , all the conspicuous vegetative organ — include the photosynthetic leaf - like structure , the thallus , stem , and the rhizoid that anchor the plant to - pron - substrate — belong to the haploid organism or gametophyte .
the sporophyte be barely noticeable .
the gamete form by bryophyte swim with a flagellum , as do gamete in a few of the tracheophyte .
the sporangium — the multicellular sexual reproductive structure
— be present in bryophyte and absent in the majority of algae .
the bryophyte embryo also remain attach to the parent plant , which protect and nourish - pron - .
this be a characteristic of land plant .
the bryophyte be divide into three phyla  the liverwort or hepaticophyta , the hornwort or anthocerotophyta , and the moss or true bryophyta .
liverworts liverworts ( hepaticophyta ) be view as the plant most closely related to the ancestor that move to land .
liverwort have colonize every terrestrial habitat on earth and diversify to more than seven  zero  zero  zero exist specie ( figure two  five  .  nine ) .
some gametophyte form lobate green structure , as see in figure two  five  .  one  zero .
the shape be similar to the lobe of the liver , and hence provide the origin of the name give to the phylum .
this one  nine  zero  four drawing show the variety of form of hepaticophyta .
a liverwort , lunularia cruciata , display - pron - lobate , flat thallus .
the organism in the photograph be in the gametophyte stage .
opening that allow the movement of gas may be observe in liverwort .
however , these be not stoma , because - pron - do not actively open and close .
the plant take up water over - pron - entire surface and have no cuticle to prevent desiccation .
figure two  five  .  one  one represent the lifecycle of a liverwort .
the cycle start with the release of haploid spore from the sporangium that develop on the sporophyte .
spore disseminate by wind or water germinate into flatten thalli attach to the substrate by thin , single - cell filament .
male and female gametangia develop on separate , individual plant .
once release , male gamete swim with the aid of - pron - flagella to the female gametangium ( the archegonium ) , and fertilization ensue .
the zygote grow into a small sporophyte still attach to the parent gametophyte .
- pron - will give rise , by meiosis , to the next generation of spore .
liverwort plant can also reproduce asexually , by the breaking of branch or the spreading of leaf fragment call gemma .
in this latter type of reproduction , the gemmae — small , intact , complete piece of plant that be produce in a cup on the surface of the thallus ( show in figure two  five  .  one  one  ) —are splash out of the cup by raindrop .
the gemmae then land nearby and develop into gametophyte .
the life cycle of a typical liverwort be show .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
hornworts
the hornwort ( anthocerotophyta ) belong to the broad bryophyte group .
- pron - have colonize a variety of habitat on land , although - pron - be never far from a source of moisture .
the short , blue - green gametophyte be the dominant phase of the lifecycle of a hornwort .
the narrow , pipe - like sporophyte be the define characteristic of the group .
the sporophyte emerge from the parent gametophyte and continue to grow throughout the life of the plant .
hornwort grow a tall and slender sporophyte .
stoma appear in the hornwort and be abundant on the sporophyte .
photosynthetic cell in the thallus contain a single chloroplast .
meristem cell at the base of the plant keep divide and add to - pron - height .
many hornwort establish symbiotic relationship with cyanobacteria that fix nitrogen from the environment .
the lifecycle of hornwort ( figure two  five  .  one  three ) follow the general pattern of alternation of generation .
the gametophyte grow as flat thalli on the soil with embed gametangia .
flagellate sperm swim to the archegonia and fertilize egg .
the zygote develop into a long and slender sporophyte that eventually split open , release spore .
thin cell call pseudoelater surround the spore and help propel - pron - further in the environment .
unlike the elater observe in horsetail , the hornwort pseudoelater be single - cell structure .
the haploid spore germinate and give rise to the next generation of gametophyte .
the alternation of generation in hornwort be show .
moss more than one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero specie of moss have be catalogue .
- pron - habitat vary from the tundra , where - pron - be the main vegetation , to the understory of tropical forest .
in the tundra , the mosses' shallow rhizoid allow - pron - to fasten to a substrate without penetrate the frozen soil .
moss slow down erosion , store moisture and soil nutrient , and provide shelter for small animal as well as food for large herbivore , such as the musk ox .
moss be very sensitive to air pollution and be use to monitor air quality .
- pron - be also sensitive to copper salt , so these salt be a common ingredient of compound market to eliminate moss from lawn .
moss form diminutive gametophyte , which be the dominant phase of the lifecycle .
green , flat structure — resemble true leaf , but lack vascular tissue
— be attach in a spiral to a central stalk .
the plant absorb water and nutrient directly through these leaf - like structure .
some moss have small branch .
some primitive trait of green algae , such as flagellate sperm , be still present in moss that be dependent on water for reproduction .
other feature of moss be clearly adaptation to dry land .
for example , stoma be present on the stem of the sporophyte , and a primitive vascular system run up the sporophyte 's stalk .
additionally , moss be anchor to the substrate — whether - pron - be soil , rock , or roof tile — by multicellular rhizoid .
these structure be precursor of root .
- pron - originate from the base of the gametophyte , but be not the major route for the absorption of water and mineral .
the lack of a true root system explain why - pron - be so easy to rip moss mat from a tree trunk .
the moss lifecycle follow the pattern of alternation of generation as show in figure two  five  .  one  four .
the most familiar structure be the haploid gametophyte , which germinate from a haploid spore and form first a protonema
— usually , a tangle of single - cell filament that hug the ground .
cell akin to an apical meristem actively divide and give rise to a gametophore , consist of a photosynthetic stem and foliage - like structure .
rhizoid form at the base of the gametophore .
gametangia of both sex develop on separate gametophore .
the male organ ( the antheridium ) produce many sperm , whereas the archegonium ( the female organ ) form a single egg .
at fertilization , the sperm swim down the neck to the venter and unite with the egg inside the archegonium .
the zygote , protect by the archegonium , divide and grow into a sporophyte , still attach by - pron - foot to the gametophyte .
the slender seta ( plural , setae ) , as see in figure two  five  .  one  five , contain tubular cell that transfer nutrient from the base of the sporophyte ( the foot ) to the sporangium or capsule .
this photograph show the long slender stem , call setae , connect to capsule of the moss thamnobryum alopecurum .
a structure call a peristome increase the spread of spore after the tip of the capsule fall off at dispersal .
the concentric tissue around the mouth of the capsule be make of triangular , close - fit unit , a little like " tooth
"  these open and close depend on moisture level , and periodically release spore .
the vascular plant , or tracheophyt , be the dominant and most conspicuous group of land plant .
more than two  six  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero specie of tracheophyte represent more than nine  zero percent of earth 's vegetation .
several evolutionary innovation explain - pron - success and - pron - ability to spread to all habitat .
bryophyte may have be successful at the transition from an aquatic habitat to land , but - pron - be still dependent on water for reproduction , and absorb moisture and nutrient through the gametophyte surface .
the lack of root for absorb water and mineral from the soil , as well as a lack of reinforce conduct cell , limit bryophyte to small size .
although - pron - may survive in reasonably dry condition , - pron - can not reproduce and expand - pron - habitat range in the absence of water .
vascular plant , on the other hand , can achieve enormous height , thus compete successfully for light .
photosynthetic organ become leaf , and pipe - like cell or vascular tissue transport water , mineral , and fix carbon throughout the organism .
in seedless vascular plant , the diploid sporophyte be the dominant phase of the lifecycle .
the gametophyte be now an inconspicuous , but still independent , organism .
throughout plant evolution , there be an evident reversal of role in the dominant phase of the lifecycle .
seedles vascular plant still depend on water during fertilization , as the sperm must swim on a layer of moisture to reach the egg .
this step in reproduction explain why fern and - pron - relative be more abundant in damp environment .
vascular tissue  xylem and phloem the first fossil that show the presence of vascular tissue date to the silurian period , about four  three  zero million year ago .
the simple arrangement of conductive cell show a pattern of xylem at the center surround by phloem .
xylem be the tissue responsible for the storage and long - distance transport of water and nutrient , as well as the transfer of water - soluble growth factor from the organ of synthesis to the target organ .
the tissue consist of conduct cell , know as tracheid , and supportive filler tissue , call parenchyma .
xylem conductive cell incorporate the compound lignin into - pron - wall , and be thus describe as lignified .
lignin - pron - be a complex polymer that be impermeable to water and confer mechanical strength to vascular tissue .
with - pron - rigid cell wall , the xylem cell provide support to the plant and allow - pron - to achieve impressive height .
tall plant have a selective advantage by be able to reach unfiltered sunlight and disperse - pron - spore or seed further away , thus expand - pron - range .
by grow high than other plant , tall tree cast - pron - shadow on short plant and limit competition for water and precious nutrient in the soil .
phloem be the second type of vascular tissue  - pron - transport sugar , protein , and other solute throughout the plant .
phloem cell be divide into sieve element ( conduct cell ) and cell that support the sieve element .
together , xylem and phloem tissue form the vascular system of plant .
root  support for the plant root be not well preserve in the fossil record .
nevertheless , - pron - seem that root appear later in evolution than vascular tissue .
the development of an extensive network of root represent a significant new feature of vascular plant .
thin rhizoid attach bryophyte to the substrate , but these rather flimsy filament do not provide a strong anchor for the plant  neither do - pron - absorb substantial amount of water and nutrient .
in contrast , root , with - pron - prominent vascular tissue system , transfer water and mineral from the soil to the rest of the plant .
the extensive network of root that penetrate deep into the soil to reach source of water also stabilize tree by act as a ballast or anchor .
the majority of root establish a symbiotic relationship with fungus , form mycorrhizae , which benefit the plant by greatly increase the surface area for absorption of water and soil mineral and nutrient .
leaf , sporophylls , and strobili
a third innovation mark the seedless vascular plant .
accompany the prominence of the sporophyte and the development of vascular tissue , the appearance of true leaf improve - pron - photosynthetic efficiency .
leaf capture more sunlight with - pron - increase surface area by employ more chloroplast to trap light energy and convert - pron - to chemical energy , which be then use to fix atmospheric carbon dioxide into carbohydrate .
the carbohydrate be export to the rest of the plant by the conductive cell of phloem tissue .
the existence of two type of morphology suggest that leaf evolve independently in several group of plant .
the first type of leaf be the microphyll , or " little leaf , " which can be date to three  five  zero million year ago in the late silurian .
a microphyll be small and have a simple vascular system .
a single unbranched vein — a bundle of vascular tissue make of xylem and phloem — run through the center of the leaf .
microphyll may have originate from the flattening of lateral branch , or from sporangia that lose - pron - reproductive capability .
microphyll be present in the club moss and probably precede the development of megaphyll , or " big leaf " , which be large leaf with a pattern of branch vein .
megaphyll most likely appear independently several time during the course of evolution .
- pron - complex network of vein suggest that several branch may have combine into a flattened organ , with the gap between the branch be fill with photosynthetic tissue .
in addition to photosynthesis , leaf play another role in the life of the plant .
pine cone , mature frond of fern , and flower
be all sporophyll
— leaf that be modify structurally to bear sporangia .
strobili be cone - like structure that contain sporangia .
- pron - be prominent in conifer and be commonly know as pine cone .
fern and other seedless vascular plant by the late devonian period , plant have evolve vascular tissue , well - define leaf , and root system .
with these advantage , plant increase in height and size .
during the carboniferous period , swamp forest of club moss and horsetail — some specimen reach height of more than three  zero m ( one  zero  zero ft ) —cover most of the land .
these forest give rise to the extensive coal deposit that give the carboniferous - pron - name .
in seedless vascular plant , the sporophyte become the dominant phase of the lifecycle .
water be still require for fertilization of seedless vascular plant , and most favor a moist environment .
modern - day seedless tracheophyt include club moss , horsetail , fern , and whisk fern .
phylum lycopodiophyta  club mosses the club moss , or phylum lycopodiophyta , be the early group of seedless vascular plant .
- pron - dominate the landscape of the carboniferous , grow into tall tree and form large swamp forest .
today 's club moss be diminutive , evergreen plant consist of a stem ( which may be branch ) and microphyll ( figure two  five  .  one  six ) .
the phylum lycopodiophyta consist of close to one  ,  two  zero  zero specie , include the quillwort ( isoetales ) , the club moss ( lycopodiales ) , and spike moss ( selaginellales ) , none of which be true moss or bryophyte .
lycophytes follow the pattern of alternation of generation see in the bryophyte , except that the sporophyte be the major stage of the lifecycle .
the gametophyte do not depend on the sporophyte for nutrient .
some gametophyte develop underground and form mycorrhizal association with fungus .
in club moss , the sporophyte give rise to sporophyll arrange in strobili , cone - like structure that give the class - pron - name .
lycophytes can be homosporous or heterosporous .
in the club moss such as lycopodium clavatum , sporangia be arrange in cluster call strobili .
phylum monilophyta  class equisetopsida ( horsetails ) horsetails , whisk fern and fern
belong to the phylum monilophyta , with horsetail place in the class equisetopsida .
the single genus equisetum be the survivor of a large group of plant , know as arthrophyta , which produce large tree and entire swamp forest in the carboniferous .
the plant be usually find in damp environment and marsh .
horsetail thrive in a marsh .
the stem of a horsetail be characterize by the presence of joint or node , hence the name arthrophyta ( arthro - = " joint "  - phyta = " plant " ) .
leaf and branch come out as whorl from the evenly spaced joint .
the needle - shape leaf do not contribute greatly to photosynthesis , the majority of which take place in the green stem .
thin leaf originate at the joint be noticeable on the horsetail plant .
horsetail be once use as scrub brush and be nickname scour brush .
silica collect in the epidermal cell , contribute to the stiffness of horsetail plant .
underground stem know as rhizome anchor the plant to the ground .
modern - day horsetail be homosporous and produce bisexual gametophyte .
phylum monilophyta  class psilotopsida ( whisk ferns )
while most fern form large leaf and branch root , the whisk fern , class psilotopsida , lack both root and leaf , probably lose by reduction .
photosynthesis take place in - pron - green stem , and small yellow knob form at the tip of the branch stem and contain the sporangia .
whisk fern be consider an early pterophyte .
however , recent comparative dna analysis suggest that this group may have lose both vascular tissue and root through evolution , and be more closely relate to fern .
the whisk fern psilotum nudum have conspicuous green stem with knob - shape sporangia .
phylum monilophyta  class psilotopsida ( ferns )
with - pron - large frond , fern be the most readily recognizable seedless vascular plant .
- pron - be consider the most advanced seedless vascular plant and display characteristic commonly observe in seed plant .
more than two  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero specie of fern live in environment range from tropic to temperate forest .
although some specie survive in dry environment , most fern be restrict to moist , shade place .
fern make - pron - appearance in the fossil record during the devonian period and expand during the carboniferous .
the dominant stage of the lifecycle of a fern be the sporophyte , which consist of large compound leaf call frond .
frond fulfill a double role  - pron - be photosynthetic organ that also carry reproductive organ .
the stem may be bury underground as a rhizome , from which adventitious root grow to absorb water and nutrient from the soil  or , - pron - may grow above ground as a trunk in tree fern ( figure two  five  .  two  zero ) .
adventitious organ be those that grow in unusual place , such as root grow from the side of a stem .
some specimen of this short tree - fern specie can grow very tall .
the tip of a develop fern frond be roll into a crozier , or fiddlehead ( figure two  five  .  two  one a and figure two  five  .  two  one b ) .
fiddlehead unroll as the frond develop .
crozier , or fiddlehead , be the tip of fern frond .
most fern produce the same type of spore and be therefore homosporous .
the diploid sporophyte be the most conspicuous stage of the lifecycle .
on the underside of - pron - mature frond , sori ( singular , sorus ) form as small cluster where sporangia develop .
sori appear as small bump on the underside of a fern frond .
inside the sori , spore be produce by meiosis and release into the air .
those that land on a suitable substrate germinate and form a heart - shape gametophyte , which be attach to the ground by thin filamentous rhizoid .
show here be a young sporophyte ( upper part of image ) and a heart - shape gametophyte .
the inconspicuous gametophyte harbor both sex gametangia .
flagellate sperm release from the antheridium swim on a wet surface to the archegonium , where the egg be fertilize .
the newly form zygote grow into a sporophyte that emerge from the gametophyte and grow by mitosis into the next generation sporophyte .
this landscape border at a college campus be design by student in the horticulture and landscaping department of the college .
the importance of seedless vascular plants mosses and liverwort be often the first macroscopic organism to colonize an area , both in a primary succession — where bare land be settle for the first time by live organism — or in a secondary succession , where soil remain intact after a catastrophic event wipe out many existing specie .
- pron - spore be carry by the wind , bird , or insect .
once moss and liverwort be establish , - pron - provide food and shelter for other specie .
in a hostile environment , like the tundra where the soil be freeze , bryophyte grow well because - pron - do not have root and can dry and rehydrate rapidly once water be again available .
moss be at the base of the food chain in the tundra biome .
many specie — from small insect to musk oxen and reindeer — depend on moss for food .
in turn , predator feed on the herbivore , which be the primary consumer .
some report indicate that bryophyte make the soil more amenable to colonization by other plant .
because - pron - establish symbiotic relationship with nitrogen - fix cyanobacteria , moss replenish the soil with nitrogen .
at the end of the nineteenth century , scientist observe that lichen and moss be become increasingly rare in urban and suburban area .
since bryophyte have neither a root system for absorption of water and nutrient , nor a cuticle layer that protect - pron - from desiccation , pollutant in rainwater readily penetrate - pron - tissue  - pron - absorb moisture and nutrient through - pron - entire expose surface .
therefore , pollutant dissolve in rainwater penetrate plant tissue readily and have a large impact on moss than on other plant .
the disappearance of moss can be consider a bioindicator for the level of pollution in the environment .
fern contribute to the environment by promote the weathering of rock , accelerate the formation of topsoil , and slow down erosion by spread rhizome in the soil .
the water fern of the genus azolla harbor nitrogen - fix cyanobacteria and restore this important nutrient to aquatic habitat .
seedless plant have historically play a role in human life through us as tool , fuel , and medicine .
dry peat moss , sphagnum , be commonly use as fuel in some part of europe and be consider a renewable resource .
sphagnum bog
( figure two  five  .  two  six ) be cultivate with cranberry and blueberry bush .
the ability of sphagnum to hold moisture make the moss a common soil conditioner .
florist use block of sphagnum to maintain moisture for floral arrangement .
sphagnum acutifolium be dry peat moss and can be use as fuel .
the attractive frond of fern make - pron - a favorite ornamental plant .
because - pron - thrive in low light , - pron - be well suit as house plant .
more importantly , fiddlehead be a traditional spring food of native americans in the pacific northwest , and be popular as a side dish in french cuisine .
the licorice fern , polypodium glycyrrhiza , be part of the diet of the pacific northwest coastal tribe , owe in part to the sweetness of - pron - rhizome .
- pron - have a faint licorice taste and serve as a sweetener .
the rhizome also figure in the pharmacopeia of native americans for - pron - medicinal property and be use as a remedy for sore throat .
by far the great impact of seedless vascular plant on human life , however , come from - pron - extinct progenitor .
the tall club moss , horsetail , and tree - like fern that flourish in the swampy forest of the carboniferous period give rise to large deposit of coal throughout the world .
coal provide an abundant source of energy during the industrial revolution , which have tremendous consequence on human society , include rapid technological progress and growth of large city , as well as the degradation of the environment .
coal be still a prime source of energy and also a major contributor to global warming .
seed plant dominate the landscape and play an integral role in human society .
( a ) palm tree grow along the shoreline  ( b ) wheat be a crop grow in most of the world  ( c ) the flower of the cotton plant produce fiber that be weave into fabric 
( d ) the potent alkaloid of the beautiful opium poppy have influence human life both as a medicinal remedy and as a dangerously addictive drug .
the lush palm on tropical shoreline do not depend on water for the dispersal of - pron - pollen , fertilization , or the survival of the zygote — unlike moss , liverwort , and fern of the terrain .
seed plant , such as palm , have break free from the need to rely on water for - pron - reproductive need .
- pron - play an integral role in all aspect of life on the planet , shape the physical terrain , influence the climate , and maintain life as - pron - know - pron - .
for millennia , human society have depend on seed plant for nutrition and medicinal compound  and more recently , for industrial by - product , such as timber and paper , dye , and textile .
palm provide material include rattan , oil , and date .
wheat be grow to feed both human and animal population .
the fruit of the cotton boll flower be harvest as a boll , with - pron - fiber transform into clothing or pulp for paper .
the showy opium poppy be value both as an ornamental flower and as a source of potent opiate compound .
the first plant to colonize land be most likely closely related to modern day moss ( bryophyte ) and be think to have appear about five  zero  zero million year ago .
- pron - be follow by liverwort ( also bryophyte ) and primitive vascul plant — the pterophyte — from which modern fern be derive .
the lifecycle of bryophyte and pterophyte be characterize by the alternation of generation , like gymnosperm and angiosperm  what set bryophyte and pterophyt apart from gymnosperm and angiosperm be - pron - reproductive requirement for water .
the completion of the bryophyte and pterophyte life cycle require water because the male gametophyte release sperm , which must swim — propel by - pron - flagella — to reach and fertilize the female gamete or egg .
after fertilization , the zygote mature and grow into a sporophyte , which in turn will form sporangia or " spore vessel . "
in the sporangia , mother cell undergo meiosis and produce the haploid spore .
release of spore in a suitable environment will lead to germination and a new generation of gametophyte .
in seed plant , the evolutionary trend lead to a dominant sporophyte generation , and at the same time , a systematic reduction in the size of the gametophyte  from a conspicuous structure to a microscopic cluster of cell enclose in the tissue of the sporophyte .
whereas low vascular plant , such as club moss and fern , be mostly homosporous ( produce only one type of spore ) , all seed plant , or spermatophyte , be heterosporous .
- pron - form two type of spore  megaspore ( female ) and microspore ( male ) .
megaspore develop into female gametophyte that produce egg , and microspor mature into male gametophyte that generate sperm .
because the gametophyte mature within the spore , - pron - be not free - living , as be the gametophyte of other seedless vascular plant .
heterosporous seedless plant be see as the evolutionary forerunner of seed plant .
seed and pollen — two critical adaptation to drought , and to reproduction that do not require water — distinguish seed plant from other ( seedless ) vascular plant .
both adaptation be require for the colonization of land begin by the bryophyte and - pron - ancestor .
fossil place the early distinct seed plant at about three  five  zero million year ago .
the first reliable record of gymnosperm date - pron - appearance to the pennsylvanian period , about three  one  nine million year ago ( figure two  six  .  two ) .
gymnosperm be precede by progymnosperm , the first naked seed plant , which arise about three  eight  zero million year ago .
progymnosperm be a transitional group of plant that superficially resemble conifer ( cone bearer ) because - pron - produce wood from the secondary growth of the vascular tissue  however , - pron - still reproduce like fern , release spore into the environment .
gymnosperm dominate the landscape in the early ( triassic ) and middle ( jurassic ) mesozoic era .
angiosperm surpass gymnosperm by the middle of the cretaceous ( about one  zero  zero million year ago ) in the late mesozoic era , and today be the most abundant plant group in most terrestrial biome .
various plant specie evolve in different era .
pollen and seed be innovative structure that allow seed plant to break - pron - dependence on water for reproduction and development of the embryo , and to conquer dry land .
the pollen grain be the male gametophyte , which contain the sperm ( gamete ) of the plant .
the small haploid ( one n ) cell be encase in a protective coat that prevent desiccation ( dry out ) and mechanical damage .
pollen grain can travel far from - pron - original sporophyte , spread the plant 's gene .
the seed offer the embryo protection , nourishment , and a mechanism to maintain dormancy for ten or even thousand of year , ensure germination can occur when growth condition be optimal .
seed therefore allow plant to disperse the next generation through both space and time .
with such evolutionary advantage , seed plant have become the most successful and familiar group of plant , in part because of - pron - size and striking appearance .
evolution of gymnosperms
the fossil plant elkinsia polymorpha , a " seed fern " from the devonian period —
about four  zero  zero million year ago — be consider the early seed plant know to date .
seed fern ( figure two  six  .  three ) produce - pron - seed along - pron - branch without specialized structure .
what make - pron - the first true seed plant be that - pron - develop structure call cupule to enclose and protect the ovule — the female gametophyte and associate tissue — which develop into a seed upon fertilization .
seed plant resemble modern tree fern become more numerous and diverse in the coal swamp of the carboniferous period .
this fossilize leaf be from glossopteris , a seed fern that thrive during the permian age ( two  nine  zero – two  four  zero million year ago ) .
fossil record indicate the first gymnosperm ( progymnosperm ) most likely originate in the paleozoic era , during the middle devonian period  about three  nine  zero million year ago .
follow the wet mississippian and pennsylvanian period , which be dominate by giant fern tree , the permian period be dry .
this give a reproductive edge to seed plant , which be better adapt to survive dry spell .
the ginkgoales , a group of gymnosperm with only one survive specie —
the gingko biloba
— be the first gymnosperm to appear during the low jurassic .
gymnosperm expand in the mesozoic era ( about two  four  zero million year ago ) , supplanting fern in the landscape , and reach - pron - great diversity during this time .
the jurassic period be as much the age of the cycad ( palm - tree - like gymnosperm ) as the age of the dinosaur .
gingkoale and the more familiar conifer also dot the landscape .
although angiosperm ( flower plant ) be the major form of plant life in most biome , gymnosperm still dominate some ecosystem , such as the taiga ( boreal forest ) and the alpine forest at high mountain elevation ( figure two  six  .  four ) because of - pron - adaptation to cold and dry growth condition .
this boreal forest ( taiga ) have low - lie plant and conifer tree .
seed and pollen as an evolutionary adaptation to dry land unlike bryophyte and fern spore ( which be haploid cell dependent on moisture for rapid development of gametophyte ) , seed contain a diploid embryo that will germinate into a sporophyte .
storage tissue to sustain growth and a protective coat give seed - pron - superior evolutionary advantage .
several layer of harden tissue prevent desiccation , and free reproduction from the need for a constant supply of water .
furthermore , seed remain in a state of dormancy — induce by desiccation and the hormone abscisic acid — until condition for growth become favorable .
whether blow by the wind , float on water , or carry away by animal , seed be scatter in an expand geographic range , thus avoid competition with the parent plant .
pollen grain ( figure two  six  .  five ) be male gametophyte and be carry by wind , water , or a pollinator .
the whole structure be protect from desiccation and can reach the female organ without dependence on water .
male gamete reach female gametophyte and the egg cell gamete though a pollen tube  an extension of a cell within the pollen grain .
the sperm of modern gymnosperm lack flagella , but in cycad and the gingko , the sperm still possess flagella that allow - pron - to swim down the pollen tube to the female gamete  however , - pron - be enclose in a pollen grain .
this fossilize pollen be from a buckbean fen core find in yellowstone national park , wyoming .
the pollen be magnify one  ,  zero  five  four time .
evolution of angiosperms undisputed fossil record place the massive appearance and diversification of angiosperm in the middle to late mesozoic era .
angiosperm ( " seed in a vessel " ) produce a flower contain male and / or female reproductive structure .
fossil evidence ( figure two  six  .  six ) indicate that flower plant first appear in the lower cretaceous , about one  two  five million year ago , and be rapidly diversify by the middle cretaceous , about one  zero  zero million year ago .
early trace of angiosperm be scarce .
fossilize pollen recover from jurassic geological material have be attribute to angiosperm .
a few early cretaceous rock show clear imprint of leaf resemble angiosperm leaf .
by the mid - cretaceous , a staggering number of diverse flowering plant crowd the fossil record .
the same geological period be also mark by the appearance of many modern group of insect , include pollinate insect that play a key role in ecology and the evolution of flower plant .
although several hypothesis have be offer to explain this sudden profusion and variety of flower plant , none have garner the consensus of paleobotanist ( scientist who study ancient plant ) .
new datum in comparative genomic and paleobotany have , however , shed some light on the evolution of angiosperm .
rather than be derive from gymnosperm , angiosperm form a sister clade ( a specie and - pron - descendent ) that develop in parallel with the gymnosperm .
the two innovative structure of flower and fruit represent an improved reproductive strategy that serve to protect the embryo , while increase genetic variability and range .
paleobotanist debate whether angiosperm evolve from small woody bush , or be basal angiosperm relate to tropical grass .
both view draw support from cladistic study , and the so - call woody magnoliid hypothesis — which propose that the early ancestor of angiosperm be shrub
— also offer molecular biological evidence .
the most primitive living angiosperm be consider to be amborella trichopoda , a small plant native to the rainforest of new caledonia , an island in the south pacific .
analysis of the genome of a . trichopoda have show that - pron - be relate to all exist flower plant and belong to the oldest confirm branch of the angiosperm family tree .
a few other angiosperm group call basal angiosperm , be view as primitive because - pron - branch off early from the phylogenetic tree .
most modern angiosperm be classify as either monocot or eudicot , base on the structure of - pron - leaf and embryo .
basal angiosperm , such as water lily , be consider more primitive because - pron - share morphological trait with both monocot and eudicot .
this leaf imprint show a ficus speciosissima , an angiosperm that flourish during the cretaceous period .
flower and fruits as an evolutionary adaptation angiosperms produce - pron - gamete in separate organ , which be usually house in a flower .
both fertilization and embryo development take place inside an anatomical structure that provide a stable system of sexual reproduction largely shelter from environmental fluctuation .
flower plant be the most diverse phylum on earth after insect  flower come in a bewilder array of size , shape , color , smell , and arrangement .
most flower have a mutualistic pollinator , with the distinctive feature of flower reflect the nature of the pollination agent .
the relationship between pollinator and flower characteristic be one of the great example of coevolution .
follow fertilization of the egg , the ovule grow into a seed .
the surround tissue of the ovary thicken , develop into a fruit that will protect the seed and often ensure - pron - dispersal over a wide geographic range .
not all fruit develop from an ovary  such structure be " false fruit .
"
like flower , fruit can vary tremendously in appearance , size , smell , and taste .
tomato , walnut shell and avocado be all example of fruit .
as with pollen and seed , fruit also act as agent of dispersal .
some may be carry away by the wind .
many attract animal that will eat the fruit and pass the seed through - pron - digestive system , then deposit the seed in another location .
cocklebur be cover with stiff , hooked spine that can hook into fur ( or clothing ) and hitch a ride on an animal for long distance .
the cocklebur that cling to the velvet trouser of an enterprising swiss hiker , george de mestral , inspire - pron - invention of the loop and hook fastener - pron - name velcro .
gymnosperm , mean " naked seed , " be a diverse group of seed plant and be paraphyletic .
paraphyletic group be those in which not all member be descendant of a single common ancestor .
- pron - characteristic include naked seed , separate female and male gamete , pollination by wind , and tracheid ( which transport water and solut in the vascular system ) .
gymnosperm seed be not enclose in an ovary  rather , - pron - be expose on cone or modify leaf .
sporophyll be specialized leaf that produce sporangia .
the term strobilus ( plural = strobili ) describe a tight arrangement of sporophyll around a central stalk , as see in cone .
some seed be envelop by sporophyte tissue upon maturation .
the layer of sporophyte tissue that surround the megasporangium , and later , the embryo , be call the integument .
gymnosperm be the dominant phylum in mesozoic era .
- pron - be adapt to live where fresh water be scarce during part of the year , or in the nitrogen - poor soil of a bog .
therefore , - pron - be still the prominent phylum in the coniferous biome or taiga , where the evergreen conifer have a selective advantage in cold and dry weather .
evergreen conifer continue low level of photosynthesis during the cold month , and be ready to take advantage of the first sunny day of spring .
one disadvantage be that conifer be more susceptible than deciduous tree to infestation because conifer do not lose - pron - leaf all at once .
- pron - can not , therefore , shed parasite and restart with a fresh supply of leaf in spring .
the life cycle of a gymnosperm involve alternation of generation , with a dominant sporophyte in which the female gametophyte reside , and reduce gametophyte .
all gymnosperm be heterosporous .
the male and female reproductive organ can form in cone or strobili .
male and female sporangia be produce either on the same plant , describe as monoecious ( " one home " or bisexual ) , or on separate plant , refer to as dioecious ( " two home " or unisexual ) plant .
the life cycle of a conifer will serve as - pron - example of reproduction in gymnosperm .
life cycle of a conifer pine tree be conifer ( cone bearing ) and carry both male and female sporophyll on the same mature sporophyte .
therefore , - pron - be monoecious plant .
like all gymnosperm , pine be heterosporous and generate two different type of spore  male microspore and female megaspore .
in the male cone , or staminate cone , the microsporocyte give rise to pollen grain by meiosis .
in the spring , large amount of yellow pollen be release and carry by the wind .
some gametophyte will land on a female cone .
pollination be define as the initiation of pollen tube growth .
the pollen tube develop slowly , and the generative cell in the pollen grain divide into two haploid sperm cell by mitosis .
at fertilization , one of the sperm cell will finally unite - pron - haploid nucleus with the haploid nucleus of a haploid egg cell .
female cone , or ovulate cone , contain two ovule per scale .
one megaspore mother cell , or megasporocyte , undergoes meiosis in each ovule .
three of the four cell break down  only a single survive cell will develop into a female multicellular gametophyte , which enclose archegonia ( an archegonium be a reproductive organ that contain a single large egg ) .
upon fertilization , the diploid egg will give rise to the embryo , which be enclose in a seed coat of tissue from the parent plant .
fertilization and seed development be a long process in pine tree  - pron - may take up to two year after pollination .
the seed that be form contain three generation of tissue  the seed coat that originate from the sporophyte tissue , the gametophyte that will provide nutrient , and the embryo - pron - .
figure two  six  .  eight illustrate the life cycle of a conifer .
the sporophyte ( two n ) phase be the long phase in the life of a gymnosperm .
the gametophyte ( one n ) —microspore and megaspore — be reduce in size .
- pron - may take more than year between pollination and fertilization while the pollen tube grow towards the megasporocyte ( two n ) , which undergo meiosis into megaspore .
the megaspore will mature into egg ( one n ) .
diversity of gymnosperms modern gymnosperm be classify into four phyla .
coniferophyta , cycadophyta , and ginkgophyta be similar in - pron - production of secondary cambium ( cell that generate the vascular system of the trunk or stem and be partially specialize for water transportation ) and - pron - pattern of seed development .
however , the three phyla be not closely relate phylogenetically to each other .
gnetophyta be consider the close group to angiosperm because - pron - produce true xylem tissue .
conifers ( coniferophyta )
conifer be the dominant phylum of gymnosperm , with the most variety of specie ( figure two  six  .  nine ) .
most be typically tall tree that usually bear scale - like or needle - like leaf .
water evaporation from leaf be reduce by - pron - thin shape and the thick cuticle .
snow slide easily off needle - shape leaf , keep the load light and decrease breaking of branch .
adaptation to cold and dry weather explain the predominance of conifer at high altitude and in cold climate .
conifer include familiar evergreen tree such as pine , spruce , fir , cedar , sequoia , and yew .
a few specie be deciduous and lose - pron - leaf in fall .
the european larch and the tamarack be example of deciduous conifer ( figure two  six  .  nine c ) .
many coniferous tree be harvest for paper pulp and timber .
the wood of conifer be more primitive than the wood of angiosperm  - pron - contain tracheid , but no vessel element , and be therefore refer to as " soft wood .
"
conifer be the dominant form of vegetation in cold or arid environment and at high altitude .
show here be the ( a ) evergreen spruce picea sp . ,
( b ) juniper juniperus sp . ,
( c ) sequoia sequoia semervirens , which be a deciduous gymnosperm , and ( d ) the tamarack larix larcinia .
notice the yellow leaf of the tamarack .
cycad cycad thrive in mild climate , and be often mistaken for palm because of the shape of - pron - large , compound leaf .
cycad bear large cone ( figure two  six  .  one  zero ) , and may be pollinate by beetle rather than wind  unusual for a gymnosperm .
- pron - dominate the landscape during the age of dinosaur in the mesozoic , but only a hundred or so specie persist to modern time .
- pron - face possible extinction , and several specie be protect through international convention .
because of - pron - attractive shape , - pron - be often use as ornamental plant in garden in the tropic and subtropic .
this encephalartos ferox cycad have large cone and broad , fern - like leaf .
gingkophytes the single surviving specie of the gingkophyte group be the gingko biloba ( figure two  six  .  one  one ) .
- pron - fan - shape leaf — unique among seed plant because - pron - feature a dichotomous venation pattern
— turn yellow in autumn and fall from the tree .
for century , g . biloba be cultivate by chinese buddhist monk in monastery , which ensure - pron - preservation .
- pron - be plant in public space because - pron - be unusually resistant to pollution .
male and female organ be produce on separate plant .
typically , gardener plant only male tree because the seed produce by the female plant have an off - put smell of rancid butter .
this plate from the one  eight  seven  zero book flora japonica , sectio prima ( tafelband ) depict the leaf and fruit of gingko biloba , as draw by philipp franz von siebold and joseph gerhard zuccarini .
gnetophytes gnetophytes be the close relative to modern angiosperm , and include three dissimilar genera of plant  ephedra , gnetum , and welwitschia ( figure two  six  .  one  two ) .
like angiosperm , - pron - have broad leaf .
in tropical and subtropical zone , gnetophyte be vine or small shrub .
ephedra occur in dry area of the west coast of the united states and mexico .
ephedra 's small , scale - like leaf be the source of the compound ephedrine , which be use in medicine as a potent decongestant .
because ephedrine be similar to amphetamine , both in chemical structure and neurological effect , - pron - use be restrict to prescription drug .
like angiosperm , but unlike other gymnosperm , all gnetophyte possess vessel element in - pron - xylem .
ephedra viridis , know by the common name mormon tea , grow on the west coast of the united states and mexico .
( b ) gnetum gnemon grow in malaysia .
( c )
the large welwitschia mirabili can be find in the namibian desert .
from - pron - humble and still obscure beginning during the early jurassic period , the angiosperm — or flower plant — have evolve to dominate most terrestrial ecosystem ( figure two  six  .  one  three ) .
with more than two  five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero specie , the angiosperm phylum ( anthophyta ) be second only to insect in term of diversification .
these flower grow in a botanical garden border in bellevue , wa .
flower plant dominate terrestrial landscape .
the vivid color of flower be an adaptation to pollination by animal such as insect and bird .
the success of angiosperm be due to two novel reproductive structure  flower and fruit .
the function of the flower be to ensure pollination .
flower also provide protection for the ovule and develop embryo inside a receptacle .
the function of the fruit be seed dispersal .
- pron - also protect the develop seed .
different fruit structure or tissue on fruit — such as sweet flesh , wing , parachute , or spine that grab — reflect the dispersal strategy that help spread seed .
flower flower be modify leaf , or sporophyll , organize around a central stalk .
although - pron - vary greatly in appearance , all flower contain the same structure  sepal , petal , carpel , and stamen .
the peduncle attach the flower to the plant .
a whorl of sepal ( collectively call the calyx ) be locate at the base of the peduncle and enclose the unopened floral bud .
sepal be usually photosynthetic organ , although there be some exception .
for example , the corolla in lily and tulip consist of three sepal and three petal that look virtually identical .
petal , collectively the corolla , be locate inside the whorl of sepal and often display vivid color to attract pollinator .
flower pollinate by wind be usually small , feathery , and visually inconspicuous .
sepal and petal together form the perianth .
the sexual organ ( carpel and stamen ) be locate at the center of the flower .
as illustrate in figure two  six  .  one  four , style , stigma , and ovule constitute the female organ  the gynoecium or carpel .
flower structure be very diverse , and carpel may be singular , multiple , or fuse .
multiple fused carpel comprise a pistil .
the megaspore and the female gametophyte be produce and protect by the thick tissue of the carpel .
a long , thin structure call a style lead from the sticky stigma , where pollen be deposit , to the ovary , enclose in the carpel .
the ovary house one or more ovule , each of which will develop into a seed upon fertilization .
the male reproductive organ , the stamen ( collectively call the androecium ) , surround the central carpel .
stamen be compose of a thin stalk call a filament and a sac - like structure call the anther .
the filament support the anther , where the microspore be produce by meiosis and develop into pollen grain .
this image depict the structure of a perfect flower .
perfect flower produce both male and female floral organ .
the flower show have only one carpel , but some flower have a cluster of carpel .
together , all the carpel make up the gynoecium .
fruit
as the seed develop , the wall of the ovary thicken and form the fruit .
the seed form in an ovary , which also enlarge as the seed grow .
in botany , a fertilize and fully grow , ripen ovary be a fruit .
many food commonly call vegetable be actually fruit .
eggplant , zucchini , string bean , and bell pepper be all technically fruit because - pron - contain seed and be derive from the thick ovary tissue .
acorn be nuts , and winged maple whirligig ( whose botanical name be samara ) be also fruit .
botanist classify fruit into more than two dozen different category , only a few of which be actually fleshy and sweet .
mature fruit can be fleshy or dry .
fleshy fruit include the familiar berry , peach , apple , grape , and tomato .
rice , wheat , and nut be example of dry fruit .
another distinction be that not all fruit be derive from the ovary .
for instance , strawberry be derive from the receptacle and apple from the pericarp , or hypanthium .
some fruit be derive from separate ovary in a single flower , such as the raspberry .
other fruit , such as the pineapple , form from cluster of flower .
additionally , some fruit , like watermelon and orange , have rind .
regardless of how - pron - be form , fruit be an agent of seed dispersal .
the variety of shape and characteristic reflect the mode of dispersal .
wind carry the light dry fruit of tree and dandelion .
water transport float coconut .
some fruit attract herbivore with color or perfume , or as food .
once eat , tough , undigested seed be disperse through the herbivore 's fece .
other fruit have bur and hook to cling to fur and hitch ride on animal .
the life cycle of an angiosperm
the adult , or sporophyte , phase be the main phase of an angiosperm 's life cycle ( figure two  six  .  one  five ) .
like gymnosperm , angiosperm be heterosporous .
therefore , - pron - generate microspore , which will generate pollen grain as the male gametophyte , and megaspore , which will form an ovule that contain female gametophyte .
inside the anthers' microsporangia , male gametophyte divide by meiosis to generate haploid microspore , which , in turn , undergo mitosis and give rise to pollen grain .
each pollen grain contain two cell  one generative cell that will divide into two sperm and a second cell that will become the pollen tube cell .
the ovule , shelter within the ovary of the carpel , contain the megasporangium protect by two layer of integument and the ovary wall .
within each megasporangium , a megasporocyte undergoe meiosis , generate four megaspore — three small and one large .
only the large megaspore survif  - pron - produce the female gametophyte , refer to as the embryo sac .
the megaspore divide three time to form an eight - cell stage .
four of these cell migrate to each pole of the embryo sac  two come to the equator , and will eventually fuse to form a two n polar nucleus  the three cell away from the egg form antipodal , and the two cell close to the egg become the synergid .
the mature embryo sac contain one egg cell , two synergid or " helper " cell , three antipodal cell , and two polar nucleus in a central cell .
when a pollen grain reach the stigma , a pollen tube extend from the grain , grow down the style , and enter through the micropyle  an opening in the integument of the ovule .
the two sperm cell be deposit in the embryo sac .
a double fertilization event then occur .
one sperm and the egg combine , form a diploid zygote — the future embryo .
the other sperm fuse with the two n polar nucleus , form a triploid cell that will develop into the endosperm , which be tissue that serve as a food reserve .
the zygote develop into an embryo with a radicle , or small root , and one ( monocot ) or two ( dicot ) leaf - like organ call cotyledon .
this difference in the number of embryonic leaf be the basis for the two major group of angiosperm  the monocot and the eudicot .
seed food reserve be store outside the embryo , in the form of complex carbohydrate , lipid or protein .
the cotyledon serve as conduit to transmit the break - down food reserve from - pron - storage site inside the seed to the develop embryo .
the seed consist of a toughened layer of integument form the coat , the endosperm with food reserve , and at the center , the well - protect embryo .
most flower be monoecious or bisexual , which mean that - pron - carry both stamen and carpel  only a few specie selfpollinate .
monoecious flower be also know as " perfect " flower because - pron - contain both type of sex organ ( figure two  six  .  one  four ) .
both anatomical and environmental barrier promote cross - pollination mediate by a physical agent ( wind or water ) , or an animal , such as an insect or bird .
cross - pollination increase genetic diversity in a species .
diversity of angiosperms angiosperms be classify in a single phylum  the anthophyta .
modern angiosperm appear to be a monophyletic group , which mean that - pron - originate from a single ancestor .
flower plant be divide into two major group , accord to the structure of the cotyledon , pollen grain , and other structure .
monocot include grass and lily , and eudicot or dicot form a polyphyletic group .
basal angiosperm be a group of plant that be believe to have branch off before the separation into monocot and eudicot because - pron - exhibit trait from both group .
- pron - be categorize separately in many classification scheme .
the magnoliidae ( magnolia tree , laurel , and water lily ) and the piperaceae ( pepper ) belong to the basal angiosperm group .
basal angiosperms
the magnoliidae be represent by the magnolia  tall tree bear large , fragrant flower that have many part and be consider archaic ( figure two  six  .  one  six d ) .
laurel tree produce fragrant leaf and small , inconspicuous flower .
the laurales grow mostly in warm climate and be small tree and shrub .
familiar plant in this group include the bay laurel , cinnamon , spice bush ( figure two  six  .  one  six a ) , and avocado tree .
the nymphaeales be comprise of the water lily , lotus ( figure two  six  .  one  six c ) , and similar plant  all specie thrive in freshwater biome , and have leaf that float on the water surface or grow underwater .
water lily be particularly prize by gardener , and have grace pond and pool for thousand of year .
the piperales be a group of herb , shrub , and small tree that grow in the tropical climate .
- pron - have small flower without petal that be tightly arrange in long spike .
many specie be the source of prize fragrance or spice , for example the berry of piper nigrum ( figure two  six  .  one  six b ) be the familiar black peppercorn that be use to flavor many dish .
the ( a ) common spicebush belong to the laurales , the same family as cinnamon and bay laurel .
the fruit of ( b ) the piper nigrum plant be black pepper , the main product that be trade along spice route .
notice the small , unobtrusive , cluster flower .
( c )
lotus flower , nelumbo nucifera , have be cultivate since ancient time for - pron - ornamental value  the root of the lotus flower be eat as a vegetable .
the red seed of ( d ) a magnolia tree , characteristic of the final stage , be just start to appear .
monocot plant in the monocot group be primarily identify as such by the presence of a single cotyledon in the seedling .
other anatomical feature share by monocot include vein that run parallel to the length of the leaf , and flower part that be arrange in a three - or six - fold symmetry .
true woody tissue be rarely find in monocot .
in palm tree , vascular and parenchyma tissue produce by the primary and secondary thickening meristem form the trunk .
the pollen from the first angiosperm be monosulcate , contain a single furrow or pore through the outer layer .
this feature be still see in the modern monocot .
vascular tissue of the stem be not arrange in any particular pattern .
the root system be mostly adventitious and unusually position , with no major tap root .
the monocot include familiar plant such as the true lily ( which be at the origin of - pron - alternate name of liliopsida ) , orchid , grass , and palm .
many important crop be monocot , such as rice and other cereal , corn , sugar cane , and tropical fruit like banana and pineapple .
the world 's major crop be flower plant .
( a ) rice , ( b ) wheat , and ( c ) banana be monocot , while ( d ) cabbage , ( e ) bean , and ( f ) peach be dicot .
eudicot eudicots , or true dicot , be characterize by the presence of two cotyledon in the develop shoot .
vein form a network in leaf , and flower part come in four , five , or many whorl .
vascular tissue form a ring in the stem  in monocot , vascular tissue be scatter in the stem .
eudicot can be herbaceous ( like grass ) , or produce woody tissue .
most eudicot produce pollen that be trisulcate or triporate , with three furrow or pore .
the root system be usually anchor by one main root develop from the embryonic radicle .
eudicot comprise two - third of all flower plant .
the major difference between monocot and eudicot be summarize in table two  six  .  one .
many specie exhibit characteristic that belong to either group  as such , the classification of a plant as a monocot or a eudicot be not always clearly evident .
without seed plant , life as - pron - know - pron - would not be possible .
plant play a key role in the maintenance of terrestrial ecosystem through stabilization of soil , cycling of carbon , and climate moderation .
large tropical forest release oxygen and act as carbon dioxide sink .
seed plant provide shelter to many life form , as well as food for herbivore , thereby indirectly feed carnivore .
plant secondary metabolite be use for medicinal purpose and industrial production .
animal and plant  herbivory coevolution of flower plant and insect be a hypothesis that have receive much attention and support , especially because both angiosperm and insect diversify at about the same time in the middle mesozoic .
many author have attribute the diversity of plant and insect to pollination and herbivory , or consumption of plant by insect and other animal .
this be believe to have be as much a drive force as pollination .
coevolution of herbivore and plant defense be observe in nature .
unlike animal , most plant can not outrun predator or use mimicry to hide from hungry animal .
a sort of arm race exist between plant and herbivore .
to " combat " herbivore , some plant seed — such as acorn and unripened persimmon
— be high in alkaloid and therefore unsavory to some animal .
other plant be protect by bark , although some animal develop specialized mouth piece to tear and chew vegetal material .
spine and thorn ( figure two  six  .  one  eight ) deter most animal , except for mammal with thick fur , and some bird have specialize beak to get past such defense .
spine and ( b ) thorn be example of plant defense .
herbivory have be use by seed plant for - pron - own benefit in a display of mutualistic relationship .
the dispersal of fruit by animal be the most striking example .
the plant offer to the herbivore a nutritious source of food in return for spread the plant 's genetic material to a wide area .
an extreme example of collaboration between an animal and a plant be the case of acacia tree and ant .
the tree support the insect with shelter and food .
in return , ant discourage herbivore , both invertebrate and vertebrate , by sting and attack leaf - eat insect .
animal and plant 
pollination grasses be a successful group of flower plant that be wind pollinate .
- pron - produce large amount of powdery pollen carry over large distance by the wind .
the flower be small and wisp - like .
large tree such as oak , maple , and birch be also wind pollinate .
more than eight  zero percent of angiosperm depend on animal for pollination  the transfer of pollen from the anther to the stigma .
consequently , plant have develop many adaptation to attract pollinator .
the specificity of specialized plant structure that target animal can be very surprising .
- pron - be possible , for example , to determine the type of pollinator favor by a plant just from the flower 's characteristic .
many bird or insect - pollinate flower secrete nectar , which be a sugary liquid .
- pron - also produce both fertile pollen , for reproduction , and sterile pollen rich in nutrient for bird and insect .
butterfly and bee can detect ultraviolet light .
flower that attract these pollinator usually display a pattern of low ultraviolet reflectance that help - pron - quickly locate the flower ' s center and collect nectar while be dust with pollen ( figure two  six  .  one  nine ) .
large , red flower with little smell and a long funnel shape be prefer by hummingbird , who have good color perception , a poor sense of smell , and need a strong perch .
white flower open at night attract moth .
other animal — such as bat , lemur , and lizard — can also act as pollinate agent .
any disruption to these interaction , such as the disappearance of bee as a consequence of colony collapse disorder , can lead to disaster for agricultural industry that depend heavily on pollinate crop .
as a bee collect nectar from a flower , - pron - be dust by pollen , which - pron - then disperse to other flower .
the importance of seed plant in human life seed plant be the foundation of human diet across the world ( figure two  six  .  two  zero ) .
many society eat almost exclusively vegetarian fare and depend solely on seed plant for - pron - nutritional need .
a few crop ( rice , wheat , and potato ) dominate the agricultural landscape .
many crop be develop during the agricultural revolution , when human society make the transition from nomadic hunter – gatherer to horticulture and agriculture .
cereal , rich in carbohydrate , provide the staple of many human diet .
bean and nut supply protein .
fat be derive from crushed seed , as be the case for peanut and rapeseed ( canola ) oil , or fruit such as olive .
animal husbandry also consume large amount of crop .
staple crop be not the only food derive from seed plant .
fruit and vegetable provide nutrient , vitamin , and fiber .
sugar , to sweeten dish , be produce from the monocot sugarcane and the eudicot sugar beet .
drink be make from infusion of tea leaf , chamomile flower , crush coffee bean , or powdered cocoa bean .
spice come from many different plant part  saffron and clove be stamen and bud , black pepper and vanilla be seed , the bark of a bush in the laurales family supply cinnamon , and the herb that flavor many dish come from dry leaf and fruit , such as the pungent red chili pepper .
the volatile oil of flower and bark provide the scent of perfume .
additionally , no discussion of seed plant contribution to human diet would be complete without the mention of alcohol .
fermentation of plant - derive sugar and starch be use to produce alcoholic beverage in all society .
in some case , the beverage be derive from the fermentation of sugar from fruit , as with wine and , in other case , from the fermentation of carbohydrate derive from seed , as with beer .
seed plant have many other us , include provide wood as a source of timber for construction , fuel , and material to build furniture .
most paper be derive from the pulp of coniferous tree .
fiber of seed plant such as cotton , flax , and hemp be weave into cloth .
textile dye , such as indigo , be mostly of plant origin until the advent of synthetic chemical dye .
lastly , - pron - be more difficult to quantify the benefit of ornamental seed plant .
these grace private and public space , add beauty and serenity to human life and inspire painter and poet alike .
human rely on plant for a variety of reason .
( a ) cacao bean be introduce in europe from the new world , where - pron - be use by mesoamerican civilization .
combine with sugar , another plant product , chocolate be a popular food .
( b ) flower like the tulip be cultivate for - pron - beauty .
( c ) quinine , extract from cinchona tree , be use to treat malaria , to reduce fever , and to alleviate pain .
( d )
this violin be make of wood .
the medicinal property of plant have be know to human society since ancient time .
there be reference to the use of plants' curative property in egyptian , babylonian , and chinese writing from five  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago .
many modern synthetic therapeutic drug be derive or synthesize de novo from plant secondary metabolite .
- pron - be important to note that the same plant extract can be a therapeutic remedy at low concentration , become an addictive drug at high dos , and can potentially kill at high concentration .
table two  six  .  three present a few drug , - pron - plant of origin , and - pron - medicinal application .
biodiversity of plants biodiversity ensure a resource for new food crop and medicine .
plant life balance ecosystem , protect watershed , mitigate erosion , moderate climate and provide shelter for many animal specie .
threat to plant diversity , however , come from many angle .
the explosion of the human population , especially in tropical country where birth rate be high and economic development be in full swing , be lead to human encroachment into forest area .
to feed the large population , human need to obtain arable land , so there be massive clearing of tree .
the need for more energy to power large city and economic growth therein lead to the construction of dam , the consequent flooding of ecosystem , and increase emission of pollutant .
other threat to tropical forest come from poacher , who log tree for - pron - precious wood .
ebony and brazilian rosewood , both on the endanger list , be example of tree specie drive almost to extinction by indiscriminate logging .
the number of plant specie become extinct be increase at an alarming rate .
because ecosystem be in a delicate balance , and seed plant maintain close symbiotic relationship with animal — whether predator or pollinator — the disappearance of a single plant can lead to the extinction of connect animal specie .
a real and pressing issue be that many plant specie have not yet be catalogue , and so - pron - place in the ecosystem be unknown .
these unknown specie be threaten by log , habitat destruction , and loss of pollinator .
- pron - may become extinct before - pron - have the chance to begin to understand the possible impact from - pron - disappearance .
effort to preserve biodiversity take several line of action , from preserve heirloom seed to barcoding specie .
heirloom seed come from plant that be traditionally grow in human population , as oppose to the seed use for large - scale agricultural production .
barcoding be a technique in which one or more short gene sequence , take from a well - characterize portion of the genome , be use to identify a species through dna analysis .
the leaf chameleon ( brookesia micra ) be discover in northern madagascar in two  zero  one  two .
at just over one inch long , - pron - be the small know chameleon .
animal evolution begin in the ocean over six  zero  zero million year ago with tiny creature that probably do not resemble any live organism today .
since then , animal have evolve into a highly diverse kingdom .
although over one million extant ( currently live ) specie of animal have be identify , scientist be continually discover more specie as - pron - explore ecosystem around the world .
the number of extant specie be estimate to be between three and three  zero million .
but what be an animal ?
while - pron - can easily identify dog , bird , fish , spider , and worm as animal , other organism , such as coral and sponge , be not as easy to classify .
animal vary in complexity — from sea sponge to cricket to chimpanzee — and scientist be face with the difficult task of classify - pron - within a unified system .
- pron - must identify trait that be common to all animal as well as trait that can be use to distinguish among related group of animal .
the animal classification system characterize animal base on - pron - anatomy , morphology , evolutionary history , feature of embryological development , and genetic makeup .
this classification scheme be constantly develop as new information about specie arise .
understanding and classify the great variety of living specie help - pron - better understand how to conserve the diversity of life on earth .
even though member of the animal kingdom be incredibly diverse , most animal share certain feature that distinguish - pron - from organism in other kingdom .
all animal be eukaryotic , multicellular organism , and almost all animal have a complex tissue structure with differentiated and specialize tissue .
most animal be motile , at least during certain life stage .
all animal require a source of food and be therefore heterotrophic , ingest other live or dead organism  this feature distinguish - pron - from autotrophic organism , such as most plant , which synthesize - pron - own nutrient through photosynthesis .
as heterotroph , animal may be carnivore , herbivore , omnivore , or parasite ( figure two  seven  .  two ab ) .
most animal reproduce sexually , and the offspring pass through a series of developmental stage that establish a determined and fix body plan .
the body plan refer to the morphology of an animal , determine by developmental cue .
all animal be heterotroph that derive energy from food .
the ( a ) black bear be an omnivore , eat both plant and animal .
the ( b ) heartworm dirofilaria immitis be a parasite that derive energy from - pron - host .
- pron - spend - pron - larval stage in mosquito and - pron - adult stage infest the heart of dog and other mammal , as show here .
complex tissue structure
as multicellular organism , animal differ from plant and fungus because - pron - cell do not have cell wall , - pron - cell may be embed in an extracellular matrix ( such as bone , skin , or connective tissue ) , and - pron - cell have unique structure for intercellular communication ( such as gap junction ) .
in addition , animal possess unique tissue , absent in fungus and plant , which allow coordination ( nerve tissue ) of motility ( muscle tissue ) .
animal be also characterize by specialized connective tissue that provide structural support for cell and organ .
this connective tissue constitute the extracellular surrounding of cell and be make up of organic and inorganic material .
in vertebrate , bone tissue be a type of connective tissue that support the entire body structure .
the complex body and activity of vertebrate demand such supportive tissue .
epithelial tissue cover , line , protect , and secrete .
epithelial tissue include the epidermis of the integument , the lining of the digestive tract and trachea , and make up the duct of the liver and gland of advanced animal .
the animal kingdom be divide into parazoa ( sponge ) and eumetazoa ( all other animal ) .
as very simple animal , the organism in group parazoa ( " beside animal " ) do not contain true specialized tissue  although - pron - do possess specialized cell that perform different function , those cell be not organize into tissue .
these organism be consider animal since - pron - lack the ability to make - pron - own food .
animal with true tissue be in the group eumetazoa ( " true animal " ) .
when - pron - think of animal , - pron - usually think of eumetazoans , since most animal fall into this category .
the different type of tissue in true animal be responsible for carry out specific function for the organism .
this differentiation and specialization of tissue be part of what allow for such incredible animal diversity .
for example , the evolution of nerve tissue and muscle tissue have result in animals' unique ability to rapidly sense and respond to change in - pron - environment .
this allow animal to survive in environment where - pron - must compete with other specie to meet - pron - nutritional demand .
animal reproduction and development most animal be diploid organism , mean that - pron - body ( somatic ) cell be diploid and haploid reproductive ( gamete ) cell be produce through meiosis .
some exception exist  for example , in bee , wasp , and ant , the male be haploid because - pron - develop from unfertilized egg .
most animal undergo sexual reproduction  this fact distinguish animal from fungus , protist , and bacteria , where asexual reproduction be common or exclusive .
however , a few group , such as cnidarian , flatworm , and roundworm , undergo asexual reproduction , although nearly all of those animal also have a sexual phase to - pron - life cycle .
process of animal reproduction and embryonic development during sexual reproduction , the haploid gamete of the male and female individual of a species combine in a process call fertilization .
typically , the small , motile male sperm fertilize the much large , sessile female egg .
this process produce a diploid fertilize egg call a zygote .
some animal specie — include sea star and sea anemone , as well as some insect , reptile , and fish — be capable of asexual reproduction .
the most common form of asexual reproduction for stationary aquatic animal include bud and fragmentation , where part of a parent individual can separate and grow into a new individual .
in contrast , a form of asexual reproduction find in certain insect and vertebrate be call parthenogenesis ( or " virgin begin " ) , where unfertilized egg can develop into new male offspring .
this type of parthenogenesis be call haplodiploidy .
these type of asexual reproduction produce genetically identical offspring , which be disadvantageous from the perspective of evolutionary adaptability because of the potential buildup of deleterious mutation .
however , for animal that be limit in - pron - capacity to attract mate , asexual reproduction can ensure genetic propagation .
after fertilization , a series of developmental stage occur during which primary germ layer be establish and reorganize to form an embryo .
during this process , animal tissue begin to specialize and organize into organ and organ system , determine - pron - future morphology and physiology .
some animal , such as grasshopper , undergo incomplete metamorphosis , in which the young resemble the adult .
other animal , such as some insect , undergo complete metamorphosis where individual enter one or more larval stage that may in differ in structure and function from the adult ( figure two  seven  .  three ) .
for the latter , the young and the adult may have different diet , limit competition for food between - pron - .
regardless of whether a species undergoe complete or incomplete metamorphosis , the series of developmental stage of the embryo remain largely the same for most member of the animal kingdom .
the grasshopper undergo incomplete metamorphosis .
( b )
the butterfly undergo complete metamorphosis .
the process of animal development begin with the cleavage , or series of mitotic cell division , of the zygote ( figure two  seven  .  four ) .
three cell division transform the single - cell zygote into an eight - cell structure .
after further cell division and rearrangement of exist cell , a six – three  two  - cell hollow structure call a blastula be form .
next , the blastula undergo further cell division and cellular rearrangement during a process call gastrulation .
this lead to the formation of the next developmental stage , the gastrula , in which the future digestive cavity be form .
different cell layer ( call germ layer ) be form during gastrulation .
these germ layer be program to develop into certain tissue type , organ , and organ system during a process call organogenesis .
during embryonic development , the zygote undergo a series of mitotic cell division , or cleavage , to form an eight - cell stage , then a hollow blastula .
during a process call gastrulation , the blastula fold inward to form a cavity in the gastrula .
the role of homeobox ( hox ) genes in animal development since the early one  nine th century
, scientist have observe that many animal , from the very simple to the complex , share similar embryonic morphology and development .
surprisingly , a human embryo and a frog embryo , at a certain stage of embryonic development , look remarkably alike .
for a long time , scientist do not understand why so many animal specie look similar during embryonic development but be very different as adult .
- pron - wonder what dictate the developmental direction that a fly , mouse , frog , or human embryo would take .
near the end of the two  zero th century , a particular class of gene be discover that have this very job .
these gene that determine animal structure be call " homeotic gene , " and - pron - contain dna sequence call homeobox .
the animal gene contain homeobox sequence be specifically refer to as hox gene .
this family of gene be responsible for determine the general body plan , such as the number of body segment of an animal , the number and placement of appendage , and animal head - tail directionality .
the first hox gene to be sequence be those from the fruit fly ( drosophila melanogaster ) .
a single hox mutation in the fruit fly can result in an extra pair of wing or even appendag grow from the " wrong " body part .
while there be a great many gene that play role in the morphological development of an animal , what make hox gene so powerful be that - pron - serve as master control gene that can turn on or off large number of other gene .
hox gene do this by cod transcription factor that control the expression of numerous other gene .
hox gene be homologous in the animal kingdom , that is , the genetic sequence of hox gene and - pron - position on chromosome be remarkably similar across most animal because of - pron - presence in a common ancestor , from worm to fly , mouse , and human ( figure two  seven  .  five ) .
one of the contribution to increase animal body complexity be that hox gene have undergo at least two duplication event during animal evolution , with the additional gene allow for more complex body type to evolve .
scientist have develop a classification scheme that categorize all member of the animal kingdom , although there be exception to most " rule " govern animal classification ( figure two  seven  .  six ) .
animal be primarily classify accord to morphological and developmental characteristic , such as a body plan .
one of the most prominent feature of the body plan of true animal be that - pron - be morphologically symmetrical .
this mean that - pron - distribution of body part be balance along an axis .
additional characteristic include the number of tissue layer form during development , the presence or absence of an internal body cavity , and other feature of embryological development , such as the origin of the mouth and anus .
animal characterization base on body symmetry
at a very basic level of classification , true animal can be largely divide into three group base on the type of symmetry of - pron - body plan  radially symmetrical , bilaterally symmetrical , and asymmetrical .
asymmetry be a unique feature of parazoa ( figure two  seven  .  seven a ) .
only a few animal group display radial symmetry .
all type of symmetry be well suited to meet the unique demand of a particular animal 's lifestyle .
radial symmetry be the arrangement of body part around a central axis , as be see in a drinking glass or pie .
- pron - result in animal have top and bottom surface but no left and right side , or front or back .
the two half of a radially symmetrical animal may be describe as the side with a mouth or " oral side , " and the side without a mouth ( the " aboral side " ) .
this form of symmetry mark the body plan of animal in the phyla ctenophora and cnidaria , include jellyfish and adult sea anemone
( figure two  seven  .  seven bc ) .
radial symmetry equip these sea creature ( which may be sedentary or only capable of slow movement or float ) to experience the environment equally from all direction .
the ( a ) sponge be asymmetrical .
the ( b ) jellyfish and ( c ) anemone be radially symmetrical , and the ( d ) butterfly be bilaterally symmetrical .
bilateral symmetry involve the division of the animal through a sagittal plane , result in two mirror image , right and leave half , such as those of a butterfly ( figure two  seven  .  seven d ) , crab , or human body .
animal with bilateral symmetry have a " head " and " tail " ( anterior vs . posterior ) , front and back ( dorsal vs . ventral ) , and right and leave side ( figure two  seven  .  eight ) .
all true animal except those with radial symmetry be bilaterally symmetrical .
the evolution of bilateral symmetry that allow for the formation of anterior and posterior ( head and tail ) end promote a phenomenon call cephalization , which refer to the collection of an organized nervous system at the animal 's anterior end .
in contrast to radial symmetry , which be best suit for stationary or limited - motion lifestyle , bilateral symmetry allow for streamlined and directional motion .
in evolutionary term , this simple form of symmetry promote active mobility and increase sophistication of resource - seeking and predator - prey relationship .
the bilaterally symmetrical human body can be divide into plane .
animal in the phylum echinodermata ( such as sea star , sand dollar , and sea urchin ) display radial symmetry as adult , but - pron - larval stage exhibit bilateral symmetry .
this be term secondary radial symmetry .
- pron - be believe to have evolve from bilaterally symmetrical animal  thus , - pron - be classify as bilaterally symmetrical .
animal characterization base on feature of embryological development most animal specie undergo a separation of tissue into germ layer during embryonic development .
recall that these germ layer be form during gastrulation , and that - pron - be predetermine to develop into the animal 's specialize tissue and organ .
animal develop either two or three embryonic germ layer ( figure two  seven  .  nine ) .
the animal that display radial symmetry develop two germ layer , an inner layer ( endoderm ) and an outer layer ( ectoderm ) .
these animal be call diploblast .
diploblast have a non - live layer between the endoderm and ectoderm .
more complex animal ( those with bilateral symmetry ) develop three tissue layer  an inner layer ( endoderm ) , an outer layer ( ectoderm ) , and a middle layer ( mesoderm ) .
animal with three tissue layer be call triploblast .
each of the three germ layer be program to give rise to particular body tissue and organ .
the endoderm give rise to the lining of the digestive tract ( include the stomach , intestine , liver , and pancrea ) , as well as to the lining of the trachea , bronchi , and lung of the respiratory tract , along with a few other structure .
the ectoderm develop into the outer epithelial covering of the body surface , the central nervous system , and a few other structure .
the mesoderm be the third germ layer  - pron - form between the endoderm and ectoderm in triploblast .
this germ layer give rise to all muscle tissue ( include the cardiac tissue and muscle of the intestine ) , connective tissue such as the skeleton and blood cell , and most other visceral organ such as the kidney and the spleen .
presence or absence of a coelom further subdivision of animal with three germ layer ( triploblast ) result in the separation of animal that may develop an internal body cavity derive from mesoderm , call a coelom , and those that do not .
this epithelial cell - line coelomic cavity represent a space , usually fill with fluid , which lie between the visceral organ and the body wall .
- pron - house many organ such as the digestive system , kidney , reproductive organ , and heart , and contain the circulatory system .
in some animal , such as mammal , the part of the coelom call the pleural cavity provide space for the lung to expand during breathing .
the evolution of the coelom be associate with many functional advantage .
primarily , the coelom provide cushioning and shock absorption for the major organ system .
organ house within the coelom can grow and move freely , which promote optimal organ development and placement .
the coelom also provide space for the diffusion of gas and nutrient , as well as body flexibility , promote improve animal motility .
triploblast that do not develop a coelom be call acoelomate , and - pron - mesoderm region be completely fill with tissue , although - pron - do still have a gut cavity .
example of acoelomate include animal in the phylum platyhelminthes , also know as flatworm .
animal with a true coelom be call eucoelomate ( or coelomate ) ( figure two  seven  .  one  zero ) .
a true coelom arise entirely within the mesoderm germ layer and be line by an epithelial membrane .
this membrane also line the organ within the coelom , connect and hold - pron - in position while allow - pron - some free motion .
annelid , mollusk , arthropod , echinoderm , and chordate be all eucoelomate .
a third group of triploblast have a slightly different coelom derive partly from mesoderm and partly from endoderm , which be find between the two layer .
although still functional , these be consider false coelom , and those animal be call pseudocoelomate .
the phylum nematoda ( roundworm ) be an example of a pseudocoelomate .
true coelomate can be further characterize base on certain feature of - pron - early embryological development .
triploblast may be ( a ) acoelomate , ( b ) eucoelomate , or ( c ) pseudocoelomat .
acoelomate have no body cavity .
eucoelomate have a body cavity within the mesoderm , call a coelom , which be line with mesoderm .
pseudocoelomate also have a body cavity , but - pron - be sandwich between the endoderm and mesoderm .
embryonic development of the mouth bilaterally symmetrical , tribloblastic eucoelomate can be further divide into two group base on difference in - pron - early embryonic development .
protostome include arthropod , mollusk , and annelid .
deuterostome include more complex animal such as chordate but also some simple animal such as echinoderm .
these two group be separate base on which opening of the digestive cavity develop first  mouth or anus .
the word protostome come from the greek word mean " mouth first , " and deuterostome originate from the word mean " mouth
second " ( in this case , the anus develop first ) .
the mouth or anus develop from a structure call the blastopore ( figure two  seven  .  one  one ) .
the blastopore be the indentation form during the initial stage of gastrulation .
in later stage , a second opening form , and these two opening will eventually give rise to the mouth and anus ( figure two  seven  .  one  one ) .
- pron - have long be believe that the blastopore develop into the mouth of protostome , with the second opening develop into the anus  the opposite be true for deuterostome .
recent evidence have challenge this view of the development of the blastopore of protostome , however , and the theory remain under debate .
another distinction between protostome and deuterostome be the method of coelom formation , begin from the gastrula stage .
the coelom of most protostome be form through a process call schizocoely , mean that during development , a solid mass of the mesoderm split apart and form the hollow opening of the coelom .
deuterostome differ in that - pron - coelom form through a process call enterocoely .
here , the mesoderm develop as pouch that be pinch off from the endoderm tissue .
these pouch eventually fuse to form the mesoderm , which then give rise to the coelom .
the early distinction between protostome and deuterostome be the type of cleavage undergo by the zygote .
protostome undergo spiral cleavage , mean that the cell of one pole of the embryo be rotate , and thus misalign , with respect to the cell of the opposite pole .
this be due to the oblique angle of the cleavage .
deuterostome undergo radial cleavage , where the cleavage ax be either parallel or perpendicular to the polar axis , result in the alignment of the cell between the two pole .
eucoelomate can be divide into two group base on - pron - early embryonic development .
in protostome , part of the mesoderm separate to form the coelom in a process call schizocoely .
in deuterostome , the mesoderm pinch off to form the coelom in a process call enterocoely .
- pron - be long believe that the blastopore develop into the mouth in protostome and into the anus in deuterostome , but recent evidence challenge this belief .
there be a second distinction between the type of cleavage in protostome and deuterostome .
in addition to spiral cleavage , protostome also undergo determinate cleavage .
this mean that even at this early stage , the developmental fate of each embryonic cell be already determine .
a cell do not have the ability to develop into any cell type .
in contrast , deuterostome undergo indeterminate cleavage , in which cell be not yet pre - determine at this early stage to develop into specific cell type .
these cell be refer to as undifferentiated cell .
this characteristic of deuterostome be reflect in the existence of familiar embryonic stem cell , which have the ability to develop into any cell type until - pron - fate be program at a later developmental stage .
biologist strive to understand the evolutionary history and relationship of member of the animal kingdom , and all of life , for that matter .
the study of phylogeny aim to determine the evolutionary relationship between phyla .
currently , most biologist divide the animal kingdom into three  five to four  zero phyla .
scientist develop phylogenetic tree , which serve as hypothesis about which specie have evolve from which ancestor recall that until recently , only morphological characteristic and the fossil record be use to determine phylogenetic relationship among animal .
scientific understanding of the distinction and hierarchy between anatomical characteristic provide much of this knowledge .
use alone , however , this information can be mislead .
morphological characteristic may evolve multiple time , and independently , through evolutionary history .
analogous characteristic may appear similar between animal , but - pron - underlie evolution may be very different .
with the advancement of molecular technology , modern phylogenetic be now inform by genetic and molecular analysis , in addition to traditional morphological and fossil datum .
with a grow understanding of genetic , the animal evolutionary tree have change substantially and continue to change as new dna and rna analysis be perform on additional animal specie .
construct an animal phylogenetic tree
the current understanding of evolutionary relationship between animal , or metazoa , phyla begin with the distinction between " true " animal with true differentiate tissue , call eumetazoa , and animal phyla that do not have true differentiate tissue ( such as the sponge ) , call parazoa .
both parazoa and eumetazoa evolve from a common ancestral organism that resemble the modern - day protist call choanoflagellate .
these protist cell strongly resemble the sponge choanocyte cell today .
cell of the protist choanoflagellate resemble sponge choanocyte cell .
beat of choanocyte flagella draw water through the sponge so that nutrient can be extract and waste remove .
eumetazoa be subdivide into radially symmetrical animal and bilaterally symmetrical animal , and be thus classify into clade bilateria or radiata , respectively .
as mention earlier , the cnidarian and ctenophore be animal phyla with true radial symmetry .
all other eumetazoa be member of the bilateria clade .
the bilaterally symmetrical animal be further divide into deuterostome ( include chordate and echinoderm ) and two distinct clade of protostome ( include ecdysozoan and lophotrochozoan ) ( figure two  seven  .  one  three ab ) .
ecdysozoa include nematode and arthropod  - pron - be so name for a commonly find characteristic among the group  exoskeletal molting ( term ecdysis ) .
lophotrochozoa be name for two structural feature , each common to certain phyla within the clade .
some lophotrochozoan phyla be characterize by a larval stage call trochophore larvae , and other phyla be characterize by the presence of a feeding structure call a lophophore .
animal that molt - pron - exoskeleton , such as these ( a ) madagascar hissing cockroach , be in the clade ecdysozoa .
( b ) phoronid be in the clade lophotrochozoa .
the tentacle be part of a feeding structure call a lophophore .
modern advances in phylogenetic understanding come from molecular analyses
the phylogenetic grouping be continually be debate and refine by evolutionary biologist .
each year , new evidence emerge that further alter the relationship describe by a phylogenetic tree diagram .
nucleic acid and protein analysis have greatly inform the modern phylogenetic animal tree .
these datum come from a variety of molecular source , such as mitochondrial dna , nuclear dna , ribosomal rna ( rrna ) , and certain cellular protein .
many evolutionary relationship in the modern tree have only recently be determine due to molecular evidence .
for example , a previously classify group of animal call lophophorate , which include brachiopod and bryozoan , be long - thought to be primitive deuterostome .
extensive molecular analysis use rrna datum find these animal to be protostome , more closely related to annelid and mollusk .
this discovery allow for the distinction of the protostome clade , the lophotrochozoan .
molecular datum have also shed light on some difference within the lophotrochozoan group , and some scientist believe that the phyla platyhelminthes and rotifera within this group should actually belong to - pron - own group of protostome term platyzoa .
molecular research similar to the discovery that bring about the distinction of the lophotrochozoan clade have also reveal a dramatic rearrangement of the relationship between mollusk , annelid , arthropod , and nematode , and a new ecdysozoan clade be form .
due to morphological similarity in - pron - segmented body type , annelid and arthropod be once think to be closely relate .
however , molecular evidence have reveal that arthropod be actually more closely related to nematode , now comprise the ecdysozoan clade , and annelid be more closely related to mollusk , brachiopod , and other phyla in the lophotrochozoan clade .
these two clade now make up the protostome .
another change to former phylogenetic grouping because of molecular analysis include the emergence of an entirely new phylum of worm call acoelomorpha .
these acoel flatworm be long think to belong to the phylum platyhelminthes because of - pron - similar " flatworm " morphology .
however , molecular analysis reveal this to be a false relationship and originally suggest that acoel represent living specie of some of the early divergent bilaterian .
more recent research into the acoelomorph have call this hypothesis into question and suggest a close relationship with deuterostome .
the placement of this new phylum remain dispute , but scientist agree that with sufficient molecular datum , - pron - true phylogeny will be determine .
many question regard the origin and evolutionary history of the animal kingdom continue to be research and debate , as new fossil and molecular evidence change prevail theory .
some of these question include the following  how long have animal exist on earth ?
what be the early member of the animal kingdom , and what organism be - pron - common ancestor ?
while animal diversity increase during the cambrian period of the paleozoic era , five  three  zero million year ago , modern fossil evidence suggest that primitive animal specie exist much earlier .
pre -
cambrian animal life
the time before the cambrian period be know as the ediacaran period ( from about six  three  five million year ago to five  four  three million year ago ) , the final period of the late proterozoic neoproterozoic era ( figure two  seven  .  one  four ) .
- pron - be believe that early animal life , term ediacaran biota , evolve from protist at this time .
some protest specie call choanoflagellate closely resemble the choanocyte cell in the simple animal , sponge .
in addition to - pron - morphological similarity , molecular analysis have reveal similar sequence homology in - pron - dna .
earth 's history be divide into eon , era , and period .
note that the ediacaran period start in the proterozoic eon and end in the cambrian period of the phanerozoic eon .
( b ) stage on the geological time scale be represent as a spiral .
the early life comprise ediacaran biota be long believe to include only tiny , sessile , soft - bodied sea creature .
however , recently there have be increase scientific evidence suggest that more varied and complex animal specie live during this time , and possibly even before the ediacaran period .
fossil believe to represent the old animal with hard body part be recently discover in south australia .
these sponge - like fossil , name coronacollina acula , date back as far as five  six  zero million year , and be believe to show the existence of hard body part and spicule that extend two  zero – four  zero cm from the main body ( estimate about five cm long ) .
other fossil from the ediacaran period be show in figure two  seven  .  one  five ab .
fossil of ( a ) cyclomedusa and ( b ) dickinsonia date to six  five  zero million year ago , during the ediacaran period .
another recent fossil discovery may represent the early animal specie ever find .
while the validity of this claim be still under investigation , these primitive fossil appear to be small , one - centimeter long , sponge - like creature .
these fossil from south australia date back six  five  zero million year , actually place the putative animal before the great ice age extinction event that mark the transition between the cryogenian period and the ediacaran period .
until this discovery , most scientist believe that there be no animal life prior to the ediacaran period .
many scientist now believe that animal may in fact have evolve during the cryogenian period .
the cambrian explosion of animal life
the cambrian period , occur between approximately five  four  two – four  eight  eight million year ago , mark the most rapid evolution of new animal phyla and animal diversity in earth 's history .
- pron - be believe that most of the animal phyla in existence today have - pron - origin during this time , often refer to as the cambrian explosion ( figure two  seven  .  one  six ) .
echinoderm , mollusk , worm , arthropod , and chordate arise during this period .
one of the most dominant specie during the cambrian period be the trilobite , an arthropod that be among the first animal to exhibit a sense of vision ( figure two  seven  .  one  seven abcd ) .
an artist 's rendition depict some organism from the cambrian period .
these fossil ( a – d ) belong to trilobite , extinct arthropod that appear in the early cambrian period , five  two  five million year ago , and disappear from the fossil record during a mass extinction at the end of the permian period , about two  five  zero million year ago .
the because of the cambrian explosion be still debate .
there be many theory that attempt to answer this question .
environmental change may have create a more suitable environment for animal life .
example of these change include rise atmospheric oxygen level and large increase in oceanic calcium concentration that precede the cambrian period .
some scientist believe that an expansive , continental shelf with numerous shallow lagoon or pool provide the necessary living space for large number of different type of animal to co - exist .
there be also support for theory that argue that ecological relationship between specie , such as change in the food web , competition for food and space , and predator - prey relationship , be prim to promote a sudden massive coevolution of specie .
yet other theory claim genetic and developmental reason for the cambrian explosion .
the morphological flexibility and complexity of animal development afford by the evolution of hox control gene may have provide the necessary opportunity for increase in possible animal morphology at the time of the cambrian period .
theory that attempt to explain why the cambrian explosion happen must be able to provide valid reason for the massive animal diversification , as well as explain why - pron - happen when - pron - do .
there be evidence that both support and refute each of the theory describe above , and the answer may very well be a combination of these and other theory .
the oxygen concentration in earth 's atmosphere rise sharply around three  zero  zero million year ago .
however , unresolved question about the animal diversification that take place during the cambrian period remain .
for example , - pron - do not understand how the evolution of so many specie occur in such a short period of time .
be there really an " explosion " of life at this particular time ?
some scientist question the validity of the this idea , because there be increase evidence to suggest that more animal life exist prior to the cambrian period and that other similar species' so - call explosion ( or radiation ) occur later in history as well .
furthermore , the vast diversification of animal specie that appear to have begin during the cambrian period continue well into the following ordovician period .
despite some of these argument , most scientist agree that the cambrian period mark a time of impressively rapid animal evolution and diversification that be unmatched elsewhere during history .
post - cambrian evolution and mass extinctions
the period that follow the cambrian during the paleozoic era be mark by further animal evolution and the emergence of many new order , family , and specie .
as animal phyla continue to diversify , new specie adapt to new ecological niche .
during the ordovician period , which follow the cambrian period , plant life first appear on land .
this change allow formerly aquatic animal specie to invade land , feed directly on plant or decay vegetation .
continual change in temperature and moisture throughout the remainder of the paleozoic era due to continental plate movement encourage the development of new adaptation to terrestrial existence in animal , such as limb appendage in amphibian and epidermal scale in reptile .
change in the environment often create new niche ( living space ) that contribute to rapid speciation and increase diversity .
on the other hand , cataclysmic event , such as volcanic eruption and meteor strike that obliterate life , can result in devastating loss of diversity .
such period of mass extinction ( figure two  seven  .  one  nine ) have occur repeatedly in the evolutionary record of life , erase some genetic line while create room for other to evolve into the empty niche leave behind .
the end of the permian period ( and the paleozoic era ) be mark by the large mass extinction event in earth 's history , a loss of roughly nine  five percent of the extant specie at that time .
some of the dominant phyla in the world 's ocean , such as the trilobite , disappear completely .
on land , the disappearance of some dominant specie of permian reptile make - pron - possible for a new line of reptile to emerge , the dinosaur .
the warm and stable climatic condition of the ensue mesozoic era promote an explosive diversification of dinosaur into every conceivable niche in land , air , and water .
plant , too , radiate into new landscape and empty niche , create complex community of producer and consumer , some of which become very large on the abundant food available .
another mass extinction event occur at the end of the cretaceous period , bring the mesozoic era to an end .
sky darken and temperature fall as a large meteor impact and ton of volcanic ash block incoming sunlight .
plant die , herbivore and carnivore starve , and the mostly cold - blooded dinosaur cede - pron - dominance of the landscape to more warm - blooded mammal .
in the following cenozoic era , mammal radiate into terrestrial and aquatic niche once occupy by dinosaur , and bird , the warm - blooded offshoot of one line of the ruling reptile , become aerial specialist .
the appearance and dominance of flower plant in the cenozoic era create new niche for insect , as well as for bird and mammal .
change in animal specie diversity during the late cretaceous and early cenozoic be also promote by a dramatic shift in earth 's geography , as continental plate slide over the crust into - pron - current position , leave some animal group isolate on island and continent , or separate by mountain range or inland sea from other competitor .
early in the cenozoic , new ecosystem appear , with the evolution of grass and coral reef .
late in the cenozoic , further extinction follow by speciation occur during ice age that cover high latitude with ice and then retreat , leave new open space for colonization .
a brief look at any magazine pertain to - pron - natural world , such as national geographic , would show a rich variety of vertebrate , especially mammal and bird .
to most people , these be the animal that attract - pron - attention .
concentrate on vertebrate , however , give - pron - a rather biased and limited view of biodiversity , because - pron - ignore nearly nine  seven percent of the animal kingdom , namely the invertebrate .
invertebrate animal be those without a cranium and define vertebral column or spine .
in addition to lack a spine , most invertebrate also lack an endoskeleton .
a large number of invertebrate be aquatic animal , and scientific research suggest that many of the world 's specie be aquatic invertebrate that have not yet be document .
the invertebrate , or invertebrata , be animal that do not contain bony structure , such as the cranium and vertebrae .
the simple of all the invertebrate be the parazoans , which include only the phylum porifera  the sponge ( figure two  eight  .  two ) .
parazoans ( " beside animal " ) do not display tissue - level organization , although - pron - do have specialize cell that perform specific function .
sponge larvae be able to swim  however , adult be non - motile and spend - pron - life attach to a substratum .
since water be vital to sponge for excretion , feeding , and gas exchange , - pron - body structure facilitate the movement of water through the sponge .
structure such as canal , chamber , and cavity enable water to move through the sponge to nearly all body cell .
sponge be member of the phylum porifera , which contain the simple invertebrate .
morphology of sponges
the morphology of the simple sponge take the shape of a cylinder with a large central cavity , the spongocoel , occupy the inside of the cylinder .
water can enter into the spongocoel from numerous pore in the body wall .
water enter the spongocoel be extrude via a large common opening call the osculum .
however , sponge exhibit a range of diversity in body form , include variation in the size of the spongocoel , the number of osculi , and where the cell that filter food from the water be locate .
while sponge ( exclude the hexactinellid ) do not exhibit tissue - layer organization , - pron - do have different cell type that perform distinct function .
pinacocyte , which be epithelial - like cell , form the outermost layer of sponge and enclose a jelly - like substance call mesohyl .
mesohyl be an extracellular matrix consist of a collagen - like gel with suspend cell that perform various function .
the gel - like consistency of mesohyl act like an endoskeleton and maintain the tubular morphology of sponge .
in addition to the osculum , sponge have multiple pore call ostia on - pron - body that allow water to enter the sponge .
in some sponge , ostia be form by porocyte , single tube - shape cell that act as valve to regulate the flow of water into the spongocoel .
in other sponge , ostia be form by fold in the body wall of the sponge .
choanocytes ( " collar cell " ) be present at various location , depend on the type of sponge , but - pron - always line the inner portion of some space through which water flow ( the spongocoel in simple sponge , canal within the body wall in more complex sponge , and chamber scatter throughout the body in the most complex sponge ) .
whereas pinacocyte line the outside of the sponge , choanocyte tend to line certain inner portion of the sponge body that surround the mesohyl .
the structure of a choanocyte be critical to - pron - function , which be to generate a water current through the sponge and to trap and ingest food particle by phagocytosis .
note the similarity in appearance between the sponge choanocyte and choanoflagellat ( protista ) .
this similarity suggest that sponge and choanoflagellate be closely related and likely share a recent common ancestry .
the cell body be embed in mesohyl and contain all organelle require for normal cell function , but protrude into the " open space " inside of the sponge be a mesh - like collar compose of microvilli with a single flagellum in the center of the column .
the cumulative effect of the flagella from all choanocyte aid the movement of water through the sponge  draw water into the sponge through the numerous ostia , into the space line by choanocyte , and eventually out through the osculum ( or osculi ) .
in the meantime , food particle , include waterborne bacteria and algae , be trap by the sieve - like collar of the choanocyte , slide down into the body of the cell , be ingest by phagocytosis , and become encase in a food vacuole .
lastly , choanocyte will differentiate into sperm for sexual reproduction , where - pron - will become dislodge from the mesohyl and leave the sponge with expel water through the osculum .
the second crucial cell in sponge be call amoebocyte ( or archaeocyte ) , name for the fact that - pron - move throughout the mesohyl in an amoeba - like fashion .
amoebocyte have a variety of function  deliver nutrient from choanocyte to other cell within the sponge , give rise to egg for sexual reproduction ( which remain in the mesohyl ) , deliver phagocytized sperm from choanocyte to egg , and differentiate into more - specific cell type .
some of these morespecific cell type include collencyte and lophocyte , which produce the collagen - like protein to maintain the mesohyl , sclerocyte , which produce spicule in some sponge , and spongocyte , which produce the protein spongin in the majority of sponge .
these cell produce collagen to maintain the consistency of the mesohyl .
the different cell type in sponge be show in figure two  eight  .  three .
in some sponge , sclerocyte secrete small spicule into the mesohyl , which be compose of either calcium carbonate or silica , depend on the type of sponge .
these spicule serve to provide additional stiffness to the body of the sponge .
the presence and composition of spicule / spongin be the differentiate characteristic of the three class of sponge ( figure two  eight  .  four ) 
class calcarea contain calcium carbonate spicule and no spongin , class hexactinellida contain six - rayed siliceous spicule and no spongin , and class demospongia contain spongin and may or may not have spicule  if present , those spicule be siliceous .
spicule be most conspicuously present in class hexactinellida , the order consist of glass sponge .
some of the spicule may attain giant proportion ( in relation to the typical size range of glass sponge of three to one  zero mm ) as see in monorhaphis chuni , which grow up to three m long .
clathrina clathrus belong to class calcarea , ( b ) staurocalyptus spp .
( common name  yellow picasso sponge ) belong to class hexactinellida , and ( c )
acarnus erithacus belong to class demospongia .
physiological processes in sponges sponges , despite be simple organism , regulate - pron - different physiological process through a variety of mechanism .
these process regulate - pron - metabolism , reproduction , and locomotion .
digestion sponges lack complex digestive , respiratory , circulatory , reproductive , and nervous system .
- pron - food be trap when water pass through the ostia and out through the osculum .
bacteria small than zero  .  five micron in size be trap by choanocyte , which be the principal cell engage in nutrition , and be ingest by phagocytosis .
particle that be large than the ostia may be phagocytiz by pinacocyte .
in some sponge , amoebocyt transport food from cell that have ingest food particle to those that do not .
for this type of digestion , in which food particle be digest within individual cell , the sponge draw water through diffusion .
the limit of this type of digestion be that food particle must be small than individual cell .
all other major body function in the sponge ( gas exchange , circulation , excretion ) be perform by diffusion between the cell that line the opening within the sponge and the water that be pass through those opening .
all cell type within the sponge obtain oxygen from water through diffusion .
likewise , carbon dioxide be release into seawater by diffusion .
in addition , nitrogenous waste produce as a byproduct of protein metabolism be excrete via diffusion by individual cell into the water as - pron - pass through the sponge .
reproduction sponges reproduce by sexual as well as asexual method .
the typical mean of asexual reproduction be either fragmentation ( where a piece of the sponge break off , settle on a new substrate , and develop into a new individual ) or bud ( a genetically identical outgrowth grow from the parent and eventually detach or remain attach to form a colony ) .
an atypical type of asexual reproduction be find only in freshwater sponge and occur through the formation of gemmule .
gemmule be environmentally resistant structure produce by adult sponge wherein the typical sponge morphology be invert .
in gemmule , an inner layer of amoebocyte be surround by a layer of collagen ( spongin ) that may be reinforce by spicule .
the collagen that be normally find in the mesohyl become the outer protective layer .
in freshwater sponge , gemmule may survive hostile environmental condition like change in temperature and serve to recolonize the habitat once environmental condition stabilize .
gemmule be capable of attach to a substratum and generate a new sponge .
since gemmule can withstand harsh environment , be resistant to desiccation , and remain dormant for long period , - pron - be an excellent mean of colonization for a sessile organism .
sexual reproduction in sponge occur when gamete be generate .
sponge be monoecious ( hermaphroditic ) , which mean that one individual can produce both gamete ( egg and sperm ) simultaneously .
in some sponge , production of gamete may occur throughout the year , whereas other sponge may show sexual cycle depend upon water temperature .
sponge may also become sequentially hermaphroditic , produce oocyte first and spermatozoa later .
oocyte arise by the differentiation of amoebocyte and be retain within the spongocoel , whereas spermatozoa result from the differentiation of choanocyte and be eject via the osculum .
ejection of spermatozoa may be a time and coordinated event , as see in certain specie .
spermatozoa carry along by water current can fertilize the oocyte bear in the mesohyl of other sponge .
early larval development occur within the sponge , and free - swimming larvae be then release via the osculum .
locomotion sponges be generally sessile as adult and spend - pron - life attach to a fix substratum .
- pron - do not show movement over large distance like other free - swimming marine invertebrate .
however , sponge cell be capable of creep along substrata via organizational plasticity .
under experimental condition , researcher have show that sponge cell spread on a physical support demonstrate a leading edge for direct movement .
- pron - have be speculate that this localize creep movement may help sponge adjust to microenvironment near the point of attachment .
- pron - must be note , however , that this pattern of movement have be document in laboratory , but - pron - remain to be observe in natural sponge habitat .
phylum cnidaria include animal that show radial or biradial symmetry and be diploblastic , that is , - pron - develop from two embryonic layer .
nearly all ( about nine  nine percent ) cnidarian be marine specie .
cnidarian contain specialized cell know as cnidocyte ( " stinging cell " ) contain organelle call nematocyst ( stinger ) .
these cell be present around the mouth and tentacle , and serve to immobilize prey with toxin contain within the cell .
nematocyst contain coil thread that may bear barb .
the outer wall of the cell have hairlike projection call cnidocil , which be sensitive to touch .
when touch , the cell be know to fire coil thread that can either penetrate the flesh of the prey or predator of cnidarian ( see figure two  eight  .  five ) or ensnare - pron - .
these coil thread release toxin into the target and can often immobilize prey or scare away predator .
animal from the phylum cnidaria have stinging cell call cnidocyte .
cnidocyte contain large organelle call ( a ) nematocyst that store a coil thread and barb .
when hairlike projection on the cell surface be touch , ( b ) the thread , barb , and a toxin be fire from the organelle .
animal in this phylum display two distinct morphological body plan  polyp or " stalk " and medusa or " bell " ( figure two  eight  .  six ) .
an example of the polyp form be hydra spp .
 perhaps the most well - know medusoid animal be the jelly ( jellyfish ) .
polyp form be sessile as adult , with a single opening to the digestive system ( the mouth ) face up with tentacle surround - pron - .
medusa form be motile , with the mouth and tentacle hang down from an umbrella - shape bell .
cnidarian have two distinct body plan , the medusa ( a ) and the polyp ( b ) .
all cnidarian have two membrane layer , with a jelly - like mesoglea between - pron - .
some cnidarian be polymorphic , that is , - pron - have two body plan during - pron - life cycle .
an example be the colonial hydroid call an obelia .
the sessile polyp form have , in fact , two type of polyp , show in figure two  eight  .  seven .
the first be the gastrozooid , which be adapt for capture prey and feeding  the other type of polyp be the gonozooid , adapt for the asexual budding of medusa .
when the reproductive bud mature , - pron - break off and become free - swim medusa , which be either male or female ( dioecious ) .
the male medusa make sperm , whereas the female medusa make egg .
after fertilization , the zygote develop into a blastula , which develop into a planula larva .
the larva be free swimming for a while , but eventually attache and a new colonial reproductive polyp be form .
the sessile form of obelia geniculate have two type of polyp  gastrozooid , which be adapt for capture prey , and gonozooid , which bud to produce medusa asexually .
all cnidarian show the presence of two membrane layer in the body that be derive from the endoderm and ectoderm of the embryo .
the outer layer ( from ectoderm ) be call the epidermis and line the outside of the animal , whereas the inner layer ( from endoderm ) be call the gastrodermis and line the digestive cavity .
between these two membrane layer be a non - living , jelly - like mesoglea connective layer .
in term of cellular complexity , cnidarian show the presence of differentiate cell type in each tissue layer , such as nerve cell , contractile epithelial cell , enzyme - secrete cell , and nutrient - absorb cell , as well as the presence of intercellular connection .
however , the development of organ or organ system be not advanced in this phylum .
the nervous system be primitive , with nerve cell scatter across the body .
this nerve net may show the presence of group of cell in the form of nerve plexi ( singular plexus ) or nerve cord .
the nerve cell show mixed characteristic of motor as well as sensory neuron .
the predominant signaling molecule in these primitive nervous system be chemical peptide , which perform both excitatory and inhibitory function .
despite the simplicity of the nervous system , - pron - coordinate the movement of tentacle , the drawing of capture prey to the mouth , the digestion of food , and the expulsion of waste .
the cnidarian perform extracellular digestion in which the food be take into the gastrovascular cavity , enzyme be secrete into the cavity , and the cell line the cavity absorb nutrient .
the gastrovascular cavity have only one opening that serve as both a mouth and an anus , which be term an incomplete digestive system .
cnidarian cell exchange oxygen and carbon dioxide by diffusion between cell in the epidermis with water in the environment , and between cell in the gastrodermis with water in the gastrovascular cavity .
the lack of a circulatory system to move dissolve gas limit the thickness of the body wall and necessitate a non - living mesoglea between the layer .
there be no excretory system or organ , and nitrogenous waste simply diffuse from the cell into the water outside the animal or in the gastrovascular cavity .
there be also no circulatory system , so nutrient must move from the cell that absorb - pron - in the lining of the gastrovascular cavity through the mesoglea to other cell .
the phylum cnidaria contain about one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero describe specie divide into four class  anthozoa , scyphozoa , cubozoa , and hydrozoa .
the anthozoan , the sea anemone and coral , be all sessile specie , whereas the scyphozoan ( jellyfish ) and cubozoan ( box jelly ) be swim form .
the hydrozoan contain sessile form and swim colonial form like the portuguese man o' war .
class anthozoa
the class anthozoa include all cnidarian that exhibit a polyp body plan only  in other word , there be no medusa stage within - pron - life cycle .
example include sea anemone ( figure two  eight  .  eight ) , sea pen , and coral , with an estimate number of six  ,  one  zero  zero describe specie .
sea anemone be usually brightly color and can attain a size of one  .  eight to one  zero cm in diameter .
these animal be usually cylindrical in shape and be attach to a substrate .
a mouth opening be surround by tentacle bear cnidocyte .
the sea anemone be show ( a ) photograph and ( b ) in a diagram illustrate - pron - morphology .
a jelly be show ( a ) photograph and ( b ) in a diagram illustrate - pron - morphology .
in the jellyfish , a mouth opening be present on the underside of the animal , surround by tentacle bearing nematocyst .
scyphozoan live most of - pron - life cycle as free - swimming , solitary carnivore .
the mouth lead to the gastrovascular cavity , which may be section into four interconnect sac , call diverticuli .
in some specie , the digestive system may be further branch into radial canal .
like the septa in anthozoan , the branched gastrovascular cell serve two function  to increase the surface area for nutrient absorption and diffusion  thus , more cell be in direct contact with the nutrient in the gastrovascular cavity .
in scyphozoan , nerve cell be scatter all over the body .
neuron may even be present in cluster call rhopalia .
these animal possess a ring of muscle line the dome of the body , which provide the contractile force require to swim through water .
scyphozoan be dioecious animal , that is , the sex be separate .
the gonad be form from the gastrodermis and gamete be expel through the mouth .
planula larvae be form by external fertilization  - pron - settle on a substratum in a polypoid form know as scyphistoma .
these form may produce additional polyp by bud or may transform into the medusoid form .
the life cycle ( figure two  eight  .  one  zero ) of these animal can be describe as polymorphic , because - pron - exhibit both a medusal and polypoid body plan at some point in - pron - life cycle .
the lifecycle of a jellyfish include two stage  the medusa stage and the polyp stage .
the polyp reproduce asexually by bud , and the medusa reproduce sexually .
class cubozoa
this class include jelly that have a box - shape medusa , or a bell that be square in cross - section  hence , be colloquially know as " box jellyfish .
"
these specie may achieve size of one  five – two  five cm .
cubozoan display overall morphological and anatomical characteristic that be similar to those of the scyphozoan .
a prominent difference between the two class be the arrangement of tentacle .
this be the most venomous group of all the cnidarian ( figure two  eight  .  one  one ) .
the cubozoan contain muscular pad call pedalia at the corner of the square bell canopy , with one or more tentacle attach to each pedalium .
these animal be further classify into order base on the presence of single or multiple tentacle per pedalium .
in some case , the digestive system may extend into the pedalia .
nematocyst may be arrange in a spiral configuration along the tentacle  this arrangement help to effectively subdue and capture prey .
cubozoan exist in a polypoid form that develop from a planula larva .
these polyp show limited mobility along the substratum and , like scyphozoan , may bud to form more polyp to colonize a habitat .
polyp form then transform into the medusoid form .
the ( a ) tiny cubazoan jelly malo kingi be thimble shape and , like all cubozoan jelly , ( b ) have four muscular pedalia to which the tentacle attach .
m . kingi be one of two specie of jelly know to because irukandji syndrome , a condition characterize by excruciating muscle pain , vomiting , increase heart rate , and psychological symptom .
two people in australia , where irukandji jelly be most commonly find , be believe to have die from irukandji sting .
( c )
a sign on a beach in northern australia warn swimmer of the danger .
class hydrozoa hydrozoa include nearly three  ,  two  zero  zero specie  most be marine , although some freshwater specie be know ( figure two  eight  .  one  two ) .
animal in this class be polymorph , and most exhibit both polypoid and medusoid form in - pron - lifecycle , although this be variable .
the polyp form in these animal often show a cylindrical morphology with a central gastrovascular cavity line by the gastrodermis .
the gastrodermis and epidermis have a simple layer of mesoglea sandwich between - pron - .
a mouth opening , surround by tentacle , be present at the oral end of the animal .
many hydrozoan form colony that be compose of a branched colony of specialized polyp that share a gastrovascular cavity , such as in the colonial hydroid obelia .
colonies may also be free - float and contain medusoid and polypoid individual in the colony as in physalia ( the portuguese man o'war ) or velella ( by - the - wind sailor ) .
even other specie be solitary polyp ( hydra ) or solitary medusa ( gonionemus ) .
the true characteristic share by all of these diverse specie be that - pron - gonad for sexual reproduction be derive from epidermal tissue , whereas in all other cnidarian - pron - be derive from gastrodermal tissue .
obelia , ( b ) physalia physali , know as the portuguese man o ' war , ( c ) velella bae , and ( d ) hydra have different body shape but all belong to the family hydrozoa .
animal belong to superphylum lophotrochozoa be protostome , in which the blastopore , or the point of involution of the ectoderm or outer germ layer , become the mouth opening to the alimentary canal .
this be call protostomy or " first mouth .
"
in protostomy , solid group of cell split from the endoderm or inner germ layer to form a central mesodermal layer of cell .
this layer multiply into a band and then split internally to form the coelom  this protostomic coelom be hence term schizocoelom .
as lophotrochozoan , the organism in this superphylum possess either a lophophore or trochophore larvae .
the lophophore include group that be unite by the presence of the lophophore , a set of ciliated tentacle surround the mouth .
lophophorata include the flatworm and several other phyla .
these clade be uphold when rna sequence be compare .
trochophore larvae be characterize by two band of cilium around the body .
the lophotrochozoan be triploblastic and possess an embryonic mesoderm sandwich between the ectoderm and endoderm find in the diploblastic cnidarian .
these phyla be also bilaterally symmetrical , mean that a longitudinal section will divide - pron - into right and leave side that be symmetrical .
- pron - also mean the beginning of cephalization , the evolution of a concentration of nervous tissue and sensory organ in the head of the organism , which be where - pron - first encounter - pron - environment .
phylum platyhelminthes
the flatworm be acoelomate organism that include many free - living and parasitic form .
most of the flatworm be classify in the superphylum lophotrochozoa , which also include the mollusk and annelid .
the platyhelminthes consist of two lineage  the catenulida and the rhabditophora .
the catenulida , or " chain worm " be a small clade of just over one  zero  zero specie .
these worm typically reproduce asexually by bud .
however , the offspring do not fully attach from the parent and , resemble a chain in appearance .
all of the remain flatworm discuss here be part of the rhabditophora .
many flatworm be parasitic , include important parasite of human .
flatworm have three embryonic tissue layer that give rise to surface that cover tissue ( from ectoderm ) , internal tissue ( from mesoderm ) , and line the digestive system ( from endoderm ) .
the epidermal tissue be a single layer cell or a layer of fused cell ( syncytium ) that cover a layer of circular muscle above a layer of longitudinal muscle .
the mesodermal tissue include mesenchymal cell that contain collagen and support secretory cell that secrete mucus and other material at the surface .
the flatworm be acoelomate , so - pron - body be solid between the outer surface and the cavity of the digestive system .
physiological processes of flatworms
the free - live specie of flatworm be predator or scavenger .
parasitic form feed on the tissue of - pron - host .
most flatworm , such as the planarian show in figure two  eight  .  one  three , have a gastrovascular cavity rather than a complete digestive system .
in such animal , the " mouth " be also use to expel waste material from the digestive system .
some specie also have an anal opening .
the gut may be a simple sac or highly branched .
digestion be extracellular , with digest material take in to the cell of the gut lining by phagocytosis .
one group , the cestode , lack a digestive system .
flatworm have an excretory system with a network of tubule throughout the body with opening to the environment and nearby flame cell , whose cilium beat to direct waste fluid concentrate in the tubule out of the body .
the system be responsible for the regulation of dissolve salt and the excretion of nitrogenous waste .
the nervous system consist of a pair of nerve cord run the length of the body with connection between - pron - and a large ganglion or concentration of nerve at the anterior end of the worm , where there may also be a concentration of photosensory and chemosensory cell .
there be neither a circulatory nor respiratory system , with gas and nutrient exchange dependent on diffusion and cell - cell junction .
this necessarily limit the thickness of the body in these organism , constrain - pron - to be " flat " worm .
most flatworm specie be monoecious , and fertilization be typically internal .
asexual reproduction be common in some group .
the planarian be a flatworm that have a gastrovascular cavity with one opening that serve as both mouth and anus .
the excretory system be make up of tubule connect to excretory pore on both side of the body .
the nervous system be compose of two interconnect nerve cord run the length of the body , with cerebral ganglion and eyespot at the anterior end .
diversity of flatworms platyhelminthes be traditionally divide into four class  turbellaria , monogenea , trematoda , and cestoda ( figure two  eight  .  one  four ) .
as discuss above , the relationship among member of these class be be reassess , with the turbellarian in particular now view as a paraphyletic group , a group that do not have a single common ancestor .
phylum platyhelminthes be divide into four class .
( a ) class turbellaria include the bedford 's flatworm ( pseudobiceros bedfordi ) , which be about eight – one  zero cm in length .
( b )
the parasitic class monogenea include dactylogyrus spp .
dactylogyrus , commonly call a gill fluke , be about zero  .  two mm in length and have two anchor , indicate by arrow , that - pron - use to latch onto the gill of host fish .
( c )
the trematoda class include fascioloides magna ( right ) and fasciaola hepatica ( two specimen of left , also know as the common liver fluke ) .
( d ) class cestoda include tapeworm such as this taenia saginata .
t . saginata , which infect both cattle and human , can reach four – one  zero meter in length  the speciman show here be about four meter .
the class turbellaria include mainly free - living , marine specie , although some specie live in freshwater or moist terrestrial environment .
the ventral epidermis of turbellarian be ciliat and facilitate - pron - locomotion .
some turbellarian be capable of remarkable feat of regeneration in which - pron - may regrow the body , even from a small fragment .
the monogenean be ectoparasite , mostly of fish , with simple lifecycle that consist of a free - swimming larva that attach to a fish to begin transformation to the parasitic adult form .
the parasite have only one host and that host be usually only one specie .
the worm may produce enzyme that digest the host tissue or simply graze on surface mucus and skin particle .
most monogenean be hermaphroditic , but the male gamete develop first and so cross - fertilization be quite common .
the trematode , or fluke , be internal parasite of mollusk and many other group , include human .
trematode have complex lifecycle that involve a primary host in which sexual reproduction occur , and one or more secondary host in which asexual reproduction occur .
the primary host be almost always a mollusk .
trematode be responsible for serious human disease include schistosomiasis , a blood fluke .
the disease infect an estimate two  zero  zero million people in the tropic , lead to organ damage and chronic symptom like fatigue .
infection occur when the human enter the water and a larva , release from the primary snail host , locate and penetrate the skin .
the parasite infect various organ in the body and feed on red blood cell before reproduce .
many of the egg be release in fece and find - pron - way into a waterway , where - pron - be able to reinfect the primary snail host .
the cestode , or tapeworm , be also internal parasite , mainly of vertebrate ( figure two  eight  .  one  five ) .
tapeworm live in the intestinal tract of the primary host and remain fix use a sucker on the anterior end , or scolex , of the tapeworm body .
the remain body of the tapeworm be make up of a long series of unit call proglottid , each of which may contain an excretory system with flame cell , but contain reproductive structure , both male and female .
tapeworm do not possess a digestive system  instead , - pron - absorb nutrient from the food matter pass - pron - in the host 's intestine .
proglottid be produce at the scolex and gradually migrate to the end of the tapeworm  at this point , - pron - be " mature " and all structure except fertilize egg have degenerate .
most reproduction occur by cross - fertilization .
the proglottid detach from the body of the worm and be release into the fece of the organism .
the egg be eat by an intermediate host .
the juvenile worm infect the intermediate host and take up residence , usually in muscle tissue .
when the muscle tissue be eat by the primary host , the cycle be complete .
there be several tapeworm parasite of human that be transmit by eat uncooked or poorly cook pork , beef , and fish .
tapeworm ( taenia spp . )
infection occur when human consume raw or undercooked infected meat .
phylum rotifera
the rotifer be a microscopic ( about one  zero  zero μm to three  zero mm ) group of mostly aquatic organism that get - pron - name from the corona , a rotate , wheel - like structure that be cover with cilium at - pron - anterior end ( figure two  eight  .  one  six ) .
although - pron - taxonomy be currently in flux , one treatment place the rotifer in three class 
bdelloidea , monogononta , and seisonidea .
the classification of the group be currently under revision , however , as more phylogenetic evidence become available .
- pron - be possible that the " spiny head worm " currently in phylum acanthocephala will be incorporate into this group in the future .
the body form of rotifer consist of a head ( which contain the corona ) , a trunk ( which contain the organ ) , and the foot .
rotifer be typically free - swimming and truly planktonic organism , but the toe or extension of the foot can secrete a sticky material form a holdfast to help - pron - adhere to surface .
the head contain sensory organ in the form of a bilob brain and small eyespot near the corona .
show be example from two of the three class of rotifer .
( a ) specie from the class bdelloidea be characterize by a large corona , show separately from the whole animal in the center of this scanning electron micrograph .
( b ) polyarthra , from the class monogononta , have a small corona than bdelloid rotifer , and a single gonad , which give the class - pron - name .
the rotifer be filter feeder that will eat dead material , algae , and other microscopic live organism , and be therefore very important component of aquatic food webs .
rotifer obtain food that be direct toward the mouth by the current create from the movement of the corona .
the food particle enter the mouth and travel to the mastax ( pharynx with jawlike structure ) .
food then pass by digestive and salivary gland , and into the stomach , then onto the intestine .
digestive and excretory waste be collect in a cloacal bladder before be release out the anus .
rotifer be pseudocoelomate commonly find in fresh water and some salt water environment throughout the world .
figure two  eight  .  one  seven show the anatomy of a rotifer belong to class bdelloidea .
about two  ,  two  zero  zero specie of rotifer have be identify .
rotifer be dioecious organism ( have either male or female genitalia ) and exhibit sexual dimorphism ( male and female have different form ) .
many specie be parthenogenic and exhibit haplodiploidy , a method of gender determination in which a fertilize egg develop into a female and an unfertilized egg develop into a male .
in many dioecious specie , male be short - live and small with no digestive system and a single testis .
female can produce egg that be capable of dormancy for protection during harsh environmental condition .
this illustration show the anatomy of a bdelloid rotifer .
phylum nemertea
the nemertea be colloquially know as ribbon worm .
most specie of phylum nemertea be marine , predominantly benthic or bottom dweller , with an estimate nine  zero  zero specie know .
however , nemertini have be record in freshwater and terrestrial habitat as well .
most nemertean be carnivore , feed on worm , clam , and crustacean .
some specie be scavenger , and some nemertini specie , like malacobdella grossa , have also evolve commensalistic relationship with some mollusk .
some specie have devastate commercial fishing of clam and crab .
nemertean have almost no predator and two specie be sell as fish bait .
morphology ribbon worm vary in size from one cm to several meter .
- pron - show bilateral symmetry and remarkable contractile property .
because of - pron - contractility , - pron - can change - pron - morphological presentation in response to environmental cue .
animal in phylum nemertea show a flattened morphology , that is , - pron - be flat from front to back , like a flattened tube .
nemertea be soft and unsegmented animal .
the proboscis worm ( parborlasia corrugatus ) be a scavenger that comb the sea floor for food .
the species be a member of the phylum nemertea .
the speciman show here be photograph in the ross sea , antarctica .
a unique characteristic of this phylum be the presence of a proboscis enclose in a rhynchocoel .
the proboscis serve to capture food and may be ornament with barb in some specie .
the rhynchocoel be a fluid - fill cavity that extend from the head to nearly two - third of the length of the gut in these animal ( figure two  eight  .  one  nine ) .
the proboscis may be extend or retract by the retractor muscle attach to the wall of the rhynchocoel .
digestive system
the nemertini show a very well - develop digestive system .
a mouth opening that be ventral to the rhynchocoel lead into the foregut , follow by the intestine .
the intestine be present in the form of diverticular pouch and end in a rectum that open via an anus .
gonad be intersperse with the intestinal diverticular pouch and open outward via genital pore .
a circulatory system consist of a closed loop of a pair of lateral blood vessel .
the circulatory system be derive from the coelomic cavity of the embryo .
some animal may also have cross - connect vessel in addition to lateral one .
although these be call blood vessel , since - pron - be of coelomic origin , the circulatory fluid be colorless .
some specie bear hemoglobin as well as other yellow or green pigment .
the blood vessel be connect to the rhynchocoel .
the flow of fluid in these vessel be facilitate by the contraction of muscle in the body wall .
a pair of protonephridia , or primitive kidney , be present in these animal to facilitate osmoregulation .
gaseous exchange occur through the skin in the nemertini .
nervous system nemertini have a ganglion or " brain " situate at the anterior end between the mouth and the foregut , surround the digestive system as well as the rhynchocoel .
a ring of four nerve mass call " ganglion " compose the brain in these animal .
pair longitudinal nerve cord emerge from the brain ganglion and extend to the posterior end .
ocelli or eyespot be present in pair , in multiple of two in the anterior portion of the body .
- pron - be speculate that the eyespot originate from neural tissue and not from the epidermis .
reproduction animals in phylum nemertea show sexual dimorphism , although freshwater specie may be hermaphroditic .
egg and sperm be release into the water , and fertilization occur externally .
the zygote then develop into a planuliform larva .
in some nemertine specie , a pilidium larva may develop inside the young worm , from a series of imaginal disc .
this larval form , characteristically shape like a deerstalker cap , devour tissue from the young worm for survival before metamorphose into the adult - like morphology .
phylum mollusca phylum mollusca be the predominant phylum in marine environment .
- pron - be estimate that two  three percent of all know marine specie be mollusk  there be over seven  five  ,  zero  zero  zero describe specie , make - pron - the second most diverse phylum of animal .
the name " mollusca " signify a soft body , since the early description of mollusk come from observation of unshelled cuttlefish .
mollusk be predominantly a marine group of animal  however , - pron - be know to inhabit freshwater as well as terrestrial habitat .
mollusk display a wide range of morphology in each class and subclass , but share a few key characteristic , include a muscular foot , a visceral mass contain internal organ , and a mantle that may or may not secrete a shell of calcium carbonate .
mollusk have a muscular foot , which be use for locomotion and anchorage , and vary in shape and function , depend on the type of mollusk under study .
in shelled mollusk , this foot be usually the same size as the opening of the shell .
the foot be a retractable as well as an extendable organ .
the foot be the ventral - most organ , whereas the mantle be the limit dorsal organ .
mollusk be eucoelomate , but the coelomic cavity be restrict to a cavity around the heart in adult animal .
the mantle cavity develop independently of the coelomic cavity .
the visceral mass be present above the foot , in the visceral hump .
this include digestive , nervous , excretory , reproductive , and respiratory system .
mollusk specie that be exclusively aquatic have gill for respiration , whereas some terrestrial specie have lung for respiration .
additionally , a tongue - like organ call a radula , which bear chitinous tooth - like ornamentation , be present in many specie , and serve to shred or scrape food .
the mantle ( also know as the pallium ) be the dorsal epidermis in mollusk  shell mollusk be specialize to secrete a chitinous and hard calcareous shell .
most mollusk be dioecious animal and fertilization occur externally , although this be not the case in terrestrial mollusk , such as snail and slug , or in cephalopod .
in some mollusk , the zygote hatch and undergoe two larval stages— trochophore and veliger — before become a young adult  bivalve may exhibit a third larval stage , glochidia .
classification of phylum mollusca phylum mollusca be a very diverse ( eight  five  ,  zero  zero  zero specie ) group of mostly marine specie .
mollusk have a dramatic variety of form , range from large predatory squid and octopus , some of which show a high degree of intelligence , to graze form with elaborately sculpted and colored shell .
this phylum can be segregate into seven class  aplacophora , monoplacophora , polyplacophora , bivalvia , gastropoda , cephalopoda , and scaphopoda .
class aplacophora ( " bear no plate " ) include worm - like animal primarily find in benthic marine habitat .
these animal lack a calcareous shell but possess aragonite spicule on - pron - epidermis .
- pron - have a rudimentary mantle cavity and lack eye , tentacle , and nephridia ( excretory organ ) .
member of class monoplacophora (
" bear one plate " ) poss a single , cap - like shell that enclose the body .
the morphology of the shell and the underlying animal can vary from circular to ovate .
a loop digestive system , multiple pair of excretory organ , many gill , and a pair of gonad be present in these animal .
the monoplacophoran be believe extinct and only know via fossil record until the discovery of neopilina galathaea in one  nine  five  two .
today , scientist have identify nearly two dozen extant specie .
animal in the class polyplacophora (
" bear many plate " ) be commonly know as " chiton " and bear an armor - like eight - plat shell ( figure two  eight  .  two  one ) .
these animal have a broad , ventral foot that be adapt for suction to rock and other substrate , and a mantle that extend beyond the shell in the form of a girdle .
calcareous spine may be present on the girdle to offer protection from predator .
respiration be facilitate by ctenidia ( gill ) that be present ventrally .
these animal possess a radula that be modify for scrap .
the nervous system be rudimentary with only buccal or " cheek " ganglion present at the anterior end .
eyespot be absent in these animal .
a single pair of nephridia for excretion be present .
this chiton from the class
polyplacaphora have the eight - plat shell that be indicative of - pron - class .
class bivalvia ( " two shell " ) include clam , oyster , mussel , scallop , and geoduck .
member of this class be find in marine as well as freshwater habitat .
as the name suggest , bivalve be enclose in a pair of shell ( valve be commonly call " shell " )
that be hinge at the dorsal end by shell ligament as well as shell tooth ( figure two  eight  .  two  two ) .
the overall morphology be laterally flatten , and the head region be poorly develop .
eyespot and statocyst may be absent in some specie .
since these animal be suspension feeder , a radula be absent in this class of mollusk .
respiration be facilitate by a pair of ctenidia , whereas excretion and osmoregulation be bring about by a pair of nephridia .
bivalve often possess a large mantle cavity .
in some specie , the posterior edge of the mantle may fuse to form two siphon that serve to take in and exude water .
these mussel , find in the intertidal zone in cornwall , england , be bivalve .
one of the function of the mantle be to secrete the shell .
some bivalve like oyster and mussel possess the unique ability to secrete and deposit a calcareous nacre or " mother of pearl " around foreign particle that may enter the mantle cavity .
this property have be commercially exploit to produce pearl .
animal in class gastropoda ( " stomach foot " ) include well - know mollusk like snail , slug , conch , sea hare , and sea butterfly .
gastropoda include shell - bearing specie as well as specie with a reduced shell .
these animal be asymmetrical and usually present a coil shell ( figure two  eight  .  two  three ) .
shell may be planospiral ( like a garden hose wind up ) , commonly see in garden snail , or conispiral , ( like a spiral staircase ) , commonly see in marine conch .
snail and ( b ) slug be both gastropod , but slug lack a shell .
the visceral mass in the shell species display torsion around the perpendicular axis on the center of the foot , which be the key characteristic of this group , along with a foot that be modify for crawl ( figure two  eight  .  two  four ) .
most gastropod bear a head with tentacle , eye , and a style .
a complex radula be use by the digestive system and aid in the ingestion of food .
eye may be absent in some gastropod specie .
the mantle cavity enclos the ctenidia as well as a pair of nephridia .
during embryonic development of gastropod , the visceral mass undergoe torsion , or counterclockwise rotation of anatomical feature .
as a result , the anus of the adult animal be locate over the head .
torsion be an independent process from coil of the shell .
class cephalopoda ( " head foot " animal ) , include octopi , squid , cuttlefish , and nautilus .
cephalopod be a class of shellbear animal as well as mollusk with a reduced shell .
- pron - display vivid coloration , typically see in squid and octopi , which be use for camouflage .
all animal in this class be carnivorous predator and have beak - like jaw at the anterior end .
all cephalopod show the presence of a very well - develop nervous system along with eye , as well as a closed circulatory system .
the foot be lob and develop into tentacle , and a funnel , which be use as - pron - mode of locomotion .
sucker be present on the tentacle in octopi and squid .
ctenidium be enclose in a large mantle cavity and be service by large blood vessel , each with - pron - own heart associate with - pron -  the mantle have siphonophore that facilitate exchange of water .
locomotion in cephalopod be facilitate by eject a stream of water for propulsion .
this be call " jet " propulsion .
a pair of nephridia be present within the mantle cavity .
sexual dimorphism be see in this class of animal .
member of a species mate , and the female then lay the egg in a secluded and protect niche .
female of some specie care for the egg for an extended period of time and may end up die during that time period .
cephalopod such as squid and octopi also produce sepia or a dark ink , which be squirt upon a predator to assist in a quick getaway .
reproduction in cephalopod be different from other mollusk in that the egg hatch to produce a juvenile adult without undergo the trochophore and veliger larval stage .
in the shell - bearing nautilus spp . , the spiral shell be multi - chamber .
these chamber be fill with gas or water to regulate buoyancy .
the shell structure in squid and cuttlefish be reduce and be present internally in the form of a squid pen and cuttlefish bone , respectively .
example be show in figure two  eight  .  two  six .
the ( a ) nautilus , ( b ) giant cuttlefish , ( c ) reef squid , and ( d ) blue - ring octopus be all member of the class cephalopoda .
member of class scaphopoda ( " boat foot " ) be know colloquially as " tusk shell " or " tooth shell , " as evident when examine dentalium , one of the few remain scaphopod genera ( figure two  eight  .  two  seven ) .
scaphopod be usually bury in sand with the anterior opening expose to water .
these animal bear a single conical shell , which have both end open .
the head be rudimentary and protrude out of the posterior end of the shell .
these animal do not possess eye , but - pron - have a radula , as well as a foot modify into tentacle with a bulbous end , know as captaculae .
captaculae serve to catch and manipulate prey .
ctenidium be absent in these animal .
antalis vulgaris show the classic dentaliidae shape that give these animal - pron - common name of " tusk shell . "
phylum annelida phylum annelida include segment worm .
these animal be find in marine , terrestrial , and freshwater habitat , but a presence of water or humidity be a critical factor for - pron - survival , especially in terrestrial habitat .
the name of the phylum be derive from the latin word annellus , which mean a small ring .
animal in this phylum show parasitic and commensal symbios with other specie in - pron - habitat .
approximately one  six  ,  five  zero  zero specie have be describe in phylum annelida .
the phylum include earthworm , polychaete worm , and leech .
annelid show protostomic development in embryonic stage and be often call " segment worm " due to - pron - key characteristic of metamerism , or true segmentation .
morphology annelids display bilateral symmetry and be worm - like in overall morphology .
annelid have a segment body plan wherein the internal and external morphological feature be repeat in each body segment .
metamerism allow animal to become big by add " compartment " while make - pron - movement more efficient .
this metamerism be think to arise from identical teloblast cell in the embryonic stage , which give rise to identical mesodermal structure .
the overall body can be divide into head , body , and pygidium ( or tail ) .
the clitellum be a reproductive structure that generate mucus that aid in sperm transfer and give rise to a cocoon within which fertilization occur  - pron - appear as a fused band in the anterior third of the animal .
the clitellum , see here as a protrude segment with different coloration than the rest of the body , be a structure that aid in annelid reproduction .
hence , - pron - be the most advanced worm .
a well - develop and complete digestive system be present in earthworm ( oligochaete ) with a mouth , muscular pharynx , esophagus , crop , and gizzard be present .
the gizzard lead to the intestine and end in an anal opening .
a cross - sectional view of a body segment of an earthworm ( a terrestrial type of annelid ) be show in figure two  eight  .  two  nine  each segment be limit by a membranous septum that divide the coelomic cavity into a series of compartment .
annelid possess a closed circulatory system of dorsal and ventral blood vessel that run parallel to the alimentary canal as well as capillary that service individual tissue .
in addition , these vessel be connect by transverse loop in every segment .
these animal lack a well - develop respiratory system , and gas exchange occur across the moist body surface .
excretion be facilitate by a pair of metanephridia ( a type of primitive " kidney " that consist of a convoluted tubule and an open , ciliated funnel ) that be present in every segment towards the ventral side .
annelid show well - develop nervous system with a nerve ring of fused ganglion present around the pharynx .
the nerve cord be ventral in position and bear enlarge node or ganglion in each segment .
this schematic drawing show the basic anatomy of annelid in a cross - sectional view .
annelid may be either monoecious with permanent gonad ( as in earthworm and leech ) or dioecious with temporary or seasonal gonad that develop ( as in polychaete ) .
however , cross - fertilization be prefer in hermaphroditic animal .
these animal may also show simultaneous hermaphroditism and participate in simultaneous sperm exchange when - pron - be align for copulation .
classification of phylum annelida phylum annelida contain the class polychaeta ( the polychaete ) and the class oligochaeta ( the earthworm , leech and - pron - relative ) .
earthworm be the most abundant member of the class oligochaeta , distinguish by the presence of the clitellum as well as few , reduce chaetae ( " oligo - = " few "  - chaetae = " hair " ) .
the number and size of chaetae be greatly diminish in oligochaeta compare to the polychaete ( poly = many , chaetae = hair ) .
the many chetae of polychaete be also arrange within fleshy , flat , pair appendage that protrude from each segment call parapodia , which may be specialize for different function in the polychate .
the subclass hirudinea include leech such as hirudo medicinali and hemiclepsis marginata .
the class oligochaeta include the subclass hirudinia and the subclass brachiobdella .
a significant difference between leech and other annelid be the development of sucker at the anterior and posterior end and a lack of chaetae .
additionally , the segmentation of the body wall may not correspond to the internal segmentation of the coelomic cavity .
this adaptation possibly help the leech to elongate when - pron - ingest copious quantity of blood from host vertebrate .
the subclass brachiobdella include specie like branchiobdella balcanica sketi and branchiobdella astaci , worm that show similarity with leech as well as oligochaete .
the ( a ) earthworm , ( b ) leech , and ( c ) featherduster be all annelid .
superphylum ecdysozoa
the superphylum ecdysozoa contain an incredibly large number of specie .
this be because - pron - contain two of the most diverse animal group  phylum nematoda ( the roundworm ) and phylum arthropoda ( the arthropod ) .
the most prominant distinguis feature of ecdysozoans be - pron - tough external covering call the cuticle .
the cuticle provide a tough , but flexible exoskeleton tht protect these animal from water loss , predator and other aspect of the external environment .
all member of this superphylum periodically molt , or shed - pron - cuticle as - pron - grow .
after molt , - pron - secrete a new cuticle that will last until - pron - next growth phase .
the process of molt and replace the cuticle be call ecdysis , which be how the superphylum derive - pron - name .
phylum nematoda
the nematoda , like most other animal phyla , be triploblastic and possess an embryonic mesoderm that be sandwich between the ectoderm and endoderm .
- pron - be also bilaterally symmetrical , mean that a longitudinal section will divide - pron - into right and leave side that be symmetrical .
furthermore , the nematode , or roundworm , possess a pseudocoelom and consist of both free - living and parasitic form .
- pron - have be say that be all the non - nematode matter of the biosphere remove , there would remain a shadow of the former world in the form of nematode .
[ one ] the arthropod , one of the most successful taxonomic group on the planet , be coelomate organism characterize by a hard exoskeleton and jointed appendage .
both the nematode and arthropod belong to the superphylum ecdysozoa that be believe to be a clade consist of all evolutionary descendant from one common ancestor .
the name derive from the word ecdysis , which refer to the shedding , or molting , of the exoskeleton .
the phyla in this group have a hard cuticle that cover - pron - body , which must be periodically shed and replace for - pron - to increase in size .
phylum nematoda include more than two  eight  ,  zero  zero  zero specie with an estimate one  six  ,  zero  zero  zero be parasitic in nature .
the name nematoda be derive from the greek word " nemos , " which mean " thread " and include roundworm .
nematode be present in all habitat with a large number of individual of each specie present in each .
the free - living nematode , caenorhabditis elegan have be extensively use as a model system in laboratory all over the world .
morphology
in contrast with cnidarian , nematode show a tubular morphology and circular cross - section .
these animal be pseudocoelomate and show the presence of a complete digestive system with a distinct mouth and anus .
this be in contrast with the cnidarian , where only one opening be present ( an incomplete digestive system ) .
the cuticle of nematodes be rich in collagen and a carbohydrate - protein polymer call chitin , and form an external " skeleton " outside the epidermis .
the cuticle also line many of the organ internally , include the pharynx and rectum .
the epidermis can be either a single layer of cell or a syncytium , which be a multinucleat cell form from the fusion of uninucleated cell .
the overall morphology of these worm be cylindrical , as see in figure two  eight  .  three  one .
the head be radially symmetrical .
a mouth opening be present at the anterior end with three or six lip as well as tooth in some specie in the form of cuticle extension .
some nematode may present other external modification like ring , head shield , or wart .
ring , however , do not reflect true internal body segmentation .
the mouth lead to a muscular pharynx and intestine , which lead to a rectum and anal opening at the posterior end .
the muscle of nematode differ from those of most animal  - pron - have a longitudinal layer only , which account for the whip - like motion of - pron - movement .
scan electron micrograph show ( a ) the soybean cyst nematode ( heterodera glycine ) and a nematode egg .
( b )
a schematic representation show the anatomy of a typical nematode .
excretory system
in nematode , specialized excretory system be not well develop .
nitrogenous waste may be lose by diffusion through the entire body or into the pseudocoelom ( body cavity ) , where - pron - be remove by specialized cell .
regulation of water and salt content of the body be achieve by renette gland , present under the pharynx in marine nematode .
nervous system most nematode possess four longitudinal nerve cord that run along the length of the body in dorsal , ventral , and lateral position .
the ventral nerve cord be better develop than the dorsal or lateral cord .
all nerve cord fuse at the anterior end , around the pharynx , to form head ganglion or the " brain " of the worm ( which take the form of a ring around the pharynx ) as well as at the posterior end to form the tail ganglia .
in c . elegan , the nervous system account for nearly one - third of the total number of cell in the animal .
reproduction nematodes employ a variety of reproductive strategy that range from monoecious to dioecious to parthenogenic , depend upon the specie under consideration .
c . elegan be a monoecious specie and show development of ova contain in a uterus as well as sperm contain in the spermatheca .
the uterus have an external opening know as the vulva .
the female genital pore be near the middle of the body , whereas the male 's be at the tip .
specialized structure at the tail of the male keep - pron - in place while - pron - deposit sperm with copulatory spicule .
fertilization be internal , and embryonic development start very soon after fertilization .
the embryo be release from the vulva during the gastrulation stage .
the embryonic development stage last for one  four hour  development then continue through four successive larval stage with ecdysis between each stage — l one , l two , l three , and l four —ultimately lead to the development of a young male or female adult worm .
adverse environmental condition like overcrowding and lack of food can result in the formation of an intermediate larval stage know as the dauer larva .
a number of common parasitic nematode serve as prime example of parasitism .
these animal exhibit complex lifecycle that involve multiple host , and - pron - can have significant medical and veterinary impact .
human may become infect by dracunculus medinensis , know as guinea worm , when - pron - drink unfiltered water contain copepod .
hookworm , such as ancyclostoma and necator , infest the intestine and feed on the blood of mammal , especially in dog , cat , and human .
trichina worm ( trichinella ) be the causal organism of trichinosis in human , often result from the consumption of undercook pork 
trichinella can infect other mammalian host as well .
ascaris , a large intestinal roundworm , steal nutrition from - pron - human host and may create physical blockage of the intestine .
the filarial worm , such as dirofilaria and wuchereria , be commonly vector by mosquito , which pass the infective agent among mammal through - pron - blood - suck activity .
dirofilaria immitis , a blood - infective parasite , be the notorious dog heartworm specie .
wuchereria bancrofti infect the lymph node of human , result in the non - lethal but deform condition call elephantiasis , in which part of the body become swell to gigantic proportion due to obstruction of lymphatic drainage and inflammation of lymphatic tissue .
the guinea worm dracunculus medinensis infect about three  .  five million people annually , mostly in africa .
( a )
here , the worm be wrap around a stick so - pron - can be extract .
( b ) infection occur when people consume water contaminate by infected copepod , but this can easily be prevent by simple filtration system .
phylum arthropoda
the name " arthropoda " mean " jointed leg
" ( in the greek , " arthro
" mean
"
joint " and " podo " mean " leg
" )  - pron - aptly describe the enormous number of invertebrate include in this phylum .
arthropoda dominate the animal kingdom with an estimate eight  five percent of know specie include in this phylum and many arthropod yet undocumented .
the principal characteristic of all the animal in this phylum be functional segmentation of the body and presence of jointed appendage .
arthropod also show the presence of an exoskeleton make principally of chitin , which be a waterproof , tough polysaccharide .
phylum arthropoda be the large phylum in the animal world , and insect form the single large class within this phylum .
arthropod be eucoelomate , protostomic organism .
phylum arthropoda include animal that have be successful in colonize terrestrial , aquatic , and aerial habitat .
this phylum be further classify into five subphyla  trilobitomorpha ( trilobite , all extinct ) , hexapoda ( insect and relative ) , myriapoda ( millipede , centipede , and relative ) , crustaceans ( crab , lobster , crayfish , isopod , barnacle , and some zooplankton ) , and chelicerata ( horseshoe crab , arachnid , scorpion , and daddy longleg ) .
trilobite be an extinct group of arthropod find chiefly in the pre - cambrian era that be probably most closely related to the chelicerata .
these be identify base on fossil record .
trilobite , like the one in this fossil , be an extinct group of arthropod .
morphology
a unique feature of animal in the arthropod phylum be the presence of a segmented body and fusion of set of segment that give rise to functional body region call tagma .
tagma may be in the form of a head , thorax , and abdoman , or a cephalothorax and abdomen , or a head and trunk .
a central cavity , call the hemocoel ( or blood cavity ) , be present , and the open circulatory system be regulate by a tubular or single - chamber heart .
respiratory system vary depend on the group of arthropod  insect and myriapod use a series of tube ( tracheae ) that branch through the body , open to the outside through opening call spiracle , and perform gas exchange directly between the cell and air in the tracheae , whereas aquatic crustacean utilize gill , terrestrial chelicerate employ book lung , and aquatic chelicerate use book gill ( figure two  eight  .  three  five ) .
the book lung of arachnid ( scorpion , spider , tick and mite ) contain a vertical stack of hemocoel wall tissue that somewhat resemble the page of a book .
between each of the " page " of tissue be an air space .
this allow both side of the tissue to be in contact with the air at all time , greatly increase the efficiency of gas exchange .
the gill of crustacean be filamentous structure that exchange gas with the surround water .
group of arthropod also differ in the organ use for excretion , with crustacean possess green gland and insect use malpighian tubule , which work in conjunction with the hindgut to reabsorb water while rid the body of nitrogenous waste .
the cuticle be the covering of an arthropod .
- pron - be make up of two layer  the epicuticle , which be a thin , waxy water - resistant outer layer contain no chitin , and the layer beneath - pron - , the chitinous procuticle .
chitin be a tough , flexible polysaccharide .
in order to grow , the arthropod must shed the exoskeleton during a process call ecdysis ( " to strip off " )  this be a cumbersome method of growth , and during this time , the animal be vulnerable to predation .
the characteristic morphology of representative animal from each subphylum be describe below .
the book lung of ( a ) arachnid be make up of alternate air pocket and hemocoel tissue shape like a stack of book .
the book gill of ( b ) crustacean be similar to book lung but be external so that gas exchange can occur with the surround water .
subphylum hexapoda
the name hexapoda denote the presence of six leg ( three pair ) in these animal as differentiate from the number of pair present in other arthropod .
hexapod be characterize by the presence of a head , thorax , and abdoman , constitute three tagma .
the thorax bear the wing as well as six leg in three pair .
many of the common insect - pron - encounter on a daily basis — include ant , cockroach , butterfly , and fly — be example of hexapoda .
amongst the hexapod , the insect ( figure two  eight  .  three  six ) be the large class in term of specie diversity as well as biomass in terrestrial habitat .
typically , the head bear one pair of sensory antennae , mandible as mouthpart , a pair of compound eye , and some ocelli ( simple eye ) along with numerous sensory hair .
the thorax bear three pair of leg ( one pair per segment ) and two pair of wing , with one pair each on the second and third thoracic segment .
the abdomen usually have eleven segment and bear reproductive aperture .
hexapoda include insect that be wing ( like fruit fly ) and wingless ( like flea ) .
subphylum myriapoda subphylum myriapoda include arthropod with numerous leg .
although the name be hyperbolic in suggest that myriad leg be present in these invertebrate , the number of leg may vary from one  zero to seven  five  zero .
this subphylum include one  three  ,  zero  zero  zero specie  the most commonly find example be millipede and centipede .
all myriapod be terrestrial animal and prefer a humid environment .
myriapod be typically find in moist soil , decay biological material , and leaf litter .
subphylum myriapoda be divide into four class  chilopoda , symphyla , diplopoda , and pauropoda .
centipede like scutigera coleoptrata ( figure two  eight  .  three  seven ) be classify as chilopod .
these animal bear one pair of leg per segment , mandible as mouthpart , and be somewhat dorsoventrally flatten .
the leg in the first segment be modify to form forcipule ( poison claws ) that deliver poison to prey like spider and cockroach , as these animal be all predatory .
millipede bear two pair of leg per diplosegment , a feature that result from embryonic fusion of adjacent pair of body segment , be usually rounder in cross - section , and be herbivore or detritivore .
millipede have visibly more number of leg as compare to centipede , although - pron - do not bear a thousand leg .
( a )
the scutigera coleoptrata centipede have up to one  five pair of leg .
( b )
this north american millipede ( narceus americanus ) bear many leg , although not a thousand , as - pron - name may suggest .
subphylum crustacea crustaceans be the most dominant aquatic arthropod , since the total number of marine crustacean specie stand at six  seven  ,  zero  zero  zero , but there be also freshwater and terrestrial crustacean specie .
krill , shrimp , lobster , crab , and crayfish be example of crustacean ( figure two  eight  .  three  eight ) .
terrestrial specie like the wood lice ( armadillidium spp . )
( also call pill bug , rolly pollie , potato bug , or isopod ) be also crustacean , although the number of non - aquatic specie in this subphylum be relatively low .
the ( a ) crab and ( b ) shrimp krill be both crustacean .
crustaceans possess two pair of antennae , mandible as mouthpart , and biramous ( " two branched " ) appendage , which mean that - pron - leg be form in two part , as distinct from the uniramous ( " one branched " ) myriapod and hexapod .
arthropod may have ( a ) biramous ( two - branched ) appendage or ( b ) uniramous ( one - branched ) appendage .
unlike that of the hexapoda , the head and thorax of most crustacean be fuse to form a cephalothorax ( figure two  eight  .  four  zero ) , which be cover by a plate call the carapace , thus produce a body structure of two tagma .
crustaceans have a chitinous exoskeleton that be shed by molt whenever the animal increase in size .
the exoskeleton of many specie be also infuse with calcium carbonate , which make - pron - even strong than in other arthropod .
crustaceans have an open circulatory system where blood be pump into the hemocoel by the dorsally locate heart .
hemocyanin and hemoglobin be the respiratory pigment present in these animal .
the crayfish be an example of a crustacean .
- pron - have a carapace around the cephalothorax and the heart in the dorsal thorax area .
most crustacean be dioecious , which mean that the sex be separate .
some specie like barnacle may be hermaphrodite .
serial hermaphroditism , where the gonad can switch from produce sperm to ova , may also be see in some specie .
fertilize egg may be hold within the female of the specie or may be release in the water .
terrestrial crustacean seek out damp space in - pron - habitat to lay egg .
larval stages— nauplius and zoea — be see in the early development of crustacean .
a cypris larva be also see in the early development of barnacle .
all crustacean go through different larval stage .
show be ( a ) the nauplius larval stage of a tadpole shrimp , ( b ) the cypris larval stage of a barnacle , and ( c ) the zoea larval stage of a green crab .
crustaceans possess a tripartite brain and two compound eye .
most crustacean be carnivorous , but herbivorous and detritivorous specie be also know .
crustaceans may also be cannibalistic when extremely high population of these organism be present .
subphylum chelicerata
this subphylum include animal such as spider , scorpion , horseshoe crab , and sea spider .
this subphylum be predominantly terrestrial , although some marine specie also exist .
an estimate seven  seven  ,  zero  zero  zero specie be include in subphylum chelicerata .
chelicerate be find in almost all habitat .
the body of chelicerate may be divide into two part  prosoma and opisthosoma , which be basically the equivalent of cephalothorax ( usually small ) and abdoman ( usually large ) .
a " head " tagmum be not usually discernible .
the phylum derive - pron - name from the first pair of appendage  the chelicerae ( figure two  eight  .  four  two ) , which be specialize , claw - like or fanglike mouthpart .
these animal do not possess antennae .
the second pair of appendage be know as pedipalp .
in some specie , like sea spider , an additional pair of appendage , call oviger , be present between the chelicerae and pedipalp .
the chelicerae ( first set of appendage ) be well develop in the scorpion .
chelicerae be mostly use for feeding , but in spider , these be often modify into fang that inject venom into - pron - prey before feeding ( figure two  eight  .  four  three ) .
member of this subphylum have an open circulatory system with a heart that pump blood into the hemocoel .
aquatic specie have gill , whereas terrestrial specie have either trachea or book lung for gaseous exchange .
the trapdoor spider , like all spider , be a member of the subphylum chelicerata .
most chelicerate ingest food use a preoral cavity form by the chelicerae and pedipalp .
some chelicerate may secrete digestive enzyme to pre - digest food before ingest - pron - .
parasitic chelicerate like tick and mite have evolve bloodsuck apparatus .
the nervous system in chelicerate consist of a brain and two ventral nerve cord .
these animal use external fertilization as well as internal fertilization strategy for reproduction , depend upon the specie and - pron - habitat .
parental care for the young range from absolutely none to relatively prolong care .
the phyla echinodermata and chordata ( the phylum in which human be place ) both belong to the superphylum deuterostomia .
recall that protostome and deuterostome differ in certain aspect of - pron - embryonic development , and - pron - be name base on which opening of the digestive cavity develop first .
the word deuterostome come from the greek word mean " mouth second , " indicate that the anus be the first to develop .
there be a series of other developmental characteristic that differ between protostome and deuterostome , include the mode of formation of the coelom and the early cell division of the embryo .
in deuterostome , internal pocket of the endodermal lining call the archenteron fuse to form the coelom .
the endodermal lining of the archenteron ( or the primitive gut ) form membrane protrusion that bud off and become the mesodermal layer .
these bud , know as coelomic pouch , fuse to form the coelomic cavity , as - pron - eventually separate from the endodermal layer .
the resultant coelom be term an enterocoelom .
the archenteron develop into the alimentary canal , and a mouth opening be form by invagination of ectoderm at the pole opposite the blastopore of the gastrula .
the blastopore form the anus of the alimentary system in the juvenile and adult form .
the fate of embryonic cell in deuterostome can be alter if - pron - be experimentally move to a different location in the embryo due to indeterminant cleavage in early embryogenesis .
phylum echinodermata echinodermata be so name owe to - pron - spiny skin ( from the greek " echino " mean " spiny " and " dermo
" mean " skin
" ) , and this phylum be a collection of about seven  ,  zero  zero  zero describe living specie .
echinodermata be exclusively marine organism .
sea star ( figure two  eight  .  four  four ) , sea cucumber , sea urchin , sand dollar , and brittle star be all example of echinoderm .
to date , no freshwater or terrestrial echinoderm be know .
morphology and anatomy adult echinoderm exhibit pentaradial symmetry and have a calcareous endoskeleton make of ossicle , although the early larval stage of all echinoderm have bilateral symmetry .
the endoskeleton be develop by epidermal cell and may possess pigment cell , give vivid color to these animal , as well as cell laden with toxin .
gonad be present in each arm .
in echinoderm like sea star , every arm bear two row of tube foot on the oral side .
these tube foot help in attachment to the substratum .
these animal possess a true coelom that be modify into a unique circulatory system call a water vascular system .
an interesting feature of these animal be - pron - power to regenerate , even when over seven  five percent of - pron - body mass be lose .
this diagram show the anatomy of a sea star .
water vascular system echinoderms possess a unique ambulacral or water vascular system , consist of a central ring canal and radial canal that extend along each arm .
water circulate through these structure and facilitate gaseous exchange as well as nutrition , predation , and locomotion .
the water vascular system also project from hole in the skeleton in the form of tube foot .
these tube foot can expand or contract base on the volume of water present in the system of that arm .
by use hydrostatic pressure , the animal can either protrude or retract the tube foot .
water enter the madreporite on the aboral side of the echinoderm .
from there , - pron - pass into the stone canal , which move water into the ring canal .
the ring canal connect the radial canal ( there be five in a pentaradial animal ) , and the radial canal move water into the ampullae , which have tube foot through which the water move .
by move water through the unique water vascular system , the echinoderm can move and force open mollusk shell during feed .
nervous system
the nervous system in these animal be a relatively simple structure with a nerve ring at the center and five radial nerve extend outward along the arm .
structure analogous to a brain or derive from fusion of ganglion be not present in these animal .
excretory system podocytes , cell specialize for ultrafiltration of bodily fluid , be present near the center of echinoderm .
these podocyte be connect by an internal system of canal to an opening call the madreporite .
reproduction echinoderms be sexually dimorphic and release - pron - egg and sperm cell into water  fertilization be external .
in some specie , the larvae divide asexually and multiply before - pron - reach sexual maturity .
echinoderm may also reproduce asexually , as well as regenerate body part lose in trauma .
class of echinoderms
this phylum be divide into five extant class  asteroidea ( sea star ) , ophiuroidea ( brittle star ) , echinoidea ( sea urchin and sand dollar ) , crinoidea ( sea lily or feather star ) , and holothuroidea ( sea cucumber ) ( figure two  eight  .  four  five ) .
the most well - know echinoderm be member of class asteroidea , or sea star .
- pron - come in a large variety of shape , color , and size , with more than one  ,  eight  zero  zero specie know so far .
the key characteristic of sea star that distinguish - pron - from other echinoderm class include thick arm ( ambulacra ) that extend from a central disk where organ penetrate into the arm .
sea star use - pron - tube foot not only for grip surface but also for grasp prey .
sea star have two stomach , one of which can protrude through - pron - mouth and secrete digestive juice into or onto prey , even before ingestion .
this process can essentially liquefy the prey and make digestion easy .
brittle star belong to the class ophiuroidea .
unlike sea star , which have plump arm , brittle star have long , thin arm that be sharply demarcate from the central disk .
brittle star move by lash out - pron - arm or wrap - pron - around object and pull - pron - forward .
sea urchin and sand dollar be example of echinoidea .
these echinoderm do not have arm , but be hemispherical or flatten with five row of tube foot that help - pron - in slow movement  tube foot be extrude through pore of a continuous internal shell call a test .
sea lily and feather star be example of crinoidea .
both of these specie be suspension feeder .
sea cucumber of class holothuroidea be extend in the oral - aboral axis and have five row of tube foot .
these be the only echinoderm that demonstrate " functional " bilateral symmetry as adult , because the uniquely extended oral - aboral axis compel the animal to lie horizontally rather than stand vertically .
different member of echinodermata include the ( a ) sea star of class asteroidea , ( b ) the brittle star of class ophiuroidea , ( c ) the sea urchin of class echinoidea ,
( d ) the sea lily belong to class crinoidea , and ( e ) sea cucumber , represent class holothuroidea .
phylum chordata animals in the phylum chordata share four key feature that appear at some stage of - pron - development  a notochord , a dorsal hollow nerve cord , pharyngeal slit , and a post - anal tail .
in some group , some of these trait be present only during embryonic development .
in addition to contain vertebrate class , the phylum chordata contain two clade of invertebrate  urochordata ( tunicate ) and cephalochordata ( lancelet ) .
most tunicate live on the ocean floor and be suspension feeder .
lancelet be suspension feeder that feed on phytoplankton and other microorganism .
example of critically endanger vertebrate specie include ( a ) the siberian tiger ( panthera tigris ) , ( b ) the mountain gorilla ( gorilla beringei ) , and ( c ) the philippine eagle ( pithecophega jefferyi ) .
vertebrate be among the most recognizable organism of the animal kingdom .
more than six  two  ,  zero  zero  zero vertebrate specie have be identify .
the vertebrate speci now live represent only a small portion of the vertebrate that have exist .
the best - know extinct vertebrate be the dinosaur , a unique group of reptile , which reach size not see before or after in terrestrial animal .
- pron - be the dominant terrestrial animal for one  five  zero million year , until - pron - die out in a mass extinction near the end of the cretaceous period .
although - pron - be not know with certainty what cause - pron - extinction , a great deal be know about the anatomy of the dinosaur , give the preservation of skeletal element in the fossil record .
currently , a number of vertebrate specie face extinction primarily due to habitat loss and pollution .
accord to the international union for the conservation of nature , more than six  ,  zero  zero  zero vertebrate specie be classify as threaten .
amphibian and mammal be the class with the great percentage of threatened specie , with two  nine percent of all amphibian and two  one percent of all mammal classify as threaten .
attempt be be make around the world to prevent the extinction of threaten specie .
for example , the biodiversity action plan be an international program , ratify by one  eight  eight country , which be design to protect specie and habitat .
vertebrate be member of the kingdom animalia and the phylum chordata ( figure two  nine  .  two ) .
recall that animal that possess bilateral symmetry can be divide into two group — protostome and deuterostome — base on - pron - pattern of embryonic development .
the deuterostome , whose name translate as " second mouth , " consist of two phyla  chordata and echinodermata .
echinoderm be invertebrate marine animal that have pentaradial symmetry and a spiny body covering , a group that include sea star , sea urchin , and sea cucumber .
the most conspicuous and familiar member of chordata be vertebrate , but this phylum also include two group of invertebrate chordate .
characteristic of chordata animals in the phylum chordata share four key feature that appear at some stage during - pron - development  a notochord , a dorsal hollow nerve cord , pharyngeal slit , and a post - anal tail ( figure two  nine  .  three ) .
in some group , some of these be present only during embryonic development .
the chordate be name for the notochord , which be a flexible , rod - shape structure that be find in the embryonic stage of all chordate and in the adult stage of some chordate specie .
- pron - be locate between the digestive tube and the nerve cord , and provide skeletal support through the length of the body .
in some chordate , the notochord act as the primary axial support of the body throughout the animal 's lifetime .
in vertebrate , the notochord be present during embryonic development , at which time - pron - induce the development of the neural tube and serve as a support for the develop embryonic body .
the notochord , however , be not find in the postnatal stage of vertebrate  at this point , - pron - have be replace by the vertebral column ( that is , the spine ) .
the dorsal hollow nerve cord derive from ectoderm that roll into a hollow tube during development .
in chordate , - pron - be locate dorsal to the notochord .
in contrast , other animal phyla be characterize by solid nerve cord that be locate either ventrally or laterally .
the nerve cord find in most chordate embryo develop into the brain and spinal cord , which compose the central nervous system .
pharyngeal slit be opening in the pharynx ( the region just posterior to the mouth ) that extend to the outside environment .
in organism that live in aquatic environment , pharyngeal slit allow for the exit of water that enter the mouth during feeding .
some invertebrate chordate use the pharyngeal slit to filter food out of the water that enter the mouth .
in vertebrate fish , the pharyngeal slit be modify into gill support , and in jaw fish , into jaw support .
in tetrapod , the slit be modify into component of the ear and tonsil .
tetrapod literally mean " four - footed , " which refer to the phylogenetic history of various group that evolve accordingly , even though some now possess few than two pair of walking appendage .
tetrapod include amphibian , reptile , bird , and mammal .
the post - anal tail be a posterior elongation of the body , extend beyond the anus .
the tail contain skeletal element and muscle , which provide a source of locomotion in aquatic specie , such as fish .
in some terrestrial vertebrate , the tail also help with balance , court , and signal when danger be near .
in human , the post - anal tail be vestigial , that is , reduce in size and nonfunctional .
chordate and the evolution of vertebrates chordata also contain two clade of invertebrate  urochordata and cephalochordata .
member of these group also possess the four distinctive feature of chordate at some point during - pron - development .
urochordata members of urochordata be also know as tunicate ( figure two  nine  .  four ) .
the name tunicate derive from the cellulose - like carbohydrate material , call the tunic , which cover the outer body of tunicate .
although adult tunicate be classify as chordate , - pron - do not have a notochord , a dorsal hollow nerve cord , or a post - anal tail , although - pron - do have pharyngeal slit .
the larval form , however , possess all four structure .
most tunicate be hermaphrodite .
tunicate larvae hatch from egg inside the adult tunicate 's body .
after hatch , a tunicate larva swim for a few day until - pron - find a suitable surface on which - pron - can attach , usually in a dark or shade location .
- pron - then attach via the head to the surface and undergoe metamorphosis into the adult form , at which point the notochord , nerve cord , and tail disappear .
this photograph show a colony of the tunicate botrylloides violaceus .
( b )
the larval stage of the tunicate possess all of the feature characteristic of chordate  a notochord , a dorsal hollow nerve cord , pharyngeal slit , and a post - anal tail .
( c )
in the adult stage , the notochord , nerve cord , and tail disappear .
most tunicate live a sessile existence on the ocean floor and be suspension feeder .
the primary food of tunicate be plankton and detritus .
seawater enter the tunicate 's body through - pron - incurrent siphon .
suspend material be filter out of this water by a mucous net ( pharyngeal slit ) and be pass into the intestine via the action of cilium .
the anus empty into the excurrent siphon , which expel waste and water .
tunicate be find in shallow ocean water around the world .
cephalochordata member of cephalochordata possess a notochord , dorsal hollow nerve cord , pharyngeal slit , and a post - anal tail in the adult stage ( figure two  nine  .  five ) .
the notochord extend into the head , which give the subphylum - pron - name .
extinct member of this subphylum include pikaia , which be the oldest know cephalochordate .
pikaia fossil be recover from the burgess shale of canada and date to the middle of the cambrian age , make - pron - more than five  zero  zero million year old .
extant member of cephalochordata be the lancelet , name for - pron - blade - like shape .
lancelet be only a few centimeter long and be usually find bury in sand at the bottom of warm temperate and tropical sea .
like tunicate , - pron - be suspension feeder .
the lancelet , like all cephalochordate , have a head .
adult lancelet retain the four key feature of chordate  a notochord , a dorsal hollow nerve cord , pharyngeal slit , and a post - anal tail .
water from the mouth enter the pharyngeal slit , which filter out food particle .
the filter water then collect in the atrium and exit through the atriopore .
craniata and vertebrata
a cranium be a bony , cartilaginous , or fibrous structure surround the brain , jaw , and facial bone ( figure two  nine  .  six ) .
most bilaterally symmetrical animal have a head  of these , those that have a cranium compose the clade craniata .
craniata include the hagfish ( myxini ) , which have a cranium but lack a backbone , and all of the organism call " vertebrate .
" craniata , include this fish ( dunkleosteus sp . ) , be characterize by the presence of a cranium , mandible , and other facial bone .
vertebrate be member of the clade vertebrata .
vertebrates display the four characteristic feature of the chordate  however , member of this group also share derive characteristic that distinguish - pron - from invertebrate chordate .
vertebrata be name for the vertebral column , compose of vertebrae , a series of separate bone join together as a backbone ( figure two  nine  .  seven ) .
in adult vertebrate , the vertebral column replace the notochord , which be only see in the embryonic stage .
vertebrata be characterize by the presence of a backbone , such as the one that run through the middle of this fish .
all vertebrate be in the craniata clade and have a cranium .
base on molecular analysis , vertebrate appear to be more closely related to lancelet ( cephalochordate ) than to tunicate ( urochordate ) among the invertebrate chordate .
this evidence suggest that the cephalochordate diverge from urochordata and the vertebrate subsequently diverge from the cephalochordate .
this hypothesis be further support by the discovery of a fossil in china from the genus haikouella .
this organism seem to be an intermediate form between cephalochordate and vertebrate .
the haikouella fossil be about five  three  zero million year old and appear similar to modern lancelet .
these organism have a brain and eye , as do vertebrate , but lack the skull find in craniate .
[ one ] this evidence suggest that vertebrate arise during the cambrian explosion .
recall that the " cambrian explosion " be the name give to a relatively brief span of time during the cambrian period during which many animal group appear and rapidly diversify .
most modern animal phyla originate during the cambrian explosion .
vertebrates be the large group of chordate , with more than six  two  ,  zero  zero  zero living specie .
vertebrates be group base on anatomical and physiological trait .
more than one classification and naming scheme be use for these animal .
here - pron - will consider the traditional group agnatha , chondrichthyes , osteichthyes , amphibia , reptilia , aves , and mammalia , which constitute class in the subphylum vertebrata .
many modern author classify bird within reptilia , which correctly reflect - pron - evolutionary heritage .
- pron - consider - pron - separately only for convenience .
further , - pron - will consider hagfish and lamprey together as jawless fish , the agnathan , although emerge classification scheme separate - pron - into chordate jawless fish ( the hagfish ) and vertebrate jawless fish ( the lamprey ) .
animal that possess jaw be know as gnathostome , which mean " jaw mouth .
"
gnathostome include fish and tetrapod — amphibian , reptile , bird , and mammal .
tetrapod can be further divide into two group  amphibian and amniote .
amniote be animal whose egg be adapt for terrestrial living , and this group include mammal , reptile , and bird .
amniotic embryo , develop in either an externally shed egg or an egg carry by the female , be provide with a water - retain environment and be protect by amniotic membrane .
modern fish include an estimate three  one  ,  zero  zero  zero specie .
fish be the early vertebrate , with jawless specie be the early and jaw specie evolve later .
- pron - be active feeder , rather than sessile , suspension feeder .
jawless fish — the hagfish and lamprey — have a distinct cranium and complex sense organ include eye , distinguish - pron - from the invertebrate chordate .
jawless fishes jawless fish be craniate that represent an ancient vertebrate lineage that arise over one half - billion year ago .
in the past , the hagfish and lamprey be classify together as agnathan .
today , hagfish and lamprey be recognize as separate clade , primarily because lamprey be true vertebrate , whereas hagfish be not .
a define feature be the lack of pair lateral appendage ( fin ) .
some of the early jawless fish be the ostracoderm ( which translate to " shellskin " ) .
ostracoderm be vertebrate fish encase in bony armor , unlike present - day jawless fish , which lack bone in - pron - scale .
myxini 
hagfishes the clade myxini include at least two  zero specie of hagfish .
hagfish be eel - like scavenger that live on the ocean floor and feed on dead invertebrate , other fish , and marine mammal ( figure two  nine  .  eight ) .
hagfish be entirely marine and be find in ocean around the world , except for the polar region .
a unique feature of these animal be the slime gland beneath the skin that release mucus through surface pore .
this mucus allow the hagfish to escape from the grip of predator .
hagfish can also twist - pron - body in a knot to feed and sometimes eat carcass from the inside out .
pacific hagfish be scavenger that live on the ocean floor .
the skeleton of a hagfish be compose of cartilage , which include a cartilaginous notochord that run the length of the body .
this notochord provide support to the hagfish 's body .
hagfish do not replace the notochord with a vertebral column during development , as do true vertebrate .
petromyzontidae 
lampreys the clade petromyzontidae include approximately three  five – four  zero or more specie of lamprey .
lamprey be similar to hagfish in size and shape  however , lamprey possess some vertebral element .
lamprey lack pair appendage and bone , as do the hagfish .
as adult , lamprey be characterize by a toothed , funnel - like suck mouth .
many specie have a parasitic stage of - pron - life cycle during which - pron - be ectoparasite of fish .
these parasitic sea lamprey attach to - pron - lake trout host by suction and use - pron - rough tongue to rasp away flesh in order to feed on the trout 's blood .
lamprey live primarily in coastal and fresh water , and have a worldwide distribution , except for in the tropic and polar region .
some specie be marine , but all specie spawn in fresh water .
egg be fertilize externally , and the larvae distinctly differ from the adult form , spend three to one  five year as suspension feeder .
once - pron - attain sexual maturity , the adult reproduce and die within day .
lamprey possess a notochord as adult  however , this notochord be surround by a cartilaginous structure call an arcualia , which may resemble an evolutionarily early form of the vertebral column .
gnathostome 
jawed fishes gnathostomes or " jaw - mouth
" be vertebrate that possess jaw .
one of the most significant development in early vertebrate evolution be the development of the jaw , which be a hinged structure attach to the cranium that allow an animal to grasp and tear - pron - food .
the evolution of jaw allow early gnathostome to exploit food resource that be unavailable to jawless fish .
early gnathostome also possess two set of pair fin , allow the fish to maneuver accurately .
pectoral fin be typically locate on the anterior body , and pelvic fin on the posterior .
evolution of the jaw and pair fin permit gnathostome to expand from the sedentary suspension feeding of jawless fish to become mobile predator .
the ability of gnathostome to exploit new nutrient source likely be one reason that - pron - replace most jawless fish during the devonian period .
two early group of gnathostome be the acanthodian and placoderm ( figure two  nine  .  one  zero ) , which arise in the late silurian period and be now extinct .
most modern fish be gnathostome that belong to the clade chondrichthyes and osteichthyes .
dunkleosteous be an enormous placoderm from the devonian period , three  eight  zero – three  six  zero million year ago .
- pron - measure up to one  zero meter in length and weigh up to three  .  six ton .
chondrichthyes 
cartilaginous fishes
the clade chondrichthyes be diverse , consist of shark ( figure two  nine  .  one  one ) , ray , and skate , together with sawfish and a few dozen specie of fish call chimaera , or " ghost " shark .
"
chondrichthye be jaw fish that possess pair fin and a skeleton make of cartilage .
this clade arise approximately three  seven  zero million year ago in the early or middle devonian .
- pron - be think to be descend from the placoderm , which have skeleton make of bone  thus , the cartilaginous skeleton of chondrichthyes be a later development .
part of shark skeleton be strengthen by granule of calcium carbonate , but this be not the same as bone .
most cartilaginous fish live in marine habitat , with a few specie live in fresh water for a part or all of - pron - life .
most shark be carnivore that feed on live prey , either swallow - pron - whole or use - pron - jaw and tooth to tear - pron - into small piece .
shark tooth likely evolve from the jagged scale that cover - pron - skin , call placoid scale .
some specie of shark and ray be suspension feeder that feed on plankton .
hammerhead shark tend to school during the day and hunt prey at night .
shark have well - develop sense organ that aid - pron - in locate prey , include a keen sense of smell and electroreception , with the latter perhaps the most sensitive of any animal .
organ call ampullae of lorenzini allow shark to detect the electromagnetic field that be produce by all live thing , include - pron - prey .
electroreception have only be observe in aquatic or amphibious animal .
shark , together with most fish and aquatic and larval amphibian , also have a sense organ call the lateral line , which be use to detect movement and vibration in the surround water , and be often consider homologous to " hear " in terrestrial vertebrate .
the lateral line be visible as a dark stripe that run along the length of a fish 's body .
shark reproduce sexually , and egg be fertilize internally .
most specie be ovoviviparous  the fertilize egg be retain in the oviduct of the mother 's body and the embryo be nourish by the egg yolk .
the egg hatch in the uterus , and young be bear alive and fully functional .
some specie of shark be oviparous  - pron - lie egg that hatch outside of the mother 's body .
embryo be protect by a shark egg case or " mermaid 's purse
"
( figure two  nine  .  one  two ) that have the consistency of leather .
the shark egg case have tentacle that snag in seaweed and give the newborn shark cover .
a few specie of shark be viviparous  the young develop within the mother 's body and - pron - give live birth .
shark embryo be clearly visible through these transparent egg case .
the round structure be the yolk that nourish the grow embryo .
ray and skate comprise more than five  zero  zero specie and be closely related to shark .
- pron - can be distinguish from shark by - pron - flattened body , pectoral fin that be enlarge and fuse to the head , and gill slit on - pron - ventral surface ( figure two  nine  .  one  three ) .
like shark , ray and skate have a cartilaginous skeleton .
most specie be marine and live on the sea floor , with nearly a worldwide distribution .
this stingray blend into the sandy bottom of the ocean floor .
osteichthye 
bony fishes member of the clade osteichthyes , also call bony fish , be characterize by a bony skeleton .
the vast majority of present - day fish belong to this group , which consist of approximately three  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero specie , make - pron - the large class of vertebrate in existence today .
nearly all bony fish have an ossified skeleton with specialized bone cell ( osteocyte ) that produce and maintain a calcium phosphate matrix .
this characteristic have only reverse in a few group of osteichthyes , such as sturgeon and paddlefish , which have primarily cartilaginous skeleton .
the skin of bony fish be often cover by overlap scale , and gland in the skin secrete mucus that reduce drag when swimming and aid the fish in osmoregulation .
like shark , bony fish have a lateral line system that detect vibration in water .
all bony fish use gill to breathe .
water be draw over gill that be locate in chamber cover and ventilate by a protective , muscular flap call the operculum .
many bony fish also have a swim bladder , a gas - fill organ that help to control the buoyancy of the fish .
bony fish be further divide into two extant clade  actinopterygii ( ray - fin fish ) and sarcopterygii ( lobe - fin fish ) .
actinopterygii , the ray - fin fish , include many familiar fish — tuna , bass , trout , and salmon ( figure two  nine  .  one  four a ) , among other .
ray - fin fish be name for - pron - fin that be webs of skin support by bony spine call ray .
in contrast , the fin of sarcopterygii be fleshy and lob , support by bone ( figure two  nine  .  one  four b ) .
live member of this clade include the less - familiar lungfish and coelacanth .
the ( a ) sockeye salmon and ( b ) coelacanth be both bony fish of the osteichthyes clade .
the coelacanth , sometimes call a lobe - fin fish , be think to have go extinct in the late cretaceous period , one  zero  zero million year ago , until one be discover in one  nine  three  eight near the comoros islands between africa and madagascar .
amphibian be vertebrate tetrapod .
amphibia include frog , salamander , and caecilian .
the term amphibian loosely translate from the greek as " dual life , " which be a reference to the metamorphosis that many frog and salamander undergo and - pron - mixture of aquatic and terrestrial environment in - pron - life cycle .
amphibian evolve during the devonian period and be the early terrestrial tetrapod .
characteristic of amphibians
as tetrapod , most amphibian be characterize by four well - develop limb .
some specie of salamander and all caecilian be functionally limbless  - pron - limb be vestigial .
an important characteristic of extant amphibian be a moist , permeable skin that be achieve via mucus gland that keep the skin moist  thus , exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide with the environment can take place through - pron - ( cutaneous respiration ) .
additional characteristic of amphibian include pedicellate tooth — tooth in which the root and crown be calcify , separate by a zone of noncalcified tissue — and a papilla amphibiorum and papilla basilaris , structure of the inner ear that be sensitive to frequency below and above one  zero  ,  zero  zero hertz , respectively .
amphibian also have an auricular operculum , which be an extra bone in the ear that transmit sound to the inner ear .
all extant adult amphibian be carnivorous , and some terrestrial amphibian have a sticky tongue that be use to capture prey .
evolution of amphibians
the fossil record provide evidence of the first tetrapod  now - extinct amphibian specie date to nearly four  zero  zero million year ago .
evolution of tetrapod from fish represent a significant change in body plan from one suit to organism that respire and swam in water , to organism that breathe air and move onto land  these change occur over a span of five  zero million year during the devonian period .
one of the earliest know tetrapod be from the genus acanthostega .
acanthostega be aquatic  fossil show that - pron - have gill similar to fish .
however , - pron - also have four limb , with the skeletal structure of limb find in present - day tetrapod , include amphibian .
therefore , - pron - be think that acanthostega live in shallow water and be an intermediate form between lobe - fin fish and early , fully terrestrial tetrapod .
what precede acanthostega ?
in two  zero  zero  six , researcher publish news of - pron - discovery of a fossil of a " tetrapod - like fish , " tiktaalik roseae , which seem to be an intermediate form between fish have fin and tetrapod have limb ( figure two  nine  .  one  five ) .
tiktaalik likely live in a shallow water environment about three  seven  five million year ago .
the recent fossil discovery of tiktaalik roseae suggest evidence for an animal intermediate to fin fish and legged tetrapod .
the early tetrapod that move onto land have access to new nutrient source and relatively few predator .
this lead to the widespread distribution of tetrapod during the early carboniferous period , a period sometimes call the " age of the amphibian .
"
modern amphibians amphibia comprise an estimate six  ,  seven  seven  zero extant specie that inhabit tropical and temperate region around the world .
amphibian can be divide into three clade  urodela ( " tail - one " ) , the salamander  anura ( " tail - less one " ) , the frog  and apoda ( " legless one " ) , the caecilian .
urodela 
salamanders salamanders be amphibian that belong to the order urodela .
living salamander ( figure two  nine  .  one  six ) include approximately six  two  zero specie , some of which be aquatic , other terrestrial , and some that live on land only as adult .
adult salamander usually have a generalize tetrapod body plan with four limb and a tail .
- pron - move by bend - pron - body from side to side , call lateral undulation , in a fish - like manner while " walk " - pron - arm and leg fore and aft .
- pron - be think that - pron - gait be similar to that use by early tetrapod .
respiration differ among different specie .
the majority of salamander be lungless , and respiration occur through the skin or through external gill .
some terrestrial salamander have primitive lung  a few specie have both gill and lung .
unlike frog , virtually all salamander rely on internal fertilization of the egg .
the only male amphibian that possess copulatory structure be the caecilian , so fertilization among salamander typically involve an elaborate and often prolong courtship .
such a courtship allow the successful transfer of sperm from male to female via a spermatophore .
development in many of the most highly evolve salamander , which be fully terrestrial , occur during a prolonged egg stage , with the egg guard by the mother .
during this time , the gill larval stage be find only within the egg capsule , with the gill be resorb , and metamorphosis be complete , before hatch .
hatchling thus resemble tiny adult .
anura  frogs frogs be amphibian that belong to the order anura ( figure two  nine  .  one  seven ) .
anuran be among the most diverse group of vertebrate , with approximately five  ,  nine  six  five specie that occur on all of the continent except antarctica .
anuran have a body plan that be more specialized for movement .
adult frog use - pron - hind limb to jump on land .
frog have a number of modification that allow - pron - to avoid predator , include skin that act as camouflage .
many specie of frog and salamander also release defensive chemical from gland in the skin that be poisonous to predator .
the australian green tree frog be a nocturnal predator that live in the canopy of tree near a water source .
frog egg be fertilize externally , and like other amphibian , frog generally lay - pron - egg in moist environment .
a moist environment be require as egg lack a shell and thus dehydrate quickly in dry environment .
frog demonstrate a great diversity of parental behavior , with some specie lay many egg and exhibit little parental care , to specie that carry egg and tadpole on - pron - hind leg or back .
the life cycle of frog , as other amphibian , consist of two distinct stage  the larval stage follow by metamorphosis to an adult stage .
the larval stage of a frog , the tadpole , be often a filter - feeding herbivore .
tadpole usually have gill , a lateral line system , long - fin tail , and lack limb .
at the end of the tadpole stage , frog undergo metamorphosis into the adult form ( figure two  nine  .  one  eight ) .
during this stage , the gill , tail , and lateral line system disappear , and four limb develop .
the jaw become large and be suit for carnivorous feeding , and the digestive system transform into the typical short gut of a predator .
an eardrum and air - breathe lung also develop .
these change during metamorphosis allow the larvae to move onto land in the adult stage .
a juvenile frog metamorphose into a frog .
here , the frog have start to develop limb , but - pron - tadpole tail be still evident .
apoda 
caecilians an estimated one  eight  five specie comprise caecilian , a group of amphibian that belong to the order apoda .
although - pron - be vertebrate , a complete lack of limb lead to - pron - resemblance to earthworm in appearance .
- pron - be adapt for a soilburrowing or aquatic lifestyle , and - pron - be nearly blind .
these animal be find in the tropic of south america , africa , and southern asia .
- pron - have vestigial limb , evidence that - pron - evolve from a legged ancestor .
the amniote —reptile , bird , and mammal — be distinguish from amphibian by - pron - terrestrially adapt egg , which be protect by amniotic membrane .
the evolution of amniotic membrane mean that the embryo of amniote be provide with - pron - own aquatic environment , which lead to less dependence on water for development and thus allow the amniote to branch out into dry environment .
this be a significant development that distinguish - pron - from amphibian , which be restrict to moist environment due - pron - shell - less egg .
although the shell of various amniotic specie vary significantly , - pron - all allow retention of water .
the shell of bird egg be compose of calcium carbonate and be hard , but fragile .
the shell of reptile egg be leathery and require a moist environment .
most mammal do not lay egg ( except for monotreme ) .
instead , the embryo grow within the mother 's body  however , even with this internal gestation , amniotic membrane be still present .
characteristic of amniotes
the amniotic egg be the key characteristic of amniote .
in amniote that lie egg , the shell of the egg provide protection for the develop embryo while be permeable enough to allow for the exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen .
the albumin , or egg white , provide the embryo with water and protein , whereas the fattier egg yolk be the energy supply for the embryo , as be the case with the egg of many other animal , such as amphibian .
however , the egg of amniote contain three additional extra - embryonic membrane  the chorion , amnion , and allantois ( figure two  nine  .  two  zero ) .
extra - embryonic membrane be membrane present in amniotic egg that be not a part of the body of the develop embryo .
while the inner amniotic membrane surround the embryo - pron - , the chorion surround the embryo and yolk sac .
the chorion facilitate exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the embryo and the egg 's external environment .
the amnion protect the embryo from mechanical shock and support hydration .
the allantois store nitrogenous waste produce by the embryo and also facilitate respiration .
in mammal , membrane that be homologous to the extra - embryonic membrane in egg be present in the placenta .
additional derive characteristic of amniote include waterproof skin , due to the presence of lipid , and costal ( rib ) ventilation of the lung .
evolution of amniotes
the first amniote evolve from amphibian ancestor approximately three  four  zero million year ago during the carboniferous period .
the early amniote diverge into two main line soon after the first amniote arise .
the initial split be into synapsid and sauropsid .
synapsid include all mammal , include extinct mammalian specie .
synapsid also include therapsid , which be mammal - like reptile from which mammal evolve .
sauropsid include reptile and bird , and can be further divide into anapsid and diapsid .
the key difference between the synapsid , anapsid , and diapsid be the structure of the skull and the number of temporal fenestrae behind each eye ( figure two  nine  .  two  one ) .
temporal fenestrae be post - orbital opening in the skull that allow muscle to expand and lengthen .
anapsid have no temporal fenestrae , synapsid have one , and diapsid have two .
anapsid include extinct organism and may , base on anatomy , include turtle .
however , this be still controversial , and turtle be sometimes classify as diapsid base on molecular evidence .
the diapsid include bird and all other living and extinct reptile .
compare the skull and temporal fenestrae of anapsid , synapsid , and diapsid .
anapsid have no opening , synapsid have one opening , and diapsid have two opening .
the diapsid diverge into two group , the archosauromorpha ( " ancient lizard form " ) and the lepidosauromorpha ( " scaly lizard form " ) during the mesozoic period ( figure two  nine  .  two  two ) .
the lepidosaur include modern lizard , snake , and tuatara .
the archosaur include modern crocodile and alligator , and the extinct pterosaur ( " winged lizard " ) and dinosaur ( " terrible lizard " ) .
clade dinosauria include bird , which evolve from a branch of dinosaur .
in the past , the most common division of amniote have be into the class mammalia , reptilia , and aves .
bird be descended , however , from dinosaur , so this classical scheme result in group that be not true clade .
- pron - will consider bird as a group distinct from reptile for the purpose of this discussion with the understanding that this do not completely reflect phylogenetic history and relationship .
characteristic of reptiles reptiles be tetrapod .
limbless reptil — snake and other squamate — have vestigial limb and , like caecilian , be classify as tetrapod because - pron - be descend from four - limb ancestor .
reptile lie egg enclose in shell on land .
even aquatic reptile return to the land to lay egg .
- pron - usually reproduce sexually with internal fertilization .
some specie display ovoviviparity , with the egg remain in the mother 's body until - pron - be ready to hatch .
other specie be viviparous , with the offspring bear alive .
one of the key adaptation that permit reptile to live on land be the development of - pron - scaly skin , contain the protein keratin and waxy lipid , which reduce water loss from the skin .
this occlusive skin mean that reptile can not use - pron - skin for respiration , like amphibian , and thus all breathe with lung .
reptile be ectotherm , animal whose main source of body heat come from the environment .
this be in contrast to endotherm , which use heat produce by metabolism to regulate body temperature .
in addition to be ectothermic , reptile be categorize as poikilotherm , or animal whose body temperature vary rather than remain stable .
reptile have behavioral adaptation to help regulate body temperature , such as bask in sunny place to warm up and find shady spot or go underground to cool down .
the advantage of ectothermy be that metabolic energy from food be not require to heat the body  therefore , reptile can survive on about one  zero percent of the calorie require by a similarly sized endotherm .
in cold weather , some reptile such as the garter snake brumate .
brumation be similar to hibernation in that the animal become less active and can go for long period without eat , but differ from hibernation in that brumating reptile be not asleep or live off fat reserve .
rather , - pron - metabolism be slow in response to cold temperature , and the animal be very sluggish .
evolution of reptiles reptiles originate approximately three  zero  zero million year ago during the carboniferous period .
one of the old know amniote be casineria , which have both amphibian and reptilian characteristic .
one of the early undisputed reptile be hylonomus .
soon after the first amniote appear , - pron - diverge into three group — synapsid , anapsid , and diapsid — during the permian period .
the permian period also see a second major divergence of diapsid reptil into archosaur ( predecessor of crocodilian and dinosaur ) and lepidosaur ( predecessor of snake and lizard ) .
these group remain inconspicuous until the triassic period , when the archosaur become the dominant terrestrial group due to the extinction of large - bodied anapsid and synapsid during the permian - triassic extinction .
about two  five  zero million year ago , archosaur radiate into the dinosaur and the pterosaur .
although - pron - be sometimes mistakenly call dinosaur , the pterosaur be distinct from true dinosaur ( figure two  nine  .  two  three ) .
pterosaur have a number of adaptation that allow for flight , include hollow bone ( bird also exhibit hollow bone , a case of convergent evolution ) .
- pron - wing be form by membrane of skin that attach to the long , fourth finger of each arm and extend along the body to the leg .
pterosaur , which exist from the late triassic to the cretaceous period ( two  one  zero to six  five  .  five million year ago ) , possess wing but be not believe to have be capable of powered flight .
instead , - pron - may have be able to soar after launch from cliff .
the dinosaur be a diverse group of terrestrial reptile with more than one  ,  zero  zero  zero specie identify to date .
paleontologist continue to discover new specie of dinosaur .
some dinosaur be quadruped ( figure two  nine  .  two  four )  other be biped .
some be carnivorous , whereas other be herbivorous .
dinosaur lay egg , and a number of nest contain fossilize egg have be find .
- pron - be not know whether dinosaur be endotherm or ectotherm .
however , give that modern bird be endothermic , the dinosaur that serve as ancestor to bird likely be endothermic as well .
some fossil evidence exist for dinosaurian parental care , and comparative biology support this hypothesis since the archosaur bird and crocodilian display parental care .
edmontonia be an armored dinosaur that live in the late cretaceous period , one  four  five  .  five to six  five  .  six million year ago .
dinosaur dominate the mesozoic era , which be know as the " age of reptile .
"
the dominance of dinosaur last until the end of the cretaceous , the last period of the mesozoic era .
the cretaceous - tertiary extinction result in the loss of most of the large - bodied animal of the mesozoic era .
bird be the only live descendant of one of the major clade of dinosaur .
modern reptiles class reptilia include many diverse specie that be classify into four living clade .
these be the two  five specie of crocodilia , two specie of sphenodontia , approximately nine  ,  two  zero  zero squamata specie , and the testudines , with about three  two  five specie .
crocodilia crocodilia ( " small lizard " ) arise with a distinct lineage by the middle triassic  extant specie include alligator , crocodile , and caiman .
crocodilians ( figure two  nine  .  two  five ) live throughout the tropic and subtropic of africa , south america , southern florida , asia , and australia .
- pron - be find in freshwater , saltwater , and brackish habitat , such as river and lake , and spend most of - pron - time in water .
some specie be able to move on land due to - pron - semi - erect posture .
crocodilian , such as this siamese crocodile ( crocodylus siamensis ) , provide parental care for - pron - offspring .
sphenodontia sphenodontia ( " wedge tooth " ) arise in the mesozoic era and include only one living genus , tuatara , comprise two specie that be find in new zealand ( figure two  nine  .  two  six ) .
tuatara measure up to eight  zero centimeter and weigh about one kilogram .
although quite lizard - like in gross appearance , several unique feature of the skull and jaw clearly define - pron - and distinguish the group from the squamate .
this tuatara from new zealand may resemble a lizard but belong to a distinct lineage , the sphenodontidae family .
squamata squamata ( " scaly " ) arise in the late permian , and extant specie include lizard and snake .
both be find on all continent except antarctica .
lizard and snake be most closely related to tuatara , both group have evolve from a lepidosaurian ancestor .
squamata be the large extant clade of reptile ( figure two  nine  .  two  seven ) .
most lizard differ from snake by have four limb , although these have be variously lose or significantly reduce in at least six  zero lineage .
snake lack eyelid and external ear , which be present in lizard .
lizard specie range in size from chameleon and geckos , which be a few centimeter in length , to the komodo dragon , which be about three meter in length .
most lizard be carnivorous , but some large specie , such as iguana , be herbivore .
this jackson 's chameleon ( trioceros jacksonii ) blend in with - pron - surrounding .
snake be think to have descend from either burrowing lizard or aquatic lizard over one  zero  zero million year ago ( figure two  nine  .  two  eight ) .
snake comprise about three  ,  zero  zero  zero specie and be find on every continent except antarctica .
- pron - range in size from one  zero centimeter - long thread snake to one  zero meter - long python and anaconda .
all snake be carnivorous and eat small animal , bird , egg , fish , and insect .
the snake body form be so specialized that , in - pron - general morphology , a " snake be a snake .
"
- pron - specialization all point to snake have evolve to feed on relatively large prey ( even though some current specie have reverse this trend ) .
although variation exist , most snake have a skull that be very flexible , involve eight rotational joint .
- pron - also differ from other squamate by have mandible ( low jaw ) without either bony or ligamentous attachment anteriorly .
have this connection via skin and muscle allow for great expansion of the gape and independent motion of the two side — both advantage in swallow big item .
the garter snake belong to the genus thamnophis , the most widely distribute reptile genus in north america .
testudo turtle be member of the clade testudines
( " have a shell " )
( figure two  nine  .  two  nine ) .
turtle be characterize by a bony or cartilaginous shell .
the shell consist of the ventral surface call the plastron and the dorsal surface call the carapace , which develop from the rib .
the plastron be make of scute or plate  the scute can be use to differentiate specie of turtle .
the two clade of turtle be most easily recognize by how - pron - retract - pron - neck .
the dominant group , which include all north american specie , retract - pron - neck in a vertical s - curve .
turtle in the less speciose clade retract the neck with a horizontal curve .
turtle arise approximately two  zero  zero million year ago , predate crocodile , lizard , and snake .
similar to other reptile , turtle be ectotherm .
- pron - lie egg on land , although many specie live in or near water .
none exhibit parental care .
turtle range in size from the speckled padloper tortoise at eight centimeter ( three  .  one inch ) to the leatherback sea turtle at two  zero  zero centimeter ( over six foot ) .
the term " turtle " be sometimes use to describe only those specie of testudo that live in the sea , with the term " tortoise " and " terrapin " use to refer to specie that live on land and in fresh water , respectively .
the african spur tortoise ( geochelone sulcata ) live at the southern edge of the sahara desert .
- pron - be the third large tortoise in the world .
the most obvious characteristic that set bird apart from other modern vertebrate be the presence of feather , which be modify scale .
while vertebrate like bat fly without feather , bird rely on feather and wing , along with other modification of body structure and physiology , for flight .
characteristic of birds birds be endothermic , and because - pron - fly , - pron - require large amount of energy , necessitate a high metabolic rate .
like mammal , which be also endothermic , bird have an insulate cover that keep heat in the body  feather .
specialized feather call down feather be especially insulate , trap air in space between each feather to decrease the rate of heat loss .
certain part of a bird 's body be cover in down feather , and the base of other feather have a downy portion , whereas newly hatch bird be cover in down .
feather not only act as insulation but also allow for flight , enable the lift and thrust necessary to become airborne .
the feather on a wing be flexible , so the collective feather move and separate as air move through - pron - , reduce the drag on the wing .
flight feather be asymmetrical , which affect airflow over - pron - and provide some of the lifting and thrust force require for flight ( figure two  nine  .  three  zero ) .
two type of flight feather be find on the wing , primary feather and secondary feather .
primary feather be locate at the tip of the wing and provide thrust .
secondary feather be locate closer to the body , attach to the forearm portion of the wing and provide lift .
contour feather be the feather find on the body , and - pron - help reduce drag produce by wind resistance during flight .
- pron - create a smooth , aerodynamic surface so that air move smoothly over the bird 's body , allow for efficient flight .
primary feather be locate at the wing tip and provide thrust  secondary feather be locate close to the body and provide lift .
flap of the entire wing occur primarily through the action of the chest muscle , the pectorali and the supracoracoideus .
these muscle be highly develop in bird and account for a high percentage of body mass than in most mammal .
these attach to a blade - shape keel , like that of a boat , locate on the sternum .
the sternum of bird be large than that of other vertebrate , which accommodate the large muscle require to generate enough upward force to generate lift with the flapping of the wing .
another skeletal modification find in most bird be the fusion of the two clavicle ( collarbone ) , form the furcula or wishbone .
the furcula be flexible enough to bend and provide support to the shoulder girdle during flap .
an important requirement of flight be a low body weight .
as body weight increase , the muscle output require for fly increase .
the large live bird be the ostrich , and while - pron - be much small than the large mammal , - pron - be flightless .
for bird that do fly , reduction in body weight make flight easy .
several modification be find in bird to reduce body weight , include pneumatization of bone .
pneumatic bone be bone that be hollow , rather than fill with tissue ( figure two  nine  .  three  one ) .
- pron - contain air space that be sometimes connect to air sac , and - pron - have strut of bone to provide structural reinforcement .
pneumatic bone be not find in all bird , and - pron - be more extensive in large bird than in small bird .
not all bone of the skeleton be pneumatic , although the skull of almost all bird be .
many bird have hollow , pneumatic bone , which make flight easy .
other modification that reduce weight include the lack of a urinary bladder .
bird possess a cloaca , a structure that allow water to be reabsorb from waste back into the bloodstream .
uric acid be not expel as a liquid but be concentrate into urate salt , which be expel along with fecal matter .
in this way , water be not hold in the urinary bladder , which would increase body weight .
most bird specie only possess one ovary rather than two , further reduce body mass .
the air sac that extend into bone to form pneumatic bone also join with the lung and function in respiration .
unlike mammalian lung in which air flow in two direction , as - pron - be breathe in and out , airflow through bird lung travel in one direction ( figure two  nine  .  three  two ) .
air sac allow for this unidirectional airflow , which also create a cross - current exchange system with the blood .
in a cross - current or counter - current system , the air flow in one direction and the blood flow in the opposite direction , create a very efficient mean of gas exchange .
avian respiration be an efficient system of gas exchange with air flow unidirectionally .
during inhalation , air pass from the trachea into posterior air sac , then through the lung to anterior air sac .
the air sac be connect to the hollow interior of bone .
during exhalation , air from air sac pass into the lung and out the trachea .
evolution of birds
the evolutionary history of bird be still somewhat unclear .
due to the fragility of bird bone , - pron - do not fossilize as well as other vertebrate .
bird be diapsid , mean - pron - have two fenestration or opening in - pron - skull .
bird belong to a group of diapsid call the archosaur , which also include crocodile and dinosaur .
- pron - be commonly accept that bird evolve from dinosaur .
dinosaur ( include bird ) be further subdivide into two group , the saurischia ( " lizard like " ) and the ornithischia ( " bird like " ) .
despite the name of these group , - pron - be not the bird - like dinosaur that give rise to modern bird .
rather , saurischia diverge into two group  one include the long - necked herbivorous dinosaur , such as apatosaurus .
the second group , bipedal predator call theropod , include bird .
this course of evolution be suggest by similarity between theropod fossil and bird , specifically in the structure of the hip and wrist bone , as well as the presence of the wishbone , form by the fusing of the clavicle .
one important fossil of an animal intermediate to dinosaur and bird be archaeopteryx , which be from the jurassic period ( figure two  nine  .  three  three ) .
archaeopteryx be important in establish the relationship between bird and dinosaur , because - pron - be an intermediate fossil , mean - pron - have characteristic of both dinosaur and bird .
some scientist propose classify - pron - as a bird , but other prefer to classify - pron - as a dinosaur .
the fossilize skeleton of archaeopteryx look like that of a dinosaur , and - pron - have tooth whereas bird do not , but - pron - also have feather modify for flight , a trait associate only with bird among modern animal .
fossil of old feather dinosaur exist , but the feather do not have the characteristic of flight feather .
( a ) archaeopteryx live in the late jurassic period around one  five  zero million year ago .
- pron - have tooth like a dinosaur , but have ( b ) flight feather like modern bird , which can be see in this fossil .
- pron - be still unclear exactly how flight evolve in bird .
two main theory exist , the arboreal ( " tree " ) hypothesis and the terrestrial ( " land " ) hypothesis .
the arboreal hypothesis posit that tree - dwell precursor to modern bird jump from branch to branch use - pron - feather for glide before become fully capable of flap flight .
in contrast to this , the terrestrial hypothesis hold that run be the stimulus for flight , as wing could be use to improve running and then become use for flap flight .
like the question of how flight evolve , the question of how endothermy evolve in bird still be unanswered .
feather provide insulation , but this be only beneficial if body heat be be produce internally .
similarly , internal heat production be only viable if insulation be present to retain that heat .
- pron - have be suggest that one or the other — feather or endothermy — evolve in response to some other selective pressure .
during the cretaceous period , a group know as the enantiornithes be the dominant bird type ( figure two  nine  .  three  four ) .
enantiornithe mean " opposite bird , " which refer to the fact that certain bone of the foot be join differently than the way the bone be join in modern bird .
these bird form an evolutionary line separate from modern bird , and - pron - do not survive past the cretaceous .
along with the enantiornithes , ornithurae bird ( the evolutionary line that include modern bird ) be also present in the cretaceous .
after the extinction of enantiornithe , modern bird become the dominant bird , with a large radiation occur during the cenozoic era .
refer to as neornithe ( " new bird
" ) , modern bird be now classify into two group , the paleognathae ( " old jaw " ) or ratite , a group of flightless bird include ostrich , emus , rhea , and kiwi , and the neognathae ( " new jaw
" ) , which include all other bird .
shanweiniao cooperorum be a species of enantiornithe that do not survive past the cretaceous period .
mammal be vertebrate that possess hair and mammary gland .
several other characteristic be distinctive to mammal , include certain feature of the jaw , skeleton , integument , and internal anatomy .
modern mammal belong to three clade  monotreme , marsupial , and eutherian ( or placental mammal ) .
characteristics of mammals
the presence of hair be one of the most obvious sign of a mammal .
although - pron - be not very extensive on certain specie , such as whale , hair have many important function for mammal .
mammal be endothermic , and hair provide insulation to retain heat generate by metabolic work .
hair trap a layer of air close to the body , retain heat .
along with insulation , hair can serve as a sensory mechanism via specialized hair call vibrissa , better know as whisker .
these attach to nerve that transmit information about sensation , which be particularly useful to nocturnal or burrowing mammal .
hair can also provide protective coloration or be part of social signaling , such as when an animal 's hair stand " on end .
"
mammalian integument , or skin , include secretory gland with various function .
sebaceous gland produce a lipid mixture call sebum that be secrete onto the hair and skin for water resistance and lubrication .
sebaceous gland be locate over most of the body .
eccrine gland produce sweat , or perspiration , which be mainly compose of water .
in most mammal , eccrine gland be limit to certain area of the body , and some mammal do not possess - pron - at all .
however , in primate , especially human , sweat figure prominently in thermoregulation , regulate the body through evaporative cooling .
sweat gland be locate over most of the body surface in primate .
apocrine gland , or scent gland , secrete substance that be use for chemical communication , such as in skunks .
mammary gland produce milk that be use to feed newborn .
while male monotreme and eutherian possess mammary gland , male marsupial do not .
mammary gland likely be modify sebaceous or eccrine gland , but - pron - evolutionary origin be not entirely clear .
the skeletal system of mammal possess many unique feature .
the low jaw of mammal consist of only one bone , the dentary .
the jaw of other vertebrate be compose of more than one bone .
in mammal , the dentary bone join the skull at the squamosal bone , while in other vertebrate , the quadrate bone of the jaw join with the articular bone of the skull .
these bone be present in mammal , but - pron - have be modify to function in hearing and form bone in the middle ear ( figure two  nine  .  three  five ) .
other vertebrate possess only one middle ear bone , the stape .
mammal have three  the malleus , incus , and stape .
the malleus originate from the articular bone , whereas the incus originate from the quadrate bone .
this arrangement of jaw and ear bone aid in distinguish fossil mammal from fossil of other synapsid .
bone of the mammalian inner ear be modify from bone of the jaw and skull .
the adductor muscle that close the jaw be compose of two muscle in mammal  the temporali and the masseter .
these allow side - to - side movement of the jaw , make chew possible , which be unique to mammal .
most mammal have heterodont tooth , mean that - pron - have different type and shape of tooth rather than just one type and shape of tooth .
most mammal be diphyodont , mean that - pron - have two set of tooth in - pron - lifetime 
deciduous or " baby " tooth , and permanent tooth .
other vertebrate be polyphyodont , that is , - pron - tooth be replace throughout - pron - entire life .
mammal , like bird , possess a four - chamber heart .
mammal also have a specialized group of cardiac fiber locate in the wall of - pron - right atrium call the sinoatrial node , or pacemaker , which determine the rate at which the heart beat .
mammalian erythrocyte ( red blood cell ) do not have nucleus , whereas the erythrocyte of other vertebrate be nucleate .
the kidney of mammal have a portion of the nephron call the loop of henle or nephritic loop , which allow mammal to produce urine with a high concentration of solute , high than that of the blood .
mammal lack a renal portal system , which be a system of vein that move blood from the hind or low limb and region of the tail to the kidney .
renal portal system be present in all other vertebrate except jawless fish .
a urinary bladder be present in all mammal .
mammalian brain have certain characteristic that differ from other vertebrate .
in some , but not all mammal , the cerebral cortex , the outermost part of the cerebrum , be highly fold , allow for a great surface area than be possible with a smooth cortex .
the optic lobe , locate in the midbrain , be divide into two part in mammal , whereas other vertebrate possess a single , undivided lobe .
eutherian mammal also possess a specialized structure that link the two cerebral hemisphere , call the corpus callosum .
evolution of mammals mammals be synapsid , mean - pron - have a single opening in the skull .
- pron - be the only live synapsid , as early form become extinct by the jurassic period .
the early non - mammalian synapsid can be divide into two group , the pelycosaur and the therapsid .
within the therapsid , a group call the cynodont be think to be the ancestor of mammal .
cynodont , which first appear in the late permian period two  six  zero million year ago , be think to be the ancestor of modern mammal .
a key characteristic of synapsid be endothermy , rather than the ectothermy see in most other vertebrate .
the increase metabolic rate require to internally modify body temperature go hand in hand with change to certain skeletal structure .
the later synapsid , which have more evolve characteristic unique to mammal , possess cheek for hold food and heterodont tooth , which be specialize for chew , mechanically break down food to speed digestion and release the energy need to produce heat .
chew also require the ability to chew and breathe at the same time , which be facilitate by the presence of a secondary palate .
a secondary palate separate the area of the mouth where chew occur from the area above where respiration occur , allow breathing to proceed uninterrupted during chew .
a secondary palate be not find in pelycosaur but be present in cynodont and mammal .
the jawbone also show change from early synapsid to later one .
the zygomatic arch , or cheekbone , be present in mammal and advanced therapsid such as cynodont , but be not present in pelycosaur .
the presence of the zygomatic arch suggest the presence of the masseter muscle , which close the jaw and function in chew .
in the appendicular skeleton , the shoulder girdle of therian mammal be modify from that of other vertebrate in that - pron - do not possess a procoracoid bone or an interclavicle , and the scapula be the dominant bone .
mammal evolve from therapsid in the late triassic period , as the earliest know mammal fossil be from the early jurassic period , some two  zero  five million year ago .
early mammal be small , about the size of a small rodent .
mammal first begin to diversify in the mesozoic era , from the jurassic to the cretaceous period , although most of these mammal be extinct by the end of the mesozoic .
during the cretaceous period , another radiation of mammal begin and continue through the cenozoic era , about six  five million year ago .
live mammals
the eutherian , or placental mammal , and the marsupial together comprise the clade of therian mammal .
monotreme , or metatherian , form - pron - sister clade .
there be three living specie of monotreme  the platypus and two specie of echidna , or spiny anteater .
the leatherybeaked platypus belong to the family ornithorhynchidae ( " bird beak
" ) , whereas echidna belong to the family tachyglossidae ( " sticky tongue " ) ( figure two  nine  .  three  seven ) .
the platypus and one specie of echidna be find in australia , and the other specie of echidna be find in new guinea .
monotreme be unique among mammal as - pron - lie egg , rather than give birth to live young .
the shell of - pron - egg be not like the hard shell of bird , but be a leathery shell , similar to the shell of reptile egg .
monotreme have no tooth .
( a )
the platypus , a monotreme , possess a leathery beak and lay egg rather than give birth to live young .
( b )
the echidna be another monotreme .
marsupial be find primarily in australia , though the opossum be find in north america .
australian marsupial include the kangaroo , koala , bandicoot , tasmanian devil ( figure two  nine  .  three  eight ) , and several other specie .
most specie of marsupial possess a pouch in which the very premature young reside after birth , receive milk and continue to develop .
marsupial differ from eutherian in that there be a less complex placental connection  the young be bear at an extremely early age and latch onto the nipple within the pouch .
the tasmanian devil be one of several marsupial native to australia .
eutherians be the most widespread of the mammal , occur throughout the world .
there be one  eight to two  zero order of placental mammal .
some example be insectivora , the insect eater  edentata , the toothless anteater  rodentia , the rodent  cetacea , the aquatic mammal include whale  carnivora , carnivorous mammal include dog , cat , and bear  and primates , which include human .
eutherian mammal be sometimes call placental mammal because all specie possess a complex placenta that connect a fetus to the mother , allow for gas , fluid , and nutrient exchange .
while other mammal possess a less complex placenta or briefly have a placenta , all eutherian possess a complex placenta during gestation .
order primates of class mammalia include lemur , tarsier , monkey , ape , and human .
non -
human primate live primarily in the tropical or subtropical region of south america , africa , and asia .
- pron - range in size from the mouse lemur at three  zero gram ( one ounce ) to the mountain gorilla at two  zero  zero kilogram ( four  four  one pound ) .
the characteristic and evolution of primate be of particular interest to - pron - as - pron - allow - pron - to understand the evolution of - pron - own specie .
characteristic of primates
all primate speci possess adaptation for climbing tree , as - pron - all descend from tree - dweller .
this arboreal heritage of primate have result in hand and foot that be adapt for brachiation , or climbing and swing through tree .
these adaptation include , but be not limited to  one ) a rotate shoulder joint , two ) a big toe that be widely separate from the other toe and thumb , which be widely separate from finger ( except human ) , which allow for grip branch , three ) stereoscopic vision , two overlap field of vision from the eye , which allow for the perception of depth and gauge distance .
other characteristic of primate be brain that be large than those of most other mammal , claws that have be modify into flattened nail , typically only one offspring per pregnancy , and a trend toward hold the body upright .
order primates be divide into two group  prosimian and anthropoid .
prosimian include the bush baby of africa , the lemur of madagascar , and the loris , potto , and tarsier of southeast asia .
anthropoid include monkey , ape , and human .
in general , prosimian tend to be nocturnal ( in contrast to diurnal anthropoid ) and exhibit a small size and small brain than anthropoid .
evolution of primates
the first primate - like mammal be refer to as proto - primate .
- pron - be roughly similar to squirrel and tree shrew in size and appearance .
the exist fossil evidence ( mostly from north africa ) be very fragmented .
these proto - primate remain largely mysterious creature until more fossil evidence become available .
the oldest know primate - like mammal with a relatively robust fossil record be plesiadapis ( although some researcher do not agree that plesiadapis be a protoprimate ) .
fossil of this primate have be date to approximately five  five million year ago .
plesiadapiforms be protoprimate that have some feature of the tooth and skeleton in common with true primate .
- pron - be find in north america and europe in the cenozoic and go extinct by the end of the eocene .
the first true primate be find in north america , europe , asia , and africa in the eocene epoch .
these early primate resemble present - day prosimian such as lemur .
evolutionary change continue in these early primate , with large brain and eye , and small muzzle be the trend .
by the end of the eocene epoch , many of the early prosimian specie go extinct due either to cool temperature or competition from the first monkey .
anthropoid monkey evolve from prosimian during the oligocene epoch .
by four  zero million year ago , evidence indicate that monkey be present in the new world ( south america ) and the old world ( africa and asia ) .
new world monkey be also call platyrrhini — a reference to - pron - broad nose ( figure two  nine  .  three  nine ) .
old world monkey be call catarrhini — a reference to - pron - narrow nose .
there be still quite a bit of uncertainty about the origin of the new world monkey .
at the time the platyrrhine arise , the continent of south american and africa have drift apart .
therefore , - pron - be think that monkey arise in the old world and reach the new world either by drift on log raft or by cross land bridge .
due to this reproductive isolation , new world monkey and old world monkey undergo separate adaptive radiation over million of year .
the new world monkey be all arboreal , whereas old world monkey include arboreal and grounddwelling specie .
the howler monkey be native to central and south america .
- pron - make a call that sound like a lion roaring .
ape evolve from the catarrhine in africa midway through the cenozoic , approximately two  five million year ago .
ape be generally large than monkey and - pron - do not possess a tail .
all ape be capable of move through tree , although many specie spend most - pron - time on the ground .
ape be more intelligent than monkey , and - pron - have relatively large brain proportionate to body size .
the ape be divide into two group .
the less ape comprise the family hylobatidae , include gibbon and siamang .
the great ape include the genera pan ( chimpanzee and bonobo )
( figure two  nine  .  four  zero a ) , gorilla ( gorilla ) , pongo ( orangutan ) , and homo ( human )
( figure two  nine  .  four  zero b ) .
the very arboreal gibbon be small than the great ape  - pron - have low sexual dimorphism ( that is , the gender be not markedly different in size )  and - pron - have relatively long arm use for swing through tree .
the ( a ) chimpanzee be one of the great ape .
- pron - possess a relatively large brain and have no tail .
( b ) all great ape have a similar skeletal structure .
human evolution
the family hominidae of order primates include the hominoid  the great ape ( figure two  nine  .  four  one ) .
evidence from the fossil record and from a comparison of human and chimpanzee dna suggest that human and chimpanzee diverge from a common hominoid ancestor approximately six million year ago .
several specie evolve from the evolutionary branch that include human , although - pron - specie be the only survive member .
the term hominin be use to refer to those specie that evolve after this split of the primate line , thereby designate specie that be more closely related to human than to chimpanzee .
hominin be predominantly bipedal and include those group that likely give rise to - pron - specie — include australopithecus , homo habili , and homo erectus
— and those non - ancestral group that can be consider " cousin " of modern human , such as neanderthals .
determine the true line of descent in hominin be difficult .
in year past , when relatively few hominin fossil have be recover , some scientist believe that consider - pron - in order , from old to young , would demonstrate the course of evolution from early hominin to modern human .
in the past several year , however , many new fossil have be find , and - pron - be clear that there be often more than one specie alive at any one time and that many of the fossil find ( and specie name ) represent hominin specie that die out and be not ancestral to modern human .
this chart show the evolution of modern human .
very early hominins three specie of very early hominid have make news in the past few year .
the old of these , sahelanthropus tchadensis , have be date to nearly seven million year ago .
there be a single speciman of this genus , a skull that be a surface find in chad .
the fossil , informally call " toumai , " be a mosaic of primitive and evolve characteristic , and - pron - be unclear how this fossil fit with the picture give by molecular datum , namely that the line lead to modern human and modern chimpanzee apparently bifurcate about six million year ago .
- pron - be not think at this time that this specie be an ancestor of modern human .
a second , young specie , orrorin tugenensis , be also a relatively recent discovery , find in two  zero  zero  zero .
there be several specimen of orrorin .
- pron - be not know whether orrorin be a human ancestor , but this possibility have not be rule out .
some feature of orrorin be more similar to those of modern human than be the australopith , although orrorin be much old .
a third genus , ardipithecus , be discover in the one  nine  nine  zero , and the scientist who discover the first fossil find that some other scientist do not believe the organism to be a biped ( thus , - pron - would not be consider a hominid ) .
in the intervene year , several more specimen of ardipithecus , classify as two different specie , demonstrate that the organism be bipedal .
again , the status of this genus as a human ancestor be uncertain .
early hominins 
genus australopithecus australopithecus ( " southern ape " ) be a genus of hominin that evolve in eastern africa approximately four million year ago and go extinct about two million year ago .
this genus be of particular interest to - pron - as - pron - be think that - pron - genus , genus homo , evolve from australopithecus about two million year ago ( after likely pass through some transitional state ) .
australopithecus have a number of characteristic that be more similar to the great ape than to modern human .
for example , sexual dimorphism be more exaggerated than in modern human .
males be up to five  zero percent large than female , a ratio that be similar to that see in modern gorilla and orangutan .
in contrast , modern human male be approximately one  five to two  zero percent large than female .
the brain size of australopithecus relative to - pron - body mass be also small than modern human and more similar to that see in the great ape .
a key feature that australopithecus have in common with modern human be bipedalism , although - pron - be likely that australopithecus also spend time in tree .
hominin footprint , similar to those of modern human , be find in laetoli , tanzania and date to three  .  six million year ago .
- pron - show that hominin at the time of australopithecus be walk upright .
there be a number of australopithecus specie , which be often refer to as australopith .
australopithecus anamensis live about four  .  two million year ago .
more be know about another early specie , australopithecus afarensis , which live between three  .  nine and two  .  nine million year ago .
this species demonstrate a trend in human evolution  the reduction of the dentition and jaw in size .
a . afarensis ( figure two  nine  .  four  two ) have small canine and molar compare to ape , but these be large than those of modern human .
- pron - brain size be three  eight  zero – four  five  zero cubic centimeter , approximately the size of a modern chimpanzee brain .
- pron - also have prognathic jaw , which be a relatively long jaw than that of modern human .
in the mid -  one  nine  seven  zero , the fossil of an adult female a . afarensis be find in the afar region of ethiopia and date to three  .  two  four million year ago ( figure two  nine  .  four  three ) .
the fossil , which be informally call " lucy , " be significant because - pron - be the most complete australopith fossil find , with four  zero percent of the skeleton recover .
the skull of ( a ) australopithecus afarensis , an early hominid that live between two and three million year ago , resemble that of ( b ) modern human but be small with a slop forehead and prominent jaw .
this adult female australopithecus afarensis skeleton , nickname lucy , be discover in the mid one  nine  seven  zero s .
australopithecus africanus live between two and three million year ago .
- pron - have a slender build and be bipedal , but have robust arm bone and , like other early hominid , may have spend significant time in tree .
- pron - brain be large than that of a . afarensis at five  zero  zero cubic centimeter , which be slightly less than one - third the size of modern human brain .
two other specie , australopithecus bahrelghazali and australopithecus garhi , have be add to the roster of australopith in recent year .
a dead end 
genus paranthropus the australopith have a relatively slender build and tooth that be suit for soft food .
in the past several year , fossil of hominid of a different body type have be find and date to approximately two  .  five million year ago .
these hominid , of the genus paranthropus , be relatively large and have large grind tooth .
- pron - molar show heavy wear , suggest that - pron - have a coarse and fibrous vegetarian diet as oppose to the partially carnivorous diet of the australopith .
paranthropus include paranthropus robustus of south africa , and paranthropus aethiopicus and paranthropus boisei of east africa .
the hominid in this genus go extinct more than one million year ago and be not think to be ancestral to modern human , but rather member of an evolutionary branch on the hominin tree that leave no descendant .
early hominins 
genus homo
the human genus , homo , first appear between two  .  five and three million year ago .
for many year , fossil of a species call h . habili be the old example in the genus homo , but in two  zero  one  zero , a new specie call homo gautengensis be discover and may be old .
compare to a . africanus , h . habili have a number of feature more similar to modern human .
h . habili have a jaw that be less prognathic than the australopith and a large brain , at six  zero  zero – seven  five  zero cubic centimeter .
however , h . habili retain some feature of old hominin specie , such as long arm .
the name h . habilis mean " handy man , " which be a reference to the stone tool that have be find with - pron - remain .
h . erectus appear approximately one  .  eight million year ago ( figure two  nine  .  four  four ) .
- pron - be believe to have originate in east africa and be the first hominin specie to migrate out of africa .
fossil of h . erectus have be find in india , china , java , and europe , and be know in the past as " java man " or " peking man .
" h . erectus have a number of feature that be more similar to modern human than those of h . habili .
h . erectus be large in size than early hominin , reach height up to one  .  eight  five meter and weigh up to six  five kilogram , which be size similar to those of modern human .
- pron - degree of sexual dimorphism be less than early specie , with male be two  zero to three  zero percent large than female , which be close to the size difference see in - pron - specie .
h . erectus have a large brain than early specie at seven  seven  five – one  ,  one  zero  zero cubic centimeter , which compare to the one  ,  one  three  zero – one  ,  two  six  zero cubic centimeter see in modern human brain .
h . erectus also have a nose with downward - face nostril similar to modern human , rather than the forward facing nostril find in other primate .
longer , downward - face nostril allow for the warming of cold air before - pron - enter the lung and may have be an adaptation to colder climate .
artifact find with fossil of h . erectus suggest that - pron - be the first hominin to use fire , hunt , and have a home base .
h . erectus be generally think to have live until about five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago .
homo erectus have a prominent brow and a nose that point downward rather than forward .
human 
homo sapiens a number of specie , sometimes call archaic homo sapiens , apparently evolve from h . erectus start about five  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago .
these specie include homo heidelbergensis , homo rhodesiensis , and homo neanderthalensis .
these archaic h . sapien have a brain size similar to that of modern human , average one  ,  two  zero  zero – one  ,  four  zero  zero cubic centimeter .
- pron - differ from modern human by have a thick skull , a prominent brow ridge , and a recede chin .
some of these specie survive until three  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero – one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago , overlap with modern human .
the homo neanderthalensis use tool and may have wear clothing .
there be considerable debate about the origin of anatomically modern human or homo sapiens sapien .
as discuss earlier , h . erectus migrate out of africa and into asia and europe in the first major wave of migration about one  .  five million year ago .
- pron - be think that modern human arise in africa from h . erectus and migrate out of africa about one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago in a second major migration wave .
then , modern human replace h . erectus specie that have migrate into asia and europe in the first wave .
this evolutionary timeline be support by molecular evidence .
one approach to study the origin of modern human be to examine mitochondrial dna ( mtdna ) from population around the world .
because a fetus develop from an egg contain - pron - mother 's mitochondria ( which have - pron - own , non - nuclear dna ) , mtdna be pass entirely through the maternal line .
mutation in mtdna can now be use to estimate the timeline of genetic divergence .
the result evidence suggest that all modern human have mtdna inherit from a common ancestor that live in africa about one  six  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago .
another approach to the molecular understanding of human evolution be to examine the y chromosome , which be pass from father to son .
this evidence suggest that all man today inherit a y chromosome from a male that live in africa about one  four  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago .
a locust leaf consist of leaflet array along a central midrib .
each leaflet be a complex photosynthetic machine , exquisitely adapt to capture sunlight and carbon dioxide .
an intricate vascular system supply the leaf with water and mineral , and export the product of photosynthesis .
plant be as essential to human existence as land , water , and air .
without plant , - pron - day - to - day life would be impossible because without oxygen from photosynthesis , aerobic life can not be sustain .
from provide food and shelter to serve as a source of medicine , oil , perfume , and industrial product , plant provide human with numerous valuable resource .
when - pron - think of plant , most of the organism that come to mind be vascular plant .
these plant have tissue that conduct food and water , and - pron - have seed .
seed plant be divide into gymnosperm and angiosperm .
gymnosperm include the needle - leave conifer — spruce , fir , and pine — as well as less familiar plant , such as ginkgo and cycad .
- pron - seed be not enclose by a fleshy fruit .
angiosperm , also call flower plant , constitute the majority of seed plant .
- pron - include broadleav tree ( such as maple , oak , and elm ) , vegetable ( such as potato , lettuce , and carrot ) , grass , and plant know for the beauty of - pron - flower ( rose , iris , and daffodil , for example ) .
while individual plant specie be unique , all share a common structure  a plant body consist of stem , root , and leaf .
- pron - all transport water , mineral , and sugar produce through photosynthesis through the plant body in a similar manner .
all plant specie also respond to environmental factor , such as light , gravity , competition , temperature , and predation .
the plant body
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  describe the shoot organ system and the root organ system distinguish between meristematic tissue and permanent tissue identify and describe the three region where plant growth occur summarize the role of dermal tissue , vascular tissue , and ground tissue compare simple plant tissue with complex plant tissue like animal , plant contain cell with organelle in which specific metabolic activity take place .
unlike animal , however , plant use energy from sunlight to form sugar during photosynthesis .
in addition , plant cell have cell wall , plastid , and a large central vacuole  structure that be not find in animal cell .
each of these cellular structure play a specific role in plant structure and function .
plant organ systems
in plant , just as in animal , similar cell work together form a tissue .
when different type of tissue work together to perform a unique function , - pron - form an organ  organ work together form organ system .
vascular plant have two distinct organ system  a shoot system , and a root system .
the shoot system consist of two portion  the vegetative ( nonreproductive ) part of the plant , such as the leaf and the stem , and the reproductive part of the plant , which include flower and fruit .
the shoot system generally grow above ground , where - pron - absorb the light need for photosynthesis .
the root system , which support the plant and absorb water and mineral , be usually underground .
figure three  zero  .  two show the organ system of a typical plant .
the shoot system of a plant consist of leaf , stem , flower , and fruit .
the root system anchor the plant while absorb water and mineral from the soil .
plant tissues plant be multicellular eukaryote with tissue system make of various cell type that carry out specific function .
plant tissue system fall into one of two general type  meristematic tissue , and permanent ( or non - meristematic ) tissue .
cell of the meristematic tissue be find in meristem , which be plant region of continuous cell division and growth .
meristematic tissue cell be either undifferentiated or incompletely differentiate , and - pron - continue to divide and contribute to the growth of the plant .
in contrast , permanent tissue consist of plant cell that be no longer actively divide .
meristematic tissue consist of three type , base on - pron - location in the plant .
apical meristem contain meristematic tissue locate at the tip of stem and root , which enable a plant to extend in length .
lateral meristem facilitate growth in thickness or girth in a mature plant .
intercalary meristem occur only in monocot , at the base of leaf blade and at node ( the area where leaf attach to a stem ) .
this tissue enable the monocot leaf blade to increase in length from the leaf base  for example , - pron - allow lawn grass leave to elongate even after repeat mowing .
meristem produce cell that quickly differentiate , or specialize , and become permanent tissue .
such cell take on specific role and lose - pron - ability to divide further .
- pron - differentiate into three main type  dermal , vascular , and ground tissue .
dermal tissue cover and protect the plant , and vascular tissue transport water , mineral , and sugar to different part of the plant .
ground tissue serve as a site for photosynthesis , provide a support matrix for the vascular tissue , and help to store water and sugar .
secondary tissue be either simple ( compose of similar cell type ) or complex ( compose of different cell type ) .
dermal tissue , for example , be a simple tissue that cover the outer surface of the plant and control gas exchange .
vascular tissue be an example of a complex tissue , and be make of two specialized conducting tissue  xylem and phloem .
xylem tissue transport water and nutrient from the root to different part of the plant , and include three different cell type  vessel element and tracheid ( both of which conduct water ) , and xylem parenchyma .
phloem tissue , which transport organic compound from the site of photosynthesis to other part of the plant , consist of four different cell type  sieve cell ( which conduct photosynthate ) , companion cell , phloem parenchyma , and phloem fiber .
unlike xylem conduct cell , phloem conduct cell be alive at maturity .
the xylem and phloem always lie adjacent to each other ( figure three  zero  .  three ) .
in stem , the xylem and the phloem form a structure call a vascular bundle  in root , this be term the vascular stele or vascular cylinder .
this light micrograph show a cross section of a squash ( curcurbita maxima ) stem .
each teardrop - shape vascular bundle consist of large xylem vessel toward the inside and small phloem cell toward the outside .
xylem cell , which transport water and nutrient from the root to the rest of the plant , be dead at functional maturity .
phloem cell , which transport sugar and other organic compound from photosynthetic tissue to the rest of the plant , be live .
the vascular bundle be encase in ground tissue and surround by dermal tissue .
stem by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  describe the main function and basic structure of stem compare and contrast the role of dermal tissue , vascular tissue , and ground tissue distinguish between primary growth and secondary growth in stem
summarize the origin of annual ring list and describe example of modify stem stems be a part of the shoot system of a plant .
- pron - may range in length from a few millimeter to hundred of meter , and also vary in diameter , depend on the plant type .
stem be usually above ground , although the stem of some plant , such as the potato , also grow underground .
stem may be herbaceous ( soft ) or woody in nature .
- pron - main function be to provide support to the plant , hold leaf , flower and bud  in some case , stem also store food for the plant .
a stem may be unbranched , like that of a palm tree , or - pron - may be highly branch , like that of a magnolia tree .
the stem of the plant connect the root to the leaf , help to transport absorb water and mineral to different part of the plant .
- pron - also help to transport the product of photosynthesis , namely sugar , from the leaf to the rest of the plant .
plant stem , whether above or below ground , be characterize by the presence of node and internode ( figure three  zero  .  four ) .
node be point of attachment for leaf , aerial root , and flower .
the stem region between two node be call an internode .
the stalk that extend from the stem to the base of the leaf be the petiole .
an axillary bud be usually find in the axil — the area between the base of a leaf and the stem — where - pron - can give rise to a branch or a flower .
the apex ( tip ) of the shoot contain the apical meristem within the apical bud .
leaf be attach to the plant stem at area call node .
an internode be the stem region between two node .
the petiole be the stalk connect the leaf to the stem .
the leaf just above the node arise from axillary bud .
stem anatomy
the stem and other plant organ arise from the ground tissue , and be primarily make up of simple tissue form from three type of cell  parenchyma , collenchyma , and sclerenchyma cell .
parenchyma cell be the most common plant cell ( figure three  zero  .  five ) .
- pron - be find in the stem , the root , the inside of the leaf , and the pulp of the fruit .
parenchyma cell be responsible for metabolic function , such as photosynthesis , and - pron - help repair and heal wound .
some parenchyma cell also store starch .
the stem of common st john ' s wort ( hypericum perforatum ) be show in cross section in this light micrograph .
the central pith ( greenish - blue , in the center ) and peripheral cortex ( narrow zone three – five cell thick just inside the epidermis ) be compose of parenchyma cell .
vascular tissue compose of xylem ( red ) and phloem tissue ( green , between the xylem and cortex ) surround the pith .
collenchyma cell be elongate cell with unevenly thicken wall ( figure three  zero  .  six ) .
- pron - provide structural support , mainly to the stem and leaf .
these cell be alive at maturity and be usually find below the epidermis .
the " string " of a celery stalk be an example of collenchyma cell .
collenchyma cell wall be uneven in thickness , as see in this light micrograph .
- pron - provide support to plant structure .
sclerenchyma cell also provide support to the plant , but unlike collenchyma cell , many of - pron - be dead at maturity .
there be two type of sclerenchyma cell  fiber and sclereid .
both type have secondary cell wall that be thicken with deposit of lignin , an organic compound that be a key component of wood .
fiber be long , slender cell  sclereid be small - sized .
sclereid give pear - pron - gritty texture .
human use sclerenchyma fiber to make linen and rope .
like the rest of the plant , the stem have three tissue system  dermal , vascular , and ground tissue .
each be distinguish by characteristic cell type that perform specific task necessary for the plant 's growth and survival .
dermal tissue
the dermal tissue of the stem consist primarily of epidermis , a single layer of cell cover and protect the underlying tissue .
woody plant have a tough , waterproof outer layer of cork cell commonly know as bark , which further protect the plant from damage .
epidermal cell be the most numerous and least differentiate of the cell in the epidermis .
the epidermis of a leaf also contain opening know as stoma , through which the exchange of gas take place ( figure three  zero  .  eight ) .
two cell , know as guard cell , surround each leaf stoma , control - pron - opening and closing and thus regulate the uptake of carbon dioxide and the release of oxygen and water vapor .
trichome be hair - like structure on the epidermal surface .
- pron - help to reduce transpiration ( the loss of water by aboveground plant part ) , increase solar reflectance , and store compound that defend the leaf against predation by herbivore .
opening call stoma ( singular  stoma ) allow a plant to take up carbon dioxide and release oxygen and water vapor .
the ( a ) colorized scanning - electron micrograph show a closed stoma of a dicot .
each stoma be flank by two guard cell that regulate - pron - ( b ) opening and closing .
the ( c ) guard cell sit within the layer of epidermal cell .
vascular tissue
the xylem and phloem that make up the vascular tissue of the stem be arrange in distinct strand call vascular bundle , which run up and down the length of the stem .
when the stem be view in cross section , the vascular bundle of dicot stem be arrange in a ring .
in plant with stem that live for more than one year , the individual bundle grow together and produce the characteristic growth ring .
in monocot stem , the vascular bundle be randomly scatter throughout the ground tissue .
in ( a ) dicot stem , vascular bundle be arrange around the periphery of the ground tissue .
the xylem tissue be locate toward the interior of the vascular bundle , and phloem be locate toward the exterior .
sclerenchyma fiber cap the vascular bundle .
in ( b ) monocot stem , vascular bundle compose of xylem and phloem tissue be scatter throughout the ground tissue .
xylem tissue have three type of cell  xylem parenchyma , tracheid , and vessel element .
the latter two type conduct water and be dead at maturity .
tracheid be xylem cell with thick secondary cell wall that be lignify .
water move from one tracheid to another through region on the side wall know as pit , where secondary wall be absent .
vessel element be xylem cell with thin wall  - pron - be short than tracheid .
each vessel element be connect to the next by mean of a perforation plate at the end wall of the element .
water move through the perforation plate to travel up the plant .
phloem tissue be compose of sieve - tube cell , companion cell , phloem parenchyma , and phloem fiber .
a series of sievetube cell ( also call sieve - tube element ) be arrange end to end to make up a long sieve tube , which transport organic substance such as sugar and amino acid .
the sugar flow from one sieve - tube cell to the next through perforated sieve plate , which be find at the end junction between two cell .
although still alive at maturity , the nucleus and other cell component of the sieve - tube cell have disintegrate .
companion cell be find alongside the sieve - tube cell , provide - pron - with metabolic support .
the companion cell contain more ribosome and mitochondrion than the sieve - tube cell , which lack some cellular organelle .
ground tissue ground tissue be mostly make up of parenchyma cell , but may also contain collenchyma and sclerenchyma cell that help support the stem .
the ground tissue towards the interior of the vascular tissue in a stem or root be know as pith , while the layer of tissue between the vascular tissue and the epidermis be know as the cortex .
growth in stem growth in plant occur as the stem and root lengthen .
some plant , especially those that be woody , also increase in thickness during - pron - life span .
the increase in length of the shoot and the root be refer to as primary growth , and be the result of cell division in the shoot apical meristem .
secondary growth be characterize by an increase in thickness or girth of the plant , and be cause by cell division in the lateral meristem .
figure three  zero  .  one  zero show the area of primary and secondary growth in a plant .
herbaceous plant mostly undergo primary growth , with hardly any secondary growth or increase in thickness .
secondary growth or " wood
" be noticeable in woody plant  - pron - occur in some dicot , but occur very rarely in monocot .
in woody plant , primary growth be follow by secondary growth , which allow the plant stem to increase in thickness or girth .
secondary vascular tissue be add as the plant grow , as well as a cork layer .
the bark of a tree extend from the vascular cambium to the epidermis .
some plant part , such as stem and root , continue to grow throughout a plant 's life  a phenomenon call indeterminate growth .
other plant part , such as leaf and flower , exhibit determinate growth , which cease when a plant part reach a particular size .
primary growth
most primary growth occur at the apex , or tip , of stem and root .
primary growth be a result of rapidly divide cell in the apical meristem at the shoot tip and root tip .
subsequent cell elongation also contribute to primary growth .
the growth of shoot and root during primary growth enable plant to continuously seek water ( root ) or sunlight ( shoot ) .
the influence of the apical bud on overall plant growth be know as apical dominance , which diminish the growth of axillary bud that form along the side of branch and stem .
most coniferous tree exhibit strong apical dominance , thus produce the typical conical christmas tree shape .
if the apical bud be remove , then the axillary bud will start form lateral branch .
gardener make use of this fact when - pron - prune plant by cut off the top of branch , thus encourage the axillary bud to grow out , give the plant a bushy shape .
secondary growth
the increase in stem thickness that result from secondary growth be due to the activity of the lateral meristem , which be lack in herbaceous plant .
lateral meristem include the vascular cambium and , in woody plant , the cork cambium ( see figure three  zero  .  one  zero ) .
the vascular cambium be locate just outside the primary xylem and to the interior of the primary phloem .
the cell of the vascular cambium divide and form secondary xylem ( tracheid and vessel element ) to the inside , and secondary phloem ( sieve element and companion cell ) to the outside .
the thickening of the stem that occur in secondary growth be due to the formation of secondary phloem and secondary xylem by the vascular cambium , plus the action of cork cambium , which form the tough outermost layer of the stem .
the cell of the secondary xylem contain lignin , which provide hardiness and strength .
in woody plant , cork cambium be the outermost lateral meristem .
- pron - produce cork cell ( bark ) contain a waxy substance know as suberin that can repel water .
the bark protect the plant against physical damage and help reduce water loss .
the cork cambium also produce a layer of cell know as phelloderm , which grow inward from the cambium .
the cork cambium , cork cell , and phelloderm be collectively term the periderm .
the periderm substitute for the epidermis in mature plant .
in some plant , the periderm have many opening , know as lenticel , which allow the interior cell to exchange gas with the outside atmosphere ( figure three  zero  .  one  one ) .
this supply oxygen to the living and metabolically active cell of the cortex , xylem and phloem .
lenticel on the bark of this cherry tree enable the woody stem to exchange gas with the surround atmosphere .
annual rings
the activity of the vascular cambium give rise to annual growth ring .
during the spring grow season , cell of the secondary xylem have a large internal diameter and - pron - primary cell wall be not extensively thicken .
this be know as early wood , or spring wood .
during the fall season , the secondary xylem develop thickened cell wall , form late wood , or autumn wood , which be denser than early wood .
this alternation of early and late wood be due largely to a seasonal decrease in the number of vessel element and a seasonal increase in the number of tracheid .
- pron - result in the formation of an annual ring , which can be see as a circular ring in the cross section of the stem ( figure three  zero  .  one  two ) .
an examination of the number of annual ring and - pron - nature ( such as - pron - size and cell wall thickness ) can reveal the age of the tree and the prevail climatic condition during each season .
the rate of wood growth increase in summer and decrease in winter , produce a characteristic ring for each year of growth .
seasonal change in weather pattern can also affect the growth rate — note how the ring vary in thickness .
stem modifications
some plant specie have modify stem that be especially suit to a particular habitat and environment ( figure three  zero  .  one  three ) .
a rhizome be a modify stem that grow horizontally underground and have node and internode .
vertical shoot may arise from the bud on the rhizome of some plant , such as ginger and fern .
corm be similar to rhizome , except - pron - be more rounded and fleshy ( such as in gladiolus ) .
corm contain store food that enable some plant to survive the winter .
stolon be stem that run almost parallel to the ground , or just below the surface , and can give rise to new plant at the node .
runner be a type of stolon that run above the ground and produce new clone plant at node at vary interval  strawberry be an example .
tuber be modify stem that may store starch , as see in the potato ( solanum sp . ) .
tuber arise as swollen end of stolon , and contain many adventitious or unusual bud ( familiar to - pron - as the " eye " on potato ) .
a bulb , which function as an underground storage unit , be a modification of a stem that have the appearance of enlarged fleshy leaf emerge from the stem or surround the base of the stem , as see in the iris .
stem modification enable plant to thrive in a variety of environment .
show be ( a ) ginger ( zingiber officinale ) rhizome , ( b ) a carrion flower ( amorphophallus titanum ) corm ( c ) rhodes grass ( chloris gayana ) stolon , ( d ) strawberry ( fragaria ananassa ) runner , ( e ) potato ( solanum tuberosum ) tuber , and ( f ) red onion ( allium ) bulb .
some aerial modification of stem be tendril and thorn ( figure three  zero  .  one  four ) .
tendril be slender , twin strand that enable a plant ( like a vine or pumpkin ) to seek support by climb on other surface .
thorn be modify branch appear as sharp outgrowth that protect the plant  common example include rose , osage orange and devil 's walking stick .
find in southeastern united states , ( a ) buckwheat vine ( brunnichia ovata ) be a weedy plant that climb with the aid of tendril .
this one be show climb up a wooden stake .
( b ) thorn be modify branch .
root
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  identify the two type of root system
describe the three zone of the root tip and summarize the role of each zone in root growth describe the structure of the root list and describe example of modify root
the root of seed plant have three major function  anchor the plant to the soil , absorb water and mineral and transport - pron - upwards , and store the product of photosynthesis .
some root be modify to absorb moisture and exchange gas .
most root be underground .
some plant , however , also have adventitious root , which emerge above the ground from the shoot .
type of root systems root system be mainly of two type ( figure three  zero  .  one  five ) .
dicot have a tap root system , while monocot have a fibrous root system .
a tap root system have a main root that grow down vertically , and from which many small lateral root arise .
dandelion be a good example  - pron - tap root usually break off when try to pull these weed , and - pron - can regrow another shoot from the remain root ) .
a tap root system penetrate deep into the soil .
in contrast , a fibrous root system be locate closer to the soil surface , and form a dense network of root that also help prevent soil erosion ( lawn grass be a good example , as be wheat , rice , and corn ) .
some plant have a combination of tap root and fibrous root .
plant that grow in dry area often have deep root system , whereas plant grow in area with abundant water be likely to have shallow root system .
( a ) tap root system have a main root that grow down , while ( b ) fibrous root system consist of many small root .
root growth and anatomy root growth begin with seed germination .
when the plant embryo emerge from the seed , the radicle of the embryo form the root system .
the tip of the root be protect by the root cap , a structure exclusive to root and unlike any other plant structure .
the root cap be continuously replace because - pron - get damage easily as the root push through soil .
the root tip can be divide into three zone  a zone of cell division , a zone of elongation , and a zone of maturation and differentiation ( figure three  zero  .  one  six ) .
the zone of cell division be close to the root tip  - pron - be make up of the actively divide cell of the root meristem .
the zone of elongation be where the newly form cell increase in length , thereby lengthen the root .
begin at the first root hair be the zone of cell maturation where the root cell begin to differentiate into special cell type .
all three zone be in the first centimeter or so of the root tip .
a longitudinal view of the root reveal the zone of cell division , elongation , and maturation .
cell division occur in the apical meristem .
the root have an outer layer of cell call the epidermis , which surround area of ground tissue and vascular tissue .
the epidermis provide protection and help in absorption .
root hair , which be extension of root epidermal cell , increase the surface area of the root , greatly contribute to the absorption of water and mineral .
inside the root , the ground tissue form two region  the cortex and the pith ( figure three  zero  .  one  seven ) .
compare to stem , root have lot of cortex and little pith .
both region include cell that store photosynthetic product .
the cortex be between the epidermis and the vascular tissue , whereas the pith lie between the vascular tissue and the center of the root .
staining reveal different cell type in this light micrograph of a wheat ( triticum ) root cross section .
sclerenchyma cell of the exodermis and xylem cell stain red , and phloem cell stain blue .
other cell type stain black .
the stele , or vascular tissue , be the area inside endodermis ( indicate by a green ring ) .
root hair be visible outside the epidermis .
the vascular tissue in the root be arrange in the inner portion of the root , which be call the stele ( figure three  zero  .  one  eight ) .
a layer of cell know as the endodermis separate the stele from the ground tissue in the outer portion of the root .
the endodermis be exclusive to root , and serve as a checkpoint for material enter the root 's vascular system .
a waxy substance call suberin be present on the wall of the endodermal cell .
this waxy region , know as the casparian strip , force water and solut to cross the plasma membrane of endodermal cell instead of slip between the cell .
this ensure that only material require by the root pass through the endodermis , while toxic substance and pathogen be generally exclude .
the outermost cell layer of the root 's vascular tissue be the pericycle , an area that can give rise to lateral root .
in dicot root , the xylem and phloem of the stele be arrange alternately in an x shape , whereas in monocot root , the vascular tissue be arrange in a ring around the pith .
in ( left ) typical dicot , the vascular tissue form an x shape in the center of the root .
in ( right ) typical monocot , the phloem cell and the large xylem cell form a characteristic ring around the central pith .
root modifications root structure may be modify for specific purpose .
for example , some root be bulbous and store starch .
aerial root and prop root be two form of aboveground root that provide additional support to anchor the plant .
tap root , such as carrot , turnip , and beet , be example of root that be modify for food storage .
many vegetable be modify root .
epiphytic root enable a plant to grow on another plant .
for example , the epiphytic root of orchid develop a spongy tissue to absorb moisture .
the banyan tree ( ficus sp . ) begin as an epiphyte , germinate in the branch of a host tree  aerial root develop from the branch and eventually reach the ground , provide additional support ( figure three  zero  .  two  zero ) .
in screwpine ( pandanus sp . ) , a palm - like tree that grow in sandy tropical soil
, aboveground prop root develop from the node to provide additional support .
the ( a ) banyan tree , also know as the strangler fig , begin life as an epiphyte in a host tree .
aerial root extend to the ground and support the grow plant , which eventually strangle the host tree .
the ( b ) screwpine develop aboveground root that help support the plant in sandy soil .
leaf
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  identify the part of a typical leaf describe the internal structure and function of a leaf compare and contrast simple leaf and compound leaf list and describe example of modify leaf leaf be the main site for photosynthesis  the process by which plant synthesize food .
most leaf be usually green , due to the presence of chlorophyll in the leaf cell .
however , some leaf may have different color , cause by other plant pigment that mask the green chlorophyll .
the thickness , shape , and size of leaf be adapt to the environment .
each variation help a plant specie maximize - pron - chance of survival in a particular habitat .
usually , the leaf of plant grow in tropical rainforest have large surface area than those of plant grow in desert or very cold condition , which be likely to have a small surface area to minimize water loss .
structure of a typical leaf
each leaf typically have a leaf blade call the lamina , which be also the wide part of the leaf .
some leaf be attach to the plant stem by a petiole .
leaf that do not have a petiole and be directly attach to the plant stem be call sessile leaf .
small green appendage usually find at the base of the petiole be know as stipule .
most leaf have a midrib , which travel the length of the leaf and branch to each side to produce vein of vascular tissue .
the edge of the leaf be call the margin .
figure three  zero  .  two  one show the structure of a typical eudicot leaf .
deceptively simple in appearance , a leaf be a highly efficient structure .
within each leaf , the vascular tissue form vein .
the arrangement of vein in a leaf be call the venation pattern .
monocot and dicot differ in - pron - pattern of venation ( figure three  zero  .  two  two ) .
monocot have parallel venation  the vein run in straight line across the length of the leaf without converge at a point .
in dicot , however , the vein of the leaf have a net - like appearance , form a pattern know as reticulate venation .
one extant plant , the ginkgo biloba , have dichotomous venation where the vein fork .
( a ) tulip ( tulipa ) , a monocot , have leaf with parallel venation .
the netlike venation in this ( b ) linden ( tilia cordata ) leaf distinguish - pron - as a dicot .
the ( c ) ginkgo biloba tree have dichotomous venation .
leaf arrangement
the arrangement of leaf on a stem be know as phyllotaxy .
the number and placement of a plant
's
leaf will vary depend on the specie , with each specie exhibit a characteristic leaf arrangement .
leaf be classify as either alternate , spiral , or opposite .
plant that have only one leaf per node have leaf that be say to be either alternate — mean the leaf alternate on each side of the stem in a flat plane — or spiral , mean the leaf be array in a spiral along the stem .
in an opposite leaf arrangement , two leaf arise at the same point , with the leaf connect opposite each other along the branch .
if there be three or more leaf connect at a node , the leaf arrangement be classify as whorl .
leaf form leaves may be simple or compound ( figure three  zero  .  two  three ) .
in a simple leaf , the blade be either completely undivided — as in the banana leaf — or - pron - have lobe , but the separation do not reach the midrib , as in the maple leaf .
in a compound leaf , the leaf blade be completely divide , form leaflet , as in the locust tree .
each leaflet may have - pron - own stalk , but be attach to the rachis .
a palmately compound leaf resemble the palm of a hand , with leaflet radiate outward from one point example include the leaf of poison ivy , the buckeye tree , or the familiar houseplant schefflera sp .
( common name " umbrella plant " ) .
pinnately compound leaf take - pron - name from - pron - feather - like appearance  the leaflet be arrange along the midrib , as in rose leaf ( rosa sp . ) , or the leaf of hickory , pecan , ash , or walnut tree . 
leaf may be simple or compound .
in simple leaf , the lamina be continuous .
the ( a ) banana plant ( musa sp . ) have simple leaf .
in compound leaf , the lamina be separate into leaflet .
compound leaf may be palmate or pinnate .
in ( b ) palmately compound leaf , such as those of the horse chestnut ( aesculus hippocastanum ) , the leaflet branch from the petiole .
in ( c ) pinnately compound leaf , the leaflet branch from the midrib , as on a scrub hickory ( carya floridana ) .
the ( d ) honey locust have double compound leaf , in which leaflet branch from the vein .
leaf structure and function
the outermost layer of the leaf be the epidermis  - pron - be present on both side of the leaf and be call the upper and low epidermis , respectively .
botanist call the upper side the adaxial surface ( or adaxi ) and the low side the abaxial surface ( or abaxi ) .
the epidermis help in the regulation of gas exchange .
- pron - contain stoma ( figure three  zero  .  two  four )  opening through which the exchange of gas take place .
two guard cell surround each stoma , regulate - pron - opening and closing .
visualize at five  zero  zero x with a scanning electron microscope , several stoma be clearly visible on ( a ) the surface of this sumac ( rhus glabra ) leaf .
at five  ,  zero  zero  zero x magnification , the guard cell of ( b ) a single stoma from lyre - leave sand cress ( arabidopsis lyrata ) have the appearance of lip that surround the opening .
in this ( c ) light micrograph cross - section of an a . lyrata leaf , the guard cell pair be visible along with the large , sub - stomatal air space in the leaf .
the epidermis be usually one cell layer thick  however , in plant that grow in very hot or very cold condition , the epidermis may be several layer thick to protect against excessive water loss from transpiration .
a waxy layer know as the cuticle cover the leaf of all plant specie .
the cuticle reduce the rate of water loss from the leaf surface .
other leaf may have small hair ( trichome ) on the leaf surface .
trichome help to deter herbivory by restrict insect movement , or by store toxic or bad - taste compound  - pron - can also reduce the rate of transpiration by block air flow across the leaf surface .
trichome give leave a fuzzy appearance as in this ( a ) sundew ( drosera sp . ) .
leaf trichome include ( b ) branched trichome on the leaf of arabidopsis lyrata and ( c ) multibranched trichome on a mature quercus marilandica leaf .
below the epidermis of dicot leaf be layer of cell know as the mesophyll , or " middle leaf .
"
the mesophyll of most leaf typically contain two arrangement of parenchyma cell  the palisade parenchyma and spongy parenchyma ( figure three  zero  .  two  six ) .
the palisade parenchyma ( also call the palisade mesophyll ) have column - shape , tightly pack cell , and may be present in one , two , or three layer .
below the palisade parenchyma be loosely arrange cell of an irregular shape .
these be the cell of the spongy parenchyma ( or spongy mesophyll ) .
the air space find between the spongy parenchyma cell allow gaseous exchange between the leaf and the outside atmosphere through the stoma .
in aquatic plant , the intercellular space in the spongy parenchyma help the leaf float .
both layer of the mesophyll contain many chloroplast .
guard cell be the only epidermal cell to contain chloroplast .
in the ( a ) leaf drawing , the central mesophyll be sandwich between an upper and low epidermis .
the mesophyll have two layer  an upper palisade layer comprise of tightly pack , columnar cell , and a lower spongy layer , comprise of loosely pack , irregularly shape cell .
stoma on the leaf underside allow gas exchange .
a waxy cuticle cover all aerial surface of land plant to minimize water loss .
these leaf layer be clearly visible in the ( b ) scan electron micrograph .
the numerous small bump in the palisade parenchyma cell be chloroplast .
chloroplast be also present in the spongy parenchyma , but be not as obvious .
the bump protrude from the low surface of the leave be glandular trichome , which differ in structure from the stalk trichome in figure three  zero  .  two  five .
like the stem , the leaf contain vascular bundle compose of xylem and phloem ( figure three  zero  .  two  seven ) .
the xylem consist of tracheid and vessel , which transport water and mineral to the leaf .
the phloem transport the photosynthetic product from the leaf to the other part of the plant .
a single vascular bundle , no matter how large or small , always contain both xylem and phloem tissue .
this scan electron micrograph show xylem and phloem in the leaf vascular bundle from the lyreleaved sand cress ( arabidopsis lyrata ) .
leaf adaptations coniferous plant specie that thrive in cold environment , like spruce , fir , and pine , have leaf that be reduce in size and needle - like in appearance .
these needle - like leaf have sink stoma and a small surface area  two attribute that aid in reduce water loss .
in hot climate , plant such as cacti have leaf that be reduce to spine , which in combination with - pron - succulent stem , help to conserve water .
many aquatic plant have leaf with wide lamina that can float on the surface of the water , and a thick waxy cuticle on the leaf surface that repel water .
transport of water and solutes in plant
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  define water potential and explain how - pron - be influence by solute , pressure , gravity , and the matric potential describe how water potential , evapotranspiration , and stomatal regulation influence how water be transport in plant explain how photosynthate be transport in plant
the structure of plant root , stem , and leaf facilitate the transport of water , nutrient , and photosynthate throughout the plant .
the phloem and xylem be the main tissue responsible for this movement .
water potential , evapotranspiration , and stomatal regulation influence how water and nutrient be transport in plant .
to understand how these process work , - pron - must first understand the energetic of water potential .
water potential plant be phenomenal hydraulic engineer .
use only the basic law of physics and the simple manipulation of potential energy , plant can move water to the top of a one  one  six  - meter - tall tree ( figure three  zero  .  three  one a ) .
plant can also use hydraulic to generate enough force to split rock and buckle sidewalk ( figure three  zero  .  three  one b ) .
plant achieve this because of water potential .
with height near one  one  six meter , ( a ) coastal redwood ( sequoia semperviren ) be the tall tree in the world .
plant root can easily generate enough force to ( b ) buckle and break concrete sidewalk , much to the dismay of homeowner and city maintenance department .
water potential be a measure of the potential energy in water .
plant physiologist be not interested in the energy in any one particular aqueous system , but be very interested in water movement between two system .
in practical term , therefore , water potential be the difference in potential energy between a give water sample and pure water ( at atmospheric pressure and ambient temperature ) .
water potential be denote by the greek letter ψ ( psi ) and be express in unit of pressure ( pressure be a form of energy ) call megapascal ( mpa ) .
the potential of pure water ( ψw pure h two o ) be , by convenience of definition , designate a value of zero ( even though pure water contain plenty of potential energy , that energy be ignore ) .
water potential value for the water in a plant root , stem , or leaf be therefore express relative to ψw pure h two o .
the water potential in plant solution be influence by solute concentration , pressure , gravity , and factor call matrix effect .
water potential can be break down into - pron - individual component use the following equation
 ψsystem = ψtotal = ψs + ψp + ψg + ψm where ψs , ψp , ψg , and ψm refer to the solute , pressure , gravity , and matric potential , respectively .
" system " can refer to the water potential of the soil water ( ψsoil ) , root water ( ψroot ) , stem water ( ψstem ) , leaf water ( ψleaf ) or the water in the atmosphere ( ψatmosphere )  whichev aqueous system be under consideration .
as the individual component change , - pron - raise or lower the total water potential of a system .
when this happen , water move to equilibrate , move from the system or compartment with a high water potential to the system or compartment with a low water potential .
this bring the difference in water potential between the two system ( δψ ) back to zero ( δψ = zero ) .
therefore , for water to move through the plant from the soil to the air ( a process call transpiration ) , ψsoil must be >
ψroot >
ψstem > ψleaf > ψatmosphere .
water only move in response to δψ , not in response to the individual component .
however , because the individual component influence the total ψsystem , by manipulate the individual component ( especially ψs ) , a plant can control water movement .
solute potential solute potential ( ψs ) , also call osmotic potential , be negative in a plant cell and zero in distilled water .
typical value for cell cytoplasm be – zero  .  five to – one  .  zero mpa .
solute reduce water potential ( result in a negative ψw ) by consume some of the potential energy available in the water .
solute molecule can dissolve in water because water molecule can bind to - pron - via hydrogen bond  a hydrophobic molecule like oil , which can not bind to water , can not go into solution .
the energy in the hydrogen bond between solute molecule and water be no longer available to do work in the system because - pron - be tie up in the bond .
in other word , the amount of available potential energy be reduce when solute be add to an aqueous system .
thus , ψs decrease with increase solute concentration .
because ψs be one of the four component of ψsystem or ψtotal , a decrease in ψs will because a decrease in ψtotal .
the internal water potential of a plant cell be more negative than pure water because of the cytoplasm 's high solute content ( figure three  zero  .  three  two ) .
because of this difference in water potential water will move from the soil into a plant 's root cell via the process of osmosis .
this be why solute potential be sometimes call osmotic potential .
plant cell can metabolically manipulate ψs ( and by extension , ψtotal ) by add or remove solute molecule .
therefore , plant have control over ψtotal via - pron - ability to exert metabolic control over ψs .
pressure potential pressure potential ( ψp ) , also call turgor potential , may be positive or negative
( figure three  zero  .  three  two ) .
because pressure be an expression of energy , the high the pressure , the more potential energy in a system , and vice versa .
therefore , a positive ψp ( compression ) increase ψtotal , and a negative ψp ( tension ) decrease ψtotal .
positive pressure inside cell be contain by the cell wall , produce turgor pressure .
pressure potential be typically around zero  .  six – zero  .  eight mpa , but can reach as high as one  .  five mpa in a well - water plant .
a ψp of one  .  five mpa equate to two  one  zero pound per square inch ( one  .  five mpa x one  four  zero lb in -  two mpa -  one = two  one  zero lb / in -  two ) .
as a comparison , most automobile tire be keep at a pressure of three  zero – three  four psi .
an example of the effect of turgor pressure be the wilting of leaf and - pron - restoration after the plant have be water ( figure three  zero  .  three  three ) .
water be lose from the leaf via transpiration ( approach ψp = zero mpa at the wilting point ) and restore by uptake via the root .
a plant can manipulate ψp via - pron - ability to manipulate ψs and by the process of osmosis .
if a plant cell increase the cytoplasmic solute concentration , ψs will decline , ψtotal will decline , the δψ between the cell and the surround tissue will decline , water will move into the cell by osmosis , and ψp will increase .
ψp be also under indirect plant control via the opening and closing of stoma .
stomatal opening allow water to evaporate from the leaf , reduce ψp and ψtotal of the leaf and increase ii between the water in the leaf and the petiole , thereby allow water to flow from the petiole into the leaf .
when ( a ) total water potential ( ψtotal ) be low outside the cell than inside , water move out of the cell and the plant wilt .
when ( b ) the total water potential be high outside the plant cell than inside , water move into the cell , result in turgor pressure ( ψp ) and keep the plant erect .
gravity potential gravity potential ( ψg ) be always negative to zero in a plant with no height .
- pron - always remove or consume potential energy from the system .
the force of gravity pull water downwards to the soil , reduce the total amount of potential energy in the water in the plant ( ψtotal ) .
the tall the plant , the tall the water column , and the more influential ψg become .
on a cellular scale and in short plant , this effect be negligible and easily ignore .
however , over the height of a tall tree like a giant coastal redwood , the gravitational pull of – zero  .  one mpa m -  one be equivalent to an extra one mpa of resistance that must be overcome for water to reach the leaf of the tall tree .
plant be unable to manipulate ψg .
matric potential matric potential ( ψm ) be always negative to zero .
in a dry system , - pron - can be as low as – two mpa in a dry seed , and - pron - be zero in a water - saturate system .
the binding of water to a matrix always remove or consume potential energy from the system .
ψm be similar to solute potential because - pron - involve tie up the energy in an aqueous system by form hydrogen bond between the water and some other component .
however , in solute potential , the other component be soluble , hydrophilic solute molecule , whereas in ψm , the other component be insoluble , hydrophilic molecule of the plant cell wall .
every plant cell have a cellulosic cell wall and the cellulose in the cell wall be hydrophilic , produce a matrix for adhesion of water  hence the name matric potential .
ψm be very large ( negative ) in dry tissue such as seed or drought - affect soil .
however , - pron - quickly go to zero as the seed take up water or the soil hydrate .
ψm can not be manipulate by the plant and be typically ignore in well - water root , stem , and leaf .
movement of water and minerals in the xylem solutes , pressure , gravity , and matric potential be all important for the transport of water in plant .
water move from an area of high total water potential ( high gibbs free energy ) to an area of low total water potential .
gibbs free energy be the energy associate with a chemical reaction that can be use to do work .
this be express as δψ . transpiration be the loss of water from the plant through evaporation at the leaf surface .
- pron - be the main driver of water movement in the xylem .
transpiration be cause by the evaporation of water at the leaf – atmosphere interface  - pron - create negative pressure ( tension ) equivalent to – two mpa at the leaf surface .
this value vary greatly depend on the vapor pressure deficit , which can be negligible at high relative humidity ( rh ) and substantial at low rh .
water from the root be pull up by this tension .
at night , when stoma shut and transpiration stop , the water be hold in the stem and leaf by the adhesion of water to the cell wall of the xylem vessel and tracheid , and the cohesion of water molecule to each other .
this be call the cohesion – tension theory of sap ascent .
inside the leaf at the cellular level , water on the surface of mesophyll cell saturate the cellulose microfibril of the primary cell wall .
the leaf contain many large intercellular air space for the exchange of oxygen for carbon dioxide , which be require for photosynthesis .
the wet cell wall be expose to this leaf internal air space , and the water on the surface of the cell evaporate into the air space , decrease the thin film on the surface of the mesophyll cell .
this decrease create a great tension on the water in the mesophyll cell ( figure three  zero  .  three  four ) , thereby increase the pull on the water in the xylem vessel .
the xylem vessel and tracheid be structurally adapt to cope with large change in pressure .
ring in the vessel maintain - pron - tubular shape , much like the ring on a vacuum cleaner hose keep the hose open while - pron - be under pressure .
small perforation between vessel element reduce the number and size of gas bubble that can form via a process call cavitation .
the formation of gas bubble in xylem interrupt the continuous stream of water from the base to the top of the plant , cause a break term an embolism in the flow of xylem sap .
the tall the tree , the great the tension force need to pull water , and the more cavitation event .
in large tree , the result embolism can plug xylem vessel , make - pron - non - functional .
transpiration — the loss of water vapor to the atmosphere through stoma — be a passive process , mean that metabolic energy in the form of atp be not require for water movement .
the energy drive transpiration be the difference in energy between the water in the soil and the water in the atmosphere .
however , transpiration be tightly control .
control of transpiration
the atmosphere to which the leaf be expose drive transpiration , but also cause massive water loss from the plant .
up to nine  zero percent of the water take up by root may be lose through transpiration .
leaf be cover by a waxy cuticle on the outer surface that prevent the loss of water .
regulation of transpiration , therefore , be achieve primarily through the opening and closing of stoma on the leaf surface .
stoma be surround by two specialized cell call guard cell , which open and close in response to environmental cue such as light intensity and quality , leaf water status , and carbon dioxide concentration .
stomata must open to allow air contain carbon dioxide and oxygen to diffuse into the leaf for photosynthesis and respiration .
when stoma be open , however , water vapor be lose to the external environment , increase the rate of transpiration .
therefore , plant must maintain a balance between efficient photosynthesis and water loss .
plant have evolve over time to adapt to - pron - local environment and reduce transpiration ( figure three  zero  .  three  five ) .
desert plant ( xerophyt ) and plant that grow on other plant ( epiphyte ) have limit access to water .
such plant usually have a much thick waxy cuticle than those grow in more moderate , well - water environment ( mesophyte ) .
aquatic plant ( hydrophyte ) also have - pron - own set of anatomical and morphological leaf adaptation .
plant be suit to - pron - local environment .
( a ) xerophytes , like this prickly pear cactus ( opuntia sp . ) and ( b ) epiphyte such as this tropical aeschynanthus perrottetii have adapt to very limited water resource .
the leaf of a prickly pear be modify into spine , which lower the surface - to - volume ratio and reduce water loss .
photosynthesis take place in the stem , which also store water .
( b ) a . perottetii leaf have a waxy cuticle that prevent water loss .
( c ) goldenrod ( solidago sp . ) be a mesophyte , well suited for moderate environment .
( d ) hydrophytes , like this fragrant water lily ( nymphaea odorata ) , be adapt to thrive in aquatic environment .
xerophyte and epiphyte often have a thick covering of trichome or of stoma that be sink below the leaf 's surface .
trichome be specialized hair - like epidermal cell that secrete oil and substance .
these adaptation impede air flow across the stomatal pore and reduce transpiration .
multiple epidermal layer be also commonly find in these type of plant .
transportation of photosynthates in the phloem plants need an energy source to grow .
in seed and bulb , food be store in polymer ( such as starch ) that be convert by metabolic process into sucrose for newly develop plant .
once green shoot and leaf be grow , plant be able to produce - pron - own food by photosynthesiz .
the product of photosynthesis be call photosynthate , which be usually in the form of simple sugar such as sucrose .
structure that produce photosynthate for the grow plant be refer to as source .
sugar produce in source , such as leaf , need to be deliver to grow part of the plant via the phloem in a process call translocation .
the point of sugar delivery , such as root , young shoot , and develop seed , be call sink .
seed , tuber , and bulb can be either a source or a sink , depend on the plant 's stage of development and the season .
the product from the source be usually translocate to the near sink through the phloem .
for example , the high leaf will send photosynthate upward to the grow shoot tip , whereas low leaf will direct photosynthate downward to the root .
intermediate leaf will send product in both direction , unlike the flow in the xylem , which be always unidirectional ( soil to leaf to atmosphere ) .
the pattern of photosynthate flow change as the plant grow and develop .
photosynthate be direct primarily to the root early on , to shoot and leaf during vegetative growth , and to seed and fruit during reproductive development .
- pron - be also direct to tuber for storage .
translocation  transport from source to sink photosynthates , such as sucrose , be produce in the mesophyll cell of photosynthesiz leaf .
from there - pron - be translocate through the phloem to where - pron - be use or store .
mesophyll cell be connect by cytoplasmic channel call plasmodesma .
photosynthate move through these channel to reach phloem sieve - tube element ( stes ) in the vascular bundle .
from the mesophyll cell , the photosynthate be load into the phloem stes .
the sucrose be actively transport against - pron - concentration gradient ( a process require atp ) into the phloem cell use the electrochemical potential of the proton gradient .
this be couple to the uptake of sucrose with a carrier protein call the sucrose - h+ symporter .
phloem ste have reduce cytoplasmic content , and be connect by a sieve plate with pore that allow for pressuredriven bulk flow , or translocation , of phloem sap .
companion cell be associate with ste .
- pron - assist with metabolic activity and produce energy for the ste .
phloem be comprise of cell call sieve - tube element .
phloem sap travel through perforation call sieve tube plate .
neighbor companion cell carry out metabolic function for the sieve - tube element and provide - pron - with energy .
lateral sieve area connect the sieve - tube element to the companion cell .
once in the phloem , the photosynthate be translocate to the close sink .
phloem sap be an aqueous solution that contain up to three  zero percent sugar , mineral , amino acid , and plant growth regulator .
the high percentage of sugar decrease ψs , which decrease the total water potential and cause water to move by osmosis from the adjacent xylem into the phloem tube , thereby increase pressure .
this increase in total water potential cause the bulk flow of phloem from source to sink ( figure three  zero  .  three  seven ) .
sucrose concentration in the sink cell be low than in the phloem stes because the sink sucrose have be metabolize for growth , or convert to starch for storage or other polymer , such as cellulose , for structural integrity .
unload at the sink end of the phloem tube occur by either diffusion or active transport of sucrose molecule from an area of high concentration to one of low concentration .
water diffus from the phloem by osmosis and be then transpire or recycle via the xylem back into the phloem sap .
sucrose be actively transport from source cell into companion cell and then into the sieve - tube element .
this reduce the water potential , which cause water to enter the phloem from the xylem .
the result positive pressure force the sucrose - water mixture down toward the root , where sucrose be unloaded .
transpiration cause water to return to the leaf through the xylem vessel .
plant sensory systems and responses
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  describe how red and blue light affect plant growth and metabolic activity discuss gravitropism understand how hormone affect plant growth and development describe thigmotropism , thigmonastism , and thigmogenesis explain how plant defend - pron - from predator and respond to wound animal can respond to environmental factor by move to a new location .
plant , however , be root in place and must respond to the surround environmental factor .
plant have sophisticated system to detect and respond to light , gravity , temperature , and physical touch .
receptor sense environmental factor and relay the information to effector system — often through intermediate chemical messenger — to bring about plant response .
plant responses to light plant have a number of sophisticated us for light that go far beyond - pron - ability to photosynthesize low - molecularweight sugar use only carbon dioxide , light , and water .
photomorphogenesis be the growth and development of plant in response to light .
- pron - allow plant to optimize - pron - use of light and space .
photoperiodism be the ability to use light to track time .
plant can tell the time of day and time of year by sense and use various wavelength of sunlight .
phototropism be a directional response that allow plant to grow towards , or even away from , light .
the sensing of light in the environment be important to plant  - pron - can be crucial for competition and survival .
the response of plant to light be mediate by different photoreceptor , which be comprise of a protein covalently bond to a lightabsorb pigment call a chromophore .
together , the two be call a chromoprotein .
the red / far - red and violet - blue region of the visible light spectrum trigger structural development in plant .
sensory photoreceptor absorb light in these particular region of the visible light spectrum because of the quality of light available in the daylight spectrum .
in terrestrial habitat , light absorption by chlorophyll peak in the blue and red region of the spectrum .
as light filter through the canopy and the blue and red wavelength be absorb , the spectrum shift to the farred end , shift the plant community to those plant better adapt to respond to far - red light .
blue - light receptor allow plant to gauge the direction and abundance of sunlight , which be rich in blue – green emission .
water absorb red light , which make the detection of blue light essential for algae and aquatic plant .
the phytochrome system and the red / far - red response
the phytochrome be a family of chromoprotein with a linear tetrapyrrole chromophore , similar to the ringed tetrapyrrole light - absorb head group of chlorophyll .
phytochrome have two photo - interconvertible form  pr and pfr .
pr absorb red light ( ~ six  six  seven nm ) and be immediately convert to pfr .
pfr absorb far - red light ( ~ seven  three  zero nm ) and be quickly convert back to pr .
absorption of red or far - red light cause a massive change to the shape of the chromophore , alter the conformation and activity of the phytochrome protein to which - pron - be bind .
pfr be the physiologically active form of the protein  therefore , exposure to red light yield physiological activity .
exposure to far - red light inhibit phytochrome activity .
together , the two form represent the phytochrome system ( figure three  zero  .  three  eight ) .
the phytochrome system act as a biological light switch .
- pron - monitor the level , intensity , duration , and color of environmental light .
the effect of red light be reversible by immediately shin far - red light on the sample , which convert the chromoprotein to the inactive pr form .
additionally , pfr can slowly revert to pr in the dark , or break down over time .
in all instance , the physiological response induce by red light be reverse .
the active form of phytochrome ( pfr ) can directly activate other molecule in the cytoplasm , or - pron - can be traffic to the nucleus , where - pron - directly activate or repress specific gene expression .
once the phytochrome system evolve , plant adapt - pron - to serve a variety of need .
unfiltered , full sunlight contain much more red light than far - red light .
because chlorophyll absorb strongly in the red region of the visible spectrum , but not in the far - red region , any plant in the shade of another plant on the forest floor will be expose to red - depleted , far - red - enriched light .
the preponderance of far - red light convert phytochrome in the shade leaf to the pr ( inactive ) form , slow growth .
the near non - shade ( or even less - shade ) area on the forest floor have more red light  leaf expose to these area sense the red light , which activate the pfr form and induce growth .
in short , plant shoot use the phytochrome system to grow away from shade and towards light .
because competition for light be so fierce in a dense plant community , the evolutionary advantage of the phytochrome system be obvious .
in seed , the phytochrome system be not use to determine direction and quality of light ( shade versus unshaded ) .
instead , be - pron - use merely to determine if there be any light at all .
this be especially important in specie with very small seed , such as lettuce .
because of - pron - size , lettuce seed have few food reserve .
- pron - seedling can not grow for long before - pron - run out of fuel .
if - pron - germinate even a centimeter under the soil surface , the seedling would never make - pron - into the sunlight and would die .
in the dark , phytochrome be in the pr ( inactive form ) and the seed will not germinate  - pron - will only germinate if expose to light at the surface of the soil .
upon exposure to light , pr be convert to pfr and germination proceed .
the biologically inactive form of phytochrome ( pr ) be convert to the biologically active form pfr under illumination with red light .
far - red light and darkness convert the molecule back to the inactive form .
plant also use the phytochrome system to sense the change of season .
photoperiodism be a biological response to the timing and duration of day and night .
- pron - control flower , setting of winter bud , and vegetative growth .
detection of seasonal change be crucial to plant survival .
although temperature and light intensity influence plant growth , - pron - be not reliable indicator of season because - pron - may vary from one year to the next .
day length be a good indicator of the time of year .
as state above , unfiltered sunlight be rich in red light but deficient in far - red light .
therefore , at dawn , all the phytochrome molecule in a leaf quickly convert to the active pfr form , and remain in that form until sunset .
in the dark , the pfr form take hour to slowly revert back to the pr form .
if the night be long ( as in winter ) , all of the pfr form revert .
if the night be short ( as in summer ) , a considerable amount of pfr may remain at sunrise .
by sense the pr / pfr ratio at dawn , a plant can determine the length of the day / night cycle .
in addition , leaf retain that information for several day , allow a comparison between the length of the previous night and the precede several night .
short night indicate springtime to the plant  when the night become longer , autumn be approach .
this information , along with sense temperature and water availability , allow plant to determine the time of the year and adjust - pron - physiology accordingly .
short - day ( longnight ) plant use this information to flower in the late summer and early fall , when night exceed a critical length ( often eight or few hour ) .
long - day ( short - night ) plant flower during the spring , when darkness be less than a critical length ( often eight to one  five hour ) .
not all plant use the phytochrome system in this way .
flower in day - neutral plant be not regulate by daylength .
the blue light responses phototropism
— the directional bending of a plant toward or away from a light source
— be a response to blue wavelength of light .
positive phototropism be growth towards a light source ( figure three  zero  .  three  nine ) , while negative phototropism ( also call skototropism ) be growth away from light .
the aptly - name phototropin be protein - base receptor responsible for mediate the phototropic response .
like all plant photoreceptor , phototropin consist of a protein portion and a light - absorb portion , call the chromophore .
in phototropin , the chromophore be a covalently - bind molecule of flavin  hence , phototropin belong to a class of protein call flavoprotein .
other response under the control of phototropin be leaf opening and closing , chloroplast movement , and the opening of stoma .
however , of all response control by phototropin , phototropism have be study the long and be the good understand .
in - pron - one  eight  eight  zero treatise the power of movements in plant , charles darwin and - pron - son francis first describe phototropism as the bending of seedling toward light .
darwin observe that light be perceive by the tip of the plant ( the apical meristem ) , but that the response ( bend ) take place in a different part of the plant .
- pron - conclude that the signal have to travel from the apical meristem to the base of the plant .
azure bluet ( houstonia caerulea ) display a phototropic response by bend toward the light .
in one  nine  one  three , peter boysen - jensen demonstrate that a chemical signal produce in the plant tip be responsible for the bending at the base .
- pron - cut off the tip of a seedling , cover the cut section with a layer of gelatin , and then replace the tip .
the seedling bent toward the light when illuminate .
however , when impermeable mica flake be insert between the tip and the cut base , the seedling do not bend .
a refinement of the experiment show that the signal travel on the shade side of the seedling .
when the mica plate be insert on the illuminate side , the plant do bend towards the light .
therefore , the chemical signal be a growth stimulant because the phototropic response involve fast cell elongation on the shade side than on the illuminate side .
- pron - now know that as light pass through a plant stem , - pron - be diffract and generate phototropin activation across the stem .
most activation occur on the light side , cause the plant hormone indole acetic acid ( iaa ) to accumulate on the shade side .
stem cell elongate under influence of iaa .
cryptochrome be another class of blue - light absorb photoreceptor that also contain a flavin - base chromophore .
cryptochrome set the plant two  four  - hour activity cycle , also know as - pron - circadian rhythem , use blue light cue .
there be some evidence that cryptochrom work together with phototropin to mediate the phototropic response .
plant responses to gravity
whether or not - pron - germinate in the light or in total darkness , shoot usually sprout up from the ground , and root grow downward into the ground .
a plant lay on - pron - side in the dark will send shoot upward when give enough time .
gravitropism ensure that root grow into the soil and that shoot grow toward sunlight .
growth of the shoot apical tip upward be call negative gravitropism , whereas growth of the root downward be call positive gravitropism .
amyloplast ( also know as statolith ) be specialized plastid that contain starch granule and settle downward in response to gravity .
amyloplast be find in shoot and in specialized cell of the root cap .
when a plant be tilt , the statolith drop to the new bottom cell wall .
a few hour later , the shoot or root will show growth in the new vertical direction .
the mechanism that mediate gravitropism be reasonably well understand .
when amyloplast settle to the bottom of the gravity - sense cell in the root or shoot , - pron - physically contact the endoplasmic reticulum ( er ) , cause the release of calcium ion from inside the er .
this calcium signal in the cell cause polar transport of the plant hormone iaa to the bottom of the cell .
in root , a high concentration of iaa inhibit cell elongation .
the effect slow growth on the low side of the root , while cell develop normally on the upper side .
iaa have the opposite effect in shoot , where a high concentration at the low side of the shoot stimulate cell expansion , cause the shoot to grow up .
after the shoot or root begin to grow vertically , the amyloplast return to - pron - normal position .
other hypothesis — involve the entire cell in the gravitropism effect — have be propose to explain why some mutant that lack amyloplast may still exhibit a weak gravitropic response .
growth responses a plant 's sensory response to external stimulus rely on chemical messenger ( hormone ) .
plant hormone affect all aspect of plant life , from flower to fruit setting and maturation , and from phototropism to leaf fall .
potentially every cell in a plant can produce plant hormone .
- pron - can act in - pron - cell of origin or be transport to other portion of the plant body , with many plant response involve the synergistic or antagonistic interaction of two or more hormone .
in contrast , animal hormone be produce in specific gland and transport to a distant site for action , and - pron - act alone .
plant hormone be a group of unrelated chemical substance that affect plant morphogenesis .
five major plant hormone be traditionally describe  auxin ( particularly iaa ) , cytokinin , gibberellin , ethylene , and abscisic acid .
in addition , other nutrient and environmental condition can be characterize as growth factor .
auxin
the term auxin be derive from the greek word auxein , which mean " to grow .
" auxin be the main hormone responsible for cell elongation in phototropism and gravitropism .
- pron - also control the differentiation of meristem into vascular tissue , and promote leaf development and arrangement .
while many synthetic auxin be use as herbicide , iaa be the only naturally occur auxin that show physiological activity .
apical dominance — the inhibition of lateral bud formation — be trigger by auxin produce in the apical meristem .
flowering , fruit setting and ripening , and inhibition of abscission ( leaf fall ) be other plant response under the direct or indirect control of auxin .
auxins also act as a relay for the effect of the blue light and red / far - red response .
commercial use of auxin be widespread in plant nursery and for crop production .
iaa be use as a root hormone to promote growth of adventitious root on cutting and detach leaf .
apply synthetic auxin to tomato plant in greenhouse promote normal fruit development .
outdoor application of auxin promote synchronization of fruit setting and drop to coordinate the harvesting season .
fruit such as seedless cucumber can be induce to set fruit by treat unfertilized plant flower with auxin .
cytokinins
the effect of cytokinin be first report when - pron - be find that add the liquid endosperm of coconut to develop plant embryo in culture stimulate - pron - growth .
the stimulating growth factor be find to be cytokinin , a hormone that promote cytokinesis ( cell division ) .
almost two  zero  zero naturally occur or synthetic cytokinin be know to date .
cytokinin be most abundant in grow tissue , such as root , embryo , and fruit , where cell division be occur .
cytokinin be know to delay senescence in leaf tissue , promote mitosis , and stimulate differentiation of the meristem in shoot and root .
many effect on plant development be under the influence of cytokinin , either in conjunction with auxin or another hormone .
for example , apical dominance seem to result from a balance between auxin that inhibit lateral bud , and cytokinin that promote bushier growth .
gibberellins gibberellins ( gas ) be a group of about one  two  five closely related plant hormone that stimulate shoot elongation , seed germination , and fruit and flower maturation .
gas be synthesize in the root and stem apical meristem , young leaf , and seed embryo .
in urban area , ga antagonist be sometimes apply to tree under power line to control growth and reduce the frequency of pruning .
gas break dormancy ( a state of inhibited growth and development ) in the seed of plant that require exposure to cold or light to germinate .
abscisic acid be a strong antagonist of ga action .
other effect of gas include gender expression , seedless fruit development , and the delay of senescence in leaf and fruit .
seedless grape be obtain through standard breeding method and contain inconspicuous seed that fail to develop .
because gas be produce by the seed , and because fruit development and stem elongation be under ga control , these variety of grape would normally produce small fruit in compact cluster .
mature grape be routinely treat with ga to promote large fruit size , as well as loose bunch ( longer stem ) , which reduce the instance of mildew infection .
in grape , application of gibberellic acid increase the size of fruit and loosen cluster .
abscisic acid
the plant hormone abscisic acid ( aba ) be first discover as the agent that cause the abscission or dropping of cotton boll .
however , more recent study indicate that aba play only a minor role in the abscission process .
aba accumulate as a response to stressful environmental condition , such as dehydration , cold temperature , or shorten day length .
- pron - activity counter many of the growth - promote effect of gas and auxin .
aba inhibit stem elongation and induce dormancy in lateral bud .
aba induce dormancy in seed by block germination and promote the synthesis of storage protein .
plant adapt to temperate climate require a long period of cold temperature before seed germinate .
this mechanism protect young plant from sprout too early during unseasonably warm weather in winter .
as the hormone gradually break down over winter , the seed be release from dormancy and germinate when condition be favorable in spring .
another effect of aba be to promote the development of winter bud  - pron - mediate the conversion of the apical meristem into a dormant bud .
low soil moisture cause an increase in aba , which cause stoma to close , reduce water loss in winter bud .
ethylene ethylene be associate with fruit ripening , flower wilting , and leaf fall .
ethylene be unusual because - pron - be a volatile gas ( c two h four ) .
hundred of year ago , when gas street lamp be instal in city street , tree that grow close to lamp post develop twisted , thickened trunk and shed - pron - leaf earlier than expect .
these effect be cause by ethylene volatilizing from the lamp .
age tissue ( especially senesce leaf ) and node of stem produce ethylene .
the best - know effect of the hormone , however , be the promotion of fruit ripening .
ethylene stimulate the conversion of starch and acid to sugar .
some people store unripe fruit , such as avocadoe , in a sealed paper bag to accelerate ripen  the gas release by the first fruit to mature will speed up the maturation of the remain fruit .
ethylene also trigger leaf and fruit abscission , flower fade and drop , and promote germination in some cereal and sprouting of bulb and potato .
ethylene be widely use in agriculture .
commercial fruit grower control the timing of fruit ripen with application of the gas .
horticulturalist inhibit leaf drop in ornamental plant by remove ethylene from greenhouse use fan and ventilation .
nontraditional hormones recent research have discover a number of compound that also influence plant development .
- pron - role be less understand than the effect of the major hormone describe so far .
jasmonate play a major role in defense response to herbivory .
- pron - level increase when a plant be wound by a predator , result in an increase in toxic secondary metabolite .
- pron - contribute to the production of volatile compound that attract natural enemy of predator .
for example , chew of tomato plant by caterpillar lead to an increase in jasmonic acid level , which in turn trigger the release of volatile compound that attract predator of the pest .
oligosaccharin also play a role in plant defense against bacterial and fungal infection .
- pron - act locally at the site of injury , and can also be transport to other tissue .
strigolactone promote seed germination in some specie and inhibit lateral apical development in the absence of auxin .
strigolactone also play a role in the establishment of mycorrhizae , a mutualistic association of plant root and fungus .
brassinosteroid be important to many developmental and physiological process .
signal between these compound and other hormone , notably auxin and gas , amplify - pron - physiological effect .
apical dominance , seed germination , gravitropism , and resistance to freezing be all positively influence by hormone .
root growth and fruit dropping be inhibit by steroid .
plant responses to wind and touch
the shoot of a pea plant wind around a trellis , while a tree grow on an angle in response to strong prevailing wind .
these be example of how plant respond to touch or wind .
the movement of a plant subject to constant directional pressure be call thigmotropism , from the greek word thigma mean " touch , " and tropism imply " direction .
"
tendril be one example of this .
the meristematic region of tendril be very touch sensitive  light touch will evoke a quick coil response .
cell in contact with a support surface contract , whereas cell on the opposite side of the support expand ( figure three  zero  .  one  four ) .
application of jasmonic acid be sufficient to trigger tendril coil without a mechanical stimulus .
a thigmonastic response be a touch response independent of the direction of stimulus figure three  zero  .  two  four .
in the venus flytrap , two modify leaf be join at a hinge and line with thin fork - like tine along the outer edge .
tiny hair be locate inside the trap .
when an insect brush against these trigger hair , touch two or more of - pron - in succession , the leaf close quickly , trap the prey .
gland on the leaf surface secrete enzym that slowly digest the insect .
the release nutrient be absorb by the leaf , which reopen for the next meal .
thigmomorphogenesis be a slow developmental change in the shape of a plant subject to continuous mechanical stress .
when tree bend in the wind , for example , growth be usually stunt and the trunk thicken .
strengthen tissue , especially xylem , be produce to add stiffness to resist the wind 's force .
researcher hypothesize that mechanical strain induce growth and differentiation to strengthen the tissue .
ethylene and jasmonate be likely involve in thigmomorphogenesis .
defense response against herbivores and pathogens plant face two type of enemy  herbivore and pathogen .
herbivore both large and small use plant as food , and actively chew - pron - .
pathogen be agent of disease .
these infectious microorganism , such as fungus , bacteria , and nematode , live off of the plant and damage - pron - tissue .
plant have develop a variety of strategy to discourage or kill attacker .
the first line of defense in plant be an intact and impenetrable barrier .
bark and the waxy cuticle can protect against predator .
other adaptation against herbivory include thorn , which be modify branch , and spine , which be modify leaf .
- pron - discourage animal by cause physical damage and induce rash and allergic reaction .
a plant 's exterior protection can be compromise by mechanical damage , which may provide an entry point for pathogen .
if the first line of defense be breach , the plant must resort to a different set of defense mechanism , such as toxin and enzyme .
secondary metabolite be compound that be not directly derive from photosynthesis and be not necessary for respiration or plant growth and development .
many metabolite be toxic , and can even be lethal to animal that ingest - pron - .
some metabolite be alkaloid , which discourage predator with noxious odor ( such as the volatile oil of mint and sage ) or repellent taste ( like the bitterness of quinine ) .
other alkaloid affect herbivore by cause either excessive stimulation ( caffeine be one example ) or the lethargy associate with opioid .
some compound become toxic after ingestion  for instance , glycol cyanide in the cassava root release cyanide only upon ingestion by the herbivore .
mechanical wounding and predator attack activate defense and protection mechanism both in the damaged tissue and at site farther from the injury location .
some defense reaction occur within minute  other over several hour .
the infected and surround cell may die , thereby stop the spread of infection .
long - distance signaling elicit a systemic response aim at deter the predator .
as tissue be damage , jasmonate may promote the synthesis of compound that be toxic to predator .
jasmonate also elicit the synthesis of volatile compound that attract parasitoid , which be insect that spend - pron - develop stage in or on another insect , and eventually kill - pron - host .
the plant may activate abscission of injured tissue if - pron - be damage beyond repair .
for this ( a ) squash seedling ( cucurbita maxima ) to develop into a mature plant bear - pron - ( b ) fruit , numerous nutritional requirement must be meet .
cucurbitaceae be a family of plant first cultivate in mesoamerica , although several specie be native to north america .
the family include many edible specie , such as squash and pumpkin , as well as inedible gourd .
in order to grow and develop into mature , fruit - bear plant , many requirement must be meet and event must be coordinate .
seed must germinate under the right condition in the soil  therefore , temperature , moisture , and soil quality be important factor that play a role in germination and seedl development .
soil quality and climate be significant to plant distribution and growth .
the young seedling will eventually grow into a mature plant , and the root will absorb nutrient and water from the soil .
at the same time , the aboveground part of the plant will absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and use energy from sunlight to produce organic compound through photosynthesis .
this chapter will explore the complex dynamic between plant and soil , and the adaptation that plant have evolve to make good use of nutritional resource .
nutritional requirements of plant
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  describe how plant obtain nutrient list the element and compound require for proper plant nutrition describe an essential nutrient plant be unique organism that can absorb nutrient and water through - pron - root system , as well as carbon dioxide from the atmosphere .
soil quality and climate be the major determinant of plant distribution and growth .
the combination of soil nutrient , water , and carbon dioxide , along with sunlight , allow plant to grow .
the chemical composition of plant since plant require nutrient in the form of element such as carbon and potassium
, - pron - be important to understand the chemical composition of plant .
the majority of volume in a plant cell be water  - pron - typically comprise eight  zero to nine  zero percent of the plant 's total weight .
soil be the water source for land plant , and can be an abundant source of water , even if - pron - appear dry .
plant root absorb water from the soil through root hair and transport - pron - up to the leaf through the xylem .
as water vapor be lose from the leaf , the process of transpiration and the polarity of water molecule ( which enable - pron - to form hydrogen bond ) draw more water from the root up through the plant to the leaf ( figure three  one  .  two ) .
plant need water to support cell structure , for metabolic function , to carry nutrient , and for photosynthesis .
water be absorb through the root hair and move up the xylem to the leaf .
plant cell need essential substance , collectively call nutrient , to sustain life .
plant nutrient may be compose of either organic or inorganic compound .
an organic compound be a chemical compound that contain carbon , such as carbon dioxide obtain from the atmosphere .
carbon that be obtain from atmospheric co two compose the majority of the dry mass within most plant .
an inorganic compound do not contain carbon and be not part of , or produce by , a live organism .
inorganic substance , which form the majority of the soil solution , be commonly call mineral  those require by plant include nitrogen ( n ) and potassium ( k ) for structure and regulation .
essential nutrients plant require only light , water and about two  zero element to support all - pron - biochemical need  these two  zero element be call essential nutrient ( table three  one  .  one ) .
for an element to be regard as essential , three criterion be require  one ) a plant can not complete - pron - life cycle without the element  two ) no other element can perform the function of the element  and three ) the element be directly involve in plant nutrition .
macronutrient and micronutrients
the essential element can be divide into two group  macronutrient and micronutrient .
nutrient that plant require in large amount be call macronutrient .
about half of the essential element be consider macronutrient  carbon , hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , phosphoru , potassium , calcium , magnesium and sulfur .
the first of these macronutrient , carbon ( c ) , be require to form carbohydrate , protein , nucleic acid , and many other compound  - pron - be therefore present in all macromolecule .
on average , the dry weight ( exclude water ) of a cell be five  zero percent carbon .
as show in figure three  one  .  three , carbon be a key part of plant biomolecule .
cellulose , the main structural component of the plant cell wall , make up over thirty percent of plant matter .
- pron - be the most abundant organic compound on earth .
plant be able to make - pron - own cellulose , but need carbon from the soil to do so .
the next most abundant element in plant cell be nitrogen ( n )  - pron - be part of protein and nucleic acid .
nitrogen be also use in the synthesis of some vitamin .
hydrogen and oxygen be macronutrient that be part of many organic compound , and also form water .
oxygen be necessary for cellular respiration  plant use oxygen to store energy in the form of atp .
phosphorus ( p ) , another macromolecule , be necessary to synthesize nucleic acid and phospholipid .
as part of atp , phosphorus enable food energy to be convert into chemical energy through oxidative phosphorylation .
likewise , light energy be convert into chemical energy during photophosphorylation in photosynthesis , and into chemical energy to be extract during respiration .
sulfur be part of certain amino acid , such as cysteine and methionine , and be present in several coenzyme .
sulfur also play a role in photosynthesis as part of the electron transport chain , where hydrogen gradient play a key role in the conversion of light energy into atp .
potassium ( k ) be important because of - pron - role in regulate stomatal opening and closing .
as the opening for gas exchange , stoma help maintain a healthy water balance  a potassium ion pump support this process .
magnesium ( mg ) and calcium ( ca ) be also important macronutrient .
the role of calcium be twofold  to regulate nutrient transport , and to support many enzyme function .
magnesium be important to the photosynthetic process .
these mineral , along with the micronutrient , which be describe below , also contribute to the plant 's ionic balance .
in addition to macronutrient , organism require various element in small amount .
these micronutrient , or trace element , be present in very small quantity .
- pron - include boron ( b ) , chlorine ( cl ) , manganese ( mn ) , iron ( fe ) , zinc ( zn ) , copper ( cu ) , molybdenum ( mo ) , nickel ( ni ) , silicon ( si ) , and sodium ( na ) .
deficiency in any of these nutrient — particularly the macronutrient — can adversely affect plant growth ( figure three  one  .  four .
depend on the specific nutrient , a lack can because stunted growth , slow growth , or chlorosis ( yellowing of the leaf ) .
extreme deficiency may result in leaf show sign of cell death .
nutrient deficiency be evident in the symptom these plant show .
this ( a ) grape tomato suffer from blossom end rot cause by calcium deficiency .
the yellowing in this ( b ) frangula alnus result from magnesium deficiency .
inadequate magnesium also lead to ( c ) intervenal chlorosis , see here in a sweetgum leaf .
this ( d ) palm be affect by potassium deficiency .
the soil
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to 
describe how soil be form
explain soil composition describe a soil profile
plant obtain inorganic element from the soil , which serve as a natural medium for land plant .
soil be the outer loose layer that cover the surface of earth .
soil quality be a major determinant , along with climate , of plant distribution and growth .
soil quality depend not only on the chemical composition of the soil , but also the topography ( regional surface feature ) and the presence of live organism .
in agriculture , the history of the soil , such as the cultivate practice and previous crop , modify the characteristic and fertility of that soil .
soil develop very slowly over long period of time , and - pron - formation result from natural and environmental force act on mineral , rock , and organic compound .
soil can be divide into two group  organic soil be those that be form from sedimentation and primarily compose of organic matter , while those that be form from the weathering of rock and be primarily compose of inorganic material be call mineral soil .
mineral soil be predominant in terrestrial ecosystem , where soil may be cover by water for part of the year or expose to the atmosphere .
soil composition soil consist of these major component ( figure three  one  .  five )   inorganic mineral matter , about four  zero to four  five percent of the soil volume  organic matter , about five percent of the soil volume  water and air , about five  zero percent of the soil volume the amount of each of the four major component of soil depend on the amount of vegetation , soil compaction , and water present in the soil .
a good healthy soil have sufficient air , water , mineral , and organic material to promote and sustain plant life .
the organic material of soil , call humus , be make up of microorganism ( dead and alive ) , and dead animal and plant in vary stage of decay .
humus improve soil structure and provide plant with water and mineral .
the inorganic material of soil consist of rock , slowly break down into small particle that vary in size .
soil particle that be zero  .  one to two mm in diameter be sand .
soil particle between zero  .  zero  zero  two and zero  .  one mm be call silt , and even small particle , less than zero  .  zero  zero  two mm in diameter , be call clay .
some soil have no dominant particle size and contain a mixture of sand , silt , and humus  these soil be call loam .
soil formation soil formation be the consequence of a combination of biological , physical , and chemical process .
soil should ideally contain five  zero percent solid material and five  zero percent pore space .
about one - half of the pore space should contain water , and the other half should contain air .
the organic component of soil serve as a cement agent , return nutrient to the plant , allow soil to store moisture , make soil tillable for farming , and provide energy for soil microorganism .
most soil microorganism — bacteria , algae , or fungus — be dormant in dry soil , but become active once moisture be available .
soil distribution be not homogenous because - pron - formation result in the production of layer  together , the vertical section of a soil be call the soil profile .
within the soil profile , soil scientist define zone call horizon .
a horizon be a soil layer with distinct physical and chemical property that differ from those of other layer .
five factor account for soil formation  parent material , climate , topography , biological factor , and time .
parent material
the organic and inorganic material in which soil form be the parent material .
mineral soil form directly from the weathering of bedrock , the solid rock that lie beneath the soil , and therefore , - pron - have a similar composition to the original rock .
other soil form in material that come from elsewhere , such as sand and glacial drift .
material locate in the depth of the soil be relatively unchanged compare with the deposit material .
sediment in river may have different characteristic , depend on whether the stream move quickly or slowly .
a fast - move river could have sediment of rock and sand , whereas a slow - move river could have fine - textur material , such as clay .
climate temperature , moisture , and wind because different pattern of weather and therefore affect soil characteristic .
the presence of moisture and nutrient from weather will also promote biological activity  a key component of a quality soil .
topography regional surface feature ( familiarly call " the lay of the land " ) can have a major influence on the characteristic and fertility of a soil .
topography affect water runoff , which strip away parent material and affect plant growth .
steep soil be more prone to erosion and may be thin than soil that be relatively flat or level .
biological factor
the presence of live organism greatly affect soil formation and structure .
animal and microorganism can produce pore and crevice , and plant root can penetrate into crevice to produce more fragmentation .
plant secretion promote the development of microorganism around the root , in an area know as the rhizosphere .
additionally , leaf and other material that fall from plant decompose and contribute to soil composition .
time time be an important factor in soil formation because soil develop over long period .
soil formation be a dynamic process .
material be deposit over time , decompose , and transform into other material that can be use by live organism or deposit onto the surface of the soil .
physical properties of the soil soils be name and classify base on - pron - horizon .
the soil profile have four distinct layer  one ) o horizon  two )
a horizon  three ) b horizon , or subsoil  and four ) c horizon , or soil base
( figure three  one  .  six ) .
the o horizon have freshly decompose organic matter
— humus — at - pron - surface , with decomposed vegetation at - pron - base .
humus enrich the soil with nutrient and enhance soil moisture retention .
topsoil —
the top layer of soil
— be usually two to three inch deep , but this depth can vary considerably .
for instance , river delta like the mississippi river delta have deep layer of topsoil .
topsoil be rich in organic material  microbial process occur there , and - pron - be the " workhorse " of plant production .
the a horizon consist of a mixture of organic material with inorganic product of weathering , and - pron - be therefore the beginning of true mineral soil .
this horizon be typically darkly color because of the presence of organic matter .
in this area , rainwater percolate through the soil and carry material from the surface .
the b horizon be an accumulation of mostly fine material that have move downward , result in a dense layer in the soil .
in some soil , the b horizon contain nodule or a layer of calcium carbonate .
the c horizon , or soil base , include the parent material , plus the organic and inorganic material that be break down to form soil .
the parent material may be either create in - pron - natural place , or transport from elsewhere to - pron - present location .
beneath the c horizon lie bedrock .
some soil may have additional layer , or lack one of these layer .
the thickness of the layer be also variable , and depend on the factor that influence soil formation .
in general , immature soil may have o , a , and c horizon , whereas mature soil may display all of these , plus additional layer .
the san joaquin soil profile have an o horizon , a horizon , b horizon , and c horizon .
nutritional adaptations of plant
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  understand the nutritional adaptation of plant describe mycorrhizae
explain nitrogen fixation plant obtain food in two different way .
autotrophic plant can make - pron - own food from inorganic raw material , such as carbon dioxide and water , through photosynthesis in the presence of sunlight .
green plant be include in this group .
some plant , however , be heterotrophic  - pron - be totally parasitic and lacking in chlorophyll .
these plant , refer to as holo - parasitic plant , be unable to synthesize organic carbon and draw all of - pron - nutrient from the host plant .
plant may also enlist the help of microbial partner in nutrient acquisition .
particular specie of bacteria and fungus have evolve along with certain plant to create a mutualistic symbiotic relationship with root .
this improve the nutrition of both the plant and the microbe .
the formation of nodule in legume plant and mycorrhization can be consider among the nutritional adaptation of plant .
however , these be not the only type of adaptation that - pron - may find  many plant have other adaptation that allow - pron - to thrive under specific condition .
nitrogen fixation  root and bacteria interactions nitrogen be an important macronutrient because - pron - be part of nucleic acid and protein .
atmospheric nitrogen , which be the diatomic molecule n two , or dinitrogen , be the large pool of nitrogen in terrestrial ecosystem .
however , plant can not take advantage of this nitrogen because - pron - do not have the necessary enzyme to convert - pron - into biologically useful form .
however , nitrogen can be " fix , " which mean that - pron - can be convert to ammonia ( nh three ) through biological , physical , or chemical process .
as - pron - have learn , biological nitrogen fixation ( bnf ) be the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen ( n two ) into ammonia ( nh three ) , exclusively carry out by prokaryote such as soil bacteria or cyanobacteria .
biological process contribute six  five percent of the nitrogen use in agriculture .
the following equation represent the process  n two + one  six atp + eight e− + eight h+ → two nh three + one  six adp + one  six pi + h two the most important source of bnf be the symbiotic interaction between soil bacteria and legume plant , include many crop important to human ( figure three  one  .  nine ) .
the nh three result from fixation can be transport into plant tissue and incorporate into amino acid , which be then make into plant protein .
some legume seed , such as soybean and peanut , contain high level of protein , and serve among the most important agricultural source of protein in the world .
soil bacteria , collectively call rhizobia , symbiotically interact with legume root to form specialized structure call nodule , in which nitrogen fixation take place .
this process entail the reduction of atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia , by mean of the enzyme nitrogenase .
therefore , use rhizobia be a natural and environmentally friendly way to fertilize plant , as oppose to chemical fertilization that use a nonrenewable resource , such as natural gas .
through symbiotic nitrogen fixation , the plant benefit from use an endless source of nitrogen from the atmosphere .
the process simultaneously contribute to soil fertility because the plant root system leave behind some of the biologically available nitrogen .
as in any symbiosis , both organism benefit from the interaction  the plant obtain ammonia , and bacteria obtain carbon compound generate through photosynthesis , as well as a protect niche in which to grow .
soybean root contain ( a ) nitrogen - fix nodule .
cell within the nodule be infect with bradyrhyzobium japonicum , a rhizobia or " root - love " bacterium .
the bacteria be encase in ( b ) vesicle inside the cell , as can be see in this transmission electron micrograph .
mycorrhizae 
the symbiotic relationship between fungi and root
a nutrient depletion zone can develop when there be rapid soil solution uptake , low nutrient concentration , low diffusion rate , or low soil moisture .
these condition be very common  therefore , most plant rely on fungus to facilitate the uptake of mineral from the soil .
fungus form symbiotic association call mycorrhizae with plant root , in which the fungus actually be integrate into the physical structure of the root .
the fungus colonize the live root tissue during active plant growth .
through mycorrhization , the plant obtain mainly phosphate and other mineral , such as zinc and copper , from the soil .
the fungus obtain nutrient , such as sugar , from the plant root ( figure three  one  .  one  one ) .
mycorrhizae help increase the surface area of the plant root system because hyphae , which be narrow , can spread beyond the nutrient depletion zone .
hyphae can grow into small soil pore that allow access to phosphoru that would otherwise be unavailable to the plant .
the beneficial effect on the plant be best observe in poor soil .
the benefit to fungus be that - pron - can obtain up to two  zero percent of the total carbon access by plant .
mycorrhizae function as a physical barrier to pathogen .
- pron - also provide an induction of generalize host defense mechanism , and sometimes involve production of antibiotic compound by the fungus .
root tip proliferate in the presence of mycorrhizal infection , which appear as off - white fuzz in this image .
there be two type of mycorrhizae  ectomycorrhizae and endomycorrhizae .
ectomycorrhizae form an extensive dense sheath around the root , call a mantle .
hyphae from the fungus extend from the mantle into the soil , which increase the surface area for water and mineral absorption .
this type of mycorrhizae be find in forest tree , especially conifer , birch , and oak .
endomycorrhizae , also call arbuscular mycorrhizae , do not form a dense sheath over the root .
instead , the fungal mycelium be embed within the root tissue .
endomycorrhizae be find in the root of more than eight  zero percent of terrestrial plant .
nutrient from other sources
some plant can not produce - pron - own food and must obtain - pron - nutrition from outside source .
this may occur with plant that be parasitic or saprophytic .
some plant be mutualistic symbiont , epiphyte , or insectivorous .
plant parasites
a parasitic plant depend on - pron - host for survival .
some parasitic plant have no leaf .
an example of this be the dodder ( figure three  one  .  one  two ) , which have a weak , cylindrical stem that coil around the host and form sucker .
from these sucker , cell invade the host stem and grow to connect with the vascular bundle of the host .
the parasitic plant obtain water and nutrient through these connection .
the plant be a total parasite ( a holoparasite ) because - pron - be completely dependent on - pron - host .
other parasitic plant ( hemiparasite ) be fully photosynthetic and only use the host for water and mineral .
there be about four  ,  one  zero  zero specie of parasitic plant .
the dodder be a holoparasite that penetrate the host 's vascular tissue and divert nutrient for - pron - own growth .
note that the vine of the dodder , which have white flower , be beige .
the dodder have no chlorophyll and can not produce - pron - own food .
saprophyte a saprophyte be a plant that do not have chlorophyll and get - pron - food from dead matter , similar to bacteria and fungus ( note that fungus be often call saprophyte , which be incorrect , because fungus be not plant ) .
plant like these use enzyme to convert organic food material into simple form from which - pron - can absorb nutrient ( figure three  one  .  one  three ) .
most saprophyte do not directly digest dead matter  instead , - pron - parasitize fungus that digest dead matter , or be mycorrhizal , ultimately obtain photosynthate from a fungus that derive photosynthate from - pron - host .
saprophytic plant be uncommon  only a few specie be describe .
saprophyte , like this dutchmen 's pipe ( monotropa hypopity ) , obtain - pron - food from dead matter and do not have chlorophyll .
symbiont a symbiont be a plant in a symbiotic relationship , with special adaptation such as mycorrhizae or nodule formation .
fungus also form symbiotic association with cyanobacteria and green algae ( call lichen ) .
lichens can sometimes be see as colorful growth on the surface of rock and tree ( figure three  one  .  one  four ) .
the algal partner ( phycobiont ) make food autotrophically , some of which - pron - share with the fungus  the fungal partner ( mycobiont ) absorb water and mineral from the environment , which be make available to the green alga .
if one partner be separate from the other , - pron - would both die .
lichens , which often have symbiotic relationship with other plant , can sometimes be find grow on tree .
epiphyt
an epiphyte be a plant that grow on other plant , but be not dependent upon the other plant for nutrition ( figure three  one  .  one  five ) .
epiphyte have two type of root  cling aerial root , which absorb nutrient from humus that accumulate in the crevice of tree  and aerial root , which absorb moisture from the atmosphere .
these epiphyte plant grow in the main greenhouse of the jardin des plantes in paris .
insectivorous plant
an insectivorous plant have specialize leaf to attract and digest insect .
the venus flytrap be popularly know for - pron - insectivorous mode of nutrition , and have leaf that work as trap ( figure three  one  .  one  six ) .
the mineral - pron - obtain from prey compensate for those lack in the boggy ( low ph ) soil of - pron - native north carolina coastal plain .
there be three sensitive hair in the center of each half of each leaf .
the edge of each leaf be cover with long spine .
nectar secrete by the plant attract fly to the leaf .
when a fly touch the sensory hair , the leaf immediately close .
next , fluid and enzyme break down the prey and mineral be absorb by the leaf .
since this plant be popular in the horticultural trade , - pron - be threaten in - pron - original habitat .
a venus flytrap have specialize leaf to trap insect .
plant that reproduce sexually often achieve fertilization with the help of pollinator such as ( a ) bee , ( b ) bird , and ( c ) butterfly .
( credit a  modification of work by john severns  credit b  modification of work by charles j . sharp  credit c  modification of work by " galawebdesign " / flickr )
introduction plant have evolve different reproductive strategy for the continuation of - pron - specie .
some plant reproduce sexually , and other asexually , in contrast to animal specie , which rely almost exclusively on sexual reproduction .
plant sexual reproduction usually depend on pollinate agent , while asexual reproduction be independent of these agent .
flower be often the showy or most strongly scented part of plant .
with - pron - bright color , fragrance , and interesting shape and size , flower attract insect , bird , and animal to serve - pron - pollination need .
other plant pollinate via wind or water  still other self - pollinate .
sexual reproduction take place with slight variation in different group of plant .
plant have two distinct stage in - pron - lifecycle  the gametophyte stage and the sporophyte stage .
the haploid gametophyte produce the male and female gamete by mitosis in distinct multicellular structure .
fusion of the male and female gamete form the diploid zygote , which develop into the sporophyte .
after reach maturity , the diploid sporophyte produce spore by meiosis , which in turn divide by mitosis to produce the haploid gametophyte .
the new gametophyte produce gamete , and the cycle continue .
this be the alternation of generation , and be typical of plant reproduction the alternation of generation in angiosperm be depict in this diagram .
the life cycle of high plant be dominate by the sporophyte stage , with the gametophyte bear on the sporophyte .
in fern , the gametophyte be free - living and very distinct in structure from the diploid sporophyte .
in bryophyte , such as moss , the haploid gametophyte be more developed than the sporophyte .
during the vegetative phase of growth , plant increase in size and produce a shoot system and a root system .
as - pron - enter the reproductive phase , some of the branch start to bear flower .
many flower be bear singly , whereas some be bear in cluster .
the flower be bear on a stalk know as a receptacle .
flower shape , color , and size be unique to each specie , and be often use by taxonomist to classify plant .
sexual reproduction in angiosperms
the lifecycle of angiosperm follow the alternation of generation explain previously .
the haploid gametophyte alternate with the diploid sporophyte during the sexual reproduction process of angiosperm .
flower contain the plant 's reproductive structure .
flower structure
a typical flower have four main part — or whorl — know as the calyx , corolla , androecium , and gynoecium ( figure three  two  .  three ) .
the outermost whorl of the flower have green , leafy structure know as sepal .
the sepal , collectively call the calyx , help to protect the unopened bud .
the second whorl be comprise of petal
— usually , brightly color — collectively call the corolla .
the number of sepal and petal vary depend on whether the plant be a monocot or dicot .
in monocot , petal usually number three or multiple of three  in dicot , the number of petal be four or five , or multiple of four and five .
together , the calyx and corolla be know as the perianth .
the third whorl contain the male reproductive structure and be know as the androecium .
the androecium have stamen with anther that contain the microsporangia .
the innermost group of structure in the flower be the gynoecium , or the female reproductive component ( s ) .
the carpel be the individual unit of the gynoecium and have a stigma , style , and ovary .
a flower may have one or multiple carpel .
if all four whorl ( the calyx , corolla , androecium , and gynoecium ) be present , the flower be describe as complete .
if any of the four part be miss , the flower be know as incomplete .
flower that contain both an androecium and a gynoecium be call perfect , androgynous or hermaphrodite .
there be two type of incomplete flower  staminate flower contain only an androecium , and carpellate flower have only a gynoecium the corn plant have both staminate ( male ) and carpellate ( female ) flower .
staminate flower , which be cluster in the tassel at the tip of the stem , produce pollen grain .
carpellate flower be cluster in the immature ear .
each strand of silk be a stigma .
the corn kernel be seed that develop on the ear after fertilization .
also show be the low stem and root .
if both male and female flower be bear on the same plant , the species be call monoecious ( mean " one home
" )  example be corn and pea .
specie with male and female flower bear on separate plant be term dioecious , or " two home , " example of which be c . papaya and cannabis .
the ovary , which may contain one or multiple ovule , may be place above other flower part , which be refer to as superior  or , - pron - may be place below the other flower part , refer to as inferior  the ( a ) lily be a superior flower , which have the ovary above the other flower part .
( b ) fuchsia be an inferior flower , which have the ovary beneath other flower part .
( credit a photo  modification of work by benjamin zwittnig  credit b photo  modification of work by " koshy koshy " / flickr ) male gametophyte ( the pollen grain )
the male gametophyte develop and reach maturity in an immature anther .
in a plant 's male reproductive organ , development of pollen take place in a structure know as the microsporangium ( figure three  two  .  six ) .
the microsporangia , which be usually bi - lob , be pollen sac in which the microspore develop into pollen grain .
these be find in the anther , which be at the end of the staman — the long filament that support the anther .
shown be ( a ) a cross section of an anther at two developmental stage .
the immature anther ( top ) contain four microsporangia , or pollen sac .
each microsporangium contain hundred of microspore mother cell that will each give rise to four pollen grain .
the tapetum support the development and maturation of the pollen grain .
upon maturation of the pollen ( bottom ) , the pollen sac wall split open and the pollen grain ( male gametophyte ) be release .
( b )
in these scanning electron micrograph , pollen sac be ready to burst , release - pron - grain .
( credit b  modification of work by robert r . wise  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
within the microsporangium , the microspore mother cell divide by meiosis to give rise to four microspore , each of which will ultimately form a pollen grain ( figure three  two  .  seven ) .
an inner layer of cell , know as the tapetum , provide nutrition to the develop microspore and contribute key component to the pollen wall .
mature pollen grain contain two cell  a generative cell and a pollen tube cell .
the generative cell be contain within the large pollen tube cell .
upon germination , the tube cell form the pollen tube through which the generative cell migrate to enter the ovary .
during - pron - transit inside the pollen tube , the generative cell divide to form two male gamete ( sperm cell ) .
upon maturity , the microsporangia burst , release the pollen grain from the anther .
pollen develop from the microspore mother cell .
the mature pollen grain be compose of two cell  the pollen tube cell and the generative cell , which be inside the tube cell .
the pollen grain have two covering  an inner layer ( intine ) and an outer layer ( exine ) .
the inset scan electron micrograph show arabidopsis lyrata pollen grain .
( credit " pollen micrograph " 
modification of work by robert r . wise  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
each pollen grain have two covering  the exine ( thick , outer layer ) and the intine ( figure three  two  .  seven ) .
the exine contain sporopollenin , a complex waterproofing substance supply by the tapetal cell .
sporopollenin allow the pollen to survive under unfavorable condition and to be carry by wind , water , or biological agent without undergo damage .
female gametophyte ( the embryo sac )
while the detail may vary between specie , the overall development of the female gametophyte have two distinct phase .
first , in the process of megasporogenesis , a single cell in the diploid megasporangium — an area of tissue in the ovule — undergoe meiosis to produce four megaspore , only one of which survive .
during the second phase , megagametogenesis , the survive haploid megaspore undergoe mitosis to produce an eight - nucleate , seven - cell female gametophyte , also know as the megagametophyte or embryo sac .
two of the nucleus — the polar nucleus — move to the equator and fuse , form a single , diploid central cell .
this central cell later fuse with a sperm to form the triploid endosperm .
three nucleus position - pron - on the end of the embryo sac opposite the micropyle and develop into the antipodal cell , which later degenerate .
the nucleus close to the micropyle become the female gamete , or egg cell , and the two adjacent nucleus develop into synergid cell ( figure three  two  .  eight ) .
the synergid help guide the pollen tube for successful fertilization , after which - pron - disintegrate .
once fertilization be complete , the result diploid zygote develop into the embryo , and the fertilize ovule form the other tissue of the seed .
a double - layered integument protect the megasporangium and , later , the embryo sac .
the integument will develop into the seed coat after fertilization and protect the entire seed .
the ovule wall will become part of the fruit .
the integument , while protect the megasporangium , do not enclose - pron - completely , but leave an opening call the micropyle .
the micropyle allow the pollen tube to enter the female gametophyte for fertilization .
sexual reproduction in gymnosperms
as with angiosperm , the lifecycle of a gymnosperm be also characterize by alternation of generation .
in conifer such as pine , the green leafy part of the plant be the sporophyte , and the cone contain the male and female gametophyte ( figure three  two  .  nine ) .
the female cone be large than the male cone and be position towards the top of the tree  the small , male cone be locate in the low region of the tree .
because the pollen be shed and blow by the wind , this arrangement make - pron - difficult for a gymnosperm to self - pollinate .
this image show the life cycle of a conifer .
pollen from male cone blow up into upper branch , where - pron - fertilize female cone .
example be show of female and male cone .
( credit " female " 
modification of work by " geographer” / wikimedia commons  credit " male " 
modification of work by roger griffith )
male gametophyte a male cone have a central axis on which bract , a type of modify leaf , be attach .
the bract be know as microsporophyll ( figure three  two  .  one  zero ) and be the site where microspore will develop .
the microspore develop inside the microsporangium .
within the microsporangium , cell know as microsporocyte divide by meiosis to produce four haploid microspore .
further mitosis of the microspore produce two nucleus  the generative nucleus , and the tube nucleus .
upon maturity , the male gametophyte ( pollen ) be release from the male cone and be carry by the wind to land on the female cone .
female gametophyte
the female cone also have a central axis on which bract know as megasporophyll ( figure three  two  .  one  zero ) be present .
in the female cone , megaspore mother cell be present in the megasporangium .
the megaspore mother cell divide by meiosis to produce four haploid megaspore .
one of the megaspore divide to form the multicellular female gametophyte , while the other divide to form the rest of the structure .
the female gametophyte be contain within a structure call the archegonium .
these series of micrograph show male and female gymnosperm gametophyte .
( a )
this male cone , show in cross section , have approximately two  zero microsporophyll , each of which produce hundred of male gametophyte ( pollen grain ) .
( b ) pollen grain be visible in this single microsporophyll .
( c )
this micrograph show an individual pollen grain .
( d )
this cross section of a female cone show portion of about one  five megasporophyll .
( e )
the ovule can be see in this single megasporophyll .
( f )
within this single ovule be the megaspore mother cell ( mmc ) , micropyle , and a pollen grain .
( credit  modification of work by robert r . wise  scale - bar datum from matt russell ) reproductive process upon landing on the female cone , the tube cell of the pollen form the pollen tube , through which the generative cell migrate towards the female gametophyte through the micropyle .
- pron - take approximately one year for the pollen tube to grow and migrate towards the female gametophyte .
the male gametophyte contain the generative cell split into two sperm nucleus , one of which fuse with the egg , while the other degenerate .
after fertilization of the egg , the diploid zygote be form , which divide by mitosis to form the embryo .
the scale of the cone be close during development of the seed .
the seed be cover by a seed coat , which be derive from the female sporophyte .
seed development take another one to two year .
once the seed be ready to be disperse , the bract of the female cone open to allow the dispersal of seed  no fruit formation take place because gymnosperm seed have no covering .
angiosperm versus gymnosperms gymnosperm reproduction differ from that of angiosperm in several way ( figure three  two  .  one  one ) .
in angiosperm , the female gametophyte exist in an enclose structure — the ovule — which be within the ovary  in gymnosperm , the female gametophyte be present on expose bract of the female cone .
double fertilization be a key event in the lifecycle of angiosperm , but be completely absent in gymnosperm .
the male and female gametophyte structure be present on separate male and female cone in gymnosperm , whereas in angiosperm , - pron - be a part of the flower .
lastly , wind play an important role in pollination in gymnosperm because pollen be blow by the wind to land on the female cone .
although many angiosperm be also wind - pollinate , animal pollination be more common .
( a ) angiosperm be flower plant , and include grass , herb , shrub and most deciduous tree , while ( b ) gymnosperm be conifer .
both produce seed but have different reproductive strategy .
( credit a  modification of work by wendy cutler  credit b  modification of work by lews castle uhi )
in angiosperm , pollination be define as the placement or transfer of pollen from the anther to the stigma of the same flower or another flower .
in gymnosperm , pollination involve pollen transfer from the male cone to the female cone .
upon transfer , the pollen germinate to form the pollen tube and the sperm for fertilize the egg .
pollination have be well study since the time of gregor mendel .
mendel successfully carry out self - as well as cross - pollination in garden pea while study how characteristic be pass on from one generation to the next .
today 's crop be a result of plant breeding , which employ artificial selection to produce the present - day cultivar .
a case in point be today ' s corn , which be a result of year of breeding that start with - pron - ancestor , teosinte .
the teosinte that the ancient mayans originally begin cultivate have tiny seed — vastly different from today 's relatively giant ear of corn .
interestingly , though these two plant appear to be entirely different , the genetic difference between - pron - be miniscule .
pollination take two form  self - pollination and cross - pollination .
self - pollination occur when the pollen from the anther be deposit on the stigma of the same flower , or another flower on the same plant .
cross - pollination be the transfer of pollen from the anther of one flower to the stigma of another flower on a different individual of the same specie .
self - pollination occur in flower where the staman and carpel mature at the same time , and be position so that the pollen can land on the flower 's stigma .
this method of pollination do not require an investment from the plant to provide nectar and pollen as food for pollinator .
living specie be design to ensure survival of - pron - progeny  those that fail become extinct .
genetic diversity be therefore require so that in change environmental or stress condition , some of the progeny can survive .
self - pollination lead to the production of plant with less genetic diversity , since genetic material from the same plant be use to form gamete , and eventually , the zygote .
in contrast , cross - pollination — or out - cross — lead to great genetic diversity because the microgametophyte and megagametophyte be derive from different plant .
because cross - pollination allow for more genetic diversity , plant have develop many way to avoid self - pollination .
in some specie , the pollen and the ovary mature at different time .
these flower make self - pollination nearly impossible .
by the time pollen mature and have be shed , the stigma of this flower be mature and can only be pollinate by pollen from another flower .
some flower have develop physical feature that prevent self - pollination .
the primrose be one such flower .
primrose have evolve two flower type with difference in anth and stigma length  the pin - eyed flower have anther position at the pollen tube 's halfway point , and the thrum - eyed flower 's stigma be likewise locate at the halfway point .
insect easily cross - pollinate while seek the nectar at the bottom of the pollen tube .
this phenomenon be also know as heterostyly .
many plant , such as cucumber , have male and female flower locate on different part of the plant , thus make self - pollination difficult .
in yet other specie , the male and female flower be bear on different plant ( dioecious ) .
all of these be barrier to self - pollination  therefore , the plant depend on pollinator to transfer pollen .
the majority of pollinator be biotic agent such as insect ( like bee , fly , and butterfly ) , bat , bird , and other animal .
other plant specie be pollinate by abiotic agent , such as wind and water .
pollination by insect bee be perhaps the most important pollinator of many garden plant and most commercial fruit tree ( figure three  two  .  one  two ) .
the most common specie of bee be bumblebee and honeybee .
since bee can not see the color red , bee - pollinate flower usually have shade of blue , yellow , or other color .
bee collect energy - rich pollen or nectar for - pron - survival and energy need .
- pron - visit flower that be open during the day , be brightly color , have a strong aroma or scent , and have a tubular shape , typically with the presence of a nectar guide .
a nectar guide include region on the flower petal that be visible only to bee , and not to human  - pron - help to guide bee to the center of the flower , thus make the pollination process more efficient .
the pollen stick to the bees' fuzzy hair , and when the bee visit another flower , some of the pollen be transfer to the second flower .
recently , there have be many report about the decline population of honeybee .
many flower will remain unpollinated and not bear seed if honeybee disappear .
the impact on commercial fruit grower could be devastating .
insect , such as bee , be important agent of pollination .
many fly be attract to flower that have a decay smell or an odor of rot flesh .
these flower , which produce nectar , usually have dull color , such as brown or purple .
- pron - be find on the corpse flower or voodoo lily ( amorphophallus ) , dragon arum ( dracunculus ) , and carrion flower ( stapleia , rafflesia ) .
the nectar provide energy , whereas the pollen provide protein .
wasps be also important insect pollinator , and pollinate many specie of fig .
butterfly , such as the monarch , pollinate many garden flower and wildflower , which usually occur in cluster .
these flower be brightly color , have a strong fragrance , be open during the day , and have nectar guide to make access to nectar easier .
the pollen be pick up and carry on the butterfly 's limb .
moth , on the other hand , pollinate flower during the late afternoon and night .
the flower pollinate by moth be pale or white and be flat , enable the moth to land .
one well - study example of a moth - pollinate plant be the yucca plant , which be pollinate by the yucca moth .
the shape of the flower and moth have adapt in such a way as to allow successful pollination .
the moth deposit pollen on the sticky stigma for fertilization to occur later .
the female moth also deposit egg into the ovary .
as the egg develop into larvae , - pron - obtain food from the flower and develop seed .
thus , both the insect and flower benefit from each other in this symbiotic relationship .
the corn earworm moth and gaura plant have a similar relationship .
a corn earworm sip nectar from a night - bloom gaura plant .
pollination by bat
in the tropic and desert , bat be often the pollinator of nocturnal flower such as agave , guava , and morning glory .
the flower be usually large and white or pale - colored  thus , - pron - can be distinguish from the dark surrounding at night .
the flower have a strong , fruity , or musky fragrance and produce large amount of nectar .
- pron - be naturally large and wide - mouthed to accommodate the head of the bat .
as the bat seek the nectar , - pron - face and head become cover with pollen , which be then transfer to the next flower .
pollination by bird many specie of small bird , such as the hummingbird ( figure three  two  .  one  four ) and sun bird , be pollinator for plant such as orchid and other wildflower .
flower visit by bird be usually sturdy and be orient in such a way as to allow the bird to stay near the flower without get - pron - wing entangle in the nearby flower .
the flower typically have a curved , tubular shape , which allow access for the bird 's beak .
brightly color , odorless flower that be open during the day be pollinate by bird .
as a bird seek energy - rich nectar , pollen be deposit on the bird 's head and neck and be then transfer to the next flower - pron - visit .
botanist have be know to determine the range of extinct plant by collect and identify pollen from two  zero  zero  - year - old bird specimen from the same site .
hummingbird have adaptation that allow - pron - to reach the nectar of certain tubular flower .
pollination by wind most specie of conifer , and many angiosperm , such as grass , maple and oak , be pollinate by wind .
pine cone be brown and unscented , while the flower of wind - pollinate angiosperm specie be usually green , small , may have small or no petal , and produce large amount of pollen .
unlike the typical insect - pollinate flower , flower adapt to pollination by wind do not produce nectar or scent .
in wind - pollinate specie , the microsporangia hang out of the flower , and , as the wind blow , the lightweight pollen be carry with - pron - ( figure three  two  .  one  five ) .
the flower usually emerge early in the spring , before the leaf , so that the leaf do not block the movement of the wind .
the pollen be deposit on the exposed feathery stigma of the flower ( figure three  two  .  one  six ) .
these male ( a ) and female ( b ) catkin be from the goat willow tree ( salix caprea ) .
note how both structure be light and feathery to good disperse and catch the wind - blow pollen .
pollination by water
some weed , such as australian sea grass and pond weed , be pollinate by water .
the pollen float on water , and when - pron - come into contact with the flower , - pron - be deposit inside the flower .
double fertilization after pollen be deposit on the stigma , - pron - must germinate and grow through the style to reach the ovule .
the microspore , or the pollen , contain two cell  the pollen tube cell and the generative cell .
the pollen tube cell grow into a pollen tube through which the generative cell travel .
the germination of the pollen tube require water , oxygen , and certain chemical signal .
as - pron - travel through the style to reach the embryo sac , the pollen tube 's growth be support by the tissue of the style .
in the meantime , if the generative cell have not already split into two cell , - pron - now divide to form two sperm cell .
the pollen tube be guide by the chemical secrete by the synergid present in the embryo sac , and - pron - enter the ovule sac through the micropyle .
of the two sperm cell , one sperm fertilize the egg cell , form a diploid zygote  the other sperm fuse with the two polar nucleus , form a triploid cell that develop into the endosperm .
together , these two fertilization event in angiosperm be know as double fertilization ( figure three  two  .  one  eight ) .
after fertilization be complete , no other sperm can enter .
the fertilize ovule form the seed , whereas the tissue of the ovary become the fruit , usually envelop the seed .
in angiosperm , one sperm fertilize the egg to form the two n zygote , and the other sperm fertilize the central cell to form the three n endosperm .
this be call a double fertilization .
after fertilization , the zygote divide to form two cell  the upper cell , or terminal cell , and the low , or basal , cell .
the division of the basal cell give rise to the suspensor , which eventually make connection with the maternal tissue .
the suspensor provide a route for nutrition to be transport from the mother plant to the grow embryo .
the terminal cell also divide , give rise to a globular - shape proembryo ( figure three  two  .  one  nine a ) .
in dicot ( eudicot ) , the develop embryo have a heart shape , due to the presence of the two rudimentary cotyledon ( figure three  two  .  one  nine b ) .
in non - endospermic dicot , such as capsella bursa , the endosperm develop initially , but be then digest , and the food reserve be move into the two cotyledon .
as the embryo and cotyledon enlarge , - pron - run out of room inside the develop seed , and be force to bend ( figure three  two  .  one  nine c ) .
ultimately , the embryo and cotyledon fill the seed ( figure three  two  .  one  nine d ) , and the seed be ready for dispersal .
embryonic development be suspend after some time , and growth be resume only when the seed germinate .
the develop seedling will rely on the food reserve store in the cotyledon until the first set of leaf begin photosynthesis .
show be the stage of embryo development in the ovule of a shepherd 's purse ( capsella bursa ) .
after fertilization , the zygote divide to form an upper terminal cell and a low basal cell .
( a )
in the first stage of development , the terminal cell divide , form a globular pro - embryo .
the basal cell also divide , give rise to the suspensor .
( b )
in the second stage , the develop embryo have a heart shape due to the presence of cotyledon .
( c )
in the third stage , the grow embryo run out of room and start to bend .
( d )
eventually , - pron - completely fill the seed .
( credit  modification of work by robert r . wise  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
development of the seed
the mature ovule develop into the seed .
a typical seed contain a seed coat , cotyledon , endosperm , and a single embryo .
the storage of food reserve in angiosperm seed differ between monocot and dicot .
in monocot , such as corn and wheat , the single cotyledon be call a scutellum  the scutellum be connect directly to the embryo via vascular tissue ( xylem and phloem ) .
food reserve be store in the large endosperm .
upon germination , enzyme be secrete by the aleurone , a single layer of cell just inside the seed coat that surround the endosperm and embryo .
the enzyme degrade the store carbohydrate , protein and lipid , the product of which be absorb by the scutellum and transport via a vasculature strand to the develop embryo .
therefore , the scutellum can be see to be an absorptive organ , not a storage organ .
the two cotyledon in the dicot seed also have vascular connection to the embryo .
in endospermic dicot , the food reserve be store in the endosperm .
during germination , the two cotyledon therefore act as absorptive organ to take up the enzymatically release food reserve , much like in monocot ( monocot , by definition , also have endospermic seed ) .
tobacco ( nicotiana tabaccum ) , tomato ( solanum lycopersicum ) , and pepper ( capsicum annuum ) be example of endospermic dicot .
in non - endospermic dicot , the triploid endosperm develop normally follow double fertilization , but the endosperm food reserve be quickly remobiliz and move into the develop cotyledon for storage .
the two half of a peanut seed ( arachis hypogaea ) and the split pea ( pisum sativum ) of split pea soup be individual cotyledon load with food reserve .
the seed , along with the ovule , be protect by a seed coat that be form from the integument of the ovule sac .
in dicot , the seed coat be further divide into an outer coat know as the testa and inner coat know as the tegman .
the embryonic axis consist of three part  the plumule , the radicle , and the hypocotyl .
the portion of the embryo between the cotyledon attachment point and the radicle be know as the hypocotyl ( hypocotyl mean " below the cotyledon " ) .
the embryonic axis terminate in a radicle ( the embryonic root ) , which be the region from which the root will develop .
in dicot , the hypocotyls extend above ground , give rise to the stem of the plant .
in monocot , the hypocotyl do not show above ground because monocot do not exhibit stem elongation .
the part of the embryonic axis that project above the cotyledon be know as the epicotyl .
the plumule be compose of the epicotyl , young leaf , and the shoot apical meristem .
upon germination in dicot seed , the epicotyl be shape like a hook with the plumule point downwards .
this shape be call the plumule hook , and - pron - persist as long as germination proceed in the dark .
therefore , as the epicotyl push through the tough and abrasive soil , the plumule be protect from damage .
upon exposure to light , the hypocotyl hook straighten out , the young foliage leaf face the sun and expand , and the epicotyl continue to elongate .
during this time , the radicle be also grow and produce the primary root .
as - pron - grow downward to form the tap root , lateral root branch off to all side , produce the typical dicot tap root system .
in monocot seed ( figure three  two  .  two  one ) , the testa and tegman of the seed coat be fuse .
as the seed germinate , the primary root emerge , protect by the root - tip covering  the coleorhiza .
next , the primary shoot emerge , protect by the coleoptile  the covering of the shoot tip .
upon exposure to light ( i . e . when the plumule have exit the soil and the protective coleoptile be no longer need ) , elongation of the coleoptile cease and the leaf expand and unfold .
at the other end of the embryonic axis , the primary root soon die , while other , adventitious root ( root that do not arise from the usual place – i . e . the root ) emerge from the base of the stem .
this give the monocot a fibrous root system .
as this monocot grass seed germinate , the primary root , or radicle , emerge first , follow by the primary shoot , or coleoptile , and the adventitious root .
seed germination many mature seed enter a period of inactivity , or extremely low metabolic activity  a process know as dormancy , which may last for month , year or even century .
dormancy help keep seed viable during unfavorable condition .
upon a return to favorable condition , seed germination take place .
favorable condition could be as diverse as moisture , light , cold , fire , or chemical treatment .
after heavy rain , many new seedling emerge .
forest fire also lead to the emergence of new seedling .
some seed require vernalization ( cold treatment ) before - pron - can germinate .
this guarantee that seed produce by plant in temperate climate will not germinate until the spring .
plant grow in hot climate may have seed that need a heat treatment in order to germinate , to avoid germination in the hot , dry summer .
in many seed , the presence of a thick seed coat retard the ability to germinate .
scarification , which include mechanical or chemical process to soften the seed coat , be often employ before germination .
presoak in hot water , or pass through an acid environment , such as an animal 's digestive tract , may also be employ .
depend on seed size , the time take for a seedling to emerge may vary .
specie with large seed have enough food reserve to germinate deep below ground , and still extend - pron - epicotyl all the way to the soil surface .
seed of small - seeded specie usually require light as a germination cue .
this ensure the seed only germinate at or near the soil surface ( where the light be great ) .
if - pron - be to germinate too far underneath the surface , the develop seedling would not have enough food reserve to reach the sunlight .
development of fruit and fruit types
after fertilization , the ovary of the flower usually develop into the fruit .
fruit be usually associate with have a sweet taste  however , not all fruit be sweet .
botanically , the term " fruit " be use for a ripen ovary .
in most case , flower in which fertilization have take place will develop into fruit , and flower in which fertilization have not take place will not .
some fruit develop from the ovary and be know as true fruit , whereas other develop from other part of the female gametophyte and be know as accessory fruit .
the fruit enclose the seed and the develop embryo , thereby provide - pron - with protection .
fruit be of many type , depend on - pron - origin and texture .
the sweet tissue of the blackberry , the red flesh of the tomato , the shell of the peanut , and the hull of corn ( the tough , thin part that get stick in - pron - tooth when - pron - eat popcorn ) be all fruit .
as the fruit mature , the seed also mature .
fruit may be classify as simple , aggregate , multiple , or accessory , depend on - pron - origin ( figure three  two  .  two  two ) .
if the fruit develop from a single carpel or fuse carpel of a single ovary , - pron - be know as a simple fruit , as see in nut and bean .
an aggregate fruit be one that develop from more than one carpel , but all be in the same flower  the mature carpel fuse together to form the entire fruit , as see in the raspberry .
multiple fruit develop from an inflorescence or a cluster of flower .
an example be the pineapple , where the flower fuse together to form the fruit .
accessory fruit ( sometimes call false fruit ) be not derive from the ovary , but from another part of the flower , such as the receptacle ( strawberry ) or the hypanthium ( apple and pear ) .
figure three  two  .  two  two
there be four main type of fruit .
simple fruit , such as these nut , be derive from a single ovary .
aggregate fruit , like raspberry , form from many carpel that fuse together .
multiple fruit , such as pineapple , form from a cluster of flower call an inflorescence .
accessory fruit , like the apple , be form from a part of the plant other than the ovary .
( credit " nut " 
modification of work by petr kratochvil  credit " raspberry "  modification of work by cory zanker  credit " pineapple "  modification of work by howie le  credit " apple " 
modification of work by paolo neo ) fruits generally have three part  the exocarp ( the outermost skin or covering ) , the mesocarp ( middle part of the fruit ) , and the endocarp ( the inner part of the fruit ) .
together , all three be know as the pericarp .
the mesocarp be usually the fleshy , edible part of the fruit  however , in some fruit , such as the almond , the endocarp be the edible part .
in many fruit , two or all three of the layer be fuse , and be indistinguishable at maturity .
fruit can be dry or fleshy .
furthermore , fruit can be divide into dehiscent or indehiscent type .
dehiscent fruit , such as pea , readily release - pron - seed , while indehiscent fruit , like peach , rely on decay to release - pron - seed .
fruit and seed dispersal the fruit have a single purpose  seed dispersal .
seed contain within fruit need to be disperse far from the mother plant , so - pron - may find favorable and less competitive condition in which to germinate and grow .
some fruit have build - in mechanism so - pron - can disperse by - pron - , whereas other require the help of agent like wind , water , and animal
( figure three  two  .  two  three ) .
modification in seed structure , composition , and size help in dispersal .
wind - disperse fruit be lightweight and may have wing - like appendage that allow - pron - to be carry by the wind .
some have a parachute - like structure to keep - pron - afloat .
some fruit — for example , the dandelion — have hairy , weightless structure that be suit to dispersal by wind .
seed disperse by water be contain in light and buoyant fruit , give - pron - the ability to float .
coconut be well know for - pron - ability to float on water to reach land where - pron - can germinate .
similarly , willow and silver birch produce lightweight fruit that can float on water .
animal and bird eat fruit , and the seed that be not digest be excrete in - pron - dropping some distance away .
some animal , like squirrel , bury seed - contain fruit for later use  if the squirrel do not find - pron - stash of fruit , and if condition be favorable , the seed germinate .
some fruit , like the cocklebur , have hook or sticky structure that stick to an animal ' s coat and be then transport to another place .
human also play a big role in disperse seed when - pron - carry fruit to new place and throw away the inedible part that contain the seed .
all of the above mechanism allow for seed to be disperse through space , much like an animal 's offspring can move to a new location .
seed dormancy , which be describe earlier , allow plant to disperse - pron - progeny through time  something animal can not do .
dormant seed can wait month , year , or even decade for the proper condition for germination and propagation of the specie .
fruit and seed be disperse by various mean .
( a ) dandelion seed be disperse by wind , the ( b ) coconut seed be disperse by water , and the ( c ) acorn be disperse by animal that cache and then forget - pron - .
( credit a  modification of work by " rosendahl " / flickr  credit b 
modification of work by shine oa  credit c  modification of work by paolo neo )
many plant be able to propagate - pron - use asexual reproduction .
this method do not require the investment require to produce a flower , attract pollinator , or find a means of seed dispersal .
asexual reproduction produce plant that be genetically identical to the parent plant because no mixing of male and female gamete take place .
traditionally , these plant survive well under stable environmental condition when compare with plant produce from sexual reproduction because - pron - carry gene identical to those of - pron - parent .
many different type of root exhibit asexual reproduction figure three  two  .  two  four .
the corm be use by gladiolus and garlic .
bulb , such as a scaly bulb in lily and a tunicate bulb in daffodil , be other common example .
a potato be a stem tuber , while parsnip propagate from a taproot .
ginger and iris produce rhizome , while ivy use an adventitious root ( a root arise from a plant part other than the main or primary root ) , and the strawberry plant have a stolon , which be also call a runner .
different type of stem allow for asexual reproduction .
( a )
the corm of a garlic plant look similar to ( b ) a tulip bulb , but the corm be solid tissue , while the bulb consist of layer of modify leaf that surround an underground stem .
both corm and bulb can self - propagate , give rise to new plant .
( c ) ginger form mass of stem call rhizome that can give rise to multiple plant .
( d ) potato plant form fleshy stem tuber .
each eye in the stem tuber can give rise to a new plant .
( e )
strawberry plant form stolon  stem that grow at the soil surface or just below ground and can give rise to new plant .
( credit a  modification of work by dwight sipler  credit c  modification of work by albert cahalan , usda ars  credit d  modification of work by richard north  credit e  modification of work by julie magro )
some plant can produce seed without fertilization .
either the ovule or part of the ovary , which be diploid in nature , give rise to a new seed .
this method of reproduction be know as apomixi .
an advantage of asexual reproduction be that the result plant will reach maturity faster .
since the new plant be arise from an adult plant or plant part , - pron - will also be sturdy than a seedling .
asexual reproduction can take place by natural or artificial ( assist by human ) mean .
natural methods of asexual reproduction natural method of asexual reproduction include strategy that plant have develop to self - propagate .
many plant — like ginger , onion , gladioli , and dahlia — continue to grow from bud that be present on the surface of the stem .
in some plant , such as the sweet potato , adventitious root or runner can give rise to new plant figure three  two  .  two  five .
in bryophyllum and kalanchoe , the leaf have small bud on - pron - margin .
when these be detach from the plant , - pron - grow into independent plant  or , - pron - may start grow into independent plant if the leaf touch the soil .
some plant can be propagate through cutting alone .
artificial methods of asexual reproduction
these method be frequently employ to give rise to new , and sometimes novel , plant .
- pron - include graft , cutting , layering , and micropropagation .
graft grafting have long be use to produce novel variety of rose , citrus specie , and other plant .
in graft , two plant specie be use  part of the stem of the desirable plant be graft onto a rooted plant call the stock .
the part that be graft or attach be call the scion .
both be cut at an oblique angle ( any angle other than a right angle ) , place in close contact with each other , and be then hold together figure three  two  .  two  six .
match up these two surface as closely as possible be extremely important because these will be hold the plant together .
the vascular system of the two plant grow and fuse , form a graft .
after a period of time , the scion start produce shoot , and eventually start bear flower and fruit .
graft be widely use in viticulture ( grape grow ) and the citrus industry .
scion capable of produce a particular fruit variety be grate onto root stock with specific resistance to disease .
grafting be an artificial method of asexual reproduction use to produce plant combine favorable stem characteristic with favorable root characteristic .
the stem of the plant to be graft be know as the scion , and the root be call the stock .
cut plant such as coleus and money plant be propagate through stem cutting , where a portion of the stem contain node and internode be place in moist soil and allow to root .
in some specie , stem can start produce a root even when place only in water .
for example , leaf of the african violet will root if keep in water undisturbed for several week .
layering layering be a method in which a stem attach to the plant be bent and cover with soil .
young stem that can be bend easily without any injury be prefer .
jasmine and bougainvillea ( paper flower ) can be propagate this way
figure three  two  .  two  seven .
in some plant , a modify form of layering know as air layering be employ .
a portion of the bark or outermost covering of the stem be remove and cover with moss , which be then tap .
some gardener also apply root hormone .
after some time , root will appear , and this portion of the plant can be remove and transplant into a separate pot .
in layering , a part of the stem be bury so that - pron - form a new plant .
( credit  modification of work by pearson scott foresman , donate to the wikimedia foundation ) micropropagation micropropagation ( also call plant tissue culture ) be a method of propagate a large number of plant from a single plant in a short time under laboratory condition figure three  two  .  two  eight .
this method allow propagation of rare , endanger specie that may be difficult to grow under natural condition , be economically important , or be in demand as disease - free plant .
figure three  two  .  two  eight micropropagation be use to propagate plant in sterile condition .
( credit  nikhilesh sanyal )
to start plant tissue culture , a part of the plant such as a stem , leaf , embryo , anther , or seed can be use .
the plant material be thoroughly sterilize use a combination of chemical treatment standardize for that specie .
under sterile condition , the plant material be place on a plant tissue culture medium that contain all the mineral , vitamin , and hormone require by the plant .
the plant part often give rise to an undifferentiated mass know as callus , from which individual plantlet begin to grow after a period of time .
these can be separate and be first grow under greenhouse condition before - pron - be move to field condition .
plant life spans
the length of time from the beginning of development to the death of a plant be call - pron - life span .
the life cycle , on the other hand , be the sequence of stage a plant go through from seed germination to seed production of the mature plant .
some plant , such as annual , only need a few week to grow , produce seed and die .
other plant , such as the bristlecone pine , live for thousand of year .
some bristlecone pine have a document age of four  ,  five  zero  zero year figure three  two  .  two  nine .
even as some part of a plant , such as region contain meristematic tissue — the area of active plant growth consist of undifferentiated cell capable of cell division — continue to grow , some part undergo program cell death ( apoptosis ) .
the cork find on stem , and the water - conduct tissue of the xylem , for example , be compose of dead cell .
the bristlecone pine , show here in the ancient bristlecone pine forest in the white mountains of eastern california , have be know to live for four  ,  five  zero  zero year .
( credit  rick goldwaser )
plant specie that complete - pron - lifecycle in one season be know as annual , an example of which be arabidopsis , or mouse - ear cress .
biennial such as carrot complete - pron - lifecycle in two season .
in a biennial 's first season , the plant have a vegetative phase , whereas in the next season , - pron - complete - pron - reproductive phase .
commercial grower harvest the carrot root after the first year of growth , and do not allow the plant to flower .
perennial , such as the magnolia , complete - pron - lifecycle in two year or more .
in another classification base on flower frequency , monocarpic plant flower only once in - pron - lifetime  example include bamboo and yucca .
during the vegetative period of - pron - life cycle ( which may be as long as one  two  zero year in some bamboo specie ) , these plant may reproduce asexually and accumulate a great deal of food material that will be require during - pron - once - in - a - lifetime flowering and setting of seed after fertilization .
soon after flower , these plant die .
polycarpic plant form flower many time during - pron - lifetime .
fruit tree , such as apple and orange tree , be polycarpic  - pron - flower every year .
other polycarpic specie , such as perennial , flower several time during - pron - life span , but not each year .
by this means , the plant do not require all - pron - nutrient to be channel towards flower each year .
as be the case with all live organism , genetic and environmental condition have a role to play in determine how long a plant will live .
susceptibility to disease , change environmental condition , drought , cold , and competition for nutrient be some of the factor that determine the survival of a plant .
plant continue to grow , despite the presence of dead tissue such as cork .
individual part of plant , such as flower and leaf , have different rate of survival .
in many tree , the old leaf turn yellow and eventually fall from the tree .
leaf fall be trigger by factor such as a decrease in photosynthetic efficiency , due to shade by upper leaf , or oxidative damage incur as a result of photosynthetic reaction .
the component of the part to be shed be recycle by the plant for use in other process , such as development of seed and storage .
this process be know as nutrient recycling .
the aging of a plant and all the associate process be know as senescence , which be mark by several complex biochemical change .
one of the characteristic of senescence be the breakdown of chloroplast , which be characterize by the yellowing of leaf .
the chloroplast contain component of photosynthetic machinery such as membrane and protein .
chloroplast also contain dna .
the protein , lipid , and nucleic acid be break down by specific enzyme into small molecule and salvage by the plant to support the growth of other plant tissue .
the complex pathway of nutrient recycling within a plant be not well understand .
hormone be know to play a role in senescence .
application of cytokinin and ethylene delay or prevent senescence  in contrast , abscissic acid cause premature onset of senescence . 
an arctic fox be a complex animal , well adapt to - pron - environment .
- pron - change coat color with the season , and have long fur in winter to trap heat .
( credit  modification of work by keith morehouse , usfws ) .
introduction
the arctic fox be an example of a complex animal that have adapt to - pron - environment and illustrate the relationship between an animal 's form and function .
the structure of animal consist of primary tissue that make up more complex organ and organ system .
homeostasis allow an animal to maintain a balance between - pron - internal and external environment .
animal vary in form and function .
from a sponge to a worm to a goat , an organism have a distinct body plan that limit - pron - size and shape .
animals' body be also design to interact with - pron - environment , whether in the deep sea , a rainfor canopy , or the desert .
therefore , a large amount of information about the structure of an organism ' s body ( anatomy ) and the function of - pron - cell , tissue and organ ( physiology ) can be learn by study that organism ' s environment .
body plan animal exhibit different type of body symmetry .
the sponge be asymmetrical , the sea anemone have radial symmetry , and the goat have bilateral symmetry .
animal body plan follow set pattern relate to symmetry .
- pron - be asymmetrical , radial , or bilateral in form as illustrate in figure three  three  .  two .
asymmetrical animal be animal with no pattern or symmetry  an example of an asymmetrical animal be a sponge .
radial symmetry , as illustrate in figure three  three  .  two , describe when an animal have an up - and - down orientation  any plane cut along - pron - longitudinal axis through the organism produce equal half , but not a definite right or leave side .
this plan be find mostly in aquatic animal , especially organism that attach - pron - to a base , like a rock or a boat , and extract - pron - food from the surround water as - pron - flow around the organism .
bilateral symmetry be illustrate in the same figure by a goat .
the goat also have an upper and low component to - pron - , but a plane cut from front to back separate the animal into definite right and leave side .
additional term use when describe position in the body be anterior ( front ) , posterior ( rear ) , dorsal ( toward the back ) , and ventral ( toward the stomach ) .
bilateral symmetry be find in both land - base and aquatic animal  - pron - enable a high level of mobility .
limit on animal size and shape animal with bilateral symmetry that live in water tend to have a fusiform shape  this be a tubular shaped body that be taper at both end .
this shape decrease the drag on the body as - pron - move through water and allow the animal to swim at high speed .
table three  three  .  one list the maximum speed of various animal .
certain type of shark can swim at fifty kilometer an hour and some dolphin at three  two to four  zero kilometer per hour .
land animal frequently travel faster , although the tortoise and snail be significantly slow than cheetah .
another difference in the adaptation of aquatic and land - dwell organism be that aquatic organism be constrain in shape by the force of drag in the water since water have high viscosity than air .
on the other hand , land - dwell organism be constrain mainly by gravity , and drag be relatively unimportant .
for example , most adaptation in bird be for gravity not for drag .
most animal have an exoskeleton , include insect , spider , scorpion , horseshoe crab , centipede , and crustacean .
scientist estimate that , of insect alone , there be over three  zero million specie on - pron - planet .
the exoskeleton be a hard covering or shell that provide benefit to the animal , such as protection against damage from predator and from water loss ( for land animal )  - pron - also provide for the attachment of muscle .
as the tough and resistant outer cover of an arthropod , the exoskeleton may be construct of a tough polymer such as chitin and be often biomineraliz with material such as calcium carbonate .
this be fuse to the animal 's epidermis .
ingrowth of the exoskeleton , call apodeme , function as attachment site for muscle , similar to tendon in more advanced animal ( figure three  three  .  three ) .
in order to grow , the animal must first synthesize a new exoskeleton underneath the old one and then shed or molt the original covering .
this limit the animal 's ability to grow continually , and may limit the individual 's ability to mature if molting do not occur at the proper time .
the thickness of the exoskeleton must be increase significantly to accommodate any increase in weight .
- pron - be estimate that a doubling of body size increase body weight by a factor of eight .
the increase thickness of the chitin necessary to support this weight limit most animal with an exoskeleton to a relatively small size .
the same principle apply to endoskeleton , but - pron - be more efficient because muscle be attach on the outside , make - pron - easy to compensate for increase mass .
figure three  three  .  three
apodemes be ingrowth on arthropod exoskeleton to which muscle attach .
the apodeme on this crab leg be locate above and below the fulcrum of the claw .
contraction of muscle attach to the apodeme pull the claw close .
an animal with an endoskeleton have - pron - size determine by the amount of skeletal system - pron - need in order to support the other tissue and the amount of muscle - pron - need for movement .
as the body size increase , both bone and muscle mass increase .
the speed achievable by the animal be a balance between - pron - overall size and the bone and muscle that provide support and movement .
limit effects of diffusion on size and development
the exchange of nutrient and waste between a cell and - pron - watery environment occur through the process of diffusion .
all live cell be bath in liquid , whether - pron - be in a single - cell organism or a multicellular one .
diffusion be effective over a specific distance and limit the size that an individual cell can attain .
if a cell be a single - cell microorganism , such as an amoeba , - pron - can satisfy all of - pron - nutrient and waste need through diffusion .
if the cell be too large , then diffusion be ineffective and the center of the cell do not receive adequate nutrient nor be - pron - able to effectively dispel - pron - waste .
an important concept in understand how efficient diffusion be as a means of transport be the surface to volume ratio .
recall that any three - dimensional object have a surface area and volume  the ratio of these two quantity be the surface - to - volume ratio .
consider a cell shape like a perfect sphere  - pron - have a surface area of four πr two , and a volume of ( four  /  three  ) πr three .
the surface - to - volume ratio of a sphere be three  / r  as the cell get big , - pron - surface to volume ratio decrease , make diffusion less efficient .
the large the size of the sphere , or animal , the less surface area for diffusion - pron - possess .
the solution to produce large organism be for - pron - to become multicellular .
specialization occur in complex organism , allow cell to become more efficient at do few task .
for example , circulatory system bring nutrient and remove waste , while respiratory system provide oxygen for the cell and remove carbon dioxide from - pron - .
other organ system have develop further specialization of cell and tissue and efficiently control body function .
moreover , surface - to - volume ratio apply to other area of animal development , such as the relationship between muscle mass and cross - sectional surface area in support skeleton , and in the relationship between muscle mass and the generation of dissipation of heat .
animal bioenergetics
all animal must obtain - pron - energy from food - pron - ingest or absorb .
these nutrient be convert to adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) for short - term storage and use by all cell .
some animal store energy for slightly long time as glycogen , and other store energy for much long time in the form of triglyceride house in specialize adipose tissue .
no energy system be one hundred percent efficient , and an animal 's metabolism produce waste energy in the form of heat .
if an animal can conserve that heat and maintain a relatively constant body temperature , - pron - be classify as a warm - blooded animal and call an endotherm .
the insulation use to conserve the body heat come in the form of fur , fat , or feather .
the absence of insulation in ectothermic animal increase - pron - dependence on the environment for body heat .
the amount of energy expend by an animal over a specific time be call - pron - metabolic rate .
the rate be measure variously in joule , calorie , or kilocalorie ( one  zero  zero  zero calorie ) .
carbohydrate and protein contain about four  .  five to five kcal / g , and fat contain about nine kcal / g .
metabolic rate be estimate as the basal metabolic rate ( bmr ) in endothermic animal at rest and as the standard metabolic rate ( smr ) in ectotherm .
human male have a bmr of one  six  zero  zero to one  eight  zero  zero kcal / day , and human female have a bmr of one  three  zero  zero to one  five  zero  zero kcal / day .
even with insulation , endothermal animal require extensive amount of energy to maintain a constant body temperature .
an ectotherm such as an alligator have an smr of six  zero kcal / day .
energy requirements relate to body size smaller endothermic animal have a great surface area for - pron - mass than large one ( figure three  three  .  four ) .
therefore , small animal lose heat at a fast rate than large animal and require more energy to maintain a constant internal temperature .
this result in a small endothermic animal have a high bmr , per body weight , than a large endothermic animal .
the mouse have a much high metabolic rate than the elephant .
( credit " mouse " 
modification of work by magnus kjaergaard  credit " elephant "  modification of work by " thelizardqueen” / flickr ) energy requirements relate to levels of activity
the more active an animal be , the more energy be need to maintain that activity , and the high - pron - bmr or smr .
the average daily rate of energy consumption be about two to four time an animal 's bmr or smr .
human be more sedentary than most animal and have an average daily rate of only one  .  five time the bmr .
the diet of an endothermic animal be determine by - pron - bmr .
for example  the type of grass , leaf , or shrub that an herbivore eat affect the number of calorie that - pron - take in .
the relative caloric content of herbivore food , in descend order , be tall grass >
legum > short grass > forb ( any broad - leave plant , not a grass )
>
subshrub > annual / biennial .
energy requirements relate to environment animals adapt to extreme of temperature or food availability through torpor .
torpor be a process that lead to a decrease in activity and metabolism and allow animal to survive adverse condition .
torpor can be use by animal for long period , such as enter a state of hibernation during the winter month , in which case - pron - enable - pron - to maintain a reduced body temperature .
during hibernation , ground squirrel can achieve an abdominal temperature of zero ° c ( three  two ° f ) , while a bear 's internal temperature be maintain high at about three  seven ° c ( nine  nine ° f ) .
if torpor occur during the summer month with high temperature and little water , - pron - be call estivation .
some desert animal use this to survive the harsh month of the year .
torpor can occur on a daily basis  this be see in bat and hummingbird .
while endothermy be limit in small animal by surface to volume ratio , some organism can be small and still be endotherm because - pron - employ daily torpor during the part of the day that be coldest .
this allow - pron - to conserve energy during the cold part of the day , when - pron - consume more energy to maintain - pron - body temperature .
animal body planes and cavities a stand vertebrate animal can be divide by several plane .
a sagittal plane divide the body into right and leave portion .
a midsagittal plane divide the body exactly in the middle , make two equal right and leave half .
a frontal plane ( also call a coronal plane ) separate the front from the back .
a transverse plane ( or , horizontal plane ) divide the animal into upper and low portion .
this be sometimes call a cross section , and , if the transverse cut be at an angle , - pron - be call an oblique plane .
figure three  three  .  five illustrate these plane on a goat ( a four - legged animal ) and a human being .
show be the plane of a quadrup goat and a bipedal human .
the midsagittal plane divide the body exactly in half , into right and leave portion .
the frontal plane divide the front and back , and the transverse plane divide the body into upper and low portion .
vertebrate animal have a number of define body cavity , as illustrate in figure three  three  .  six .
two of these be major cavity that contain small cavity within - pron - .
the dorsal cavity contain the cranial and the vertebral ( or spinal ) cavity .
the ventral cavity contain the thoracic cavity , which in turn contain the pleural cavity around the lung and the pericardial cavity , which surround the heart .
the ventral cavity also contain the abdominopelvic cavity , which can be separate into the abdominal and the pelvic cavity .
figure three  three  .  six vertebrate animal have two major body cavity .
the dorsal cavity , indicate in green , contain the cranial and the spinal cavity .
the ventral cavity , indicate in yellow , contain the thoracic cavity and the abdominopelvic cavity .
the thoracic cavity be separate from the abdominopelvic cavity by the diaphragm .
the thoracic cavity be separate into the abdominal cavity and the pelvic cavity by an imaginary line parallel to the pelvis bone .
( credit  modification of work by nci )
the tissue of multicellular , complex animal be four primary type  epithelial , connective , muscle , and nervous .
recall that tissue be group of similar cell group of similar cell carry out related function .
these tissue combine to form organ — like the skin or kidney — that have specific , specialized function within the body .
organ be organize into organ system to perform function  example include the circulatory system , which consist of the heart and blood vessel , and the digestive system , consist of several organ , include the stomach , intestine , liver , and pancrea .
organ system come together to create an entire organism .
epithelial tissues epithelial tissue cover the outside of organ and structure in the body and line the lumen of organ in a single layer or multiple layer of cell .
the type of epithelia be classify by the shape of cell present and the number of layer of cell .
epithelia compose of a single layer of cell be call simple epithelia  epithelial tissue compose of multiple layer be call stratify epithelia .
table three  three  .  two summarize the different type of epithelial tissue .
squamous epithelia squamous epithelial cell be generally round , flat , and have a small , centrally locate nucleus .
the cell outline be slightly irregular , and cell fit together to form a covering or lining .
when the cell be arrange in a single layer ( simple epithelia ) , - pron - facilitate diffusion in tissue , such as the area of gas exchange in the lung and the exchange of nutrient and waste at blood capillary .
squamous epithelia cell ( a ) have a slightly irregular shape , and a small , centrally locate nucleus .
these cell can be stratify into layer , as in ( b ) this human cervix speciman .
( credit b  modification of work by ed uthman  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
figure three  three  .  seven a illustrate a layer of squamous cell with - pron - membrane join together to form an epithelium .
image figure three  three  .  seven b illustrate squamous epithelial cell arrange in stratified layer , where protection be need on the body from outside abrasion and damage .
this be call a stratified squamous epithelium and occur in the skin and in tissue line the mouth and vagina .
cuboidal epithelia cuboidal epithelial cell , show in figure three  three  .  eight , be cube - shape with a single , central nucleus .
- pron - be most commonly find in a single layer represent a simple epithelia in glandular tissue throughout the body where - pron - prepare and secrete glandular material .
- pron - be also find in the wall of tubule and in the duct of the kidney and liver .
simple cuboidal epithelial cell line tubule in the mammalian kidney , where - pron - be involve in filter the blood .
columnar epithelia columnar epithelial cell be tall than - pron - be wide  - pron - resemble a stack of column in an epithelial layer , and be most commonly find in a single - layer arrangement .
the nucleus of columnar epithelial cell in the digestive tract appear to be line up at the base of the cell , as illustrate in figure three  three  .  nine .
these cell absorb material from the luman of the digestive tract and prepare - pron - for entry into the body through the circulatory and lymphatic system .
simple columnar epithelial cell absorb material from the digestive tract .
goblet cell secret mucous into the digestive tract luman .
columnar epithelial cell line the respiratory tract appear to be stratify .
however , each cell be attach to the base membrane of the tissue and , therefore , - pron - be simple tissue .
the nucleus be arrange at different level in the layer of cell , make - pron - appear as though there be more than one layer , as see in figure three  three  .  one  zero .
this be call pseudostratifi , columnar epithelia .
this cellular covering have cilium at the apical , or free , surface of the cell .
the cilium enhance the movement of mucous and trap particle out of the respiratory tract , help to protect the system from invasive microorganism and harmful material that have be breathe into the body .
goblet cell be intersperse in some tissue ( such as the lining of the trachea ) .
the goblet cell contain mucous that trap irritant , which in the case of the trachea keep these irritant from get into the lung .
pseudostratifi columnar epithelia line the respiratory tract .
- pron - exist in one layer , but the arrangement of nucleus at different level make - pron - appear that there be more than one layer .
goblet cell intersperse between the columnar epithelial cell secrete mucous into the respiratory tract .
transitional epithelia transitional or uroepithelial cell appear only in the urinary system , primarily in the bladder and ureter .
these cell be arrange in a stratified layer , but - pron - have the capability of appear to pile up on top of each other in a relaxed , empty bladder , as illustrate in figure three  three  .  one  one .
as the urinary bladder fill , the epithelial layer unfold and expand to hold the volume of urine introduce into - pron - .
as the bladder fill , - pron - expand and the lining become thin .
in other word , the tissue transition from thick to thin .
connective tissues connective tissue be make up of a matrix consisting of live cell and a non - living substance , call the ground substance .
the ground substance be make of an organic substance ( usually a protein ) and an inorganic substance ( usually a mineral or water ) .
the principal cell of connective tissue be the fibroblast .
this cell make the fiber find in nearly all of the connective tissue .
fibroblast be motile , able to carry out mitosis , and can synthesize whichev connective tissue be need .
macrophage , lymphocyte , and , occasionally , leukocyte can be find in some of the tissue .
some tissue have specialize cell that be not find in the other .
the matrix in connective tissue give the tissue - pron - density .
when a connective tissue have a high concentration of cell or fiber , - pron - have proportionally a less dense matrix .
the organic portion or protein fiber find in connective tissue be either collagen , elastic , or reticular fiber .
collagen fiber provide strength to the tissue , prevent - pron - from be tear or separate from the surround tissue .
elastic fiber be make of the protein elastin  this fiber can stretch to one and one half of - pron - length and return to - pron - original size and shape .
elastic fiber provide flexibility to the tissue .
reticular fiber be the third type of protein fiber find in connective tissue .
this fiber consist of thin strand of collagen that form a network of fiber to support the tissue and other organ to which - pron - be connect .
the various type of connective tissue , the type of cell and fiber - pron - be make of , and sample location of the tissue be summarize in table three  three  .  three .
loose / areolar connective tissue loose connective tissue , also call areolar connective tissue , have a sampling of all of the component of a connective tissue .
as illustrate in figure three  three  .  one  two , loose connective tissue have some fibroblast  macrophage be present as well .
collagen fiber be relatively wide and stain a light pink , while elastic fiber be thin and stain dark blue to black .
the space between the form element of the tissue be fill with the matrix .
the material in the connective tissue give - pron - a loose consistency similar to a cotton ball that have be pull apart .
loose connective tissue be find around every blood vessel and help to keep the vessel in place .
the tissue be also find around and between most body organ .
in summary , areolar tissue be tough , yet flexible , and comprise membrane .
loose connective tissue be compose of loosely weave collagen and elastic fiber .
the fiber and other component of the connective tissue matrix be secrete by fibroblast .
fibrous connective tissue fibrous connective tissue contain large amount of collagen fiber and few cell or matrix material .
the fiber can be arrange irregularly or regularly with the strand line up in parallel .
irregularly arrange fibrous connective tissue be find in area of the body where stress occur from all direction , such as the dermis of the skin .
regular fibrous connective tissue , show in figure three  three  .  one  three , be find in tendon ( which connect muscle to bone ) and ligament ( which connect bone to bone ) .
fibrous connective tissue from the tendon have strand of collagen fiber line up in parallel .
cartilage cartilage be a connective tissue with a large amount of the matrix and variable amount of fiber .
the cell , call chondrocyte , make the matrix and fiber of the tissue .
chondrocyte be find in space within the tissue call lacunae .
a cartilage with few collagen and elastic fiber be hyaline cartilage , illustrate in figure three  three  .  one  four .
the lacunae be randomly scatter throughout the tissue and the matrix take on a milky or scrub appearance with routine histological stain .
shark have cartilaginous skeleton , as do nearly the entire human skeleton during a specific pre - birth developmental stage .
a remnant of this cartilage persist in the outer portion of the human nose .
hyaline cartilage be also find at the end of long bone , reduce friction and cushion the articulation of these bone .
hyaline cartilage consist of a matrix with cell call chondrocyte embed in - pron - .
the chondrocyte exist in cavity in the matrix call lacunae .
elastic cartilage have a large amount of elastic fiber , give - pron - tremendous flexibility .
the ear of most vertebrate animal contain this cartilage as do portion of the larynx , or voice box .
fibrocartilage contain a large amount of collagen fiber , give the tissue tremendous strength .
fibrocartilage comprise the intervertebral disc in vertebrate animal .
hyaline cartilage find in movable joint such as the knee and shoulder become damage as a result of age or trauma .
damaged hyaline cartilage be replace by fibrocartilage and result in the joint become " stiff .
" bone bone , or osseous tissue , be a connective tissue that have a large amount of two different type of matrix material .
the organic matrix be similar to the matrix material find in other connective tissue , include some amount of collagen and elastic fiber .
this give strength and flexibility to the tissue .
the inorganic matrix consist of mineral salt
—
mostly calcium salt — that give the tissue hardness .
without adequate organic material in the matrix , the tissue break  without adequate inorganic material in the matrix , the tissue bend .
there be three type of cell in bone  osteoblast , osteocyte , and osteoclast .
osteoblast be active in make bone for growth and remodeling .
osteoblast deposit bone material into the matrix and , after the matrix surround - pron - , - pron - continue to live , but in a reduced metabolic state as osteocyte .
osteocyte be find in lacunae of the bone .
osteoclast be active in break down bone for bone remodeling , and - pron - provide access to calcium store in tissue .
osteoclast be usually find on the surface of the tissue .
bone can be divide into two type  compact and spongy .
compact bone be find in the shaft ( or diaphysis ) of a long bone and the surface of the flat bone , while spongy bone be find in the end ( or epiphysis ) of a long bone .
compact bone be organize into subunit call osteon , as illustrate in figure three  three  .  one  five .
a blood vessel and a nerve be find in the center of the structure within the haversian canal , with radiate circle of lacunae around - pron - know as lamellae .
the wavy line see between the lacunae be microchannel call canaliculus  - pron - connect the lacunae to aid diffusion between the cell .
spongy bone be make of tiny plate call trabeculae these plate serve as strut to give the spongy bone strength .
over time , these plate can break cause the bone to become less resilient .
bone tissue form the internal skeleton of vertebrate animal , provide structure to the animal and point of attachment for tendon .
compact bone be a dense matrix on the outer surface of bone .
spongy bone , inside the compact bone , be porous with web - like trabeculae .
( b ) compact bone be organize into ring call osteon .
blood vessel , nerve , and lymphatic vessel be find in the central haversian canal .
ring of lamellae surround the haversian canal .
between the lamellae be cavity call lacunae .
canaliculi be microchannel connect the lacunae together .
( c ) osteoblast surround the exterior of the bone .
osteoclast bear tunnel into the bone and osteocyte be find in the lacunae .
adipose tissue adipose tissue , or fat tissue , be consider a connective tissue even though - pron - do not have fibroblast or a real matrix and only have a few fiber .
adipose tissue be make up of cell call adipocyte that collect and store fat in the form of triglyceride , for energy metabolism .
adipose tissue additionally serve as insulation to help maintain body temperature , allow animal to be endothermic , and - pron - function as cushion against damage to body organ .
under a microscope , adipose tissue cell appear empty due to the extraction of fat during the processing of the material for view , as see in figure three  three  .  one  six .
the thin line in the image be the cell membrane , and the nucleus be the small , black dot at the edge of the cell .
adipose be a connective tissue be make up of cell call adipocyte .
adipocyte have small nucleus localize at the cell edge .
blood blood be consider a connective tissue because - pron - have a matrix , as show in figure three  three  .  one  seven .
the live cell type be red blood cell ( rbc ) , also call erythrocyte , and white blood cell ( wbc ) , also call leukocyte .
the fluid portion of whole blood , - pron - matrix , be commonly call plasma .
blood be a connective tissue that have a fluid matrix , call plasma , and no fiber .
erythrocyte ( red blood cell ) , the predominant cell type , be involve in the transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide .
also present be various leukocyte ( white blood cell ) involve in immune response .
the cell find in great abundance in blood be the erythrocyte .
erythrocytes be count in million in a blood sample  the average number of red blood cell in primate be four  .  seven to five  .  five million cell per microliter .
erythrocyte be consistently the same size in a specie , but vary in size between specie .
for example , the average diameter of a primate red blood cell be seven  .  five μl , a dog be close at seven  .  zero μl , but a cat 's
rbc diameter be five  .  nine μl .
sheep erythrocyte be even small at four  .  six μl .
mammalian erythrocyte lose - pron - nucleus and mitochondrion when - pron - be release from the bone marrow where - pron - be make .
fish , amphibian , and avian red blood cell maintain - pron - nucleus and mitochondria throughout the cell 's life .
the principal job of an erythrocyte be to carry and deliver oxygen to the tissue .
leukocyte be the predominant white blood cell find in the peripheral blood .
leukocyte be count in the thousand in the blood with measurement express as range  primate count range from four  ,  eight  zero  zero to one  zero  ,  eight  zero  zero cell per μl , dog from five  ,  six  zero  zero to one  nine  ,  two  zero  zero cell per μl , cat from eight  ,  zero  zero  zero to two  five  ,  zero  zero  zero cell per μl , cattle from four  ,  zero  zero  zero to one  two  ,  zero  zero  zero cell per μl , and pig from one  one  ,  zero  zero  zero to two  two  ,  zero  zero  zero cell per μl .
lymphocytes function primarily in the immune response to foreign antigen or material .
different type of lymphocyte make antibody tailor to the foreign antigen and control the production of those antibody .
neutrophil be phagocytic cell and - pron - participate in one of the early line of defense against microbial invader , aid in the removal of bacteria that have enter the body .
another leukocyte that be find in the peripheral blood be the monocyte .
monocyte give rise to phagocytic macrophage that clean up dead and damaged cell in the body , whether - pron - be foreign or from the host animal .
two additional leukocyte in the blood be eosinophil and basophil —
both help to facilitate the inflammatory response .
the slightly granular material among the cell be a cytoplasmic fragment of a cell in the bone marrow .
this be call a platelet or thrombocyte .
platelet participate in the stage lead up to coagulation of the blood to stop bleed through damaged blood vessel .
blood have a number of function , but primarily - pron - transport material through the body to bring nutrient to cell and remove waste material from - pron - .
muscle tissues
there be three type of muscle in animal body  smooth , skeletal , and cardiac .
- pron - differ by the presence or absence of striation or band , the number and location of nucleus , whether - pron - be voluntarily or involuntarily control , and - pron - location within the body .
table three  three  .  four summarize these difference .
smooth muscle smooth muscle do not have striation in - pron - cell .
- pron - have a single , centrally locate nucleus , as show in figure three  three  .  one  eight .
constriction of smooth muscle occur under involuntary , autonomic nervous control and in response to local condition in the tissue .
smooth muscle tissue be also call non - striate as - pron - lack the banded appearance of skeletal and cardiac muscle .
the wall of blood vessel , the tube of the digestive system , and the tube of the reproductive system be compose of mostly smooth muscle .
smooth muscle cell do not have striation , while skeletal muscle cell do .
cardiac muscle cell have striation , but , unlike the multinucleate skeletal cell , - pron - have only one nucleus .
cardiac muscle tissue also have intercalate disc , specialized region run along the plasma membrane that join adjacent cardiac muscle cell and assist in pass an electrical impulse from cell to cell .
skeletal muscle skeletal muscle have striation across - pron - cell cause by the arrangement of the contractile protein actin and myosin .
these muscle cell be relatively long and have multiple nucleus along the edge of the cell .
skeletal muscle be under voluntary , somatic nervous system control and be find in the muscle that move bone .
figure three  three  .  one  eight illustrate the histology of skeletal muscle .
cardiac muscle cardiac muscle , show in figure three  three  .  one  eight , be find only in the heart .
like skeletal muscle , - pron - have cross striation in - pron - cell , but cardiac muscle have a single , centrally locate nucleus .
cardiac muscle be not under voluntary control but can be influence by the autonomic nervous system to speed up or slow down .
an add feature to cardiac muscle cell be a line than extend along the end of the cell as - pron - abut the next cardiac cell in the row .
this line be call an intercalated disc  - pron - assist in pass electrical impulse efficiently from one cell to the next and maintain the strong connection between neighbor cardiac cell .
nervous tissues nervous tissue be make of cell specialize to receive and transmit electrical impulse from specific area of the body and to send - pron - to specific location in the body .
the main cell of the nervous system be the neuron , illustrate in figure three  three  .  one  nine .
the large structure with a central nucleus be the cell body of the neuron .
projection from the cell body be either dendrite specialize in receive input or a single axon specialize in transmit impulse .
some glial cell be also show .
astrocyte regulate the chemical environment of the nerve cell , and oligodendrocyte insulate the axon so the electrical nerve impulse be transfer more efficiently .
other glial cell that be not show support the nutritional and waste requirement of the neuron .
some of the glial cell be phagocytic and remove debris or damage cell from the tissue .
a nerve consist of neuron and glial cell .
the neuron have projection call dendrite that receive signal and projection call axon that send signal .
also show be two type of glial cell  astrocyte regulate the chemical environment of the nerve cell , and oligodendrocyte insulate the axon so the electrical nerve impulse be transfer more efficiently .
animal organ and organ system constantly adjust to internal and external change through a process call homeostasis ( " steady state " ) .
these change may be in the level of glucose or calcium in blood or in external temperature .
homeostasis mean to maintain dynamic equilibrium in the body .
- pron - be dynamic because - pron - be constantly adjust to the change that the body 's system encounter .
- pron - be equilibrium because body function be keep within specific range .
even an animal that be apparently inactive be maintain this homeostatic equilibrium .
homeostatic process
the goal of homeostasis be the maintenance of equilibrium around a point or value call a set point .
while there be normal fluctuation from the set point , the body 's system will usually attempt to go back to this point .
a change in the internal or external environment be call a stimulus and be detect by a receptor  the response of the system be to adjust the deviation parameter toward the set point .
for instance , if the body become too warm , adjustment be make to cool the animal .
if the blood 's glucose rise after a meal , adjustment be make to lower the blood glucose level by get the nutrient into tissue that need - pron - or to store - pron - for later use .
control of homeostasis
when a change occur in an animal 's environment , an adjustment must be make .
the receptor sense the change in the environment , then send a signal to the control center ( in most case , the brain ) which in turn generate a response that be signal to an effector .
the effector be a muscle ( that contract or relax ) or a gland that secrete .
homeostatsis be maintain by negative feedback loop .
positive feedback loop actually push the organism further out of homeostasis , but may be necessary for life to occur .
homeostasis be control by the nervous and endocrine system of mammal .
negative feedback mechanisms
any homeostatic process that change the direction of the stimulus be a negative feedback loop .
- pron - may either increase or decrease the stimulus , but the stimulus be not allow to continue as - pron - do before the receptor sense - pron - .
in other word , if a level be too high , the body do something to bring - pron - down , and conversely , if a level be too low , the body do something to make - pron - go up .
hence the term negative feedback .
an example be animal maintenance of blood glucose level .
when an animal have eat , blood glucose level rise .
this be sense by the nervous system .
specialized cell in the pancreas sense this , and the hormone insulin be release by the endocrine system .
insulin cause blood glucose level to decrease , as would be expect in a negative feedback system , as illustrate in figure three  three  .  two  zero .
however , if an animal have not eat and blood glucose level decrease , this be sense in another group of cell in the pancreas , and the hormone glucagon be release cause glucose level to increase .
this be still a negative feedback loop , but not in the direction expect by the use of the term " negative .
"
another example of an increase as a result of the feedback loop be the control of blood calcium .
if calcium level decrease , specialized cell in the parathyroid gland sense this and release parathyroid hormone ( pth ) , cause an increase absorption of calcium through the intestine and kidney and , possibly , the breakdown of bone in order to liberate calcium .
the effect of pth be to raise blood level of the element .
negative feedback loop be the predominant mechanism use in homeostasis .
blood sugar level be control by a negative feedback loop .
( credit  modification of work by jon sullivan )
positive feedback loop
a positive feedback loop maintain the direction of the stimulus , possibly accelerate - pron - .
few example of positive feedback loop exist in animal body , but one be find in the cascade of chemical reaction that result in blood clotting , or coagulation .
as one clotting factor be activate , - pron - activate the next factor in sequence until a fibrin clot be achieve .
the direction be maintain , not change , so this be positive feedback .
another example of positive feedback be uterine contraction during childbirth , as illustrate in figure three  three  .  two  one .
the hormone oxytocin , make by the endocrine system , stimulate the contraction of the uterus .
this produce pain sense by the nervous system .
instead of lower the oxytocin and cause the pain to subside , more oxytocin be produce until the contraction be powerful enough to produce childbirth .
set point
- pron - be possible to adjust a system 's set point .
when this happen , the feedback loop work to maintain the new setting .
an example of this be blood pressure  over time , the normal or set point for blood pressure can increase as a result of continue increase in blood pressure .
the body no longer recognize the elevation as abnormal and no attempt be make to return to the low set point .
the result be the maintenance of an elevated blood pressure that can have harmful effect on the body .
medication can lower blood pressure and lower the set point in the system to a more healthy level .
this be call a process of alteration of the set point in a feedback loop .
change can be make in a group of body organ system in order to maintain a set point in another system .
this be call acclimatization .
this occur , for instance , when an animal migrate to a high altitude than - pron - be accustom to .
in order to adjust to the low oxygen level at the new altitude , the body increase the number of red blood cell circulate in the blood to ensure adequate oxygen delivery to the tissue .
another example of acclimatization be animal that have seasonal change in - pron - coat  a heavy coat in the winter ensure adequate heat retention , and a light coat in summer assist in keep body temperature from rise to harmful level .
homeostasis 
thermoregulation body temperature affect body activity .
generally , as body temperature rise , enzyme activity rise as well .
for every ten degree centigrade rise in temperature , enzyme activity double , up to a point .
body protein , include enzyme , begin to denature and lose - pron - function with high heat ( around five  zero oc for mammal ) .
enzyme activity will decrease by half for every ten degree centigrade drop in temperature , to the point of freezing , with a few exception .
some fish can withstand freeze solid and return to normal with thawing .
endotherm and ectotherms animal can be divide into two group  some maintain a constant body temperature in the face of differ environmental temperature , while other have a body temperature that be the same as - pron - environment and thus vary with the environment .
animal that do not control - pron - body temperature be ectotherm .
this group have be call cold - blooded , but the term may not apply to an animal in the desert with a very warm body temperature .
in contrast to ectotherm , which rely on external temperature to set - pron - body temperature , poikilotherm be animal with constantly vary internal temperature .
an animal that maintain a constant body temperature in the face of environmental change be call a homeotherm .
endotherm be animal that rely on internal source for body temperature but which can exhibit extreme in temperature .
these animal be able to maintain a level of activity at cool temperature , which an ectotherm can not due to differ enzyme level of activity .
heat can be exchange between an animal and - pron - environment through four mechanism  radiation , evaporation , convection , and conduction ( figure three  three  .  two  two ) .
radiation be the emission of electromagnetic " heat " wave .
heat come from the sun in this manner and radiate from dry skin the same way .
heat can be remove with liquid from a surface during evaporation .
this occur when a mammal sweat .
convection current of air remove heat from the surface of dry skin as the air pass over - pron - .
heat will be conduct from one surface to another during direct contact with the surface , such as an animal rest on a warm rock .
heat can be exchange by four mechanism  ( a ) radiation , ( b ) evaporation , ( c ) convection , or ( d ) conduction .
( credit b  modification of work by " kullez” / flickr  credit c  modification of work by chad rosenthal  credit d  modification of work by " stacey . d” / flickr ) heat conservation and dissipation animal conserve or dissipate heat in a variety of way .
in certain climate , endothermic animal have some form of insulation , such as fur , fat , feather , or some combination thereof .
animal with thick fur or feather create an insulate layer of air between - pron - skin and internal organ .
polar bear and seal live and swim in a subfreez environment and yet maintain a constant , warm , body temperature .
the arctic fox , for example , use - pron - fluffy tail as extra insulation when - pron - curl up to sleep in cold weather .
mammal have a residual effect from shiver and increased muscle activity  arrector pili muscle because " goose bump , " cause small hair to stand up when the individual be cold  this have the intend effect of increase body temperature .
mammal use layer of fat to achieve the same end .
loss of significant amount of body fat will compromise an individual 's ability to conserve heat .
endotherm use - pron - circulatory system to help maintain body temperature .
vasodilation bring more blood and heat to the body surface , facilitate radiation and evaporative heat loss , which help to cool the body .
vasoconstriction reduce blood flow in peripheral blood vessel , force blood toward the core and the vital organ find there , and conserve heat .
some animal have adaption to - pron - circulatory system that enable - pron - to transfer heat from artery to vein , warm blood return to the heart .
this be call a countercurrent heat exchange  - pron - prevent the cold venous blood from cool the heart and other internal organ .
this adaption can be shut down in some animal to prevent overheat the internal organ .
the countercurrent adaption be find in many animal , include dolphin , shark , bony fish , bee , and hummingbird .
in contrast , similar adaptation can help cool endotherm when need , such as dolphin fluke and elephant ear .
some ectothermic animal use change in - pron - behavior to help regulate body temperature .
for example , a desert ectothermic animal may simply seek cool area during the hot part of the day in the desert to keep from get too warm .
the same animal may climb onto rock to capture heat during a cold desert night .
some animal seek water to aid evaporation in cool - pron - , as see with reptile .
other ectotherm use group activity such as the activity of bee to warm a hive to survive winter .
many animal , especially mammal , use metabolic waste heat as a heat source .
when muscle be contract , most of the energy from the atp use in muscle action be waste energy that translate into heat .
severe cold elicit a shivering reflex that generate heat for the body .
many specie also have a type of adipose tissue call brown fat that specialize in generate heat .
neural control of thermoregulation
the nervous system be important to thermoregulation , as illustrate in figure three  three  .  two  two .
the process of homeostasis and temperature control be center in the hypothalamus of the advanced animal brain .
the hypothalamus maintain the set point for body temperature through reflex that because vasodilation and sweating when the body be too warm , or vasoconstriction and shiver when the body be too cold .
- pron - respond to chemical from the body .
when a bacterium be destroy by phagocytic leukocyte , chemical call endogenous pyrogen be release into the blood .
these pyrogen circulate to the hypothalamus and reset the thermostat .
this allow the body 's temperature to increase in what be commonly call a fever .
an increase in body temperature cause iron to be conserve , which reduce a nutrient need by bacteria .
an increase in body heat also increase the activity of the animal 's enzyme and protective cell while inhibit the enzyme and activity of the invade microorganism .
finally , heat - pron - may also kill the pathogen .
a fever that be once think to be a complication of an infection be now understand to be a normal defense mechanism .
for human , fruit and vegetable be important in maintain a balanced diet .
introduction
all live organism need nutrient to survive .
while plant can obtain the molecule require for cellular function through the process of photosynthesis , most animal obtain - pron - nutrient by the consumption of other organism .
at the cellular level , the biological molecule necessary for animal function be amino acid , lipid molecule , nucleotide , and simple sugar .
however , the food consume consist of protein , fat , and complex carbohydrate .
animal must convert these macromolecule into the simple molecule require for maintain cellular function , such as assemble new molecule , cell , and tissue .
the conversion of the food consume to the nutrient require be a multi - step process involve digestion and absorption .
during digestion , food particle be break down to small component , and later , - pron - be absorb by the body .
one of the challenge in human nutrition be maintain a balance between food intake , storage , and energy expenditure .
imbalance can have serious health consequence .
for example , eat too much food while not expend much energy lead to obesity , which in turn will increase the risk of develop illness such as type -  two diabete and cardiovascular disease .
the recent rise in obesity and related disease make understand the role of diet and nutrition in maintain good health all the more important .
animal obtain - pron - nutrition from the consumption of other organism .
depend on - pron - diet , animal can be classify into the follow category  plant eater ( herbivore ) , meat eater ( carnivore ) , and those that eat both plant and animal ( omnivore ) .
the nutrient and macromolecule present in food be not immediately accessible to the cell .
there be a number of process that modify food within the animal body in order to make the nutrient and organic molecule accessible for cellular function .
as animal evolve in complexity of form and function , - pron - digestive system have also evolve to accommodate - pron - various dietary need .
herbivores , omnivores , and carnivor herbivore be animal whose primary food source be plant - base .
example of herbivore , as show in figure three  four  .  two include vertebrate like deer , koala , and some bird specie , as well as invertebrat such as cricket and caterpillar .
these animal have evolve digestive system capable of handle large amount of plant material .
herbivore can be further classify into frugivore ( fruit - eater ) , granivore ( seed eater ) , nectivore ( nectar feeder ) , and folivore ( leaf eater ) .
herbivore , like this ( a ) mule deer and ( b ) monarch caterpillar , eat primarily plant material .
( credit a  modification of work by bill ebbesen  credit b  modification of work by doug bowman )
carnivore be animal that eat other animal .
the word carnivore be derive from latin and literally mean " meat eater .
"
wild cat such as lion , show in figure three  four  .  three a and tiger be example of vertebrate carnivore , as be snake and shark , while invertebrate carnivore include sea star , spider , and ladybug , show in figure three  four  .  three b .
obligate carnivore be those that rely entirely on animal flesh to obtain - pron - nutrient  example of obligate carnivore be member of the cat family , such as lion and cheetah .
facultative carnivore be those that also eat non - animal food in addition to animal food .
note that there be no clear line that differentiate facultative carnivore from omnivore  dog would be consider facultative carnivore .
carnivore like the ( a ) lion eat primarily meat .
the ( b ) ladybug be also a carnivore that consume small insect call aphid .
( credit a  modification of work by kevin pluck  credit b  modification of work by jon sullivan )
omnivores be animal that eat both plant - and animal - derive food .
in latin , omnivore mean to eat everything .
human , bear ( show in figure three  four  .  four a ) , and chicken be example of vertebrate omnivore  invertebrate omnivore include cockroach and crayfish ( show in figure three  four  .  four b ) .
omnivore like the ( a ) bear and ( b ) crayfish eat both plant and animal base food .
( credit a  modification of work by dave menke  credit b  modification of work by jon sullivan )
invertebrate digestive systems animals have evolve different type of digestive system to aid in the digestion of the different food - pron - consume .
the simple example be that of a gastrovascular cavity and be find in organism with only one opening for digestion .
platyhelminthes ( flatworm ) , ctenophora ( comb jelly ) , and cnidaria ( coral , jelly fish , and sea anemone ) use this type of digestion .
gastrovascular cavity , as show in figure three  four  .  five a , be typically a blind tube or cavity with only one opening , the " mouth " , which also serve as an " anus " .
ingested material enter the mouth and pass through a hollow , tubular cavity .
cell within the cavity secrete digestive enzyme that break down the food .
the food particle be engulf by the cell line the gastrovascular cavity .
the alimentary canal , show in figure three  four  .  five b , be a more advanced system  - pron - consist of one tube with a mouth at one end and an anus at the other .
earthworm be an example of an animal with an alimentary canal .
once the food be ingest through the mouth , - pron - pass through the esophagus and be store in an organ call the crop  then - pron - pass into the gizzard where - pron - be churn and digest .
from the gizzard , the food pass through the intestine , the nutrient be absorb , and the waste be eliminate as fece , call casting , through the anus .
a gastrovascular cavity have a single opening through which food be ingest and waste be excrete , as show in this hydra and in this jellyfish medusa .
( b )
an alimentary canal have two opening  a mouth for ingest food , and an anus for eliminate waste , as show in this nematode .
vertebrate digestive systems vertebrates have evolve more complex digestive system to adapt to - pron - dietary need .
some animal have a single stomach , while other have multi - chamber stomach .
bird have develop a digestive system adapt to eat unmasticated food .
monogastric 
single - chamber stomach
as the word monogastric suggest , this type of digestive system consist of one ( " mono " ) stomach chamber ( " gastric " ) .
human and many animal have a monogastric digestive system as illustrate in figure three  four  .  six ab .
the process of digestion begin with the mouth and the intake of food .
the tooth play an important role in masticating ( chew ) or physically break down food into small particle .
the enzyme present in saliva also begin to chemically break down food .
the esophagus be a long tube that connect the mouth to the stomach .
use peristalsis , or wave - like smooth muscle contraction , the muscle of the esophagus push the food towards the stomach .
in order to speed up the action of enzyme in the stomach , the stomach be an extremely acidic environment , with a ph between one  .  five and two  .  five .
the gastric juice , which include enzyme in the stomach , act on the food particle and continue the process of digestion .
further breakdown of food take place in the small intestine where enzyme produce by the liver , the small intestine , and the pancrea continue the process of digestion .
the nutrient be absorb into the blood stream across the epithelial cell line the wall of the small intestine .
the waste material travel on to the large intestine where water be absorb and the dry waste material be compact into fece  - pron - be store until - pron - be excrete through the rectum .
human and herbivore , such as the ( b ) rabbit , have a monogastric digestive system .
however , in the rabbit the small intestine and cecum be enlarge to allow more time to digest plant material .
the enlarged organ provide more surface area for absorption of nutrient .
rabbit digest - pron - food twice  the first time food pass through the digestive system , - pron - collect in the cecum , and then - pron - pass as soft fece call cecotrophe .
the rabbit re - ingest these cecotrophe to further digest - pron - .
avian birds face special challenge when - pron - come to obtain nutrition from food .
- pron - do not have tooth and
so - pron - digestive system , show in figure three  four  .  seven , must be able to process un - masticate food .
bird have evolve a variety of beak type that reflect the vast variety in - pron - diet , range from seed and insect to fruit and nut .
because most bird fly , - pron - metabolic rate be high in order to efficiently process food and keep - pron - body weight low .
the stomach of bird have two chamber  the proventriculus , where gastric juice be produce to digest the food before - pron - enter the stomach , and the gizzard , where the food be store , soak , and mechanically ground .
the undigested material form food pellet that be sometimes regurgitate .
most of the chemical digestion and absorption happen in the intestine and the waste be excrete through the cloaca .
the avian esophagus have a pouch , call a crop , which store food .
food pass from the crop to the first of two stomach , call the proventriculus , which contain digestive juice that break down food .
from the proventriculus , the food enter the second stomach , call the gizzard , which grind food .
some bird swallow stone or grit , which be store in the gizzard , to aid the grind process .
bird do not have separate opening to excrete urine and fece .
instead , uric acid from the kidney be secrete into the large intestine and combine with waste from the digestive process .
this waste be excrete through an opening call the cloaca .
ruminant ruminant be mainly herbivore like cow , sheep , and goat , whose entire diet consist of eat large amount of roughage or fiber .
- pron - have evolve digestive system that help - pron - digest vast amount of cellulose .
an interesting feature of the ruminants' mouth be that - pron - do not have upper incisor tooth .
- pron - use - pron - low tooth , tongue and lip to tear and chew - pron - food .
from the mouth , the food travel to the esophagus and on to the stomach .
to help digest the large amount of plant material , the stomach of the ruminant be a multi - chamber organ , as illustrate in figure three  four  .  eight .
the four compartment of the stomach be call the ruman , reticulum , omasum , and abomasum .
these chamber contain many microbe that break down cellulose and ferment ingest food .
the abomasum be the " true " stomach and be the equivalent of the monogastric stomach chamber where gastric juice be secrete .
the four - compartment gastric chamber provide large space and the microbial support necessary to digest plant material in ruminant .
the fermentation process produce large amount of gas in the stomach chamber , which must be eliminate .
as in other animal , the small intestine play an important role in nutrient absorption , and the large intestine help in the elimination of waste .
ruminant animal , such as goat and cow , have four stomach .
the first two stomach , the ruman and the reticulum , contain prokaryote and protist that be able to digest cellulose fiber .
the ruminant regurgitate cud from the reticulum , chew - pron - , and swallow - pron - into a third stomach , the omasum , which remove water .
the cud then pass onto the fourth stomach , the abomasum , where - pron - be digest by enzyme produce by the ruminant .
pseudo - ruminant some animal , such as camel and alpaca , be pseudo - ruminant .
- pron - eat a lot of plant material and roughage .
digest plant material be not easy because plant cell wall contain the polymeric sugar molecule cellulose .
the digestive enzyme of these animal can not break down cellulose , but microorganism present in the digestive system can .
therefore , the digestive system must be able to handle large amount of roughage and break down the cellulose .
pseudo - ruminant have a three - chamber stomach in the digestive system .
however , - pron - cecum — a pouched organ at the beginning of the large intestine contain many microorganism that be necessary for the digestion of plant material — be large and be the site where the roughage be ferment and digest .
these animal do not have a ruman but have an omasum , abomasum , and reticulum .
part of the digestive system
the vertebrate digestive system be design to facilitate the transformation of food matter into the nutrient component that sustain organism .
oral cavity
the oral cavity , or mouth , be the point of entry of food into the digestive system , illustrate in figure three  four  .  nine .
the food consume be break into small particle by mastication , the chew action of the tooth .
all mammal have tooth and can chew - pron - food .
the extensive chemical process of digestion begin in the mouth .
as food be be chew , saliva , produce by the salivary gland , mix with the food .
saliva be a watery substance produce in the mouth of many animal .
there be three major gland that secrete saliva — the parotid , the submandibular , and the sublingual .
saliva contain mucus that moisten food and buffer the ph of the food .
saliva also contain immunoglobulin and lysozyme , which have antibacterial action to reduce tooth decay by inhibit growth of some bacteria .
saliva also contain an enzyme call salivary amylase that begin the process of convert starch in the food into a disaccharide call maltose .
another enzyme call lipase be produce by the cell in the tongue .
lipase be a class of enzyme that can break down triglyceride .
the lingual lipase begin the breakdown of fat component in the food .
the chewing and wet action provide by the tooth and saliva prepare the food into a mass call the bolus for swallow .
the tongue help in swallow — move the bolus from the mouth into the pharynx .
the pharynx open to two passageway  the trachea , which lead to the lung , and the esophagus , which lead to the stomach .
the trachea have an opening call the glottis , which be cover by a cartilaginous flap call the epiglottis .
when swallow , the epiglottis close the glottis and food pass into the esophagus and not the trachea .
this arrangement allow food to be keep out of the trachea .
digestion of food begin in the ( a ) oral cavity .
food be masticate by tooth and moisten by saliva secrete from the ( b ) salivary gland .
enzyme in the saliva begin to digest starch and fat .
with the help of the tongue , the result bolus be move into the esophagus by swallow .
( credit  modification of work by the national cancer institute )
esophagus
the esophagus be a tubular organ that connect the mouth to the stomach .
the chewed and soften food pass through the esophagus after be swallow .
the smooth muscle of the esophagus undergo a series of wave like movement call peristalsis that push the food toward the stomach , as illustrate in figure three  four  .  one  zero .
the peristalsis wave be unidirectional — - pron - move food from the mouth to the stomach , and reverse movement be not possible .
the peristaltic movement of the esophagus be an involuntary reflex  - pron - take place in response to the act of swallow .
the esophagus transfer food from the mouth to the stomach through peristaltic movement .
a ring - like muscle call a sphincter form valve in the digestive system .
the gastro - esophageal sphincter be locate at the stomach end of the esophagus .
in response to swallow and the pressure exert by the bolus of food , this sphincter open , and the bolus enter the stomach .
when there be no swallow action , this sphincter be shut and prevent the content of the stomach from travel up the esophagus .
many animal have a true sphincter  however , in human , there be no true sphincter , but the esophagus remain closed when there be no swallow action .
acid reflux or " heartburn
" occur when the acidic digestive juice escape into the esophagus .
stomach a large part of digestion occur in the stomach , show in figure three  four  .  one  one .
the stomach be a saclike organ that secrete gastric digestive juice .
the ph in the stomach be between one  .  five and two  .  five .
this highly acidic environment be require for the chemical breakdown of food and the extraction of nutrient .
when empty , the stomach be a rather small organ  however , - pron - can expand to up to two  zero time - pron - resting size when fill with food .
this characteristic be particularly useful for animal that need to eat when food be available .
the stomach be also the major site for protein digestion in animal other than ruminant .
protein digestion be mediate by an enzyme call pepsin in the stomach chamber .
pepsin be secrete by the chief cell in the stomach in an inactive form call pepsinogen .
pepsin break peptide bond and cleaf protein into small polypeptide  - pron - also help activate more pepsinogen , start a positive feedback mechanism that generate more pepsin .
another cell type — parietal cell — secrete hydrogen and chloride ion , which combine in the luman to form hydrochloric acid , the primary acidic component of the stomach juice .
hydrochloric acid help to convert the inactive pepsinogen to pepsin .
the highly acidic environment also kill many microorganism in the food and , combine with the action of the enzyme pepsin , result in the hydrolysis of protein in the food .
chemical digestion be facilitate by the churn action of the stomach .
contraction and relaxation of smooth muscle mix the stomach content about every two  zero minute .
the partially digest food and gastric juice mixture be call chyme .
chyme pass from the stomach to the small intestine .
further protein digestion take place in the small intestine .
gastric empty occur within two to six hour after a meal .
only a small amount of chyme be release into the small intestine at a time .
the movement of chyme from the stomach into the small intestine be regulate by the pyloric sphincter .
when digest protein and some fat , the stomach lining must be protect from get digest by pepsin .
there be two point to consider when describe how the stomach lining be protect .
first , as previously mention , the enzyme pepsin be synthesize in the inactive form .
this protect the chief cell , because pepsinogen do not have the same enzyme functionality of pepsin .
second , the stomach have a thick mucus lining that protect the underlying tissue from the action of the digestive juice .
when this mucus lining be rupture , ulcer can form in the stomach .
ulcer be open wound in or on an organ cause by bacteria ( helicobacter pylori ) when the mucus lining be rupture and fail to reform .
small intestine chyme move from the stomach to the small intestine .
the small intestine be the organ where the digestion of protein , fat , and carbohydrate be complete .
the small intestine be a long tube - like organ with a highly fold surface contain finger - like projection call the villi .
the apical surface of each villus have many microscopic projection call microvilli .
these structure , illustrate in figure three  four  .  one  two , be line with epithelial cell on the luminal side and allow for the nutrient to be absorb from the digest food and absorb into the blood stream on the other side .
the villi and microvilli , with - pron - many fold , increase the surface area of the intestine and increase absorption efficiency of the nutrient .
absorbed nutrient in the blood be carry into the hepatic portal vein , which lead to the liver .
there , the liver regulate the distribution of nutrient to the rest of the body and remove toxic substance , include drug , alcohol , and some pathogen .
the human small intestine be over six m long and be divide into three part  the duodenum , the jejunum , and the ileum .
the " c - shape , " fix part of the small intestine be call the duodenum and be show in figure three  four  .  one  one .
the duodenum be separate from the stomach by the pyloric sphincter which open to allow chyme to move from the stomach to the duodenum .
in the duodenum , chyme be mix with pancreatic juice in an alkaline solution rich in bicarbonate that neutralize the acidity of chyme and act as a buffer .
pancreatic juice also contain several digestive enzyme .
digestive juice from the pancreas , liver , and gallbladder , as well as from gland cell of the intestinal wall - pron - , enter the duodenum .
bile be produce in the liver and store and concentrate in the gallbladder .
bile contain bile salt which emulsify lipid while the pancreas produce enzyme that catabolize starch , disaccharide , protein , and fat .
these digestive juice break down the food particle in the chyme into glucose , triglyceride , and amino acid .
some chemical digestion of food take place in the duodenum .
absorption of fatty acid also take place in the duodenum .
the second part of the small intestine be call the jejunum , show in figure three  four  .  one  one .
here , hydrolysis of nutrient be continue while most of the carbohydrate and amino acid be absorb through the intestinal lining .
the bulk of chemical digestion and nutrient absorption occur in the jejunum .
the ileum , also illustrate in figure three  four  .  one  one be the last part of the small intestine and here the bile salt and vitamin be absorb into blood stream .
the undigested food be send to the colon from the ileum via peristaltic movement of the muscle .
the ileum end and the large intestine begin at the ileocecal valve .
the vermiform , " worm - like , " appendix be locate at the ileocecal valve .
the appendix of human secrete no enzyme and have an insignificant role in immunity .
large intestine
the large intestine , illustrate in figure three  four  .  one  three , reabsorbs the water from the undigested food material and process the waste material .
the human large intestine be much small in length compare to the small intestine but large in diameter .
- pron - have three part  the cecum , the colon , and the rectum .
the cecum join the ileum to the colon and be the receive pouch for the waste matter .
the colon be home to many bacteria or " intestinal flora " that aid in the digestive process .
the colon can be divide into four region , the ascend colon , the transverse colon , the descend colon and the sigmoid colon .
the main function of the colon be to extract the water and mineral salt from undigested food , and to store waste material .
carnivorous mammal have a short large intestine compare to herbivorous mammal due to - pron - diet .
the large intestine reabsorbs water from undigested food and store waste material until - pron - be eliminate .
rectum and anus
the rectum be the terminal end of the large intestine , as show in figure three  four  .  one  three .
the primary role of the rectum be to store the fece until defecation .
the fece be propel use peristaltic movement during elimination .
the anus be an opening at the far - end of the digestive tract and be the exit point for the waste material .
two sphincter between the rectum and anus control elimination  the inner sphincter be involuntary and the outer sphincter be voluntary .
accessory organs
the organ discuss above be the organ of the digestive tract through which food pass .
accessory organ be organ that add secretion ( enzyme ) that catabolize food into nutrient .
accessory organ include salivary gland , the liver , the pancrea , and the gallbladder .
the liver , pancreas , and gallbladder be regulate by hormone in response to the food consume .
the liver be the large internal organ in human and - pron - play a very important role in digestion of fat and detoxify blood .
the liver produce bile , a digestive juice that be require for the breakdown of fatty component of the food in the duodenum .
the liver also process the vitamin and fat and synthesize many plasma protein .
the pancreas be another important gland that secrete digestive juice .
the chyme produce from the stomach be highly acidic in nature  the pancreatic juice contain high level of bicarbonate , an alkali that neutralize the acidic chyme .
additionally , the pancreatic juice contain a large variety of enzyme that be require for the digestion of protein and carbohydrate .
the gallbladder be a small organ that aid the liver by store bile and concentrate bile salt .
when chyme contain fatty acid enter the duodenum , the bile be secrete from the gallbladder into the duodenum .
give the diversity of animal life on - pron - planet , - pron - be not surprising that the animal diet would also vary substantially .
the animal diet be the source of material need for build dna and other complex molecule need for growth , maintenance , and reproduction  collectively these process be call biosynthesis .
the diet be also the source of material for atp production in the cell .
the diet must be balance to provide the mineral and vitamin that be require for cellular function .
food requirements
what be the fundamental requirement of the animal diet ?
the animal diet should be well balance and provide nutrient require for bodily function and the mineral and vitamin require for maintain structure and regulation necessary for good health and reproductive capability .
these requirement for a human be illustrate graphically in figure three  four  .  one  four .
organic precursor
the organic molecule require for build cellular material and tissue must come from food .
carbohydrate or sugar be the primary source of organic carbon in the animal body .
during digestion , digestible carbohydrate be ultimately break down into glucose and use to provide energy through metabolic pathway .
complex carbohydrate , include polysaccharide , can be break down into glucose through biochemical modification  however , human do not produce the enzyme cellulase and lack the ability to derive glucose from the polysaccharide cellulose .
in human , these molecule provide the fiber require for move waste through the large intestine and a healthy colon .
the intestinal flora in the human gut be able to extract some nutrition from these plant fiber .
the excess sugar in the body be convert into glycogen and store in the liver and muscle for later use .
glycogen store be use to fuel prolong exertion , such as long - distance running , and to provide energy during food shortage .
excess glycogen can be convert to fat , which be store in the low layer of the skin of mammal for insulation and energy storage .
excess digestible carbohydrate be store by mammal in order to survive famine and aid in mobility .
another important requirement be that of nitrogen .
protein catabolism provide a source of organic nitrogen .
amino acid be the building block of protein and protein breakdown provide amino acid that be use for cellular function .
the carbon and nitrogen derive from these become the building block for nucleotide , nucleic acid , protein , cell , and tissue .
excess nitrogen must be excrete as - pron - be toxic .
fat add flavor to food and promote a sense of satiety or fullness .
fatty food be also significant source of energy because one gram of fat contain nine calorie .
fat be require in the diet to aid the absorption of fat - soluble vitamin and the production of fat - soluble hormone .
essential nutrients
while the animal body can synthesize many of the molecule require for function from the organic precursor , there be some nutrient that need to be consume from food .
these nutrient be term essential nutrient , mean - pron - must be eat , and the body can not produce - pron - .
the omega -  three alpha - linolenic acid and the omega -  six linoleic acid be essential fatty acid need to make some membrane phospholipid .
vitamin be another class of essential organic molecule that be require in small quantity for many enzyme to function and , for this reason , be consider to be co - enzyme .
absence or low level of vitamin can have a dramatic effect on health , as outline in table three  four  .  one and table three  four  .  two .
both fat - soluble and water - soluble vitamin must be obtain from food .
mineral , list in table three  four  .  three , be inorganic essential nutrient that must be obtain from food .
among - pron - many function , mineral help in structure and regulation and be consider co - factor .
certain amino acid also must be procure from food and can not be synthesize by the body .
these amino acid be the " essential " amino acid .
the human body can synthesize only one  one of the two  zero required amino acid  the rest must be obtain from food .
the essential amino acid be list in table three  four  .  four .
food energy and atp animals need food to obtain energy and maintain homeostasis .
homeostasis be the ability of a system to maintain a stable internal environment even in the face of external change to the environment .
for example , the normal body temperature of human be three  seven ° c ( nine  eight  .  six ° f ) .
human maintain this temperature even when the external temperature be hot or cold .
- pron - take energy to maintain this body temperature , and animal obtain this energy from food .
the primary source of energy for animal be carbohydrate , mainly glucose .
glucose be call the body 's fuel .
the digestible carbohydrate in an animal 's diet be convert to glucose molecule through a series of catabolic chemical reaction .
adenosine triphosphate , or atp , be the primary energy currency in cell  atp store energy in phosphate ester bond .
atp release energy when the phosphodiester bond be break and atp be convert to adp and a phosphate group .
atp be produce by the oxidative reaction in the cytoplasm and mitochondrion of the cell , where carbohydrate , protein , and fat undergo a series of metabolic reaction collectively call cellular respiration .
for example , glycolysis be a series of reaction in which glucose be convert to pyruvic acid and some of - pron - chemical potential energy be transfer to nadh and atp .
atp be require for all cellular function .
- pron - be use to build the organic molecule that be require for cell and tissue  - pron - provide energy for muscle contraction and for the transmission of electrical signal in the nervous system .
when the amount of atp be available in excess of the body 's requirement , the liver use the excess atp and excess glucose to produce molecule call glycogen .
glycogen be a polymeric form of glucose and be store in the liver and skeletal muscle cell .
when blood sugar drop , the liver release glucose from store of glycogen .
skeletal muscle convert glycogen to glucose during intense exercise .
the process of convert glucose and excess atp to glycogen and the storage of excess energy be an evolutionarily important step in help animal deal with mobility , food shortage , and famine .
obtain nutrition and energy from food be a multi - step process .
for true animal , the first step be ingestion , the act of take in food .
this be follow by digestion , absorption , and elimination .
in the following section , each of these step will be discuss in detail .
ingestion
the large molecule find in intact food can not pass through the cell membrane .
food need to be break into small particle so that animal can harness the nutrient and organic molecule .
the first step in this process be ingestion .
ingestion be the process of take in food through the mouth .
in vertebrate , the tooth , saliva , and tongue play important role in mastication ( prepare the food into bolus ) .
while the food be be mechanically break down , the enzyme in saliva begin to chemically process the food as well .
the combined action of these process modify the food from large particle to a soft mass that can be swallow and can travel the length of the esophagus .
digestion and absorption digestion be the mechanical and chemical break down of food into small organic fragment .
- pron - be important to break down macromolecule into small fragment that be of suitable size for absorption across the digestive epithelium .
large , complex molecule of protein , polysaccharide , and lipid must be reduce to simple particle such as simple sugar before - pron - can be absorb by the digestive epithelial cell .
different organ play specific role in the digestive process .
the animal diet need carbohydrate , protein , and fat , as well as vitamin and inorganic component for nutritional balance .
how each of these component be digest be discuss in the following section .
carbohydrate the digestion of carbohydrate begin in the mouth .
the salivary enzyme amylase begin the breakdown of food starch into maltose , a disaccharide .
as the bolus of food travel through the esophagus to the stomach , no significant digestion of carbohydrate take place .
the esophagus produce no digestive enzyme but do produce mucous for lubrication .
the acidic environment in the stomach stop the action of the amylase enzyme .
the next step of carbohydrate digestion take place in the duodenum .
recall that the chyme from the stomach enter the duodenum and mix with the digestive secretion from the pancreas , liver , and gallbladder .
pancreatic juice also contain amylase , which continue the breakdown of starch and glycogen into maltose , a disaccharide .
the disaccharide be break down into monosaccharide by enzyme call maltas , sucrase , and lactase , which be also present in the brush border of the small intestinal wall .
maltase break down maltose into glucose .
other disaccharide , such as sucrose and lactose be break down by sucrase and lactase , respectively .
sucrase break down sucrose ( or " table sugar " ) into glucose and fructose , and lactase break down lactose ( or " milk sugar " ) into glucose and galactose .
the monosaccharide ( glucose ) thus produce be absorb and then can be use in metabolic pathway to harness energy .
the monosaccharide be transport across the intestinal epithelium into the bloodstream to be transport to the different cell in the body .
the step in carbohydrate digestion be summarize in figure three  four  .  one  six and table three  four  .  five .
digestion of carbohydrate be perform by several enzyme .
starch and glycogen be break down into glucose by amylase and maltase .
sucrose ( table sugar ) and lactose ( milk sugar ) be break down by sucrase and lactase , respectively .
protein a large part of protein digestion take place in the stomach .
the enzyme pepsin play an important role in the digestion of protein by break down the intact protein to peptide , which be short chain of four to nine amino acid .
in the duodenum , other enzymes— trypsin , elastase , and chymotrypsin — act on the peptide reduce - pron - to small peptide .
trypsin elastase , carboxypeptidase , and chymotrypsin be produce by the pancrea and release into the duodenum where - pron - act on the chyme .
further breakdown of peptide to single amino acid be aid by enzyme call peptidase ( those that break down peptide ) .
specifically , carboxypeptidase , dipeptidase , and aminopeptidase play important role in reduce the peptide to free amino acid .
the amino acid be absorb into the bloodstream through the small intestine .
the step in protein digestion be summarize in figure three  four  .  one  seven and table three  four  .  six .
lipids lipid digestion begin in the stomach with the aid of lingual lipase and gastric lipase .
however , the bulk of lipid digestion occur in the small intestine due to pancreatic lipase .
when chyme enter the duodenum , the hormonal response trigger the release of bile , which be produce in the liver and store in the gallbladder .
bile aid in the digestion of lipid , primarily triglyceride by emulsification .
emulsification be a process in which large lipid globule be break down into several small lipid globule .
these small globule be more widely distribute in the chyme rather than form large aggregate .
lipid be hydrophobic substance  in the presence of water , - pron - will aggregate to form globule to minimize exposure to water .
bile contain bile salt , which be amphipathic , mean - pron - contain hydrophobic and hydrophilic part .
thus , the bile salt hydrophilic side can interface with water on one side and the hydrophobic side interface with lipid on the other .
by do so , bile salt emulsify large lipid globule into small lipid globule .
why be emulsification important for digestion of lipid ?
pancreatic juice contain enzyme call lipase ( enzyme that break down lipid ) .
if the lipid in the chyme aggregate into large globule , very little surface area of the lipid be available for the lipase to act on , leave lipid digestion incomplete .
by form an emulsion , bile salt increase the available surface area of the lipid many fold .
the pancreatic lipase can then act on the lipid more efficiently and digest - pron - , as detail in figure three  four  .  one  eight .
lipase break down the lipid into fatty acid and glyceride .
these molecule can pass through the plasma membrane of the cell and enter the epithelial cell of the intestinal lining .
the bile salt surround long - chain fatty acid and monoglyceride form tiny sphere call micelle .
the micelle move into the brush border of the small intestine absorptive cell where the long - chain fatty acid and monoglycerid diffuse out of the micelle into the absorptive cell leave the micelle behind in the chyme .
the long - chain fatty acid and monoglyceride recombine in the absorptive cell to form triglyceride , which aggregate into globule and become coated with protein .
these large sphere be call chylomicron .
chylomicron contain triglyceride , cholesterol , and other lipid and have protein on - pron - surface .
the surface be also compose of the hydrophilic phosphate " head " of phospholipid .
together , - pron - enable the chylomicron to move in an aqueous environment without expose the lipid to water .
chylomicron leave the absorptive cell via exocytosis .
chylomicron enter the lymphatic vessel , and then enter the blood in the subclavian vein .
vitamins vitamins can be either water - soluble or lipid - soluble .
fat soluble vitamin be absorb in the same manner as lipid .
- pron - be important to consume some amount of dietary lipid to aid the absorption of lipid - soluble vitamin .
water - soluble vitamin can be directly absorb into the bloodstream from the intestine .
elimination
the final step in digestion be the elimination of undigested food content and waste product .
the undigested food material enter the colon , where most of the water be reabsorb .
recall that the colon be also home to the microflora call " intestinal flora " that aid in the digestion process .
the semi - solid waste be move through the colon by peristaltic movement of the muscle and be store in the rectum .
as the rectum expand in response to storage of fecal matter , - pron - trigger the neural signal require to set up the urge to eliminate .
the solid waste be eliminate through the anus use peristaltic movement of the rectum .
common problems with elimination diarrhea and constipation be some of the most common health concern that affect digestion .
constipation be a condition where the fece be harden because of excess water removal in the colon .
in contrast , if enough water be not remove from the fece , - pron - result in diarrhea .
many bacteria , include the one that because cholera , affect the protein involve in water reabsorption in the colon and result in excessive diarrhea .
emesis emesis , or vomiting , be elimination of food by forceful expulsion through the mouth .
- pron - be often in response to an irritant that affect the digestive tract , include but not limit to virus , bacteria , emotion , sight , and food poisoning .
this forceful expulsion of the food be due to the strong contraction produce by the stomach muscle .
the process of emesis be regulate by the medulla .
the brain be the control center for the sensation of hunger and satiety .
the function of the digestive system be regulate through neural and hormonal response .
neural responses to food
in reaction to the smell , sight , or thought of food , like that show in figure three  four  .  two  zero , the first response be that of salivation .
the salivary gland secrete more saliva in response to stimulation by the autonomic nervous system trigger by food in preparation for digestion .
simultaneously , the stomach begin to produce hydrochloric acid to digest the food .
recall that the peristaltic movement of the esophagus and other organ of the digestive tract be under the control of the brain .
the brain prepare these muscle for movement as well .
when the stomach be full , the part of the brain that detect satiety signal fullness .
there be three overlapping phase of gastric control — the cephalic phase , the gastric phase , and the intestinal phase — each require many enzyme and be under neural control as well .
see a plate of food trigger the secretion of saliva in the mouth and the production of hcl in the stomach .
( credit  kelly bailey )
digestive phases
the response to food begin even before food enter the mouth .
the first phase of ingestion , call the cephalic phase , be control by the neural response to the stimulus provide by food .
all aspect — such as sight , sense , and smell — trigger the neural response result in salivation and secretion of gastric juice .
the gastric and salivary secretion in the cephalic phase can also take place due to the thought of food .
right now , if - pron - think about a piece of chocolate or a crispy potato chip , the increase in salivation be a cephalic phase response to the thought .
the central nervous system prepare the stomach to receive food .
the gastric phase begin once the food arrive in the stomach .
- pron - build on the stimulation provide during the cephalic phase .
gastric acid and enzyme process the ingest material .
the gastric phase be stimulate by ( one ) distension of the stomach , ( two ) a decrease in the ph of the gastric content , and ( three ) the presence of undigested material .
this phase consist of local , hormonal , and neural response .
these response stimulate secretion and powerful contraction .
the intestinal phase begin when chyme enter the small intestine trigger digestive secretion .
this phase control the rate of gastric emptying .
in addition to gastrin empty , when chyme enter the small intestine , - pron - trigger other hormonal and neural event that coordinate the activity of the intestinal tract , pancreas , liver , and gallbladder .
hormonal responses to food
the endocrine system control the response of the various gland in the body and the release of hormone at the appropriate time .
one of the important factor under hormonal control be the stomach acid environment .
during the gastric phase , the hormone gastrin be secrete by g cell in the stomach in response to the presence of protein .
gastrin stimulate the release of stomach acid , or hydrochloric acid ( hcl ) which aid in the digestion of the protein .
however , when the stomach be empty , the acidic environment ne not be maintain and a hormone call somatostatin stop the release of hydrochloric acid .
this be control by a negative feedback mechanism .
in the duodenum , digestive secretion from the liver , pancreas , and gallbladder play an important role in digesting chyme during the intestinal phase .
in order to neutralize the acidic chyme , a hormone call secretin stimulate the pancrea to produce alkaline bicarbonate solution and deliver - pron - to the duodenum .
secretin act in tandem with another hormone call cholecystokinin ( cck ) .
not only do cck stimulate the pancrea to produce the requisite pancreatic juice , - pron - also stimulate the gallbladder to release bile into the duodenum .
another level of hormonal control occur in response to the composition of food .
food high in lipid take a long time to digest .
a hormone call gastric inhibitory peptide be secrete by the small intestine to slow down the peristaltic movement of the intestine to allow fatty food more time to be digest and absorb .
understand the hormonal control of the digestive system be an important area of ongoing research .
scientist be explore the role of each hormone in the digestive process and develop way to target these hormone .
advance could lead to knowledge that may help to battle the obesity epidemic .
an athlete 's nervous system be hard at work during the planning and execution of a movement as precise as a high jump .
part of the nervous system be involve in determine how hard to push off and when to turn , as well as control the muscle throughout the body that make this complicated movement possible without knock the bar down — all in just a few second .
( credit  modification of work by shane t . mccoy , u . s . navy )
introduction when - pron - be read this book , - pron - nervous system be perform several function simultaneously .
the visual system be process what be see on the page  the motor system control the turn of the page ( or click of the mouse )  the prefrontal cortex maintain attention .
even fundamental function , like breathing and regulation of body temperature , be control by the nervous system .
a nervous system be an organism 's control center  - pron - process sensory information from outside ( and inside ) the body and control all behavior — from eat to sleep to find a mate .
nervous system throughout the animal kingdom vary in structure and complexity , as illustrate by the variety of animal show in figure three  five  .  two .
some organism , like sea sponge , lack a true nervous system .
other , like jellyfish , lack a true brain and instead have a system of separate but connect nerve cell ( neuron ) call a " nerve net .
"
echinoderm such as sea star have nerve cell that be bundle into fiber call nerve .
flatworm of the phylum platyhelminthes have both a central nervous system ( cns ) , make up of a small " brain " and two nerve cord , and a peripheral nervous system ( pns ) contain a system of nerve that extend throughout the body .
the insect nervous system be more complex but also fairly decentralized .
- pron - contain a brain , ventral nerve cord , and ganglion ( cluster of connected neuron ) .
these ganglion can control movement and behavior without input from the brain .
octopi may have the most complicated of invertebrate nervous system —
- pron - have neuron that be organize in specialized lobe and eye that be structurally similar to vertebrate specie .
nervous system vary in structure and complexity .
in ( a ) cnidarian , nerve cell form a decentralize nerve net .
in ( b ) echinoderm , nerve cell be bundle into fiber call nerve .
in animal exhibit bilateral symmetry such as ( c ) planarian , neuron cluster into an anterior brain that process information .
in addition to a brain , ( d ) arthropod have cluster of nerve cell body , call peripheral ganglia , locate along the ventral nerve cord .
mollusk such as squid and ( e ) octopi , which must hunt to survive , have complex brain contain million of neuron .
in ( f ) vertebrate , the brain and spinal cord comprise the central nervous system , while neuron extend into the rest of the body comprise the peripheral nervous system .
( credit e  modification of work by michael vecchione , clyde f . e . roper , and michael j . sweeney , noaa 
credit f  modification of work by nih ) .
compare to invertebrate , vertebrate nervous system be more complex , centralized , and specialize .
while there be great diversity among different vertebrate nervous system , - pron - all share a basic structure  a cns that contain a brain and spinal cord and a pns make up of peripheral sensory and motor nerve .
one interesting difference between the nervous system of invertebrate and vertebrate be that the nerve cord of many invertebrate be locate ventrally whereas the vertebrate spinal cord be locate dorsally .
there be debate among evolutionary biologist as to whether these different nervous system plan evolve separately or whether the invertebrate body plan arrangement somehow " flip " during the evolution of vertebrate .
the nervous system be make up of neuron , specialized cell that can receive and transmit chemical or electrical signal , and glia , cell that provide support function for the neuron by play an information processing role that be complementary to neuron .
a neuron can be compare to an electrical wire —
- pron - transmit a signal from one place to another .
glia can be compare to the worker at the electric company who make sure wire go to the right place , maintain the wire , and take down wire that be break .
although glia have be compare to worker , recent evidence suggest that also usurp some of the signal function of neuron .
there be great diversity in the type of neuron and glia that be present in different part of the nervous system .
there be four major type of neuron , and - pron - share several important cellular component .
neuron
the nervous system of the common laboratory fly , drosophila melanogaster , contain around one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero neuron , the same number as a lobster .
this number compare to seven  five million in the mouse and three  zero  zero million in the octopus .
a human brain contain around eight  six billion neuron .
despite these very different number , the nervous system of these animal control many of the same behavior — from basic reflex to more complicated behavior like find food and courting mate .
the ability of neuron to communicate with each other as well as with other type of cell underlie all of these behavior .
most neuron share the same cellular component .
but neuron be also highly specialize — different type of neuron have different size and shape that relate to - pron - functional role .
part of a neuron
like other cell , each neuron have a cell body ( or soma ) that contain a nucleus , smooth and rough endoplasmic reticulum , golgi apparatus , mitochondria , and other cellular component .
neuron also contain unique structure , illustrate in figure three  five  .  three for receive and send the electrical signal that make neuronal communication possible .
dendrite be tree - like structure that extend away from the cell body to receive message from other neuron at specialized junction call synapsis .
although some neuron do not have any dendrite , some type of neuron have multiple dendrite .
dendrite can have small protrusion call dendritic spine , which further increase surface area for possible synaptic connection .
once a signal be receive by the dendrite , - pron - then travel passively to the cell body .
the cell body contain a specialized structure , the axon hillock that integrate signal from multiple synapsis and serve as a junction between the cell body and an axon .
an axon be a tube - like structure that propagate the integrated signal to specialized ending call axon terminal .
these terminal in turn synapse on other neuron , muscle , or target organ .
chemical release at axon terminal allow signal to be communicate to these other cell .
neuron usually have one or two axon , but some neuron , like amacrine cell in the retina , do not contain any axon .
some axon be cover with myelin , which act as an insulator to minimize dissipation of the electrical signal as - pron - travel down the axon , greatly increase the speed on conduction .
this insulation be important as the axon from a human motor neuron can be as long as a meter — from the base of the spine to the toe .
the myelin sheath be not actually part of the neuron .
myelin be produce by glial cell .
along the axon there be periodic gap in the myelin sheath .
these gap be call node of ranvi and be site where the signal be " recharge " as - pron - travel along the axon .
- pron - be important to note that a single neuron do not act alone — neuronal communication depend on the connection that neuron make with one another ( as well as with other cell , like muscle cell ) .
dendrite from a single neuron may receive synaptic contact from many other neuron .
for example , dendrit from a purkinje cell in the cerebellum be think to receive contact from as many as two  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero other neuron .
type of neurons there be different type of neuron , and the functional role of a give neuron be intimately dependent on - pron - structure .
there be an amazing diversity of neuron shape and size find in different part of the nervous system ( and across specie ) , as illustrate by the neuron show in figure three  five  .  four .
there be great diversity in the size and shape of neuron throughout the nervous system .
example include ( a ) a pyramidal cell from the cerebral cortex , ( b ) a purkinje cell from the cerebellar cortex , and ( c ) olfactory cell from the olfactory epithelium and olfactory bulb .
while there be many define neuron cell subtype , neuron be broadly divide into four basic type  unipolar , bipolar , multipolar , and pseudounipolar .
figure three  five  .  five illustrate these four basic neuron type .
unipolar neuron have only one structure that extend away from the soma .
these neuron be not find in vertebrate but be find in insect where - pron - stimulate muscle or gland .
a bipolar neuron have one axon and one dendrite extend from the soma .
an example of a bipolar neuron be a retinal bipolar cell , which receive signal from photoreceptor cell that be sensitive to light and transmit these signal to ganglion cell that carry the signal to the brain .
multipolar neuron be the most common type of neuron .
each multipolar neuron contain one axon and multiple dendrite .
multipolar neuron can be find in the central nervous system ( brain and spinal cord ) .
an example of a multipolar neuron be a purkinje cell in the cerebellum , which have many branch dendrite but only one axon .
pseudounipolar cell share characteristic with both unipolar and bipolar cell .
a pseudounipolar cell have a single process that extend from the soma , like a unipolar cell , but this process later branch into two distinct structure , like a bipolar cell .
most sensory neuron be pseudounipolar and have an axon that branch into two extension  one connect to dendrite that receive sensory information and another that transmit this information to the spinal cord .
neuron be broadly divide into four main type base on the number and placement of axon  ( one ) unipolar , ( two ) bipolar , ( three ) multipolar , and ( four ) pseudounipolar .
glia
while glia be often think of as the support cast of the nervous system , the number of glial cell in the brain actually outnumber the number of neuron by a factor of ten .
neuron would be unable to function without the vital role that be fulfil by these glial cell .
glia guide develop neuron to - pron - destination , buffer ion and chemical that would otherwise harm neuron , and provide myelin sheath around axon .
scientist have recently discover that - pron - also play a role in respond to nerve activity and modulate communication between nerve cell .
when glia do not function properly , the result can be disastrous —
most brain tumor be cause by mutation in glia .
types of glia
there be several different type of glia with different function , two of which be show in figure three  five  .  seven .
astrocyte , show in figure three  five  .  eight a make contact with both capillary and neuron in the cns .
- pron - provide nutrient and other substance to neuron , regulate the concentration of ion and chemical in the extracellular fluid , and provide structural support for synapsis .
astrocyte also form the blood - brain barrier — a structure that block entrance of toxic substance into the brain .
astrocyte , in particular , have be show through calcium imaging experiment to become active in response to nerve activity , transmit calcium wave between astrocyte , and modulate the activity of surround synapsis .
satellite glia provide nutrient and structural support for neuron in the pns .
microglia scavenge and degrade dead cell and protect the brain from invade microorganism .
oligodendrocytes , show in figure three  five  .  eight b form myelin sheath around axon in the cns .
one axon can be myelinat by several oligodendrocyte , and one oligodendrocyte can provide myelin for multiple neuron .
this be distinctive from the pns where a single schwann cell provide myelin for only one axon as the entire schwann cell surround the axon .
radial glia serve as scaffold for develop neuron as - pron - migrate to - pron - end destination .
ependymal cell line fluid - fill ventricle of the brain and the central canal of the spinal cord .
- pron - be involve in the production of cerebrospinal fluid , which serve as a cushion for the brain , move the fluid between the spinal cord and the brain , and be a component for the choroid plexus .
glial cell support neuron and maintain - pron - environment .
glial cell of the ( a ) central nervous system include oligodendrocyte , astrocyte , ependymal cell , and microglial cell .
oligodendrocytes form the myelin sheath around axon .
astrocyte provide nutrient to neuron , maintain - pron - extracellular environment , and provide structural support .
microglia scavenge pathogen and dead cell .
ependymal cell produce cerebrospinal fluid that cushion the neuron .
glial cell of the ( b ) peripheral nervous system include schwann cell , which form the myelin sheath , and satellite cell , which provide nutrient and structural support to neuron .
astrocyte and ( b ) oligodendrocyte be glial cell of the central nervous system .
( credit a  modification of work by uniformed services university  credit b  modification of work by jurjen broeke  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
all function perform by the nervous system — from a simple motor reflex to more advanced function like make a memory or a decision — require neuron to communicate with one another .
while human use word and body language to communicate , neuron use electrical and chemical signal .
just like a person in a committee , one neuron usually receive and synthesize message from multiple other neuron before " make the decision " to send the message on to other neuron .
nerve impulse transmission within a neuron
for the nervous system to function , neuron must be able to send and receive signal .
these signal be possible because each neuron have a charge cellular membrane ( a voltage difference between the inside and the outside ) , and the charge of this membrane can change in response to neurotransmitter molecule release from other neuron and environmental stimulus .
to understand how neuron communicate , one must first understand the basis of the baseline or ' resting' membrane charge .
neuronal charged membranes
the lipid bilayer membrane that surround a neuron be impermeable to charge molecule or ion .
to enter or exit the neuron , ion must pass through special protein call ion channel that span the membrane .
ion channel have different configuration  open , closed , and inactive , as illustrate in figure three  five  .  nine .
some ion channel need to be activate in order to open and allow ion to pass into or out of the cell .
these ion channel be sensitive to the environment and can change - pron - shape accordingly .
ion channel that change - pron - structure in response to voltage change be call voltage - gate ion channel .
voltage - gate ion channel regulate the relative concentration of different ion inside and outside the cell .
the difference in total charge between the inside and outside of the cell be call the membrane potential .
voltage - gate ion channel open in response to change in membrane voltage .
after activation , - pron - become inactivate for a brief period and will no longer open in response to a signal .
rest membrane potential a neuron at rest be negatively charge  the inside of a cell be approximately seven  zero millivolt more negative than the outside ( − seven  zero mv , note that this number vary by neuron type and by specie ) .
this voltage be call the rest membrane potential  - pron - be cause by difference in the concentration of ion inside and outside the cell .
if the membrane be equally permeable to all ion , each type of ion would flow across the membrane and the system would reach equilibrium .
because ion can not simply cross the membrane at will , there be different concentration of several ion inside and outside the cell , as show in table three  five  .  one .
the difference in the number of positively charge potassium ion ( k+ ) inside and outside the cell dominate the rest membrane potential ( figure three  five  .  one  zero ) .
when the membrane be at rest , k+ ion accumulate inside the cell due to a net movement with the concentration gradient .
the negative rest membrane potential be create and maintain by increase the concentration of cation outside the cell ( in the extracellular fluid ) relative to inside the cell ( in the cytoplasm ) .
the negative charge within the cell be create by the cell membrane be more permeable to potassium ion movement than sodium ion movement .
in neuron , potassium ion be maintain at high concentration within the cell while sodium ion be maintain at high concentration outside of the cell .
the cell possess potassium and sodium leakage channel that allow the two cation to diffuse down - pron - concentration gradient .
however , the neuron have far more potassium leakage channel than sodium leakage channel .
therefore , potassium diffus out of the cell at a much fast rate than sodium leak in .
because more cation be leave the cell than be enter , this cause the interior of the cell to be negatively charge relative to the outside of the cell .
the action of the sodium potassium pump help to maintain the rest potential , once establish .
recall that sodium potassium pump bring two k+ ion into the cell while remove three na+ ion per atp consume .
as more cation be expel from the cell than take in , the inside of the cell remain negatively charge relative to the extracellular fluid .
- pron - should be note that calcium ion ( cl– ) tend to accumulate outside of the cell because - pron - be repel by negatively - charge protein within the cytoplasm .
- pron - ( a ) rest membrane potential be a result of different concentration of na+ and k+ ion inside and outside the cell .
a nerve impulse cause na+ to enter the cell , result in ( b ) depolarization .
at the peak action potential , k+ channel open and the cell become ( c ) hyperpolariz .
action potential a neuron can receive input from other neuron and , if this input be strong enough , send the signal to downstream neuron .
transmission of a signal between neuron be generally carry by a chemical call a neurotransmitter .
transmission of a signal within a neuron ( from dendrite to axon terminal ) be carry by a brief reversal of the rest membrane potential call an action potential .
when neurotransmitter molecule bind to receptor locate on a neuron 's dendrite , ion channel open .
at excitatory synapsis , this opening allow positive ion to enter the neuron and result in depolarization of the membrane — a decrease in the difference in voltage between the inside and outside of the neuron .
a stimulus from a sensory cell or another neuron depolarize the target neuron to - pron - threshold potential ( -  five  five mv ) .
na+ channel in the axon hillock open , allow positive ion to enter the cell ( figure three  five  .  one  zero and figure three  five  .  one  one ) .
once the sodium channel open , the neuron completely depolarize to a membrane potential of about + four  zero mv . action potential be consider an " all - or nothing " event , in that , once the threshold potential be reach , the neuron always completely depolarize .
once depolarization be complete , the cell must now " reset " - pron - membrane voltage back to the rest potential .
to accomplish this , the na+ channel close and can not be open .
this begin the neuron ' s refractory period , in which - pron - can not produce another action potential because - pron - sodium channel will not open .
at the same time , voltage - gate k+ channel open , allow k+ to leave the cell .
as k+ ion leave the cell , the membrane potential once again become negative .
the diffusion of k+ out of the cell actually hyperpolariz the cell , in that the membrane potential become more negative than the cell ' s normal resting potential .
at this point , the sodium channel will return to - pron - rest state , mean - pron - be ready to open again if the membrane potential again exceed the threshold potential .
eventually the extra k+ ion diffuse out of the cell through the potassium leakage channel , bring the cell from - pron - hyperpolarized state , back to - pron - rest membrane potential .
myelin and the propagation of the action potential
for an action potential to communicate information to another neuron , - pron - must travel along the axon and reach the axon terminal where - pron - can initiate neurotransmitter release .
the speed of conduction of an action potential along an axon be influence by both the diameter of the axon and the axon 's resistance to current leak .
myelin act as an insulator that prevent current from leave the axon  this increase the speed of action potential conduction .
in demyelinate disease like multiple sclerosis , action potential conduction slow because current leak from previously insulated axon area .
the node of ranvier , illustrate in figure three  five  .  one  three be gap in the myelin sheath along the axon .
these unmyelinated space be about one micrometer long and contain voltage gate na+ and k+ channel .
flow of ion through these channel , particularly the na+ channel , regenerate the action potential over and over again along the axon .
this ' jumping' of the action potential from one node to the next be call saltatory conduction .
if node of ranvier be not present along an axon , the action potential would propagate very slowly since na+ and k+ channel would have to continuously regenerate action potential at every point along the axon instead of at specific point .
node of ranvi also save energy for the neuron since the channel only need to be present at the node and not along the entire axon .
node of ranvier be gap in myelin coverage along axon .
node contain voltage - gate k+ and na+ channel .
action potential travel down the axon by jump from one node to the next .
synaptic transmission
the synapse or " gap
" be the place where information be transmit from one neuron to another .
synapsis usually form between axon terminal and dendritic spine , but this be not universally true .
there be also axon - to - axon , dendrite - to - dendrite , and axon - to - cell body synapsis .
the neuron transmit the signal be call the presynaptic neuron , and the neuron receive the signal be call the postsynaptic neuron .
note that these designation be relative to a particular synapse —
most neuron be both presynaptic and postsynaptic .
there be two type of synapsis  chemical and electrical .
chemical synapse
when an action potential reach the axon terminal - pron - depolarize the membrane and open voltage - gate na+ channel .
na+ ion enter the cell , further depolarize the presynaptic membrane .
this depolarization cause voltage - gate ca two + channel to open .
calcium ion enter the cell initiate a signaling cascade that cause small membrane - bind vesicle , call synaptic vesicle , contain neurotransmitter molecule to fuse with the presynaptic membrane .
synaptic vesicle be show in figure three  five  .  one  four , which be an image from a scanning electron microscope .
this pseudocolor image take with a scanning electron microscope show an axon terminal that be break open to reveal synaptic vesicle ( blue and orange ) inside the neuron .
( credit  modification of work by tina carvalho , nih - nigms  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
fusion of a vesicle with the presynaptic membrane cause neurotransmitter to be release into the synaptic cleft , the extracellular space between the presynaptic and postsynaptic membrane , as illustrate in figure three  five  .  one  five .
the neurotransmitter diffuse across the synaptic cleft and bind to receptor protein on the postsynaptic membrane .
communication at chemical synapsis require release of neurotransmitter .
when the presynaptic membrane be depolarize , voltage - gate ca two + channel open and allow ca two + to enter the cell .
the calcium entry cause synaptic vesicle to fuse with the membrane and release neurotransmitter molecule into the synaptic cleft .
the neurotransmitter diffuse across the synaptic cleft and bind to ligand - gate ion channel in the postsynaptic membrane , result in a localize depolarization or hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic neuron .
the binding of a specific neurotransmitter cause particular ion channel , in this case ligand - gate channel , on the postsynaptic membrane to open .
neurotransmitter can either have excitatory or inhibitory effect on the postsynaptic membrane , as detail in table three  five  .  one .
for example , when acetylcholine be release at the synapse between a nerve and muscle ( call the neuromuscular junction ) by a presynaptic neuron , - pron - cause postsynaptic na+ channel to open .
na+ enter the postsynaptic cell and cause the postsynaptic membrane to depolarize .
this depolarization be call an excitatory postsynaptic potential ( epsp ) and make the postsynaptic neuron more likely to fire an action potential .
release of neurotransmitter at inhibitory synapsis cause inhibitory postsynaptic potential ( ipsps ) , a hyperpolarization of the presynaptic membrane .
for example , when the neurotransmitter gaba ( gamma - aminobutyric acid ) be release from a presynaptic neuron , - pron - bind to and open cl - channel .
cl - ion enter the cell and hyperpolariz the membrane , make the neuron less likely to fire an action potential .
once neurotransmission have occur , the neurotransmitter must be remove from the synaptic cleft so the postsynaptic membrane can " reset " and be ready to receive another signal .
this can be accomplish in three way  the neurotransmitter can diffuse away from the synaptic cleft , - pron - can be degrade by enzyme in the synaptic cleft , or - pron - can be recycle ( sometimes call reuptake ) by the presynaptic neuron .
several drug act at this step of neurotransmission .
for example , some drug that be give to alzheimer 's patient work by inhibit acetylcholinesterase , the enzyme that degrade acetylcholine .
this inhibition of the enzyme essentially increase neurotransmission at synapsis that release acetylcholine .
once release , the acetylcholine stay in the cleft and can continually bind and unbind to postsynaptic receptor .
electrical synapse cns and / or pns cns and / or pns cns cns and / or pns 
while electrical synapsis be few in number than chemical synapsis , - pron - be find in all nervous system and play important and unique role .
the mode of neurotransmission in electrical synapsis be quite different from that in chemical synapsis .
in an electrical synapse , the presynaptic and postsynaptic membrane be very close together and be actually physically connect by channel protein form gap junction .
gap junction allow current to pass directly from one cell to the next .
in addition to the ion that carry this current , other molecule , such as atp , can diffuse through the large gap junction pore .
there be key difference between chemical and electrical synapsis .
because chemical synapsis depend on the release of neurotransmitter molecule from synaptic vesicle to pass on - pron - signal , there be an approximately one millisecond delay between when the axon potential reach the presynaptic terminal and when the neurotransmitter lead to opening of postsynaptic ion channel .
additionally , this signaling be unidirectional .
signal in electrical synapsis , in contrast , be virtually instantaneous ( which be important for synapsis involve in key reflex ) , and some electrical synapsis be bidirectional .
electrical synapsis be also more reliable as - pron - be less likely to be block , and - pron - be important for synchronize the electrical activity of a group of neuron .
for example , electrical synapsis in the thalamus be think to regulate slow - wave sleep , and disruption of these synapsis can because seizure .
signal summation
sometimes a single epsp be strong enough to induce an action potential in the postsynaptic neuron , but often multiple presynaptic input must create epsps around the same time for the postsynaptic neuron to be sufficiently depolarize to fire an action potential .
this process be call summation and occur at the axon hillock , as illustrate in figure three  five  .  one  six .
additionally , one neuron often have input from many presynaptic neuron — some excitatory and some inhibitory
— so ipsp can cancel out epsps and vice versa .
- pron - be the net change in postsynaptic membrane voltage that determine whether the postsynaptic cell have reach - pron - threshold of excitation need to fire an action potential .
together , synaptic summation and the threshold for excitation act as a filter so that random " noise " in the system be not transmit as important information .
a single neuron can receive both excitatory and inhibitory input from multiple neuron , result in local membrane depolarization ( epsp input ) and hyperpolarization ( ipsp input ) .
all these input be add together at the axon hillock .
if the epsps be strong enough to overcome the ipsp and reach the threshold of excitation , the neuron will fire .
synaptic plasticity synapses be not static structure .
- pron - can be weaken or strengthen .
- pron - can be break , and new synapsis can be make .
synaptic plasticity allow for these change , which be all need for a function nervous system .
in fact , synaptic plasticity be the basis of learning and memory .
two process in particular , long - term potentiation ( ltp ) and long - term depression ( ltd ) be important form of synaptic plasticity that occur in synapsis in the hippocampus , a brain region that be involve in store memory .
long - term potentiation ( ltp )
long - term potentiation ( ltp ) be a persistent strengthening of a synaptic connection .
ltp be base on the hebbian principle  cell that fire together wire together .
there be various mechanism , none fully understand , behind the synaptic strengthening see with ltp .
one known mechanism involve a type of postsynaptic glutamate receptor , call nmda ( n - methyl - d - aspartate ) receptor , show in figure three  five  .  one  eight .
these receptor be normally block by magnesium ion  however , when the postsynaptic neuron be depolarize by multiple presynaptic input in quick succession ( either from one neuron or multiple neuron ) , the magnesium ion be force out allow ca ion to pass into the postsynaptic cell .
next , ca two + ion enter the cell initiate a signaling cascade that cause a different type of glutamate receptor , call ampa ( α - amino -  three  - hydroxy -  five  - methyl -  four  - isoxazolepropionic acid ) receptor , to be insert into the postsynaptic membrane , since activate ampa receptor allow positive ion to enter the cell .
so , the next time glutamate be release from the presynaptic membrane , - pron - will have a large excitatory effect ( epsp ) on the postsynaptic cell because the binding of glutamate to these ampa receptor will allow more positive ion into the cell .
the insertion of additional ampa receptor strengthen the synapse and mean that the postsynaptic neuron be more likely to fire in response to presynaptic neurotransmitter release .
some drug of abuse co - opt the ltp pathway , and this synaptic strengthening can lead to addiction .
long - term depression ( ltd )
long - term depression ( ltd ) be essentially the reverse of ltp  - pron - be a long - term weakening of a synaptic connection .
one mechanism know to because ltd also involve ampa receptor .
in this situation , calcium that enter through nmda receptor initiate a different signaling cascade , which result in the removal of ampa receptor from the postsynaptic membrane , as illustrate in figure three  five  .  one  eight .
the decrease in ampa receptor in the membrane make the postsynaptic neuron less responsive to glutamate release from the presynaptic neuron .
while - pron - may seem counterintuitive , ltd may be just as important for learning and memory as ltp .
the weakening and pruning of unused synapsis allow for unimportant connection to be lose and make the synapsis that have undergo ltp that much strong by comparison .
calcium entry through postsynaptic nmda receptor can initiate two different form of synaptic plasticity  long - term potentiation ( ltp ) and long - term depression ( ltd ) .
ltp arise when a single synapse be repeatedly stimulate .
this stimulation cause a calcium - and camkii - dependent cellular cascade , which result in the insertion of more ampa receptor into the postsynaptic membrane .
the next time glutamate be release from the presynaptic cell , - pron - will bind to both nmda and the newly insert ampa receptor , thus depolarize the membrane more efficiently .
ltd occur when few glutamate molecule bind to nmda receptor at a synapse ( due to a low firing rate of the presynaptic neuron ) .
the calcium that do flow through nmda receptor initiate a different calcineurin and protein phosphatase one  - dependent cascade , which result in the endocytosis of ampa receptor .
this make the postsynaptic neuron less responsive to glutamate release from the presynaptic neuron .
the central nervous system ( cns ) be make up of the brain , a part of which be show in figure three  five  .  one  nine and spinal cord and be cover with three layer of protective covering call meninge ( from the greek word for membrane ) .
the outermost layer be the dura mater ( latin for " hard mother " ) .
as the latin suggest , the primary function for this thick layer be to protect the brain and spinal cord .
the dura mater also contain vein - like structure that carry blood from the brain back to the heart .
the middle layer be the web - like arachnoid mater .
the last layer be the pia mater ( latin for " soft mother " ) , which directly contact and cover the brain and spinal cord like plastic wrap .
the space between the arachnoid and pia mater be fill with cerebrospinal fluid ( csf ) .
csf be produce by a tissue call choroid plexus in fluid - fill compartment in the cns call ventricle .
the brain float in csf , which act as a cushion and shock absorber and make the brain neutrally buoyant .
csf also function to circulate chemical substance throughout the brain and into the spinal cord .
the entire brain contain only about eight  .  five tablespoon of csf , but csf be constantly produce in the ventricle .
this create a problem when a ventricle be block — the csf build up and create swell and the brain be push against the skull .
this swell condition be call hydrocephalus ( " water head " ) and can because seizure , cognitive problem , and even death if a shunt be not insert to remove the fluid and pressure .
the cerebral cortex be cover by three layer of meninge  the dura , arachnoid , and pia mater .
( credit  modification of work by gray 's
anatomy )
brain
the brain be the part of the central nervous system that be contain in the cranial cavity of the skull .
- pron - include the cerebral cortex , limbic system , basal ganglion , thalamus , hypothalamus , and cerebellum .
there be three different way that a brain can be section in order to view internal structure  a sagittal section cut the brain leave to right , as show in figure three  five  .  two  one b , a coronal section cut the brain front to back , as show in figure three  five  .  two  zero a , and a horizontal section cut the brain top to bottom .
cerebral cortex
the outermost part of the brain be a thick piece of nervous system tissue call the cerebral cortex , which be fold into hill call gyri ( singular  gyrus ) and valley call sulci ( singular  sulcus ) .
the cortex be make up of two hemisphere — right and left — which be separate by a large sulcus .
a thick fiber bundle call the corpus callosum ( latin  " tough body " ) connect the two hemisphere and allow information to be pass from one side to the other .
although there be some brain function that be localize more to one hemisphere than the other , the function of the two hemisphere be largely redundant .
in fact , sometimes ( very rarely ) an entire hemisphere be remove to treat severe epilepsy .
while patient do suffer some deficit follow the surgery , - pron - can have surprisingly few problem , especially when the surgery be perform on child who have very immature nervous system .
these illustration show the ( a ) coronal and ( b ) sagittal section of the human brain .
in other surgery to treat severe epilepsy , the corpus callosum be cut instead of remove an entire hemisphere .
this cause a condition call split - brain , which give insight into unique function of the two hemisphere .
for example , when an object be present to patients' leave visual field , - pron - may be unable to verbally name the object ( and may claim to not have see an object at all ) .
this be because the visual input from the left visual field cross and enter the right hemisphere and can not then signal to the speech center , which generally be find in the left side of the brain .
remarkably , if a split - brain patient be ask to pick up a specific object out of a group of object with the left hand , the patient will be able to do so but will still be unable to vocally identify - pron - .
each cortical hemisphere contain region call lobe that be involve in different function .
scientist use various technique to determine what brain area be involve in different function  - pron - examine patient who have have injury or disease that affect specific area and see how those area be relate to functional deficit .
- pron - also conduct animal study where - pron - stimulate brain area and see if there be any behavioral change .
- pron - use a technique call transmagnetic stimulation ( tms ) to temporarily deactivate specific part of the cortex use strong magnet place outside the head  and - pron - use functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fmri ) to look at change in oxygenated blood flow in particular brain region that correlate with specific behavioral task .
these technique , and other , have give great insight into the function of different brain region but have also show that any give brain area can be involve in more than one behavior or process , and any given behavior or process generally involve neuron in multiple brain area .
that be say , each hemisphere of the mammalian cerebral cortex can be break down into four functionally and spatially define lobe  frontal , parietal , temporal , and occipital .
figure three  five  .  two  one illustrate these four lobe of the human cerebral cortex .
the human cerebral cortex include the frontal , parietal , temporal , and occipital lobe .
the frontal lobe be locate at the front of the brain , over the eye .
this lobe contain the olfactory bulb , which process smell .
the frontal lobe also contain the motor cortex , which be important for plan and implement movement .
area within the motor cortex map to different muscle group , and there be some organization to this map , as show in figure three  five  .  two  two .
for example , the neuron that control movement of the finger be next to the neuron that control movement of the hand .
neuron in the frontal lobe also control cognitive function like maintain attention , speech , and decision - making .
study of human who have damage - pron - frontal lobe show that part of this area be involve in personality , socialization , and assess risk .
different part of the motor cortex control different muscle group .
muscle group that be neighbor in the body be generally control by neighbor region of the motor cortex as well .
for example , the neuron that control finger movement be near the neuron that control hand movement .
the parietal lobe be locate at the top of the brain .
neuron in the parietal lobe be involve in speech and also read .
two of the parietal lobe 's main function be process somatosensation — touch sensation like pressure , pain , heat , cold — and processing proprioception — the sense of how part of the body be orient in space .
the parietal lobe contain a somatosensory map of the body similar to the motor cortex .
the occipital lobe be locate at the back of the brain .
- pron - be primarily involve in vision — seeing , recognize , and identify the visual world .
the temporal lobe be locate at the base of the brain by - pron - ear and be primarily involve in processing and interpreting sound .
- pron - also contain the hippocampus ( greek for " seahorse” ) —a structure that process memory formation .
the hippocampus be illustrate in figure three  five  .  two  four .
the role of the hippocampus in memory be partially determine by study one famous epileptic patient , hm , who have both side of - pron - hippocampus remove in an attempt to cure - pron - epilepsy .
- pron - seizure go away , but - pron - could no longer form new memory ( although - pron - could remember some fact from before - pron - surgery and could learn new motor task ) .
basal ganglia interconnect brain area call the basal ganglion ( or basal nucleus ) , show in figure three  five  .  two  zero b , play important role in movement control and posture .
damage to the basal ganglion , as in parkinson 's disease , lead to motor impairment like a shuffling gait when walk .
the basal ganglion also regulate motivation .
for example , when a wasp st lead to bilateral basal ganglion damage in a two  five  - year - old businessman , - pron - begin to spend all - pron - day in bed and show no interest in anything or anybody .
but when - pron - be externally stimulate — as when someone ask to play a card game with - pron - — - pron - be able to function normally .
interestingly , - pron - and other similar patient do not report feel bored or frustrate by - pron - state .
thalamus
the thalamus ( greek for " inner chamber " ) , illustrate in figure three  five  .  two  four , act as a gateway to and from the cortex .
- pron - receive sensory and motor input from the body and also receive feedback from the cortex .
this feedback mechanism can modulate conscious awareness of sensory and motor input depend on the attention and arousal state of the animal .
the thalamus help regulate consciousness , arousal , and sleep state .
a rare genetic disorder call fatal familial insomnia cause the degeneration of thalamic neuron and glia .
this disorder prevent affect patient from be able to sleep , among other symptom , and be eventually fatal .
the limbic system regulate emotion and other behavior .
- pron - include part of the cerebral cortex locate near the center of the brain , include the cingulate gyrus and the hippocampus as well as the thalamus , hypothalamus and amygdala .
hypothalamus below the thalamus be the hypothalamus , show in figure three  five  .  two  four .
the hypothalamus control the endocrine system by send signal to the pituitary gland , a pea - sized endocrine gland that release several different hormone that affect other gland as well as other cell .
this relationship mean that the hypothalamus regulate important behavior that be control by these hormone .
the hypothalamus be the body 's thermostat —
- pron - make sure key function like food and water intake , energy expenditure , and body temperature be keep at appropriate level .
neuron within the hypothalamus also regulate circadian rhythm , sometimes call sleep cycle .
limbic system
the limbic system be a connected set of structure that regulate emotion , as well as behavior relate to fear and motivation .
- pron - play a role in memory formation and include part of the thalamus and hypothalamus as well as the hippocampus .
one important structure within the limbic system be a temporal lobe structure call the amygdala ( greek for " almond " ) , illustrate in figure three  five  .  two  four .
the two amygdala be important both for the sensation of fear and for recognize fearful face .
the cingulate gyrus help regulate emotion and pain .
cerebellum the cerebellum ( latin for " little brain " ) , show in figure three  five  .  two  one , sit at the base of the brain on top of the brainstem .
the cerebellum control balance and aid in coordinate movement and learn new motor task .
brainstem
the brainstem , illustrate in figure three  five  .  two  one , connect the rest of the brain with the spinal cord .
- pron - consist of the midbrain , medulla oblongata , and the pon .
motor and sensory neuron extend through the brainstem allow for the relay of signal between the brain and spinal cord .
ascend neural pathway cross in this section of the brain allow the left hemisphere of the cerebrum to control the right side of the body and vice versa .
the brainstem coordinate motor control signal send from the brain to the body .
the brainstem control several important function of the body include alertness , arousal , breathing , blood pressure , digestion , heart rate , swallow , walk , and sensory and motor information integration .
spinal cord connecting to the brainstem and extend down the body through the spinal column be the spinal cord , show in figure three  five  .  two  one .
the spinal cord be a thick bundle of nerve tissue that carry information about the body to the brain and from the brain to the body .
the spinal cord be contain within the bone of the vertebrate column but be able to communicate signal to and from the body through - pron - connection with spinal nerve ( part of the peripheral nervous system ) .
a cross - section of the spinal cord look like a white oval contain a gray butterfly - shape , as illustrate in figure three  five  .  two  five .
myelinated axon make up the " white matter " and neuron and glial cell body make up the " gray matter .
"
gray matter be also compose of interneuron , which connect two neuron each locate in different part of the body .
axon and cell body in the dorsal ( face the back of the animal ) spinal cord convey mostly sensory information from the body to the brain .
axon and cell body in the ventral ( face the front of the animal ) spinal cord primarily transmit signal control movement from the brain to the body .
the spinal cord also control motor reflex .
these reflex be quick , unconscious movement — like automatically remove a hand from a hot object .
reflex be so fast because - pron - involve local synaptic connection .
for example , the knee reflex that a doctor test during a routine physical be control by a single synapse between a sensory neuron and a motor neuron .
while a reflex may only require the involvement of one or two synapsis , synapsis with interneuron in the spinal column transmit information to the brain to convey what happen ( the knee jerk , or the hand be hot ) .
in the united states , there around one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero spinal cord injury each year .
because the spinal cord be the information superhighway connect the brain with the body , damage to the spinal cord can lead to paralysis .
the extent of the paralysis depend on the location of the injury along the spinal cord and whether the spinal cord be completely sever .
for example , if the spinal cord be damage at the level of the neck , - pron - can because paralysis from the neck down , whereas damage to the spinal column further down may limit paralysis to the leg .
spinal cord injury be notoriously difficult to treat because spinal nerve do not regenerate , although ongoing research suggest that stem cell transplant may be able to act as a bridge to reconnect sever nerve .
researcher be also look at way to prevent the inflammation that worsen nerve damage after injury .
one such treatment be to pump the body with cold saline to induce hypothermia .
this cooling can prevent swelling and other process that be think to worsen spinal cord injury .
the peripheral nervous system ( pns ) be the connection between the central nervous system and the rest of the body .
the cns be like the power plant of the nervous system .
- pron - create the signal that control the function of the body .
the pns be like the wire that go to individual house .
without those " wire , " the signal produce by the cns could not control the body ( and the cns would not be able to receive sensory information from the body either ) .
the pns can be break down into the autonomic nervous system , which control bodily function without conscious control , and the sensory - somatic nervous system , which transmit sensory information from the skin , muscle , and sensory organ to the cns and send motor command from the cns to the muscle .
the autonomic nervous system serve as the relay between the cns and the internal organ .
- pron - control the lung , the heart , smooth muscle , and exocrine and endocrine gland .
the autonomic nervous system control these organ largely without conscious control  - pron - can continuously monitor the condition of these different system and implement change as need .
signal to the target tissue usually involve two synapsis  a preganglionic neuron ( originate in the cns ) synaps to a neuron in a ganglion that , in turn , synapsis on the target organ , as illustrate in figure three  five  .  two  six .
there be two division of the autonomic nervous system that often have oppose effect  the sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous system .
sympathetic nervous system
the sympathetic nervous system be responsible for the " fight or flight " response that occur when an animal encounter a dangerous situation .
one way to remember this be to think of the surprise a person feel when encounter a snake ( " snake " and " sympathetic "
both begin with " s " ) .
example of function control by the sympathetic nervous system include an accelerated heart rate and inhibited digestion .
these function help prepare an organism 's body for the physical strain require to escape a potentially dangerous situation or to fend off a predator .
the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system often have oppose effect on target organ .
most preganglionic neuron in the sympathetic nervous system originate in the spinal cord , as illustrate in figure three  five  .  two  seven .
the axon of these neuron release acetylcholine on postganglionic neuron within sympathetic ganglion ( the sympathetic ganglion form a chain that extend alongside the spinal cord ) .
the acetylcholine activate the postganglionic neuron .
postganglionic neuron then release norepinephrine onto target organ .
as anyone who have ever feel a rush before a big test , speech , or athletic event can attest , the effect of the sympathetic nervous system be quite pervasive .
this be both because one preganglionic neuron synapsis on multiple postganglionic neuron , amplify the effect of the original synapse , and because the adrenal gland also release norepinephrine ( and the closely related hormone epinephrine ) into the blood stream .
the physiological effect of this norepinephrine release include dilate the trachea and bronchi ( make - pron - easy for the animal to breathe ) , increase heart rate , and move blood from the skin to the heart , muscle , and brain ( so the animal can think and run ) .
the strength and speed of the sympathetic response help an organism avoid danger , and scientist have find evidence that - pron - may also increase ltp — allow the animal to remember the dangerous situation and avoid - pron - in the future .
parasympathetic nervous system
while the sympathetic nervous system be activate in stressful situation , the parasympathetic nervous system allow an animal to " rest and digest .
"
one way to remember this be to think that during a restful situation like a picnic , the parasympathetic nervous system be in control ( " picnic " and " parasympathetic " both start with " p " ) .
parasympathetic preganglionic neuron have cell body locate in the brainstem and in the sacral ( toward the bottom ) spinal cord , as show in figure three  five  .  two  seven .
the axon of the preganglionic neuron release acetylcholine on the postganglionic neuron , which be generally locate very near the target organ .
most postganglionic neuron release acetylcholine onto target organ , although some release nitric oxide .
the parasympathetic nervous system reset organ function after the sympathetic nervous system be activate
( the common adrenaline dump - pron - feel after a ' fight - or - flight' event ) .
effect of acetylcholine release on target organ include slow of heart rate , lower blood pressure , and stimulation of digestion .
sensory - somatic nervous system
the sensory - somatic nervous system be make up of cranial and spinal nerve and contain both sensory and motor neuron .
sensory neuron transmit sensory information from the skin , skeletal muscle , and sensory organ to the cns .
motor neuron transmit message about desire movement from the cns to the muscle to make - pron - contract .
without - pron - sensory - somatic nervous system , an animal would be unable to process any information about - pron - environment ( what - pron - see , feel , hear , and so on ) and could not control motor movement .
unlike the autonomic nervous system , which have two synapsis between the cns and the target organ , sensory and motor neuron have only one synapse — one ending of the neuron be at the organ and the other directly contact a cns neuron .
acetylcholine be the main neurotransmitter release at these synapsis .
human have one  two cranial nerve , nerve that emerge from or enter the skull ( cranium ) , as oppose to the spinal nerve , which emerge from the vertebral column .
each cranial nerve be accord a name , which be detail in figure three  five  .  two  eight .
some cranial nerve transmit only sensory information .
for example , the olfactory nerve transmit information about smell from the nose to the brainstem .
other cranial nerve transmit almost solely motor information .
for example , the oculomotor nerve control the opening and closing of the eyelid and some eye movement .
other cranial nerve contain a mix of sensory and motor fiber .
for example , the glossopharyngeal nerve have a role in both taste ( sensory ) and swallow ( motor ) .
the human brain contain one  two cranial nerve that receive sensory input and control motor output for the head and neck .
spinal nerve transmit sensory and motor information between the spinal cord and the rest of the body .
each of the three  one spinal nerve ( in human ) contain both sensory and motor axon .
the sensory neuron cell body be group in structure call dorsal root ganglion and be show in figure three  five  .  two  nine .
each sensory neuron have one projection — with a sensory receptor end in skin , muscle , or sensory organ — and another that synaps with a neuron in the dorsal spinal cord .
motor neuron have cell body in the ventral gray matter of the spinal cord that project to muscle through the ventral root .
these neuron be usually stimulate by interneuron within the spinal cord but be sometimes directly stimulate by sensory neuron .
spinal nerve contain both sensory and motor axon .
the soma of sensory neuron be locate in dorsal root ganglion .
the soma of motor neuron be find in the ventral portion of the gray matter of the spinal cord .
a nervous system that function correctly be a fantastically complex , well - oil machine — synapsis fire appropriately , muscle move when need , memory be form and store , and emotion be well regulated .
unfortunately , each year million of people in the united states deal with some sort of nervous system disorder .
while scientist have discover potential cause of many of these disease , and viable treatment for some , ongoing research seek to find way to better prevent and treat all of these disorder .
neurodegenerative disorders neurodegenerative disorder be illness characterize by a loss of nervous system functioning that be usually cause by neuronal death .
these disease generally worsen over time as more and more neuron die .
the symptom of a particular neurodegenerative disease be relate to where in the nervous system the death of neuron occur .
spinocerebellar ataxia , for example , lead to neuronal death in the cerebellum .
the death of these neuron cause problem in balance and walking .
neurodegenerative disorder include huntington 's disease , amyotrophic lateral sclerosis , alzheimer 's disease and other type of dementia disorder , and parkinson 's disease .
here , alzheimer 's and parkinson 's disease will be discuss in more depth .
alzheimer 's
disease alzheimer 's disease be the most common because of dementia in the elderly .
in two  zero  one  two , an estimate five  .  four million americans suffer from alzheimer 's disease , and payment for - pron - care be estimate at $ two  zero  zero billion .
roughly one in every eight people age six  five or old have the disease .
due to the aging of the baby - boomer generation , there be project to be as many as one  three million alzheimer 's patient in the united states in the year two  zero  five  zero .
symptom of alzheimer 's disease include disruptive memory loss , confusion about time or place , difficulty plan or execute task , poor judgment , and personality change .
problem smell certain scent can also be indicative of alzheimer 's disease and may serve as an early warning sign .
many of these symptom be also common in people who be age normally , so - pron - be the severity and longevity of the symptom that determine whether a person be suffer from alzheimer 's .
alzheimer 's disease be name for alois alzheimer , a german psychiatrist who publish a report in one  nine  one  one about a woman who show severe dementia symptom .
along with - pron - colleague , - pron - examine the woman 's brain follow - pron - death and report the presence of abnormal clump , which be now call amyloid plaque , along with tangled brain fiber call neurofibrillary tangle .
amyloid plaqu , neurofibrillary tangle , and an overall shrinking of brain volume be commonly see in the brain of alzheimer 's patient .
loss of neuron in the hippocampus be especially severe in advanced alzheimer 's patient .
figure three  five  .  three  zero compare a normal brain to the brain of an alzheimer 's patient .
many research group be examine the cause of these hallmark of the disease .
one form of the disease be usually cause by mutation in one of three know gene .
this rare form of early onset alzheimer 's disease affect few than five percent of patient with the disease and cause dementia beginning between the age of three  zero and six  zero .
the more prevalent , late - onset form of the disease likely also have a genetic component .
one particular gene , apolipoprotein e ( apoe ) have a variant ( e four ) that increase a carrier 's likelihood of get the disease .
many other gene have be identify that may be involve in the pathology .
unfortunately , there be no cure for alzheimer 's disease .
current treatment focus on manage the symptom of the disease .
because decrease in the activity of cholinergic neuron ( neuron that use the neurotransmitter acetylcholine ) be common in alzheimer 's disease , several drug use to treat the disease work by increase acetylcholine neurotransmission , often by inhibit the enzyme that break down acetylcholine in the synaptic cleft .
other clinical intervention focus on behavioral therapy like psychotherapy , sensory therapy , and cognitive exercise .
since alzheimer 's disease appear to hijack the normal aging process , research into prevention be prevalent .
smoking , obesity , and cardiovascular problem may be risk factor for the disease , so treatment for those may also help to prevent alzheimer 's disease .
some study have show that people who remain intellectually active by play game , reading , play musical instrument , and be socially active in later life have a reduce risk of develop the disease .
compare to a normal brain ( leave ) , the brain from a patient with alzheimer 's disease ( right ) show a dramatic neurodegeneration , particularly within the ventricle and hippocampus .
( credit  modification of work by " garrando” / wikimedia commons base on original image by adear  " alzheimer ' s disease education and referral center , a service of the national institute on age " )
parkinson 's
disease like alzheimer
's disease , parkinson 's
disease be a neurodegenerative disease .
- pron - be first characterize by james parkinson in one  eight  one  seven .
each year , five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero - six  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero people in the united states be diagnose with the disease .
parkinson 's disease cause the loss of dopamine neuron in the substantia nigra , a midbrain structure that regulate movement .
loss of these neuron cause many symptom include tremor ( shake of finger or a limb ) , slow movement , speech change , balance and posture problem , and rigid muscle .
the combination of these symptom often cause a characteristic slow hunched shuffling walk , illustrate in figure three  five  .  three  one .
patient with parkinson 's disease can also exhibit psychological symptom , such as dementia or emotional problem .
although some patient have a form of the disease know to be cause by a single mutation , for most patient the exact cause of parkinson 's disease remain unknown  the disease likely result from a combination of genetic and environmental factor ( similar to alzheimer 's disease ) .
post - mortem analysis of brain from parkinson 's patient show the presence of lewy body — abnormal protein clump — in dopaminergic neuron .
the prevalence of these lewy body often correlate with the severity of the disease .
there be no cure for parkinson 's disease , and treatment be focus on ease symptom .
one of the most commonly prescribe drug for parkinson 's be l - dopa , which be a chemical that be convert into dopamine by neuron in the brain .
this conversion increase the overall level of dopamine neurotransmission and can help compensate for the loss of dopaminergic neuron in the substantia nigra .
other drug work by inhibit the enzyme that break down dopamine .
parkinson 's
patient often have a characteristic hunched walk .
neurodevelopmental disorders neurodevelopmental disorder occur when the development of the nervous system be disturb .
there be several different class of neurodevelopmental disorder .
some , like down syndrome , because intellectual deficit .
other specifically affect communication , learning , or the motor system .
some disorder like autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit / hyperactivity disorder have complex symptom .
autism autism spectrum disorder ( asd ) be a neurodevelopmental disorder .
- pron - severity differ from person to person .
estimate for the prevalence of the disorder have change rapidly in the past few decade .
current estimate suggest that one in eight  eight child will develop the disorder .
asd be four time more prevalent in male than female .
a characteristic symptom of asd be impair social skill .
child with autism may have difficulty make and maintain eye contact and read social cue .
- pron - also may have problem feel empathy for other .
other symptom of asd include repetitive motor behavior ( such as rock back and forth ) , preoccupation with specific subject , strict adherence to certain ritual , and unusual language use .
up to three  zero percent of patient with asd develop epilepsy , and patient with some form of the disorder ( like fragile x ) also have intellectual disability .
because - pron - be a spectrum disorder , other asd patient be very functional and have good - to - excellent language skill .
many of these patient do not feel that - pron - suffer from a disorder and instead think that - pron - brain just process information differently .
except for some well - characterize , clearly genetic form of autism ( like fragile x and rett 's syndrome ) , the cause of asd be largely unknown .
variant of several gene correlate with the presence of asd , but for any give patient , many different mutation in different gene may be require for the disease to develop .
at a general level , asd be think to be a disease of " incorrect " wiring .
accordingly , brain of some asd patient lack the same level of synaptic pruning that occur in non - affect people .
in the one  nine  nine  zero , a research paper link autism to a common vaccine give to child .
this paper be retract when - pron - be discover that the author falsify datum , and follow - up study show no connection between vaccine and autism .
treatment for autism usually combine behavioral therapy and intervention , along with medication to treat other disorder common to people with autism ( depression , anxiety , obsessive compulsive disorder ) .
although early intervention can help mitigate the effect of the disease , there be currently no cure for asd .
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( adhd )
approximately three to five percent of child and adult be affect by attention deficit / hyperactivity disorder ( adhd ) .
like asd , adhd be more prevalent in male than female .
symptom of the disorder include inattention ( lack of focus ) , executive function difficulty , impulsivity , and hyperactivity beyond what be characteristic of the normal developmental stage .
some patient do not have the hyperactive component of symptom and be diagnose with a subtype of adhd  attention deficit disorder ( add ) .
many people with adhd also show comorbitity , in that - pron - develop secondary disorder in addition to adhd .
example include depression or obsessive compulsive disorder ( ocd ) .
figure three  five  .  three  two provide some statistic concern comorbidity with adhd .
the because of adhd be unknown , although research point to a delay and dysfunction in the development of the prefrontal cortex and disturbance in neurotransmission .
accord to study of twin , the disorder have a strong genetic component .
there be several candidate gene that may contribute to the disorder , but no definitive link have be discover .
environmental factor , include exposure to certain pesticide , may also contribute to the development of adhd in some patient .
treatment for adhd often involve behavioral therapy and the prescription of stimulant medication , which paradoxically because a calming effect in these patient .
many people with adhd have one or more other neurological disorder .
( credit " chart design and illustration
"  modification of work by leigh coriale  credit " datum "  drs .
biederman and faraone , massachusetts general hospital ) .
mental illnesses mental illness be nervous system disorder that result in problem with thinking , mood , or relate with other people .
these disorder be severe enough to affect a person 's quality of life and often make - pron - difficult for people to perform the routine task of daily living .
debilitate mental disorder plague approximately one  two  .  five million americans ( about one in one  seven people ) at an annual cost of more than $ three  zero  zero billion .
there be several type of mental disorder include schizophrenia , major depression , bipolar disorder , anxiety disorder and phobia , post - traumatic stress disorder , and obsessive - compulsive disorder ( ocd ) , among other .
the american psychiatric association publish the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders ( or dsm ) , which describe the symptom require for a patient to be diagnose with a particular mental disorder .
each newly release version of the dsm contain different symptom and classification as scientist learn more about these disorder , - pron - cause , and how - pron - relate to each other .
a more detailed discussion of two mental illness — schizophrenia and major depression — be give below .
schizophrenia schizophrenia be a serious and often debilitate mental illness affect one percent of people in the united states .
symptom of the disease include the inability to differentiate between reality and imagination , inappropriate and unregulated emotional response , difficulty thinking , and problem with social situation .
people with schizophrenia can suffer from hallucination and hear voice  - pron - may also suffer from delusion .
patient also have so - call " negative " symptom like a flattened emotional state , loss of pleasure , and loss of basic drive .
many schizophrenic patient be diagnose in - pron - late adolescence or early two  zero .
the development of schizophrenia be think to involve malfunction dopaminergic neuron and may also involve problem with glutamate signaling .
treatment for the disease usually require antipsychotic medication that work by block dopamine receptor and decrease dopamine neurotransmission in the brain .
this decrease in dopamine can because parkinson 's disease - like symptom in some patient .
while some class of antipsychotic can be quite effective at treat the disease , - pron - be not a cure , and most patient must remain medicated for the rest of - pron - life .
depression major depression affect approximately six  .  seven percent of the adult in the united states each year and be one of the most common mental disorder .
to be diagnose with major depressive disorder , a person must have experience a severely depressed mood last long than two week along with other symptom include a loss of enjoyment in activity that be previously enjoy , change in appetite and sleep schedule , difficulty concentrate , feeling of worthlessness , and suicidal thought .
the exact cause of major depression be unknown and likely include both genetic and environmental risk factor .
some research support the " classic monoamine hypothesis , " which suggest that depression be cause by a decrease in norepinephrine and serotonin neurotransmission .
one argument against this hypothesis be the fact that some antidepressant medication because an increase in norepinephrine and serotonin release within a few hour of begin treatment — but clinical result of these medication be not see until week later .
this have lead to alternative hypothesis  for example , dopamine may also be decrease in depressed patient , or - pron - may actually be an increase in norepinephrine and serotonin that cause the disease , and antidepressant force a feedback loop that decrease this release .
treatment for depression include psychotherapy , electroconvulsive therapy , deep - brain stimulation , and prescription medication .
there be several class of antidepressant medication that work through different mechanism .
for example , monoamine oxidase inhibitor ( mao inhibitor ) block the enzyme that degrade many neurotransmitter ( include dopamine , serotonin , norepinephrine ) , result in increase neurotransmitter in the synaptic cleft .
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor ( ssris ) block the reuptake of serotonin into the presynaptic neuron .
this blockage result in an increase in serotonin in the synaptic cleft .
other type of drug such as norepinephrine - dopamine reuptake inhibitor and norepinephrine - serotonin reuptake inhibitor be also use to treat depression .
other neurological disorders
there be several other neurological disorder that can not be easily place in the above category .
these include chronic pain condition , cancer of the nervous system , epilepsy disorder , and stroke .
epilepsy and stroke be discuss below .
epilepsy estimate suggest that up to three percent of people in the united states will be diagnose with epilepsy in - pron - lifetime .
while there be several different type of epilepsy , all be characterize by recurrent seizure .
epilepsy - pron - can be a symptom of a brain injury , disease , or other illness .
for example , people who have intellectual disability or asd can experience seizure , presumably because the developmental wiring malfunction that cause - pron - disorder also put - pron - at risk for epilepsy .
for many patient , however , the because of - pron - epilepsy be never identify and be likely to be a combination of genetic and environmental factor .
often , seizure can be control with anticonvulsant medication .
however , for very severe case , patient may undergo brain surgery to remove the brain area where seizure originate .
stroke a stroke result when blood fail to reach a portion of the brain for a long enough time to because damage .
without the oxygen supply by blood flow , neuron in this brain region die .
this neuronal death can because many different symptom — depend on the brain area affected— include headache , muscle weakness or paralysis , speech disturbance , sensory problem , memory loss , and confusion .
stroke be often cause by blood clot and can also be cause by the bursting of a weak blood vessel .
stroke be extremely common and be the third most common because of death in the united states .
on average one person experience a stroke every four  zero second in the united states .
approximately seven  five percent of stroke occur in people old than six  five .
risk factor for stroke include high blood pressure , diabetes , high cholesterol , and a family history of stroke .
smoking double the risk of stroke .
because a stroke be a medical emergency , patient with symptom of a stroke should immediately go to the emergency room , where - pron - can receive drug that will dissolve any clot that may have form .
these drug will not work if the stroke be cause by a burst blood vessel or if the stroke occur more than three hour before arrive at the hospital .
treatment follow a stroke can include blood pressure medication ( to prevent future stroke ) and ( sometimes intense ) physical therapy .
introduction
in more advanced animal , the sens be constantly at work , make the animal aware of stimulus — such as light , or sound , or the presence of a chemical substance in the external environment — and monitor information about the organism 's internal environment .
all bilaterally symmetric animal have a sensory system , and the development of any species' sensory system have be drive by natural selection  thus , sensory system differ among specie accord to the demand of - pron - environment .
the shark , unlike most fish predator , be electrosensitive — that is , sensitive to electrical field produce by other animal in - pron - environment .
while - pron - be helpful to this underwater predator , electrosensitivity be a sense not find in most land animal .
sens provide information about the body and - pron - environment .
human have five special sens  olfaction ( smell ) , gustation ( taste ) , equilibrium ( balance and body position ) , vision , and hearing .
additionally , - pron - possess general sens , also call somatosensation , which respond to stimulus like temperature , pain , pressure , and vibration .
vestibular sensation , which be an organism 's sense of spatial orientation and balance , proprioception ( position of bone , joint , and muscle ) , and the sense of limb position that be use to track kinesthesia ( limb movement ) be part of somatosensation .
although the sensory system associate with these sens be very different , all share a common function  to convert a stimulus ( such as light , or sound , or the position of the body ) into an electrical signal in the nervous system .
this process be call sensory transduction .
there be two broad type of cellular system that perform sensory transduction .
in one , a neuron work with a sensory receptor , a cell , or cell process that be specialize to engage with and detect a specific stimulus .
stimulation of the sensory receptor activate the associated afferent neuron , which carry information about the stimulus to the central nervous system .
in the second type of sensory transduction , a sensory nerve ending respond to a stimulus in the internal or external environment  this neuron constitute the sensory receptor .
free nerve ending can be stimulate by several different stimulus , thus show little receptor specificity .
for example , pain receptor in - pron - gum and tooth may be stimulate by temperature change , chemical stimulation , or pressure .
reception the first step in sensation be reception , which be the activation of sensory receptor by stimulus such as mechanical stimulus ( be bent or squish , for example ) , chemical , or temperature .
the receptor can then respond to the stimulus .
the region in space in which a give sensory receptor can respond to a stimulus , be - pron - far away or in contact with the body , be that receptor 's receptive field .
think for a moment about the difference in receptive field for the different sens .
for the sense of touch , a stimulus must come into contact with body .
for the sense of hearing , a stimulus can be a moderate distance away ( some baleen whale sound can propagate for many kilometer ) .
for vision , a stimulus can be very far away  for example , the visual system perceif light from star at enormous distance .
transduction
the most fundamental function of a sensory system be the translation of a sensory signal to an electrical signal in the nervous system .
this take place at the sensory receptor , and the change in electrical potential that be produce be call the receptor potential .
how be sensory input , such as pressure on the skin , change to a receptor potential ?
in this example , a type of receptor call a mechanoreceptor ( as show in figure three  six  .  two ) possess specialize membrane that respond to pressure .
disturbance of these dendrite by compress - pron - or bend - pron - open gate ion channel in the plasma membrane of the sensory neuron , change - pron - electrical potential .
recall that in the nervous system , a positive change of a neuron 's electrical potential ( also call the membrane potential ) , depolarize the neuron .
receptor potential be grade potential  the magnitude of these grade ( receptor ) potential vary with the strength of the stimulus .
if the magnitude of depolarization be sufficient ( that is , if membrane potential reach a threshold ) , the neuron will fire an action potential .
in most case , the correct stimulus impinge on a sensory receptor will drive membrane potential in a positive direction , although for some receptor , such as those in the visual system , this be not always the case .
mechanosensitive ion channel be gate ion channel that respond to mechanical deformation of the plasma membrane .
a mechanosensitive channel be connect to the plasma membrane and the cytoskeleton by hair - like tether .
when pressure cause the extracellular matrix to move , the channel open , allow ion to enter or exit the cell .
( b ) stereocilia in the human ear be connect to mechanosensitive ion channel .
when a sound cause the stereocilia to move , mechanosensitive ion channel transduce the signal to the cochlear nerve .
sensory receptor for different sens be very different from each other , and - pron - be specialize accord to the type of stimulus - pron - sense  - pron - have receptor specificity .
for example , touch receptor , light receptor , and sound receptor be each activate by different stimulus .
touch receptor be not sensitive to light or sound  - pron - be sensitive only to touch or pressure .
however , stimulus may be combine at high level in the brain , as happen with olfaction , contribute to - pron - sense of taste .
encoding and transmission of sensory information four aspect of sensory information be encode by sensory system  the type of stimulus , the location of the stimulus in the receptive field , the duration of the stimulus , and the relative intensity of the stimulus .
thus , action potential transmit over a sensory receptor 's afferent axon encode one type of stimulus , and this segregation of the sens be preserve in other sensory circuit .
for example , auditory receptor transmit signal over - pron - own dedicated system , and electrical activity in the axon of the auditory receptor will be interpret by the brain as an auditory stimulus — a sound .
the intensity of a stimulus be often encode in the rate of action potential produce by the sensory receptor .
thus , an intense stimulus will produce a more rapid train of action potential , and reduce the stimulus will likewise slow the rate of production of action potential .
a second way in which intensity be encode be by the number of receptor activate .
an intense stimulus may initiate action potential in a large number of adjacent receptor , while a less intense stimulus may stimulate few receptor .
integration of sensory information begin as soon as the information be receive in the cns , and the brain will further process incoming signal .
perception perception be an individual 's interpretation of a sensation .
although perception rely on the activation of sensory receptor , perception happen not at the level of the sensory receptor , but at high level in the nervous system , in the brain .
the brain distinguish sensory stimulus through a sensory pathway  action potential from sensory receptor travel along neuron that be dedicate to a particular stimulus .
these neuron be dedicate to that particular stimulus and synapse with particular neuron in the brain or spinal cord .
all sensory signal , except those from the olfactory system , be transmit though the central nervous system and be rout to the thalamus and to the appropriate region of the cortex .
recall that the thalamus be a structure in the forebrain that serve as a clearinghouse and relay station for sensory ( as well as motor ) signal .
when the sensory signal exit the thalamus , - pron - be conduct to the specific area of the cortex ( figure three  six  .  three ) dedicate to process that particular sense .
how be neural signal interpret ?
interpretation of sensory signal between individual of the same specie be largely similar , owe to the inherit similarity of - pron - nervous system  however , there be some individual difference .
a good example of this be individual tolerance to a painful stimulus , such as dental pain , which certainly differ .
in human , with the exception of olfaction , all sensory signal be rout from the ( a ) thalamus to ( b ) final processing region in the cortex of the brain .
( credit b  modification of work by polina tishina )
somatosensation be a mixed sensory category and include all sensation receive from the skin and mucous membrane , as well from as the limb and joint .
somatosensation be also know as tactile sense , or more familiarly , as the sense of touch .
somatosensation occur all over the exterior of the body and at some interior location as well .
a variety of receptor type — embed in the skin , mucous membrane , muscle , joint , internal organ , and cardiovascular system — play a role .
recall that the epidermis be the outermost layer of skin in mammal .
- pron - be relatively thin , be compose of keratin - fill cell , and have no blood supply .
the epidermis serve as a barrier to water and to invasion by pathogen .
below this , the much thick dermis contain blood vessel , sweat gland , hair follicle , lymph vessel , and lipid - secrete sebaceous gland ( figure three  six  .  four ) .
below the epidermis and dermis be the subcutaneous tissue , or hypodermis , the fatty layer that contain blood vessel , connective tissue , and the axon of sensory neuron .
the hypodermis , which hold about five  zero percent of the body 's fat , attach the dermis to the bone and muscle , and supply nerve and blood vessel to the dermis .
mammalian skin have three layer  an epidermis , a dermis , and a hypodermis .
( credit  modification of work by don bliss , national cancer institute )
somatosensory receptors sensory receptor be classify into five category  mechanoreceptor , thermoreceptor , proprioceptor , pain receptor , and chemoreceptor .
these category be base on the nature of stimulus each receptor class transduce .
what be commonly refer to as " touch " involve more than one kind of stimulus and more than one kind of receptor .
mechanoreceptor in the skin be describe as encapsulate ( that is , surround by a capsule ) or unencapsulated ( a group that include free nerve ending ) .
a free nerve ending , as - pron - name imply , be an unencapsulated dendrite of a sensory neuron .
free nerve ending be the most common nerve ending in skin , and - pron - extend into the middle of the epidermis .
free nerve ending be sensitive to painful stimulus , to hot and cold , and to light touch .
- pron - be slow to adjust to a stimulus and so be less sensitive to abrupt change in stimulation .
there be three class of mechanoreceptor  tactile , proprioceptor , and baroreceptor .
mechanoreceptor sense stimuli due to physical deformation of - pron - plasma membrane .
- pron - contain mechanically gate ion channel whose gate open or close in response to pressure , touch , stretch , and sound .
"
there be four primary tactile mechanoreceptor in human skin  merkel 's disk , meissner 's corpuscle , ruffini ending , and pacinian corpuscle  two be locate toward the surface of the skin and two be locate deeper .
a fifth type of mechanoreceptor , krause end bulb , be find only in specialized region .
merkel 's disk ( show in figure three  six  .  five ) be find in the upper layer of skin near the base of the epidermis , both in skin that have hair and on glabrous skin , that is , the hairless skin find on the palm and finger , the sol of the foot , and the lip of human and other primate .
merkel 's disk be densely distribute in the fingertip and lip .
- pron - be slow - adapt , unencapsulated nerve ending , and - pron - respond to light touch .
light touch , also know as discriminative touch , be a light pressure that allow the location of a stimulus to be pinpoint .
the receptive field of merkel 's disk be small with well - define border .
that make - pron - finely sensitive to edge and - pron - come into use in task such as type on a keyboard .
meissner 's corpuscle , ( show in figure three  six  .  six ) also know as tactile corpuscle , be find in the upper dermis , but - pron - project into the epidermis .
- pron - , too , be find primarily in the glabrous skin on the fingertip and eyelid .
- pron - respond to fine touch and pressure , but - pron - also respond to low - frequency vibration or flutter .
- pron - be rapidly adapt , fluid - fill , encapsulate neuron with small , well - define border and be responsive to fine detail .
like merkel 's disk , meissner 's corpuscle be not as plentiful in the palm as - pron - be in the fingertip .
meissner corpuscle in the fingertip , such as the one view here use bright field light microscopy , allow for touch discrimination of fine detail .
( credit  modification of work by " wbensmith " / wikimedia commons 
scale - bar datum from matt russell )
deeper in the epidermis , near the base , be ruffini ending , which be also know as bulbous corpuscle .
- pron - be find in both glabrous and hairy skin .
these be slow - adapt , encapsulate mechanoreceptor that detect skin stretch and deformation within joint , so - pron - provide valuable feedback for grip object and control finger position and movement .
thus , - pron - also contribute to proprioception and kinesthesia .
ruffini ending also detect warmth .
note that these warmth detector be situate deeper in the skin than be the cold detector .
- pron - be not surprising , then , that human detect cold stimulus before - pron - detect warm stimulus .
pacinian corpuscle ( see in figure three  six  .  seven ) be locate deep in the dermis of both glabrous and hairy skin and be structurally similar to meissner 's corpuscle  - pron - be find in the bone periosteum , joint capsule , pancrea and other viscera , breast , and genital .
- pron - be rapidly adapt mechanoreceptor that sense deep transient ( but not prolong ) pressure and high - frequency vibration .
pacinian receptor detect pressure and vibration by be compress , stimulate - pron - internal dendrite .
there be few pacinian corpuscle and ruffini ending in skin than there be merkel 's disk and meissner 's corpuscle .
pacinian corpuscle , such as these visualize use bright field light microscopy , detect pressure ( touch ) and high - frequency vibration .
( credit  modification of work by ed uthman  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
in proprioception , proprioceptive and kinesthetic signal travel through myelinat afferent neuron run from the spinal cord to the medulla .
neuron be not physically connect , but communicate via neurotransmitter secrete into synapsis or " gap " between communicate neuron .
once in the medulla , the neuron continue carry the signal to the thalamus .
muscle spindle be stretch receptor that detect the amount of stretch , or lengthening of muscle .
relate to these be golgi tendon organ , which be tension receptor that detect the force of muscle contraction .
proprioceptive and kinesthetic signal come from limb .
unconscious proprioceptive signal run from the spinal cord to the cerebellum , the brain region that coordinate muscle contraction , rather than to the thalamus , like most other sensory information .
barorecptor detect pressure change in an organ .
- pron - be find in the wall of the carotid artery and the aorta where - pron - monitor blood pressure , and in the lung where - pron - detect the degree of lung expansion .
stretch receptor be find at various site in the digestive and urinary system .
in addition to these two type of deep receptor , there be also rapidly adapt hair receptor , which be find on nerve ending that wrap around the base of hair follicle .
there be a few type of hair receptor that detect slow and rapid hair movement , and - pron - differ in - pron - sensitivity to movement .
some hair receptor also detect skin deflection , and certain rapidly adapt hair receptor allow detection of stimulus that have not yet touch the skin .
integration of signals from mechanoreceptors
the configuration of the different type of receptor work in concert in human skin result in a very refined sense of touch .
the nociceptive receptor — those that detect pain — be locate near the surface .
small , finely calibrate mechanoreceptor — merkel 's disk and meissner 's corpuscle
— be locate in the upper layer and can precisely localize even gentle touch .
the large mechanoreceptor — pacinian corpuscle and ruffini ending — be locate in the low layer and respond to deep touch .
( consider that the deep pressure that reach those deep receptor would not need to be finely localize . )
both the upper and low layer of the skin hold rapidly and slowly adapt receptor .
both primary somatosensory cortex and secondary cortical area be responsible for process the complex picture of stimulus transmit from the interplay of mechanoreceptor .
density of mechanoreceptors
the distribution of touch receptor in human skin be not consistent over the body .
in human , touch receptor be less dense in skin cover with any type of hair , such as the arm , leg , torso , and face .
touch receptor be denser in glabrous skin ( the type find on human fingertip and lip , for example ) , which be typically more sensitive and be thick than hairy skin ( four to five mm versus two to three mm ) .
how be receptor density estimate in a human subject ?
the relative density of pressure receptor in different location on the body can be demonstrate experimentally use a two - point discrimination test .
in this demonstration , two sharp point , such as two thumbtack , be bring into contact with the subject 's skin ( though not hard enough to because pain or break the skin ) .
the subject report if - pron - or - pron - feel one point or two point .
if the two point be feel as one point , - pron - can be infer that the two point be both in the receptive field of a single sensory receptor .
if two point be feel as two separate point , each be in the receptive field of two separate sensory receptor .
the point could then be move closer and re - test until the subject report feel only one point , and the size of the receptive field of a single receptor could be estimate from that distance .
thermoreception
in addition to krause end bulb that detect cold and ruffini ending that detect warmth , there be different type of cold receptor on some free nerve ending  thermoreceptor , locate in the dermis , skeletal muscle , liver , and hypothalamus , that be activate by different temperature .
- pron - pathway into the brain run from the spinal cord through the thalamus to the primary somatosensory cortex .
warmth and cold information from the face travel through one of the cranial nerve to the brain .
- pron - know from experience that a tolerably cold or hot stimulus can quickly progress to a much more intense stimulus that be no longer tolerable .
any stimulus that be too intense can be perceive as pain because temperature sensation be conduct along the same pathway that carry pain sensation
pain pain be the name give to nociception , which be the neural processing of injurious stimulus in response to tissue damage .
pain be cause by true source of injury , such as contact with a heat source that cause a thermal burn or contact with a corrosive chemical .
but pain also can be cause by harmless stimulus that mimic the action of damaging stimulus , such as contact with capsaicin , the compound that because pepper to taste hot and which be use in self - defense pepper spray and certain topical medication .
pepper taste " hot " because the protein receptor that bind capsaicin open the same calcium channel that be activate by warm receptor .
nociception start at the sensory receptor , but pain , inasmuch as - pron - be the perception of nociception , do not start until - pron - be communicate to the brain .
there be several nociceptive pathway to and through the brain .
most axon carry nociceptive information into the brain from the spinal cord project to the thalamus ( as do other sensory neuron ) and the neural signal undergoe final processing in the primary somatosensory cortex .
interestingly , one nociceptive pathway project not to the thalamus but directly to the hypothalamus in the forebrain , which modulate the cardiovascular and neuroendocrine function of the autonomic nervous system .
recall that threaten — or painful — stimulus stimulate the sympathetic branch of the visceral sensory system , ready a fight - or - flight response .
taste , also call gustation , and smell , also call olfaction , be the most interconnected sens in that both involve molecule of the stimulus enter the body and bond to receptor .
smell let an animal sense the presence of food or other animal — whether potential mate , predator , or prey — or other chemical in the environment that can impact - pron - survival .
similarly , the sense of taste allow animal to discriminate between type of food .
while the value of a sense of smell be obvious , what be the value of a sense of taste ?
different tasting food have different attribute , both helpful and harmful .
for example , sweet - tasting substance tend to be highly caloric , which could be necessary for survival in lean time .
bitterness be associate with toxicity , and sourness be associate with spoiled food .
salty food be valuable in maintain homeostasis by help the body retain water and by provide ion necessary for cell to function .
taste and odors
both taste and odor stimulus be molecule take in from the environment .
the primary taste detect by human be sweet , sour , bitter , salty and umami .
the first four taste need little explanation .
the identification of umami as a fundamental taste occur fairly recently — - pron - be identify in one  nine  zero  eight by japanese scientist kikunae ikeda while - pron - work with seaweed broth , but - pron - be not widely accept as a taste that could be physiologically distinguished until many year later .
the taste of umami , also know as savoriness , be attributable to the taste of the amino acid l - glutamate .
in fact , monosodium glutamate , or msg , be often use in cooking to enhance the savory taste of certain food .
what be the adaptive value of be able to distinguish umami ?
savory substance tend to be high in protein .
all odor that - pron - perceive be molecule in the air - pron - breathe .
if a substance do not release molecule into the air from - pron - surface , - pron - have no smell .
and if a human or other animal do not have a receptor that recognize a specific molecule , then that molecule have no smell .
human have about three  five  zero olfactory receptor subtype that work in various combination to allow - pron - to sense about one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero different odor .
compare that to mice , for example , which have about one  ,  three  zero  zero olfactory receptor type , and therefore probably sense more odor .
both odor and taste involve molecule that stimulate specific chemoreceptor .
although human commonly distinguish taste as one sense and smell as another , - pron - work together to create the perception of flavor .
a person 's perception of flavor be reduce if - pron - or - pron - have congest nasal passage .
reception and transduction odorants ( odor molecule ) enter the nose and dissolve in the olfactory epithelium , the mucosa at the back of the nasal cavity ( as illustrate in figure three  six  .  eight ) .
the olfactory epithelium be a collection of specialized olfactory receptor in the back of the nasal cavity that span an area about five cm two in human .
recall that sensory cell be neuron .
an olfactory receptor , which be a dendrite of a specialized neuron , respond when - pron - bind certain molecule inhale from the environment by send impulse directly to the olfactory bulb of the brain .
human have about one  two million olfactory receptor , distribute among hundred of different receptor type that respond to different odor .
twelve million seem like a large number of receptor , but compare that to other animal  rabbit have about one  zero  zero million , most dog have about one billion , and bloodhound — dog selectively breed for - pron - sense of smell — have about four billion .
the overall size of the olfactory epithelium also differ between specie , with that of bloodhound , for example , be many time large than that of human .
olfactory neuron be bipolar neuron ( neuron with two process from the cell body ) .
each neuron have a single dendrite bury in the olfactory epithelium , and extend from this dendrite be five to two  zero receptor - laden , hair - like cilium that trap odorant molecule .
the sensory receptor on the cilium be protein , and - pron - be the variation in - pron - amino acid chain that make the receptor sensitive to different odorant .
each olfactory sensory neuron have only one type of receptor on - pron - cilium , and the receptor be specialize to detect specific odorant , so the bipolar neuron - pron - be specialized .
when an odorant bind with a receptor that recognize - pron - , the sensory neuron associate with the receptor be stimulate .
olfactory stimulation be the only sensory information that directly reach the cerebral cortex , whereas other sensation be relay through the thalamus .
in the human olfactory system , ( a ) bipolar olfactory neuron extend from ( b ) the olfactory epithelium , where olfactory receptor be locate , to the olfactory bulb .
( credit  modification of work by patrick j . lynch , medical illustrator  c . carl jaffe , md , cardiologist ) taste
detect a taste ( gustation ) be fairly similar to detect an odor ( olfaction ) , give that both taste and smell rely on chemical receptor be stimulate by certain molecule .
the primary organ of taste be the taste bud .
a taste bud be a cluster of gustatory receptor ( taste cell ) that be locate within the bump on the tongue call papillae ( singular  papilla ) ( illustrate in figure three  six  .  one  zero ) .
there be several structurally distinct papillae .
filiform papillae , which be locate across the tongue , be tactile , provide friction that help the tongue move substance , and contain no taste cell .
in contrast , fungiform papillae , which be locate mainly on the anterior two - third of the tongue , each contain one to eight taste bud and also have receptor for pressure and temperature .
the large circumvallate papillae contain up to one  zero  zero taste bud and form a v near the posterior margin of the tongue .
foliate , circumvallate , and fungiform papillae be locate on different region of the tongue .
( b ) foliate papilla be prominent protrusion on this light micrograph .
( credit a  modification of work by nci  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
in addition to those two type of chemically and mechanically sensitive papilla be foliate papillae — leaf - like papillae locate in parallel fold along the edge and toward the back of the tongue , as see in the figure three  six  .  one  zero micrograph .
foliate papilla contain about one  ,  three  zero  zero taste bud within - pron - fold .
finally , there be circumvallate papillae , which be wall - like papilla in the shape of an invert " v " at the back of the tongue .
each of these papillae be surround by a groove and contain about two  five  zero taste bud .
each taste bud 's taste cell be replace every one  zero to one  four day .
these be elongate cell with hair - like process call microvilli at the tip that extend into the taste bud pore ( illustrate in figure three  six  .  one  one ) .
food molecule ( tastant ) be dissolve in saliva , and - pron - bind with and stimulate the receptor on the microvilli .
the receptor for tastant be locate across the outer portion and front of the tongue , outside of the middle area where the filiform papillae be most prominent .
pore in the tongue allow tastant to enter taste pore in the tongue .
( credit  modification of work by vincenzo rizzo )
in human , there be five primary taste , and each taste have only one correspond type of receptor .
thus , like olfaction , each receptor be specific to - pron - stimulus ( tastant ) .
transduction of the five taste happen through different mechanism that reflect the molecular composition of the tastant .
a salty tastant ( contain nacl ) provide the sodium ion ( na+ ) that enter the taste neuron and excite - pron - directly .
sour tastant be acid and belong to the thermoreceptor protein family .
bind of an acid or other sour - tasting molecule trigger a change in the ion channel and these increase hydrogen ion ( h+ ) concentration in the taste neuron , thus depolarize - pron - .
sweet , bitter , and umami tastant require a g - protein couple receptor .
these tastant bind to - pron - respective receptor , thereby excite the specialized neuron associate with - pron - .
both tasting ability and sense of smell change with age .
in human , the sens decline dramatically by age five  zero and continue to decline .
a child may find a food to be too spicy , whereas an elderly person may find the same food to be bland and unappetizing .
smell and taste in the brain olfactory neuron project from the olfactory epithelium to the olfactory bulb as thin , unmyelinated axon .
the olfactory bulb be compose of neural cluster call glomeruli , and each glomerulus receive signal from one type of olfactory receptor , so each glomerulus be specific to one odorant .
from glomeruli , olfactory signal travel directly to the olfactory cortex and then to the frontal cortex and the thalamus .
recall that this be a different path from most other sensory information , which be send directly to the thalamus before end up in the cortex .
olfactory signal also travel directly to the amygdala , thereafter reach the hypothalamus , thalamus , and frontal cortex .
the last structure that olfactory signal directly travel to be a cortical center in the temporal lobe structure important in spatial , autobiographical , declarative , and episodic memory .
olfaction be finally process by area of the brain that deal with memory , emotion , reproduction , and think .
taste neuron project from taste cell in the tongue , esophagus , and palate to the medulla , in the brainstem .
from the medulla , taste signal travel to the thalamus and then to the primary gustatory cortex .
information from different region of the tongue be segregate in the medulla , thalamus , and cortex .
audition , or hearing , be important to human and to other animal for many different interaction .
- pron - enable an organism to detect and receive information about danger , such as an approach predator , and to participate in communal exchange like those concern territory or mating .
on the other hand , although - pron - be physically link to the auditory system , the vestibular system be not involve in hearing .
instead , an animal 's vestibular system detect - pron - own movement , both linear and angular acceleration and deceleration , and balance .
sound auditory stimulus be sound wave , which be mechanical , pressure wave that move through a medium , such as air or water .
there be no sound wave in a vacuum since there be no air molecule to move in wave .
the speed of sound wave differ , base on altitude , temperature , and medium , but at sea level and a temperature of two  zero o c ( six  eight o f ) , sound wave travel in the air at about three  four  three meter per second .
as be true for all wave , there be four main characteristic of a sound wave  frequency , wavelength , period , and amplitude .
frequency be the number of wave per unit of time , and in sound be hear as pitch .
high - frequency ( ≥ one  five  .  zero  zero  zero hz ) sound be higher - pitch ( short wavelength ) than low - frequency ( long wavelength  ≤ one  zero  zero hz ) sound .
frequency be measure in cycle per second , and for sound , the most commonly use unit be hertz ( hz ) , or cycle per second .
most human can perceive sound with frequency between three  zero and two  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero hz .
woman be typically good at hear high frequency , but everyone 's ability to hear high frequency decrease with age .
dog detect up to about four  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero hz  cat , six  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero hz  bat , one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero hz  and dolphin one  five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero hz , and american shad ( alosa sapidissima ) , a fish , can hear one  eight  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero hz .
those frequency above the human range be call ultrasound .
amplitude , or the dimension of a wave from peak to trough , in sound be hear as volume and be illustrate in figure three  six  .  one  two .
the sound wave of loud sound have great amplitude than those of soft sound .
for sound , volume be measure in decibel ( db ) .
the soft sound that a human can hear be the zero point .
human speak normally at six  zero decibel .
for sound wave , wavelength correspond to pitch .
amplitude of the wave correspond to volume .
the sound wave show with a dash line be soft in volume than the sound wave show with a solid line .
( credit  nih ) reception of sound
in mammal , sound wave be collect by the external , cartilaginous part of the ear call the pinna , then travel through the auditory canal and because vibration of the thin diaphragm call the tympanum or ear drum , the innermost part of the outer ear ( illustrate in figure three  six  .  one  three ) .
interior to the tympanum be the middle ear .
the middle ear hold three small bone call the ossicle , which transfer energy from the move tympanum to the inner ear .
the three ossicle be the malleus ( also know as the hammer ) , the incus ( the anvil ) , and stape ( the stirrup ) .
the aptly name stape look very much like a stirrup .
the three ossicle be unique to mammal , and each play a role in hearing .
the malleus attache at three point to the interior surface of the tympanic membrane .
the incus attach the malleus to the stape .
in human , the stape be not long enough to reach the tympanum .
if - pron - do not have the malleus and the incus , then the vibration of the tympanum would never reach the inner ear .
these bone also function to collect force and amplify sound .
the ear ossicle be homologous to bone in a fish mouth  the bone that support gill in fish be think to be adapt for use in the vertebrate ear over evolutionary time .
many animal ( frog , reptile , and bird , for example ) use the stape of the middle ear to transmit vibration to the middle ear .
sound travel through the outer ear to the middle ear , which be bound on - pron - exterior by the tympanic membrane .
the middle ear contain three bone call ossicle that transfer the sound wave to the oval window , the exterior boundary of the inner ear .
the organ of corti , which be the organ of sound transduction , lie inside the cochlea .
( credit  modification of work by lars chittka , axel brockmann )
transduction of sound vibrating object , such as vocal cord , create sound wave or pressure wave in the air .
when these pressure wave reach the ear , the ear transduce this mechanical stimulus ( pressure wave ) into a nerve impulse ( electrical signal ) that the brain perceif as sound .
the pressure wave strike the tympanum , cause - pron - to vibrate .
the mechanical energy from the move tympanum transmit the vibration to the three bone of the middle ear .
the stape transmit the vibration to a thin diaphragm call the oval window , which be the outermost structure of the inner ear .
the structure of the inner ear be find in the labyrinth , a bony , hollow structure that be the most interior portion of the ear .
here , the energy from the sound wave be transfer from the stape through the flexible oval window and to the fluid of the cochlea .
the vibration of the oval window create pressure wave in the fluid ( perilymph ) inside the cochlea .
the cochlea be a whorl structure , like the shell of a snail , and - pron - contain receptor for transduction of the mechanical wave into an electrical signal ( as illustrate in figure three  six  .  one  four ) .
inside the cochlea , the basilar membrane be a mechanical analyzer that run the length of the cochlea , curl toward the cochlea 's center .
the mechanical property of the basilar membrane change along - pron - length , such that - pron - be thick , tauter , and narrow at the outside of the whorl ( where the cochlea be large ) , and thin , floppier , and broad toward the apex , or center , of the whorl ( where the cochlea be small ) .
different region of the basilar membrane vibrate accord to the frequency of the sound wave conduct through the fluid in the cochlea .
for these reason , the fluid - fill cochlea detect different wave frequency ( pitch ) at different region of the membrane .
when the sound wave in the cochlear fluid contact the basilar membrane , - pron - flex back and forth in a wave - like fashion .
above the basilar membrane be the tectorial membrane .
the site of transduction be in the organ of corti ( spiral organ ) .
- pron - be compose of hair cell hold in place above the basilar membrane like flower project up from soil , with - pron - expose short , hair - like stereocilia contact or embed in the tectorial membrane above - pron - .
the inner hair cell be the primary auditory receptor and exist in a single row , number approximately three  ,  five  zero  zero .
the stereocilia from inner hair cell extend into small dimple on the tectorial membrane 's low surface .
the outer hair cell be arrange in three or four row .
- pron - number approximately one  two  ,  zero  zero  zero , and - pron - function to fine tune incoming sound wave .
the long stereocilia that project from the outer hair cell actually attach to the tectorial membrane .
all of the stereocilia be mechanoreceptor , and when bend by vibration - pron - respond by open a gate ion channel ( refer to figure three  six  .  two ) .
as a result , the hair cell membrane be depolarize , and a signal be transmit to the chochlear nerve .
intensity ( volume ) of sound be determine by how many hair cell at a particular location be stimulate .
the hair cell be arrange on the basilar membrane in an orderly way .
the basilar membrane vibrate in different region , accord to the frequency of the sound wave impinge on - pron - .
likewise , the hair cell that lie above - pron - be most sensitive to a specific frequency of sound wave .
hair cell can respond to a small range of similar frequency , but - pron - require stimulation of great intensity to fire at frequency outside of - pron - optimal range .
the difference in response frequency between adjacent inner hair cell be about zero  .  two percent .
compare that to adjacent piano string , which be about six percent different .
place theory , which be the model for how biologist think pitch detection work in the human ear , state that high frequency sound selectively vibrate the basilar membrane of the inner ear near the entrance port ( the oval window ) .
low frequency travel farther along the membrane before cause appreciable excitation of the membrane .
the basic pitch - determine mechanism be base on the location along the membrane where the hair cell be stimulate .
the place theory be the first step toward an understanding of pitch perception .
consider the extreme pitch sensitivity of the human ear , - pron - be think that there must be some auditory " sharpen " mechanism to enhance the pitch resolution .
when sound wave produce fluid wave inside the cochlea , the basilar membrane flex , bend the stereocilia that attach to the tectorial membrane .
- pron - bend result in action potential in the hair cell , and auditory information travel along the neural ending of the bipolar neuron of the hair cell ( collectively , the auditory nerve ) to the brain .
when the hair bend , - pron - release an excitatory neurotransmitter at a synapse with a sensory neuron , which then conduct action potential to the central nervous system .
the cochlear branch of the vestibulocochlear cranial nerve send information on hearing .
the auditory system be very refined , and there be some modulation or " sharpen " build in .
the brain can send signal back to the cochlea , result in a change of length in the outer hair cell , sharpen or dampen the hair cells' response to certain frequency .
high processing
the inner hair cell be most important for convey auditory information to the brain .
about nine  zero percent of the afferent neuron carry information from inner hair cell , with each hair cell synaps with one  zero or so neuron .
outer hair cell connect to only one  zero percent of the afferent neuron , and each afferent neuron innervate many hair cell .
the afferent , bipolar neuron that convey auditory information travel from the cochlea to the medulla , through the pon and midbrain in the brainstem , finally reach the primary auditory cortex in the temporal lobe .
vestibular information
the stimulus associate with the vestibular system be linear acceleration ( gravity ) and angular acceleration and deceleration .
gravity , acceleration , and deceleration be detect by evaluate the inertia on receptive cell in the vestibular system .
gravity be detect through head position .
angular acceleration and deceleration be express through turn or tilting of the head .
the vestibular system have some similarity with the auditory system .
- pron - utilize hair cell just like the auditory system , but - pron - excite - pron - in different way .
there be five vestibular receptor organ in the inner ear  the utricle , the saccule , and three semicircular canal .
together , - pron - make up what ' know as the vestibular labyrinth that be show in figure three  six  .  one  five .
the utricle and saccule respond to acceleration in a straight line , such as gravity .
the roughly three  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero hair cell in the utricle and one  six  ,  zero  zero  zero hair cell in the saccule lie below a gelatinous layer , with - pron - stereocilia project into the gelatin .
embed in this gelatin be calcium carbonate crystal — like tiny rock .
when the head be tilt , the crystal continue to be pull straight down by gravity , but the new angle of the head cause the gelatin to shift , thereby bend the stereocilia .
the bending of the stereocilia stimulate the neuron , and - pron - signal to the brain that the head be tilt , allow the maintenance of balance .
- pron - be the vestibular branch of the vestibulocochlear cranial nerve that deal with balance .
the structure of the vestibular labyrinth be show .
( credit  modification of work by nih )
the fluid - fill semicircular canal be tubular loop set at oblique angle .
- pron - be arrange in three spatial plane .
the base of each canal have a swelling that contain a cluster of hair cell .
the hair project into a gelatinous cap call the cupula and monitor angular acceleration and deceleration from rotation .
- pron - would be stimulate by drive - pron - car around a corner , turn - pron - head , or fall forward .
one canal lie horizontally , while the other two lie at about four  five degree angle to the horizontal axis , as illustrate in figure three  six  .  one  five .
when the brain process input from all three canal together , - pron - can detect angular acceleration or deceleration in three dimension .
when the head turn , the fluid in the canal shift , thereby bend stereocilia and send signal to the brain .
upon cessation accelerate or decelerate — or just move —
the movement of the fluid within the canal slow or stop .
for example , imagine hold a glass of water .
when move forward , water may splash backwards onto the hand , and when motion have stop , water may splash forward onto the finger .
while in motion , the water settle in the glass and do not splash .
note that the canal be not sensitive to velocity - pron - , but to change in velocity , so move forward at six  zero mph with - pron - eye closed would not give the sensation of movement , but suddenly accelerate or brake would stimulate the receptor .
high processing hair cell from the utricle , saccule , and semicircular canal also communicate through bipolar neuron to the cochlear nucleus in the medulla .
cochlear neuron send descend projection to the spinal cord and ascend projection to the pon , thalamus , and cerebellum .
connection to the cerebellum be important for coordinated movement .
there be also projection to the temporal cortex , which account for feeling of dizziness  projection to autonomic nervous system area in the brainstem , which account for motion sickness  and projection to the primary somatosensory cortex , which monitor subjective measurement of the external world and self - movement .
people with lesion in the vestibular area of the somatosensory cortex see vertical object in the world as be tilt .
finally , the vestibular signal project to certain optic muscle to coordinate eye and head movement .
vision be the ability to detect light pattern from the outside environment and interpret - pron - into image .
animal be bombard with sensory information , and the sheer volume of visual information can be problematic .
fortunately , the visual system of specie have evolve to attend to the most - important stimulus .
the importance of vision to human be further substantiate by the fact that about one - third of the human cerebral cortex be dedicate to analyze and perceive visual information .
light
as with auditory stimulus , light travel in wave .
the compression wave that compose sound must travel in a medium — a gas , a liquid , or a solid .
in contrast , light be compose of electromagnetic wave and need no medium  light can travel in a vacuum ( figure three  six  .  one  six ) .
the behavior of light can be discuss in term of the behavior of wave and also in term of the behavior of the fundamental unit of light — a packet of electromagnetic radiation call a photon .
a glance at the electromagnetic spectrum show that visible light for human be just a small slice of the entire spectrum , which include radiation that - pron - can not see as light because - pron - be below the frequency of visible red light and above the frequency of visible violet light .
certain variable be important when discuss perception of light .
wavelength ( which vary inversely with frequency ) manifest - pron - as hue .
light at the red end of the visible spectrum have long wavelength ( and be low frequency ) , while light at the violet end have short wavelength ( and be high frequency ) .
the wavelength of light be express in nanometer ( nm )  one nanometer be one billionth of a meter .
human perceive light that range between approximately three  eight  zero nm and seven  four  zero nm .
some other animal , though , can detect wavelength outside of the human range .
for example , bee see near - ultraviolet light in order to locate nectar guide on flower , and some non - avian reptile sense infrar light ( heat that prey give off ) .
in the electromagnetic spectrum , visible light lie between three  eight  zero nm and seven  four  zero nm .
( credit  modification of work by nasa )
wave amplitude be perceive as luminous intensity , or brightness .
the standard unit of intensity of light be the candela , which be approximately the luminous intensity of a one common candle .
light wave travel two  nine  nine  ,  seven  nine  two km per second in a vacuum , ( and somewhat slower in various medium such as air and water ) , and those wave arrive at the eye as long ( red ) , medium ( green ) , and short ( blue ) wave .
what be term " white light " be light that be perceive as white by the human eye .
this effect be produce by light that stimulate equally the color receptor in the human eye .
the apparent color of an object be the color ( or color ) that the object reflect .
thus a red object reflect the red wavelength in mixed ( white ) light and absorb all other wavelength of light .
anatomy of the eye
the photoreceptive cell of the eye , where transduction of light to nervous impulse occur , be locate in the retina ( show in figure three  six  .  one  seven ) on the inner surface of the back of the eye .
but light do not impinge on the retina unaltered .
- pron - pass through other layer that process - pron - so that - pron - can be interpret by the retina ( figure three  six  .  one  seven b ) .
the cornea , the front transparent layer of the eye , and the crystalline lens , a transparent convex structure behind the cornea , both refract ( bend ) light to focus the image on the retina .
the iris , which be conspicuous as the colored part of the eye , be a circular muscular ring lie between the lens and cornea that regulate the amount of light enter the eye .
in condition of high ambient light , the iris contract , reduce the size of the pupil at - pron - center .
in condition of low light , the iris relax and the pupil enlarge .
the main function of the lens be to focus light on the retina and fovea centrali .
the lens be dynamic , focus and re - focus light as the eye rest on near and far object in the visual field .
the lens be operate by muscle that stretch - pron - flat or allow - pron - to thicken , change the focal length of light come through - pron - to focus - pron - sharply on the retina .
with age come the loss of the flexibility of the lens , and a form of farsightedness call presbyopia result .
presbyopia occur because the image focus behind the retina .
presbyopia be a deficit similar to a different type of farsightedness call hyperopia cause by an eyeball that be too short .
for both defect , image in the distance be clear but image nearby be blurry .
myopia ( nearsightedness ) occur when an eyeball be elongate and the image focus fall in front of the retina .
in this case , image in the distance be blurry but image nearby be clear .
there be two type of photoreceptor in the retina  rod and cone , name for - pron - general appearance as illustrate in figure three  six  .  one  eight .
rod be strongly photosensitive and be locate in the outer edge of the retina .
- pron - detect dim light and be use primarily for peripheral and nighttime vision .
cone be weakly photosensitive and be locate near the center of the retina .
- pron - respond to bright light , and - pron - primary role be in daytime , color vision .
rod and cone be photoreceptor in the retina .
rod respond in low light and can detect only shade of gray .
cone respond in intense light and be responsible for color vision .
( credit  modification of work by piotr sliwa )
the fovea be the region in the center back of the eye that be responsible for acute vision .
the fovea have a high density of cone .
when - pron - bring - pron - gaze to an object to examine - pron - intently in bright light , the eye orient so that the object 's
image fall on the fovea .
however , when look at a star in the night sky or other object in dim light , the object can be better view by the peripheral vision because - pron - be the rod at the edge of the retina , rather than the cone at the center , that operate better in low light .
in human , cone far outnumber rod in the fovea .
transduction of light
the rod and cone be the site of transduction of light to a neural signal .
both rod and cone contain photopigment .
in vertebrate , the main photopigment , rhodopsin , have two main part figure three  six  .  one  nine ) 
an opsin , which be a membrane protein ( in the form of a cluster of α - helice that span the membrane ) , and retinal — a molecule that absorb light .
when light hit a photoreceptor , - pron - cause a shape change in the retinal , alter - pron - structure from a bent ( cis ) form of the molecule to - pron - linear ( tran ) isomer .
this isomerization of retinal activate the rhodopsin , start a cascade of event that end with the closing of na+ channel in the membrane of the photoreceptor .
thus , unlike most other sensory neuron ( which become depolarize by exposure to a stimulus ) visual receptor become hyperpolarized and thus drive away from threshold ( figure three  six  .  two  zero ) .
rhodopsin , the photoreceptor in vertebrate , have two part  the tran - membrane protein opsin , and retinal .
when light strike retinal , - pron - change shape from ( b ) a cis to a tran form .
the signal be pass to a g - protein call transducin , trigger a series of downstream event .
when light strike rhodopsin , the g - protein transducin be activate , which in turn activate phosphodiesterase .
phosphodiesterase convert cgmp to gmp , thereby close sodium channel .
as a result , the membrane become hyperpolariz .
the hyperpolarized membrane do not release glutamate to the bipolar cell .
trichromatic coding
there be three type of cone ( with different photopsin ) , and - pron - differ in the wavelength to which - pron - be most responsive , as show in figure three  six  .  two  one .
some cone be maximally responsive to short light wave of four  two  zero nm , so - pron - be call s cone ( " s
" for " short " )  other respond maximally to wave of five  three  zero nm ( m cone , for " medium " )  a third group respond maximally to light of long wavelength , at five  six  zero nm ( l , or " long " cone ) .
with only one type of cone , color vision would not be possible , and a two - cone ( dichromatic ) system have limitation .
primate use a three - cone ( trichromatic ) system , result in full color vision .
the color - pron - perceive be a result of the ratio of activity of - pron - three type of cone .
the color of the visual spectrum , run from long - wavelength light to short , be red ( seven  zero  zero nm ) , orange ( six  zero  zero nm ) , yellow ( five  six  five nm ) , green ( four  nine  seven nm ) , blue ( four  seven  zero nm ) , indigo ( four  five  zero nm ) , and violet ( four  two  five nm ) .
human have very sensitive perception of color and can distinguish about five  zero  zero level of brightness , two  zero  zero different hue , and two  zero step of saturation , or about two million distinct color . 
human rod cell and the different type of cone cell each have an optimal wavelength .
however , there be considerable overlap in the wavelength of light detect .
retinal process visual signal leave the cone and rod , travel to the bipolar cell , and then to ganglion cell .
a large degree of processing of visual information occur in the retina - pron - , before visual information be send to the brain .
photoreceptor in the retina continuously undergo tonic activity .
that is , - pron - be always slightly active even when not stimulate by light .
in neuron that exhibit tonic activity , the absence of stimulus maintain a firing rate at a baseline  while some stimulus increase firing rate from the baseline , and other stimulus decrease firing rate .
in the absence of light , the bipolar neuron that connect rod and cone to ganglion cell be continuously and actively inhibit by the rod and cone .
exposure of the retina to light hyperpolariz the rod and cone and remove - pron - inhibition of bipolar cell .
the now active bipolar cell in turn stimulate the ganglion cell , which send action potential along - pron - axon ( which leave the eye as the optic nerve ) .
thus , the visual system rely on change in retinal activity , rather than the absence or presence of activity , to encode visual signal for the brain .
sometimes horizontal cell carry signal from one rod or cone to other photoreceptor and to several bipolar cell .
when a rod or cone stimulate a horizontal cell , the horizontal cell inhibit more distant photoreceptor and bipolar cell , create lateral inhibition .
this inhibition sharpen edge and enhance contrast in the image by make region receive light appear light and dark surrounding appear dark .
amacrine cell can distribute information from one bipolar cell to many ganglion cell .
- pron - can demonstrate this use an easy demonstration to " trick " - pron - retina and brain about the color - pron - be observe in - pron - visual field .
look fixedly at figure three  six  .  two  two for about four  five second .
then quickly shift - pron - gaze to a sheet of blank white paper or a white wall .
- pron - should see an afterimage of the norwegian flag in - pron - correct color .
at this point , close - pron - eye for a moment , then reopen - pron - , look again at the white paper or wall  the afterimage of the flag should continue to appear as red , white , and blue .
what cause this ?
accord to an explanation call opponent process theory , as - pron - gaze fixedly at the green , black , and yellow flag , - pron - retinal ganglion cell that respond positively to green , black , and yellow increase - pron - firing dramatically .
when - pron - shift - pron - gaze to the neutral white ground , these ganglion cell abruptly decrease - pron - activity and the brain interpret this abrupt downshift as if the ganglion cell be respond now to - pron - " opponent " color  red , white , and blue , respectively , in the visual field .
once the ganglion cell return to - pron - baseline activity state , the false perception of color will disappear .
view this flag to understand how retinal processing work .
stare at the center of the flag ( indicate by the white dot ) for four  five second , and then quickly look at a white background , notice how color appear .
high processing
the myelinat axon of ganglion cell make up the optic nerve .
within the nerve , different axon carry different quality of the visual signal .
some axon constitute the magnocellular ( big cell ) pathway , which carry information about form , movement , depth , and difference in brightness .
other axon constitute the parvocellular ( small cell ) pathway , which carry information on color and fine detail .
some visual information project directly back into the brain , while other information cross to the opposite side of the brain .
this crossing of optical pathway produce the distinctive optic chiasma ( greek , for " cross " ) find at the base of the brain and allow - pron - to coordinate information from both eye .
once in the brain , visual information be process in several place , and - pron - route reflect the complexity and importance of visual information to human and other animal .
one route take the signal to the thalamus , which serve as the rout station for all incoming sensory impulse except olfaction .
in the thalamus , the magnocellular and parvocellular distinction remain intact , and there be different layer of the thalamus dedicate to each .
when visual signal leave the thalamus , - pron - travel to the primary visual cortex at the rear of the brain .
from the visual cortex , the visual signal travel in two direction .
one stream that project to the parietal lobe , in the side of the brain , carry magnocellular ( " where " ) information .
a second stream project to the temporal lobe and carry both magnocellular ( " where " ) and parvocellular ( " what " ) information .
another important visual route be a pathway from the retina to the superior colliculus in the midbrain , where eye movement be coordinate and integrate with auditory information .
finally , there be the pathway from the retina to the suprachiasmatic nucleus ( scn ) of the hypothalamus .
the scn be a cluster of cell that be consider to be the body 's internal clock , which control - pron - circadian ( day - long ) cycle .
the scn send information to the pineal gland , which be important in sleep / wake pattern and annual cycle .
introduction an animal 's endocrine system control body process through the production , secretion , and regulation of hormone , which serve as chemical " messenger " function in cellular and organ activity and , ultimately , maintain the body 's homeostasis .
the endocrine system play a role in growth , metabolism , and sexual development .
in human , common endocrine system disease include thyroid disease and diabetes mellitus .
in organism that undergo metamorphosis , the process be control by the endocrine system .
the transformation from tadpole to frog , for example , be complex and nuanc to adapt to specific environment and ecological circumstance .
maintain homeostasis within the body require the coordination of many different system and organ .
communication between neighboring cell , and between cell and tissue in distant part of the body , occur through the release of chemical call hormone .
hormone be release into body fluid ( usually blood ) that carry these chemical to - pron - target cell .
at the target cell , which be cell that have a receptor for a signal or ligand from a signal cell , the hormone elicit a response .
the cell , tissue , and organ that secrete hormone make up the endocrine system .
example of gland of the endocrine system include the adrenal gland , which produce hormone such as epinephrine and norepinephrine that regulate response to stress , and the thyroid gland , which produce thyroid hormone that regulate metabolic rate .
although there be many different hormone in the human body , - pron - can be divide into three class base on - pron - chemical structure  lipid - derive , amino acid - derive , and peptide ( peptide and protein ) hormone .
one of the key distinguishing feature of lipid - derive hormone be that - pron - can diffuse across plasma membrane whereas the amino acid - derive and peptide hormone can not .
lipid - derive hormones ( or lipid - soluble hormones )
most lipid hormone be derive from cholesterol and thus be structurally similar to - pron - , as illustrate in figure three  seven  .  two .
the primary class of lipid hormone in human be the steroid hormone .
chemically , these hormone be usually ketone or alcohol  - pron - chemical name will end in " - ol " for alcohol or " - one " for ketone .
example of steroid hormone include estradiol , which be an estrogen , or female sex hormone , and testosterone , which be an androgen , or male sex hormone .
these two hormone be release by the female and male reproductive organ , respectively .
other steroid hormone include aldosterone and cortisol , which be release by the adrenal gland along with some other type of androgen .
steroid hormone be insoluble in water , and - pron - be transport by transport protein in blood .
as a result , - pron - remain in circulation longer than peptide hormone .
for example , cortisol have a half - life of six  zero to nine  zero minute , while epinephrine , an amino acid derive - hormone , have a half - life of approximately one minute .
the structure show here represent ( a ) cholesterol , plus the steroid hormone ( b ) testosterone and ( c ) estradiol .
amino acid - derived hormones
the amino acid - derive hormone be relatively small molecule that be derive from the amino acid tyrosine and tryptophan , show in figure three  seven  .  three .
if a hormone be amino acid - derive , - pron - chemical name will end in " - ine " .
example of amino acid - derive hormone include epinephrine and norepinephrine , which be synthesize in the medulla of the adrenal gland , and thyroxine , which be produce by the thyroid gland .
the pineal gland in the brain make and secrete melatonin which regulate sleep cycle .
the hormone epinephrine , which trigger the fight - or - flight response , be derive from the amino acid tyrosine .
( b )
the hormone melatonin , which regulate circadian rhythm , be derive from the amino acid tryptophan .
peptide hormones
the structure of peptide hormone be that of a polypeptide chain ( chain of amino acid ) .
the peptide hormone include molecule that be short polypeptide chain , such as antidiuretic hormone and oxytocin produce in the brain and release into the blood in the posterior pituitary gland .
this class also include small protein , like growth hormone produce by the pituitary , and large glycoprotein such as follicle - stimulate hormone produce by the pituitary .
figure three  seven  .  four illustrate these peptide hormone .
secreted peptide like insulin be store within vesicle in the cell that synthesize - pron - .
- pron - be then release in response to stimulus such as high blood glucose level in the case of insulin .
amino acid - derive and polypeptide hormone be water - soluble and insoluble in lipid .
these hormone can not pass through plasma membrane of cell  therefore , - pron - receptor be find on the surface of the target cell .
the structure of peptide hormone ( a ) oxytocin , ( b ) growth hormone , and ( c ) follicle - stimulate hormone be show .
these peptide hormone be much large than those derive from cholesterol or amino acid .
hormone mediate change in target cell by bind to specific hormone receptor .
in this way , even though hormone circulate throughout the body and come into contact with many different cell type , - pron - only affect cell that possess the necessary receptor .
receptor for a specific hormone may be find on many different cell or may be limit to a small number of specialized cell .
for example , thyroid hormone act on many different tissue type , stimulate metabolic activity throughout the body .
cell can have many receptor for the same hormone but often also possess receptor for different type of hormone .
the number of receptor that respond to a hormone determine the cell 's sensitivity to that hormone , and the result cellular response .
additionally , the number of receptor that respond to a hormone can change over time , result in increase or decrease cell sensitivity .
in up - regulation , the number of receptor increase in response to rise hormone level , make the cell more sensitive to the hormone and allow for more cellular activity .
when the number of receptor decrease in response to rise hormone level , call down - regulation , cellular activity be reduce .
receptor bind alter cellular activity and result in an increase or decrease in normal body process .
depend on the location of the protein receptor on the target cell and the chemical structure of the hormone , hormone can mediate change directly by bind to intracellular hormone receptor and modulate gene transcription , or indirectly by bind to cell surface receptor and stimulating signaling pathway .
intracellular hormone receptors lipid - derive ( soluble ) hormone such as steroid hormone diffuse across the membrane of the endocrine cell .
once outside the cell , - pron - bind to transport protein that keep - pron - soluble in the bloodstream .
at the target cell , the hormone be release from the carrier protein and diffuse across the lipid bilayer of the plasma membrane of cell .
the steroid hormone pass through the plasma membrane of a target cell and adhere to intracellular receptor reside in the cytoplasm or in the nucleus .
the cell signaling pathway induce by the steroid hormone regulate specific gene on the cell ' s dna .
the hormone and receptor complex act as transcription regulator by increase or decrease the synthesis of mrna molecule of specific gene .
this , in turn , determine the amount of correspond protein that be synthesize by alter gene expression .
this protein can be use either to change the structure of the cell or to produce enzyme that catalyze chemical reaction .
in this way , the steroid hormone regulate specific cell process as illustrate in figure three  seven  .  five . 
other lipid - soluble hormone that be not steroid hormone , such as vitamin d and thyroxine , have receptor locate in the nucleus .
the hormone diffuse across both the plasma membrane and the nuclear envelope , then bind to receptor in the nucleus .
the hormone - receptor complex stimulate transcription of specific gene .
plasma membrane hormone receptors amino acid derive hormone and polypeptide hormone be not lipid - derive ( lipid - soluble ) and therefore can not diffuse through the plasma membrane of cell .
lipid insoluble hormone bind to receptor on the outer surface of the plasma membrane , via plasma membrane hormone receptor .
unlike steroid hormone , lipid insoluble hormone do not directly affect the target cell because - pron - can not enter the cell and act directly on dna .
bind of these hormone to a cell surface receptor result in activation of a signal pathway  this trigger intracellular activity and carry out the specific effect associate with the hormone .
in this way , nothing pass through the cell membrane  the hormone that bind at the surface remain at the surface of the cell while the intracellular product remain inside the cell .
the hormone that initiate the signal pathway be call a first messenger , which activate a second messenger in the cytoplasm , as illustrate in figure three  seven  .  six .
the amino acid - derive hormone epinephrine and norepinephrine bind to beta - adrenergic receptor on the plasma membrane of cell .
hormone bind to receptor activate a g - protein , which in turn activate adenylyl cyclase , convert atp to camp .
camp be a second messenger that mediate a cell - specific response .
an enzyme call phosphodiesterase break down camp , terminate the signal .
one very important second messenger be cyclic amp ( camp ) .
when a hormone bind to - pron - membrane receptor , a g - protein that be associate with the receptor be activate  g - protein be protein separate from receptor that be find in the cell membrane .
when a hormone be not bind to the receptor , the g - protein be inactive and be bind to guanosine diphosphate , or gdp .
when a hormone bind to the receptor , the g - protein be activate by bind guanosine triphosphate , or gtp , in place of gdp .
after bind , gtp be hydrolyse by the g - protein into gdp and become inactive .
the activate g - protein in turn activate a membrane - bind enzyme call adenylyl cyclase .
adenylyl cyclase catalyze the conversion of atp to camp .
camp , in turn , activate a group of protein call protein kinase , which transfer a phosphate group from atp to a substrate molecule in a process call phosphorylation .
the phosphorylation of a substrate molecule change - pron - structural orientation , thereby activate - pron - .
these activate molecule can then mediate change in cellular process .
the effect of a hormone be amplify as the signaling pathway progress .
the binding of a hormone at a single receptor cause the activation of many g - protein , which activate adenylyl cyclase .
each molecule of adenylyl cyclase then trigger the formation of many molecule of camp .
further amplification occur as protein kinase , once activate by camp , can catalyze many reaction .
in this way , a small amount of hormone can trigger the formation of a large amount of cellular product .
to stop hormone activity , camp be deactivate by the cytoplasmic enzyme phosphodiesterase , or pde .
pde be always present in the cell and break down camp to control hormone activity , prevent overproduction of cellular product .
the specific response of a cell to a lipid insoluble hormone depend on the type of receptor that be present on the cell membrane and the substrate molecule present in the cell cytoplasm .
cellular response to hormone binding of a receptor include alter membrane permeability and metabolic pathway , stimulate synthesis of protein and enzyme , and activate hormone release .
hormone have a wide range of effect and modulate many different body process .
the key regulatory process that will be examine here be those affect the excretory system , the reproductive system , metabolism , blood calcium concentration , growth , and the stress response .
hormonal regulation of the excretory system maintain a proper water balance in the body be important to avoid dehydration or over - hydration ( hyponatremia ) .
the water concentration of the body be monitor by osmoreceptor in the hypothalamus , which detect the concentration of electrolyte in the extracellular fluid .
the concentration of electrolyte in the blood rise when there be water loss cause by excessive perspiration , inadequate water intake , or low blood volume due to blood loss .
an increase in blood electrolyte level result in a neuronal signal be send from the osmoreceptor in hypothalamic nucleus .
the pituitary gland have two component  anterior and posterior .
the anterior pituitary be compose of glandular cell that secrete protein hormone .
the posterior pituitary be an extension of the hypothalamus .
- pron - be compose largely of neuron that be continuous with the hypothalamus .
the hypothalamus produce a polypeptide hormone know as antidiuretic hormone ( adh ) , which be transport to and release from the posterior pituitary gland .
the principal action of adh be to regulate the amount of water excrete by the kidney .
as adh ( which be also know as vasopressin ) cause direct water reabsorption from the kidney tubule , salt and waste be concentrate in what will eventually be excrete as urine .
the hypothalamus control the mechanism of adh secretion , either by regulate blood volume or the concentration of water in the blood .
dehydration or physiological stress can because an increase of osmolarity above three  zero  zero mosm / l , which in turn , raise adh secretion and water will be retain , cause an increase in blood pressure .
adh travel in the bloodstream to the kidney .
once at the kidney , adh change the kidney to become more permeable to water by temporarily insert water channel , aquaporin , into the kidney tubule .
water move out of the kidney tubule through the aquaporin , reduce urine volume .
the water be reabsorb into the capillary lower blood osmolarity back toward normal .
as blood osmolarity decrease , a negative feedback mechanism reduce osmoreceptor activity in the hypothalamus , and adh secretion be reduce .
adh release can be reduce by certain substance , include alcohol , which can because increase urine production and dehydration .
chronic underproduction of adh or a mutation in the adh receptor result in diabetes insipidu .
if the posterior pituitary do not release enough adh , water can not be retain by the kidney and be lose as urine .
this cause increase thirst , but water take in be lose again and must be continually consume .
if the condition be not severe , dehydration may not occur , but severe case can lead to electrolyte imbalance due to dehydration .
another hormone responsible for maintain electrolyte concentration in extracellular fluid be aldosterone , a steroid hormone that be produce by the adrenal cortex .
in contrast to adh , which promote the reabsorption of water to maintain proper water balance , aldosterone maintain proper water balance by enhance na+ reabsorption and k+ secretion from extracellular fluid of the cell in kidney tubule .
because - pron - be produce in the cortex of the adrenal gland and affect the concentration of mineral na+ and k+ , aldosterone be refer to as a mineralocorticoid , a corticosteroid that affect ion and water balance .
aldosterone release be stimulate by a decrease in blood sodium level , blood volume , or blood pressure , or an increase in blood potassium level .
- pron - also prevent the loss of na+ from sweat , saliva , and gastric juice .
the reabsorption of na+ also result in the osmotic reabsorption of water , which alter blood volume and blood pressure .
aldosterone production can be stimulate by low blood pressure , which trigger a sequence of chemical release , as illustrate in figure three  seven  .  seven .
when blood pressure drop , the renin - angiotensin - aldosterone system ( raas ) be activate .
cell in the juxtaglomerular apparatus , which regulate the function of the nephron of the kidney , detect this and release renin .
renin , an enzyme , circulate in the blood and react with a plasma protein produce by the liver call angiotensinogen .
when angiotensinogen be cleave by renin , - pron - produce angiotensin
i , which be then convert into angiotensin ii in the lung .
angiotensin ii function as a hormone and then cause the release of the hormone aldosterone by the adrenal cortex , result in increase na+ reabsorption , water retention , and an increase in blood pressure .
angiotensin ii in addition to be a potent vasoconstrictor also cause an increase in adh and increase thirst , both of which help to raise blood pressure .
adh and aldosterone increase blood pressure and volume .
angiotensin ii stimulate release of these hormone .
angiotensin ii , in turn , be form when renin cleaf angiotensinogen .
( credit  modification of work by mikael häggström )
hormonal regulation of the reproductive system regulation of the reproductive system be a process that require the action of hormone from the pituitary gland , the adrenal cortex , and the gonad .
during puberty in both male and female , the hypothalamus produce gonadotropin - release hormone ( gnrh ) , which stimulate the production and release of follicle - stimulate hormone ( fsh ) and luteiniz hormone ( lh ) from the anterior pituitary gland .
these hormone regulate the gonad ( testis in male and ovary in female ) and therefore be call gonadotropin .
in both male and female , fsh stimulate gamete production and lh stimulate production of hormone by the gonad .
an increase in gonad hormone level inhibit gnrh production through a negative feedback loop .
regulation of the male reproductive system
in male , fsh stimulate the maturation of sperm cell .
fsh production be inhibit by the hormone inhibin , which be release by the testis .
lh stimulate production of the sex hormone ( androgen ) by the interstitial cell of the testis and therefore be also call interstitial cell - stimulate hormone .
the most widely know androgen in male be testosterone .
testosterone promote the production of sperm and masculine characteristic .
the adrenal cortex also produce small amount of testosterone precursor , although the role of this additional hormone production be not fully understand .
regulation of the female reproductive system
in female , fsh stimulate development of egg cell , call ova , which develop in structure call follicle .
follicle cell produce the hormone inhibin , which inhibit fsh production .
lh also play a role in the development of ova , induction of ovulation , and stimulation of estradiol and progesterone production by the ovary , as illustrate in figure three  seven  .  nine .
estradiol and progesterone be steroid hormone that prepare the body for pregnancy .
estradiol produce secondary sex characteristic in female , while both estradiol and progesterone regulate the menstrual cycle .
hormonal regulation of the female reproductive system involve hormone from the hypothalamus , pituitary , and ovary .
in addition to produce fsh and lh , the anterior portion of the pituitary gland also produce the hormone prolactin ( prl ) in female .
prolactin stimulate the production of milk by the mammary gland follow childbirth .
prolactin level be regulate by the hypothalamic hormone prolactin - release hormone ( prh ) and prolactin - inhibit hormone ( pih ) , which be now know to be dopamine .
prh stimulate the release of prolactin and pih inhibit - pron - .
the posterior pituitary release the hormone oxytocin , which stimulate uterine contraction during childbirth .
the uterine smooth muscle be not very sensitive to oxytocin until late in pregnancy when the number of oxytocin receptor in the uterus peak .
stretch of tissue in the uterus and cervix stimulate oxytocin release during childbirth .
contraction increase in intensity as blood level of oxytocin rise via a positive feedback mechanism until the birth be complete .
oxytocin also stimulate the contraction of myoepithelial cell around the milk - produce mammary gland .
as these cell contract , milk be force from the secretory alveoli into milk duct and be eject from the breast in milk ejection ( " let - down " ) reflex .
oxytocin release be stimulate by the suckling of an infant , which trigger the synthesis of oxytocin in the hypothalamus and - pron - release into circulation at the posterior pituitary .
hormonal regulation of metabolism blood glucose level vary widely over the course of a day as period of food consumption alternate with period of fasting .
insulin and glucagon be the two hormone primarily responsible for maintain homeostasis of blood glucose level .
additional regulation be mediate by the thyroid hormone .
regulation of blood glucose levels by insulin and glucagon cells of the body require nutrient in order to function , and these nutrient be obtain through feeding .
in order to manage nutrient intake , store excess intake and utilize reserve when necessary , the body use hormone to moderate energy store .
insulin be produce by the beta cell of the pancreas , which be stimulate to release insulin as blood glucose level rise ( for example , after a meal be consume ) .
insulin lower blood glucose level by enhance the rate of glucose uptake and utilization by target cell , which use glucose for atp production .
- pron - also stimulate the liver to convert glucose to glycogen , which be then store by cell for later use .
insulin also increase glucose transport into certain cell , such as muscle cell and the liver .
this result from an insulin - mediate increase in the number of glucose transporter protein in cell membrane , which remove glucose from circulation by facilitate diffusion .
as insulin bind to - pron - target cell via insulin receptor and signal transduction , - pron - trigger the cell to incorporate glucose transport protein into - pron - membrane .
this allow glucose to enter the cell , where - pron - can be use as an energy source .
however , this do not occur in all cell  some cell , include those in the kidney and brain , can access glucose without the use of insulin .
insulin also stimulate the conversion of glucose to fat in adipocyte and the synthesis of protein .
these action mediate by insulin because blood glucose concentration to fall , call a hypoglycemic " low sugar " effect , which inhibit further insulin release from beta cell through a negative feedback loop .
impaired insulin function can lead to a condition call diabetes mellitus , the main symptom of which be illustrate in figure three  seven  .  one  zero .
this can be cause by low level of insulin production by the beta cell of the pancrea , or by reduce sensitivity of tissue cell to insulin .
this prevent glucose from be absorb by cell , cause high level of blood glucose , or hyperglycemia ( high sugar ) .
high blood glucose level make - pron - difficult for the kidney to recover all the glucose from nascent urine , result in glucose be lose in urine .
high glucose level also result in less water be reabsorb by the kidney , cause high amount of urine to be produce  this may result in dehydration .
over time , high blood glucose level can because nerve damage to the eye and peripheral body tissue , as well as damage to the kidney and cardiovascular system .
oversecretion of insulin can because hypoglycemia , low blood glucose level .
this cause insufficient glucose availability to cell , often lead to muscle weakness , and can sometimes because unconsciousness or death if leave untreated .
the main symptom of diabete be show .
( credit  modification of work by mikael häggström )
when blood glucose level decline below normal level , for example between meal or when glucose be utilize rapidly during exercise , the hormone glucagon be release from the alpha cell of the pancreas .
glucagon raise blood glucose level , elicit what be call a hyperglycemic effect , by stimulate the breakdown of glycogen to glucose in skeletal muscle cell and liver cell in a process call glycogenolysis .
glucose can then be utilize as energy by muscle cell and release into circulation by the liver cell .
glucagon also stimulate absorption of amino acid from the blood by the liver , which then convert - pron - to glucose .
this process of glucose synthesis be call gluconeogenesis .
glucagon also stimulate adipose cell to release fatty acid into the blood .
these action mediate by glucagon result in an increase in blood glucose level to normal homeostatic level .
rise blood glucose level inhibit further glucagon release by the pancreas via a negative feedback mechanism .
in this way , insulin and glucagon work together to maintain homeostatic glucose level , as show in figure three  seven  .  one  one .
regulation of blood glucose levels by thyroid hormones
the basal metabolic rate , which be the amount of calorie require by the body at rest , be determine by two hormone produce by the thyroid gland  thyroxine , also know as tetraiodothyronine or t four , and triiodothyronine , also know as t three .
these hormone affect nearly every cell in the body except for the adult brain , uterus , testes , blood cell , and spleen .
- pron - be transport across the plasma membrane of target cell and bind to receptor on the mitochondria result in increase atp production .
in the nucleus , t three and t four activate gene involve in energy production and glucose oxidation .
this result in increase rate of metabolism and body heat production , which be know as the hormone 's calorigenic effect .
t three and t four release from the thyroid gland be stimulate by thyroid - stimulate hormone ( tsh ) , which be produce by the anterior pituitary .
tsh bind at the receptor of the follicle of the thyroid trigger the production of t three and t four from a glycoprotein call thyroglobulin .
thyroglobulin be present in the follicle of the thyroid , and be convert into thyroid hormone with the addition of iodine .
iodine be form from iodide ion that be actively transport into the thyroid follicle from the bloodstream .
a peroxidase enzyme then attach the iodine to the tyrosine amino acid find in thyroglobulin .
t three have three iodine ion attach , while t four have four iodine ion attach .
t three and t four be then release into the bloodstream , with t four be release in much great amount than t three .
as t three be more active than t four and be responsible for most of the effect of thyroid hormone , tissue of the body convert t four to t three by the removal of an iodine ion .
most of the release t three and t four become attach to transport protein in the bloodstream and be unable to cross the plasma membrane of cell .
these protein - bind molecule be only release when blood level of the unattached hormone begin to decline .
in this way , a week 's worth of reserve hormone be maintain in the blood .
increase t three and t four level in the blood inhibit the release of tsh , which result in low t three and t four release from the thyroid .
the follicular cell of the thyroid require iodide ( anion of iodine ) in order to synthesize t three and t four .
iodide obtain from the diet be actively transport into follicle cell result in a concentration that be approximately three  zero time high than in blood .
the typical diet in north america provide more iodine than require due to the addition of iodide to table salt .
inadequate iodine intake , which occur in many develop country , result in an inability to synthesize t three and t four hormone .
the thyroid gland enlarge in a condition call goiter , which be cause by overproduction of tsh without the formation of thyroid hormone .
thyroglobulin be contain in a fluid call colloid , and tsh stimulation result in high level of colloid accumulation in the thyroid .
in the absence of iodine , this be not convert to thyroid hormone , and colloid begin to accumulate more and more in the thyroid gland , lead to goiter .
disorder can arise from both the underproduction and overproduction of thyroid hormone .
hypothyroidism , underproduction of the thyroid hormone , can because a low metabolic rate lead to weight gain , sensitivity to cold , and reduce mental activity , among other symptom .
in child , hypothyroidism can because cretinism , which can lead to mental retardation and growth defect .
hyperthyroidism , the overproduction of thyroid hormone , can lead to an increase metabolic rate and - pron - effect  weight loss , excess heat production , sweating , and an increase heart rate .
graves' disease be one example of a hyperthyroid condition .
hormonal control of blood calcium levels regulation of blood calcium concentration be important for generation of muscle contraction and nerve impulse , which be electrically stimulate .
if calcium level get too high , membrane permeability to sodium decrease and membrane become less responsive .
if calcium level get too low , membrane permeability to sodium increase and convulsion or muscle spasm can result .
blood calcium level be regulate by parathyroid hormone ( pth ) , which be produce by the parathyroid gland , as illustrate in figure three  seven  .  one  two .
pth be release in response to low blood ca two + level .
pth increase ca two + level by target the skeleton , the kidney , and the intestine .
in the skeleton , pth stimulate osteoclast , which cause bone to be reabsorb , release ca two + from bone into the blood .
pth also inhibit osteoblast , reduce ca two + deposition in bone .
in the intestine , pth increase dietary ca two + absorption , and in the kidney , pth stimulate reabsorption of the ca two + .
while pth act directly on the kidney to increase ca two + reabsorption , - pron - effect on the intestine be indirect .
pth trigger the formation of calcitriol , an active form of vitamin d , which act on the intestine to increase absorption of dietary calcium .
pth release be inhibit by rise blood calcium level .
parathyroid hormone ( pth ) be release in response to low blood calcium level .
- pron - increase blood calcium level by target the skeleton , the kidney , and the intestine .
( credit  modification of work by mikael häggström ) hyperparathyroidism result from an overproduction of parathyroid hormone .
this result in excessive calcium be remove from bone and introduce into blood circulation , produce structural weakness of the bone , which can lead to deformation and fracture , plus nervous system impairment due to high blood calcium level .
hypoparathyroidism , the underproduction of pth , result in extremely low level of blood calcium , which cause impaired muscle function and may result in tetany ( severe sustained muscle contraction ) .
the hormone calcitonin , which be produce by the parafollicular or c cell of the thyroid , have the opposite effect on blood calcium level as do pth .
calcitonin decrease blood calcium level by inhibit osteoclast , stimulating osteoblast , and stimulate calcium excretion by the kidney .
this result in calcium be add to the bone to promote structural integrity .
calcitonin be most important in child ( when - pron - stimulate bone growth ) , during pregnancy ( when - pron - reduce maternal bone loss ) , and during prolonged starvation ( because - pron - reduce bone mass loss ) .
in healthy nonpregnant , unstarved adult , the role of calcitonin be unclear .
hormonal regulation of growth hormonal regulation be require for the growth and replication of most cell in the body .
growth hormone ( gh ) , produce by the anterior portion of the pituitary gland , accelerate the rate of protein synthesis , particularly in skeletal muscle and bone .
growth hormone have direct and indirect mechanism of action .
the first direct action of gh be stimulation of triglyceride breakdown ( lipolysis ) and release into the blood by adipocyte .
this result in a switch by most tissue from utilize glucose as an energy source to utilize fatty acid .
this process be call a glucose - spar effect .
in another direct mechanism , gh stimulate glycogen breakdown in the liver  the glycogen be then release into the blood as glucose .
blood glucose level increase as most tissue be utilize fatty acid instead of glucose for - pron - energy need .
the gh mediate increase in blood glucose level be call a diabetogenic effect because - pron - be similar to the high blood glucose level see in diabetes mellitus .
the indirect mechanism of gh action be mediate by insulin - like growth factor ( igfs ) or somatomedin , which be a family of growth - promote protein produce by the liver , which stimulate tissue growth .
igf stimulate the uptake of amino acid from the blood , allow the formation of new protein , particularly in skeletal muscle cell , cartilage cell , and other target cell , as show in figure three  seven  .  one  three .
this be especially important after a meal , when glucose and amino acid concentration level be high in the blood .
gh level be regulate by two hormone produce by the hypothalamus .
gh release be stimulate by growth hormone - release hormone ( ghrh ) and be inhibit by growth hormone - inhibit hormone ( ghih ) , also call somatostatin .
growth hormone directly accelerate the rate of protein synthesis in skeletal muscle and bone .
insulin - like growth factor one ( igf -  one ) be activate by growth hormone and also allow formation of new protein in muscle cell and bone .
( credit  modification of work by mikael häggström )
a balanced production of growth hormone be critical for proper development .
underproduction of gh in adult do not appear to because any abnormality , but in child - pron - can result in pituitary dwarfism , in which growth be reduce .
pituitary dwarfism be characterize by symmetric body formation .
in some case , individual be under three  zero inch in height .
oversecretion of growth hormone can lead to gigantism in child , cause excessive growth .
in some document case , individual can reach height of over eight foot .
in adult , excessive gh can lead to acromegaly , a condition in which there be enlargement of bone in the face , hand , and foot that be still capable of growth .
hormonal regulation of stress
when a threat or danger be perceive , the body respond by release hormone that will ready - pron - for the " fight - or - flight " response .
the effect of this response be familiar to anyone who have be in a stressful situation  increase heart rate , dry mouth , and hair stand up .
the sympathetic nervous system regulate the stress response via the hypothalamus .
stressful stimulus because the hypothalamus to signal the adrenal medulla ( which mediate short - term stress response ) via nerve impulse , and the adrenal cortex , which mediate long - term stress response , via the hormone adrenocorticotropic hormone ( acth ) , which be produce by the anterior pituitary .
short - term stress response
when present with a stressful situation , the body respond by call for the release of hormone that provide a burst of energy .
the hormone epinephrine ( also know as adrenaline ) and norepinephrine ( also know as noradrenaline ) be release by the adrenal medulla .
how do these hormone provide a burst of energy ?
epinephrine and norepinephrine increase blood glucose level by stimulate the liver and skeletal muscle to break down glycogen and by stimulate glucose release by liver cell .
additionally , these hormone increase oxygen availability to cell by increase the heart rate and dilate the bronchiole .
the hormone also prioritize body function by increase blood supply to essential organ such as the heart , brain , and skeletal muscle , while restrict blood flow to organ not in immediate need , such as the skin , digestive system , and kidney .
epinephrine and norepinephrine be collectively call catecholamine .
long - term stress response long - term stress response differ from short - term stress response .
the body can not sustain the burst of energy mediate by epinephrine and norepinephrine for long time .
instead , other hormone come into play .
in a long - term stress response , the hypothalamus trigger the release of acth from the anterior pituitary gland .
the adrenal cortex be stimulate by acth to release steroid hormone call corticosteroid .
corticosteroid turn on transcription of certain gene in the nucleus of target cell .
- pron - change enzyme concentration in the cytoplasm and affect cellular metabolism .
there be two main corticosteroid  glucocorticoid such as cortisol , and mineralocorticoid such as aldosterone .
these hormone target the breakdown of fat into fatty acid in the adipose tissue .
the fatty acid be release into the bloodstream for other tissue to use for atp production .
the glucocorticoid primarily affect glucose metabolism by stimulate glucose synthesis .
glucocorticoid also have anti - inflammatory property through inhibition of the immune system .
for example , cortisone be use as an anti - inflammatory medication  however , - pron - can not be use long term as - pron - increase susceptibility to disease due to - pron - immune - suppress effect .
mineralocorticoid function to regulate ion and water balance of the body .
the hormone aldosterone stimulate the reabsorption of water and sodium ion in the kidney , which result in increased blood pressure and volume .
hypersecretion of glucocorticoid can because a condition know as cushing 's disease , characterize by a shifting of fat storage area of the body .
this can because the accumulation of adipose tissue in the face and neck , and excessive glucose in the blood .
hyposecretion of the corticosteroid can because addison 's disease , which may result in bronzing of the skin , hypoglycemia , and low electrolyte level in the blood .
hormone production and release be primarily control by negative feedback .
in negative feedback system , a stimulus elicit the release of a substance  once the substance reach a certain level , - pron - send a signal that stop further release of the substance .
in this way , the concentration of hormone in blood be maintain within a narrow range .
for example , the anterior pituitary signal the thyroid to release thyroid hormone .
increase level of these hormone in the blood then give feedback to the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary to inhibit further signal to the thyroid gland , as illustrate in figure three  seven  .  one  four .
there be three mechanism by which endocrine gland be stimulate to synthesize and release hormone  humoral stimulus , hormonal stimulus , and neural stimulus .
humoral stimuli
the term " humoral " be derive from the term " humor , " which refer to bodily fluid such as blood .
a humoral stimulus refer to the control of hormone release in response to change in extracellular fluid such as blood or the ion concentration in the blood .
for example , a rise in blood glucose level trigger the pancreatic release of insulin .
insulin cause blood glucose level to drop , which signal the pancrea to stop produce insulin in a negative feedback loop .
hormonal stimuli hormonal stimulus refer to the release of a hormone in response to another hormone .
a number of endocrine gland release hormone when stimulate by hormone release by other endocrine gland .
for example , the hypothalamus produce hormone that stimulate the anterior portion of the pituitary gland .
the anterior pituitary in turn release hormone that regulate hormone production by other endocrine gland .
the anterior pituitary release the thyroid - stimulate hormone , which then stimulate the thyroid gland to produce the hormone t three and t four .
as blood concentration of t three and t four rise , - pron - inhibit both the pituitary and the hypothalamus in a negative feedback loop .
neural stimuli
in some case , the nervous system directly stimulate endocrine gland to release hormone , which be refer to as neural stimulus .
recall that in a short - term stress response , the hormone epinephrine and norepinephrine be important for provide the burst of energy require for the body to respond .
here , neuronal signaling from the sympathetic nervous system directly stimulate the adrenal medulla to release the hormone epinephrine and norepinephrine in response to stress .
both the endocrine and nervous system use chemical signal to communicate and regulate the body ' s physiology .
the endocrine system release hormone that act on target cell to regulate development , growth , energy metabolism , reproduction , and many behavior .
the nervous system release neurotransmitter or neurohormone that regulate neuron , muscle cell , and endocrine cell .
because the neuron can regulate the release of hormone , the nervous and endocrine system work in a coordinated manner to regulate the body ' s physiology .
hypothalamic - pituitary axis
the hypothalamus in vertebrate integrate the endocrine and nervous system .
the hypothalamus be an endocrine organ locate in the diencephalon of the brain .
- pron - receive input from the body and other brain area and initiate endocrine response to environmental change .
the hypothalamus act as an endocrine organ , synthesize hormone and transport - pron - along axon to the posterior pituitary gland .
- pron - synthesize and secrete regulatory hormone that control the endocrine cell in the anterior pituitary gland .
the hypothalamus contain autonomic center that control endocrine cell in the adrenal medulla via neuronal control .
the pituitary gland , sometimes call the hypophysis or " master gland " be locate at the base of the brain in the sella turcica , a groove of the sphenoid bone of the skull , illustrate in figure three  seven  .  one  five .
- pron - be attach to the hypothalamus via a stalk call the pituitary stalk ( or infundibulum ) .
the anterior portion of the pituitary gland be regulate by release or release - inhibit hormone produce by the hypothalamus , and the posterior pituitary receive signal via neurosecretory cell to release hormone produce by the hypothalamus .
the pituitary have two distinct region — the anterior pituitary and the posterior pituitary — which between - pron - secrete nine different peptide or protein hormone .
the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland contain axon of the hypothalamic neuron .
the pituitary gland be locate at ( a ) the base of the brain and ( b ) connect to the hypothalamus by the pituitary stalk .
( credit a  modification of work by nci  credit b  modification of work by gray 's
anatomy )
anterior
pituitary
the anterior pituitary gland , or adenohypophysis , be surround by a capillary network that extend from the hypothalamus , down along the infundibulum , and to the anterior pituitary .
this capillary network be a part of the hypophyseal portal system that carry substance from the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary and hormone from the anterior pituitary into the circulatory system .
a portal system carry blood from one capillary network to another  therefore , the hypophyseal portal system allow hormone produce by the hypothalamus to be carry directly to the anterior pituitary without first enter the circulatory system .
the anterior pituitary produce seven hormone  growth hormone ( gh ) , prolactin ( prl ) , thyroid - stimulate hormone ( tsh ) , melanin - stimulate hormone ( msh ) , adrenocorticotropic hormone ( acth ) , follicle - stimulate hormone ( fsh ) , and luteiniz hormone ( lh ) .
anterior pituitary hormone be sometimes refer to as tropic hormone , because - pron - control the functioning of other organ .
while these hormone be produce by the anterior pituitary , - pron - production be control by regulatory hormone produce by the hypothalamus .
these regulatory hormone can be release hormone or inhibit hormone , cause more or less of the anterior pituitary hormone to be secrete .
these travel from the hypothalamus through the hypophyseal portal system to the anterior pituitary where - pron - exert - pron - effect .
negative feedback then regulate how much of these regulatory hormone be release and how much anterior pituitary hormone be secrete .
posterior pituitary
the posterior pituitary be significantly different in structure from the anterior pituitary .
- pron - be a part of the brain , extend down from the hypothalamus , and contain mostly nerve fiber and neuroglial cell , which support axon that extend from the hypothalamus to the posterior pituitary .
the posterior pituitary and the infundibulum together be refer to as the neurohypophysis .
the hormone antidiuretic hormone ( adh ) , also know as vasopressin , and oxytocin be produce by neuron in the hypothalamus and transport within these axon along the infundibulum to the posterior pituitary .
- pron - be release into the circulatory system via neural signal from the hypothalamus .
these hormone be consider to be posterior pituitary hormone , even though - pron - be produce by the hypothalamus , because that be where - pron - be release into the circulatory system .
the posterior pituitary - pron - do not produce hormone , but instead store hormone produce by the hypothalamus and release - pron - into the blood stream .
thyroid gland
the thyroid gland be locate in the neck , just below the larynx and in front of the trachea , as show in figure three  seven  .  one  six .
- pron - be a butterfly - shape gland with two lobe that be connect by the isthmus .
- pron - have a dark red color due to - pron - extensive vascular system .
when the thyroid swell due to dysfunction , - pron - can be feel under the skin of the neck .
this illustration show the location of the thyroid gland .
the thyroid gland be make up of many spherical thyroid follicle , which be line with a simple cuboidal epithelium .
these follicle contain a viscous fluid , call colloid , which store the glycoprotein thyroglobulin , the precursor to the thyroid hormone .
the follicle produce hormone that can be store in the colloid or release into the surround capillary network for transport to the rest of the body via the circulatory system .
thyroid follicle cell synthesize the hormone thyroxine , which be also know as t four because - pron - contain four atom of iodine , and triiodothyronine , also know as t three because - pron - contain three atom of iodine .
follicle cell be stimulate to release store t three and t four by thyroid stimulate hormone ( tsh ) , which be produce by the anterior pituitary .
these thyroid hormone increase the rate of mitochondrial atp production .
a third hormone , calcitonin , be produce by parafollicular cell of the thyroid either release hormone or inhibit hormone .
calcitonin release be not control by tsh , but instead be release when calcium ion concentration in the blood rise .
calcitonin function to help regulate calcium concentration in body fluid .
- pron - act in the bone to inhibit osteoclast activity and in the kidney to stimulate excretion of calcium .
the combination of these two event lower body fluid level of calcium .
parathyroid glands
most people have four parathyroid gland  however , the number can vary from two to six .
these gland be locate on the posterior surface of the thyroid gland , as show in figure three  seven  .  one  seven .
normally , there be a superior gland and an inferior gland associate with each of the thyroid 's two lobe .
each parathyroid gland be cover by connective tissue and contain many secretory cell that be associate with a capillary network .
- pron - parathyroid gland be locate on the posterior of the thyroid gland .
( credit  modification of work by nci )
the parathyroid gland produce parathyroid hormone ( pth ) .
pth increase blood calcium concentration when calcium ion level fall below normal .
pth ( one ) enhance reabsorption of ca two + by the kidney ,
( two ) stimulate osteoclast activity and inhibit osteoblast activity , and ( three ) - pron - stimulate synthesis and secretion of calcitriol by the kidney , which enhance ca two + absorption by the digestive system .
pth be produce by chief cell of the parathyroid .
pth and calcitonin work in opposition to one another to maintain homeostatic ca two + level in body fluid .
another type of cell , oxyphil cell , exist in the parathyroid but - pron - function be not know .
these hormone encourage bone growth , muscle mass , and blood cell formation in child and woman .
adrenal glands
the adrenal gland be associate with the kidney  one gland be locate on top of each kidney as illustrate in figure three  seven  .  one  eight .
the adrenal gland consist of an outer adrenal cortex and an inner adrenal medulla .
these region secrete different hormone .
the location of the adrenal gland on top of the kidney be show .
( credit  modification of work by nci )
adrenal cortex
the adrenal cortex be make up of layer of epithelial cell and associated capillary network .
these layer form three distinct region  an outer zona glomerulosa that produce mineralocorticoid , a middle zona fasciculata that produce glucocorticoid , and an inner zona reticularis that produce androgen .
the main mineralocorticoid be aldosterone , which regulate the concentration of na+ ion in urine , sweat , pancrea , and saliva .
aldosterone release from the adrenal cortex be stimulate by a decrease in blood concentration of sodium ion , blood volume , or blood pressure , or by an increase in blood potassium level .
the three main glucocorticoid be cortisol , corticosterone , and cortisone .
the glucocorticoid stimulate the synthesis of glucose and gluconeogenesis ( convert a non - carbohydrate to glucose ) by liver cell and - pron - promote the release of fatty acid from adipose tissue .
these hormone increase blood glucose level to maintain level within a normal range between meal .
these hormone be secrete in response to acth and level be regulate by negative feedback .
androgen be sex hormone that promote masculinity .
- pron - be produce in small amount by the adrenal cortex in both male and female .
- pron - do not affect sexual characteristic and may supplement sex hormone release from the gonad .
adrenal medulla
the adrenal medulla contain large , irregularly shape cell that be closely associate with blood vessel .
these cell be innervate by preganglionic autonomic nerve fiber from the central nervous system .
the adrenal medulla contain two type of secretory cell  one that produce epinephrine ( adrenaline ) and another that produce norepinephrine ( noradrenaline ) .
epinephrine be the primary adrenal medulla hormone account for seven  five to eight  zero percent of - pron - secretion .
epinephrine and norepinephrine increase heart rate , breathing rate , cardiac muscle contraction , blood pressure , and blood glucose level .
- pron - also accelerate the breakdown of glucose in skeletal muscle and store fat in adipose tissue .
the release of epinephrine and norepinephrine be stimulate by neural impulse from the sympathetic nervous system .
secretion of these hormone be stimulate by acetylcholine release from preganglionic sympathetic fiber innervate the adrenal medulla .
these neural impulse originate from the hypothalamus in response to stress to prepare the body for the fight - or - flight response .
pancreas the pancrea , illustrate in figure three  seven  .  one  nine , be an elongate organ that be locate between the stomach and the proximal portion of the small intestine .
- pron - contain both exocrine cell that excrete digestive enzyme and endocrine cell that release hormone .
- pron - be sometimes refer to as a heterocrine gland because - pron - have both endocrine and exocrine function .
the pancreas be find underneath the stomach and point toward the spleen .
( credit  modification of work by nci )
the endocrine cell of the pancreas form cluster call pancreatic islet or the islet of langerhans , as visible in the micrograph show in figure three  seven  .  two  zero .
the pancreatic islet contain two primary cell type  alpha cell , which produce the hormone glucagon , and beta cell , which produce the hormone insulin .
these hormone regulate blood glucose level .
as blood glucose level decline , alpha cell release glucagon to raise the blood glucose level by increase rate of glycogen breakdown and glucose release by the liver .
when blood glucose level rise , such as after a meal , beta cell release insulin to low blood glucose level by increase the rate of glucose uptake in most body cell , and by increase glycogen synthesis in skeletal muscle and the liver .
together , glucagon and insulin regulate blood glucose level .
figure three  seven  .  two  zero
the islet of langerhans be cluster of endocrine cell find in the pancrea  - pron - stain light than surround cell .
( credit  modification of work by muhammad t . tabiin , christopher p . white , grant morahan , and bernard e . tuch  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
pineal gland the pineal gland produce melatonin .
the rate of melatonin production be affect by the photoperiod .
collateral from the visual pathway innervate the pineal gland .
during the day photoperiod , little melatonin be produce  however , melatonin production increase during the dark photoperiod ( night ) .
in some mammal , melatonin have an inhibitory affect on reproductive function by decrease production and maturation of sperm , oocyte , and reproductive organ .
melatonin be an effective antioxidant , protect the cns from free radical such as nitric oxide and hydrogen peroxide .
lastly , melatonin be involve in biological rhythm , particularly circadian rhythm such as the sleep - wake cycle and eat habit .
gonad
the gonad — the male testis and female ovary — produce steroid hormone .
the testis produce androgen , testosterone be the most prominent , which allow for the development of secondary sex characteristic and the production of sperm cell .
the ovary produce estradiol and progesterone , which because secondary sex characteristic and prepare the body for childbirth .
organ with secondary endocrine functions
there be several organ whose primary function be non - endocrine but that also possess endocrine function .
these include the heart , kidney , intestine , thymus , gonad , and adipose tissue .
the heart possess endocrine cell in the wall of the atria that be specialize cardiac muscle cell .
these cell release the hormone atrial natriuretic peptide ( anp ) in response to increase blood volume .
high blood volume cause the cell to be stretch , result in hormone release .
anp act on the kidney to reduce the reabsorption of na+ , cause na+ and water to be excrete in the urine .
anp also reduce the amount of renin release by the kidney and aldosterone release by the adrenal cortex , further prevent the retention of water .
in this way , anp cause a reduction in blood volume and blood pressure , and reduce the concentration of na+ in the blood .
the gastrointestinal tract produce several hormone that aid in digestion .
the endocrine cell be locate in the mucosa of the gi tract throughout the stomach and small intestine .
some of the hormone produce include gastrin , secretin , and cholecystokinin , which be secrete in the presence of food , and some of which act on other organ such as the pancreas , gallbladder , and liver .
- pron - trigger the release of gastric juice , which help to break down and digest food in the gi tract .
while the adrenal gland associate with the kidney be major endocrine gland , the kidney - pron - also possess endocrine function .
renin be release in response to decrease blood volume or pressure and be part of the renin - angiotensin - aldosterone system that lead to the release of aldosterone .
aldosterone then cause the retention of na+ and water , raise blood volume .
the kidney also release calcitriol , which aid in the absorption of ca two + and phosphate ion .
erythropoietin ( epo ) be a protein hormone that trigger the formation of red blood cell in the bone marrow .
epo be release in response to low oxygen level .
because red blood cell be oxygen carrier , increase production result in great oxygen delivery throughout the body .
epo have be use by athlete to improve performance , as great oxygen delivery to muscle cell allow for great endurance .
because red blood cell increase the viscosity of blood , artificially high level of epo can because severe health risk .
the thymus be find behind the sternum  - pron - be most prominent in infant , become small in size through adulthood .
the thymus produce hormone refer to as thymosin , which contribute to the development of the immune response .
adipose tissue be a connective tissue find throughout the body .
- pron - produce the hormone leptin in response to food intake .
leptin increase the activity of anorexigenic neuron and decrease that of orexigenic neuron , produce a feeling of satiety after eat , thus affect appetite and reduce the urge for further eating .
leptin be also associate with reproduction .
- pron - must be present for gnrh and gonadotropin synthesis to occur .
extremely thin female may enter puberty late  however , if adipose level increase , more leptin will be produce , improve fertility . 
introduction the muscular and skeletal system provide support to the body and allow for a wide range of movement .
the bone of the skeletal system protect the body 's internal organ and support the weight of the body .
the muscle of the muscular system contract and pull on the bone , allow for movement as diverse as standing , walk , run , and grasp item .
injury or disease affect the musculoskeletal system can be very debilitate .
in human , the most common musculoskeletal disease worldwide be cause by malnutrition .
ailment that affect the joint be also widespread , such as arthritis , which can make movement difficult and — in advanced case — completely impair mobility .
in severe case in which the joint have suffer extensive damage , joint replacement surgery may be need .
progress in the science of prosthesis design have result in the development of artificial joint , with joint replacement surgery in the hip and knee be the most common .
replacement joint for shoulder , elbow , and finger be also available .
even with this progress , there be still room for improvement in the design of prosthesis .
the state - of - the - art prosthesis have limit durability and therefore wear out quickly , particularly in young or active individual .
current research be focus on the use of new material , such as carbon fiber , that may make prosthesis more durable .
a skeletal system be necessary to support the body , protect internal organ , and allow for the movement of an organism .
there be three different skeleton design that fulfill these function  hydrostatic skeleton , exoskeleton , and endoskeleton .
hydrostatic skeleton
a hydrostatic skeleton be a skeleton form by a fluid - fill compartment within the body , call the coelom .
the organ of the coelom be support by the aqueous fluid , which also resist external compression .
this compartment be under hydrostatic pressure because of the fluid and support the other organ of the organism .
this type of skeletal system be find in soft - bodied animal such as sea anemone , earthworm , cnidaria , and other invertebrate ( figure three  eight  .  two ) .
the skeleton of the red - knobbed sea star ( protoreaster linckii ) be an example of a hydrostatic skeleton .
( credit  " amada four  four ” / wikimedia commons )
movement in a hydrostatic skeleton be provide by muscle that surround the coelom .
the muscle in a hydrostatic skeleton contract to change the shape of the coelom  the pressure of the fluid in the coelom produce movement .
for example , earthworm move by wave of muscular contraction of the skeletal muscle of the body wall hydrostatic skeleton , call peristalsis , which alternately shorten and lengthen the body .
lengthen the body extend the anterior end of the organism .
most organism have a mechanism to fix - pron - in the substrate .
shorten the muscle then draw the posterior portion of the body forward .
although a hydrostatic skeleton be well - suit to invertebrate organism such as earthworm and some aquatic organism , - pron - be not an efficient skeleton for terrestrial animal .
exoskeleton an exoskeleton be an external skeleton that consist of a hard encasement on the surface of an organism .
for example , the shell of crab and insect be exoskeleton ( figure three  eight  .  three ) .
this skeleton type provide defence against predator , support the body , and allow for movement through the contraction of attach muscle .
as with vertebrate , muscle must cross a joint inside the exoskeleton .
shortening of the muscle change the relationship of the two segment of the exoskeleton .
arthropod such as crab and lobster have exoskeleton that consist of three  zero – five  zero percent chitin , a polysaccharide derivative of glucose that be a strong but flexible material .
chitin be secrete by the epidermal cell .
the exoskeleton be further strengthen by the addition of calcium carbonate in organism such as the lobster .
because the exoskeleton be acellular , arthropod must periodically shed - pron - exoskeleton because the exoskeleton do not grow as the organism grow .
muscle attach to the exoskeleton of the halloween crab ( gecarcinus quadratus ) allow - pron - to move .
endoskeleton
an endoskeleton be a skeleton that consist of hard , mineralize structure locate within the soft tissue of organism .
an example of a primitive endoskeletal structure be the spicule of sponge .
the bone of vertebrate be compose of tissue , whereas sponge have no true tissue ( figure three  eight  .  four ) .
endoskeleton provide support for the body , protect internal organ , and allow for movement through contraction of muscle attach to the skeleton .
figure three  eight  .  four
the skeleton of human and horse be example of endoskeleton .
( credit  ross murphy )
the human skeleton be an endoskeleton that consist of two  zero  six bone in the adult .
- pron - have five main function  provide support to the body , store mineral and lipid , produce blood cell , protect internal organ , and allow for movement .
the skeletal system in vertebrate be divide into the axial skeleton ( which consist of the skull , vertebral column , and rib cage ) , and the appendicular skeleton ( which consist of the shoulder , limb bone , the pectoral girdle , and the pelvic girdle ) .
human axial skeleton
the axial skeleton form the central axis of the body and include the bone of the skull , ossicle of the middle ear , hyoid bone of the throat , vertebral column , and the thoracic cage ( ribcage )
( figure three  eight  .  five ) .
the function of the axial skeleton be to provide support and protection for the brain , the spinal cord , and the organ in the ventral body cavity .
- pron - provide a surface for the attachment of muscle that move the head , neck , and trunk , perform respiratory movement , and stabilize part of the appendicular skeleton .
the axial skeleton consist of the bone of the skull , ossicle of the middle ear , hyoid bone , vertebral column , and rib cage .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
the skull the bone of the skull support the structure of the face and protect the brain .
the skull consist of two  two bone , which be divide into two category  cranial bone and facial bone .
the cranial bone be eight bone that form the cranial cavity , which enclose the brain and serve as an attachment site for the muscle of the head and neck .
the eight cranial bone be the frontal bone , two parietal bone , two temporal bone , occipital bone , sphenoid bone , and the ethmoid bone .
although the bone develop separately in the embryo and fetus , in the adult , - pron - be tightly fuse with connective tissue and adjoin bone do not move ( figure three  eight  .  six ) .
the bone of the skull support the structure of the face and protect the brain .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
the auditory ossicle of the middle ear transmit sound from the air as vibration to the fluid - fill cochlea .
the auditory ossicle consist of six bone  two malleus bone , two incus bone , and two stape on each side .
these be the small bone in the body and be unique to mammal .
fourteen facial bone form the face , provide cavity for the sense organ ( eye , mouth , and nose ) , protect the entrance to the digestive and respiratory tract , and serve as attachment point for facial muscle .
the one  four facial bone be the nasal bone , the maxillary bone , zygomatic bone , palatine , vomer , lacrimal bone , the inferior nasal conchae , and the mandible .
all of these bone occur in pair except for the mandible and the vomer ( figure three  eight  .  seven ) .
the cranial bone , include the frontal , parietal , and sphenoid bone , cover the top of the head .
the facial bone of the skull form the face and provide cavity for the eye , nose , and mouth .
although - pron - be not find in the skull , the hyoid bone be consider a component of the axial skeleton .
the hyoid bone lie below the mandible in the front of the neck .
- pron - act as a movable base for the tongue and be connect to muscle of the jaw , larynx , and tongue .
the mandible articulate with the base of the skull .
the mandible control the opening to the airway and gut .
in animal with tooth , the mandible bring the surface of the tooth in contact with the maxillary tooth .
the vertebral column the vertebral column , or spinal column , surround and protect the spinal cord , support the head , and act as an attachment point for the rib and muscle of the back and neck .
the adult vertebral column comprise two  six bone  the two  four vertebrae , the sacrum , and the coccyx bone .
in the adult , the sacrum be typically compose of five vertebrae that fuse into one .
the coccyx be typically three – four vertebrae that fuse into one .
around the age of seven  zero , the sacrum and the coccyx may fuse together .
- pron - begin life with approximately three  three vertebrae , but as - pron - grow , several vertebrae fuse together .
the adult vertebrae be further divide into the seven cervical vertebrae , one  two thoracic vertebrae , and five lumbar vertebrae ( figure three  eight  .  eight ) .
the vertebral column consist of seven cervical vertebrae ( c one – seven ) twelve thoracic vertebrae ( th one – one  two ) , five lumbar vertebrae ( l one – five ) , the os sacrum , and the coccyx .
( b ) spinal curve increase the strength and flexibility of the spine .
( credit a  modification of work by uwe gille base on original work by gray ' s anatomy  credit b  modification of work by nci , nih )
each vertebral body have a large hole in the center through which the nerve of the spinal cord pass .
there be also a notch on each side through which the spinal nerve , which serve the body at that level , can exit from the spinal cord .
the vertebral column be approximately seven  one cm ( two  eight inch ) in adult male human and be curve , which can be see from a side view .
the name of the spinal curve correspond to the region of the spine in which - pron - occur .
the thoracic and sacral curve be concave ( curve inward relative to the front of the body ) and the cervical and lumbar curve be convex ( curve outward relative to the front of the body ) .
the arched curvature of the vertebral column increase - pron - strength and flexibility , allow - pron - to absorb shock like a spring ( figure three  eight  .  eight ) .
intervertebral disc compose of fibrous cartilage lie between adjacent vertebral body from the second cervical vertebra to the sacrum .
each disc be part of a joint that allow for some movement of the spine and act as a cushion to absorb shock from movement such as walk and running .
intervertebral disc also act as ligament to bind vertebrae together .
the inner part of disc , the nucleus pulposus , harden as people age and become less elastic .
this loss of elasticity diminish - pron - ability to absorb shock .
the thoracic cage the thoracic cage , also know as the ribcage , be the skeleton of the chest , and consist of the rib , sternum , thoracic vertebrae , and costal cartilage ( figure three  eight  .  nine ) .
the thoracic cage enclos and protect the organ of the thoracic cavity , include the heart and lung .
- pron - also provide support for the shoulder girdle and upper limb , and serve as the attachment point for the diaphragm , muscle of the back , chest , neck , and shoulder .
change in the volume of the thorax enable breathing .
the sternum , or breastbone , be a long , flat bone locate at the anterior of the chest .
- pron - be form from three bone that fuse in the adult .
the rib be one  two pair of long , curve bone that attach to the thoracic vertebrae and curve toward the front of the body , form the ribcage .
costal cartilage connect the anterior end of the rib to the sternum , with the exception of rib pair one  one and one  two , which be free - float rib .
the thoracic cage , or rib cage , protect the heart and the lung .
( credit  modification of work by nci , nih )
human appendicular skeleton
the appendicular skeleton be compose of the bone of the upper limb ( which function to grasp and manipulate object ) and the low limb ( which permit locomotion ) .
- pron - also include the pectoral girdle , or shoulder girdle , that attach the upper limb to the body , and the pelvic girdle that attach the low limb to the body ( figure three  eight  .  one  zero ) .
the appendicular skeleton be compose of the bone of the pectoral limb ( arm , forearm , hand ) , the pelvic limb ( thigh , leg , foot ) , the pectoral girdle , and the pelvic girdle .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
the pectoral girdle
the pectoral girdle bone provide the point of attachment of the upper limb to the axial skeleton .
the human pectoral girdle consist of the clavicle ( or collarbone ) in the anterior , and the scapula ( or shoulder blade ) in the posterior ( figure three  eight  .  one  one ) .
figure three  eight  .  one  one ( a )
the pectoral girdle in primate consist of the clavicle and scapulae .
( b )
the posterior view reveal the spine of the scapula to which muscle attache .
the clavicle be s - shape bone that position the arm on the body .
the clavicle lie horizontally across the front of the thorax ( chest ) just above the first rib .
these bone be fairly fragile and be susceptible to fracture .
for example , a fall with the arm outstretch cause the force to be transmit to the clavicle , which can break if the force be excessive .
the clavicle articulate with the sternum and the scapula .
the scapulae be flat , triangular bone that be locate at the back of the pectoral girdle .
- pron - support the muscle cross the shoulder joint .
a ridge , call the spine , run across the back of the scapula and can easily be feel through the skin ( figure three  eight  .  one  one ) .
the spine of the scapula be a good example of a bony protrusion that facilitate a broad area of attachment for muscle to bone .
the upper limb
the upper limb contain three  zero bone in three region  the arm ( shoulder to elbow ) , the forearm ( ulna and radius ) , and the wrist and hand ( figure three  eight  .  one  two ) .
the upper limb consist of the humerus of the upper arm , the radius and ulna of the forearm , eight bone of the carpus , five bone of the metacarpus , and one  four bone of the phalange .
an articulation be any place at which two bone be join .
the humerus be the large and long bone of the upper limb and the only bone of the arm .
- pron - articulate with the scapula at the shoulder and with the forearm at the elbow .
the forearm extend from the elbow to the wrist and consist of two bone  the ulna and the radius .
the radius be locate along the lateral ( thumb ) side of the forearm and articulate with the humerus at the elbow .
the ulna be locate on the medial aspect ( pinky - finger side ) of the forearm .
- pron - be long than the radius .
the ulna articulate with the humerus at the elbow .
the radius and ulna also articulate with the carpal bone and with each other , which in vertebrate enable a variable degree of rotation of the carpus with respect to the long axis of the limb .
the hand include the eight bone of the carpus ( wrist ) , the five bone of the metacarpus ( palm ) , and the one  four bone of the phalange ( digit ) .
each digit consist of three phalange , except for the thumb , when present , which have only two .
the pelvic girdle
the pelvic girdle attache to the low limb of the axial skeleton .
because - pron - be responsible for bear the weight of the body and for locomotion , the pelvic girdle be securely attach to the axial skeleton by strong ligament .
- pron - also have deep socket with robust ligament to securely attach the femur to the body .
the pelvic girdle be further strengthen by two large hip bone .
in adult , the hip bone , or coxal bone , be form by the fusion of three pair of bone  the ilium , ischium , and pubis .
the pelvis join together in the anterior of the body at a joint call the pubic symphysis and with the bone of the sacrum at the posterior of the body .
the female pelvis be slightly different from the male pelvi .
over generation of evolution , female with a wide pubic angle and large diameter pelvic canal reproduce more successfully .
therefore , - pron - offspring also have pelvic anatomy that enable successful childbirth ( figure three  eight  .  one  three ) .
o adapt to reproductive fitness , the ( a ) female pelvis be light , wide , shallow , and have a broad angle between the pubic bone than ( b ) the male pelvi .
the low limb
the low limb consist of the thigh , the leg , and the foot .
the bone of the low limb be the femur ( thigh bone ) , patella ( kneecap ) , tibia and fibula ( bone of the leg ) , tarsal ( bone of the ankle ) , and metatarsal and phalange ( bone of the foot )
( figure three  eight  .  one  four ) .
the bone of the low limb be thick and strong than the bone of the upper limb because of the need to support the entire weight of the body and the result force from locomotion .
in addition to evolutionary fitness , the bone of an individual will respond to force exert upon - pron - .
- pron - low limb consist of the thigh ( femur ) , kneecap ( patella ) , leg ( tibia and fibula ) , ankle ( tarsal ) , and foot ( metatarsal and phalange ) bone .
the femur , or thighbone , be the long , heavy , and strong bone in the body .
the femur and pelvi form the hip joint at the proximal end .
at the distal end , the femur , tibia , and patella form the knee joint .
the patella , or kneecap , be a triangular bone that lie anterior to the knee joint .
the patella be embed in the tendon of the femoral extensor ( quadricep ) .
- pron - improve knee extension by reduce friction .
the tibia , or shinbone , be a large bone of the leg that be locate directly below the knee .
the tibia articulate with the femur at - pron - proximal end , with the fibula and the tarsal bone at - pron - distal end .
- pron - be the second large bone in the human body and be responsible for transmit the weight of the body from the femur to the foot .
the fibula , or calf bone , parallel and articulate with the tibia .
- pron - do not articulate with the femur and do not bear weight .
the fibula act as a site for muscle attachment and form the lateral part of the ankle joint .
the tarsal be the seven bone of the ankle .
the ankle transmit the weight of the body from the tibia and the fibula to the foot .
the metatarsal be the five bone of the foot .
the phalange be the one  four bone of the toe .
each toe consist of three phalange , except for the big toe that have only two ( figure three  eight  .  one  five ) .
variation exist in other specie  for example , the horse 's metacarpal and metatarsal be orient vertically and do not make contact with the substrate .
bone , or osseous tissue , be a connective tissue that constitute the endoskeleton .
- pron - contain specialized cell and a matrix of mineral salt and collagen fiber .
the mineral salt primarily include hydroxyapatite , a mineral form from calcium phosphate .
calcification be the process of deposition of mineral salt on the collagen fiber matrix that crystallize and harden the tissue .
the process of calcification only occur in the presence of collagen fiber .
the bone of the human skeleton be classify by - pron - shape  long bone , short bone , flat bone , sutural bone , sesamoid bone , and irregular bone ( figure three  eight  .  one  six ) .
show be different type of bone  flat , irregular , long , short , and sesamoid .
long bone be long than - pron - be wide and have a shaft and two end .
the diaphysis , or central shaft , contain bone marrow in a marrow cavity .
the rounded end , the epiphysis , be cover with articular cartilage and be fill with red bone marrow , which produce blood cell ( figure three  eight  .  one  seven ) .
most of the limb bone be long bone
— for example , the femur , tibia , ulna , and radius .
exception to this include the patella and the bone of the wrist and ankle .
the long bone be cover by articular cartilage at either end and contain bone marrow ( show in yellow in this illustration ) in the marrow cavity .
short bone , or cuboidal bone , be bone that be the same width and length , give - pron - a cube - like shape .
for example , the bone of the wrist ( carpal ) and ankle ( tarsal ) be short bone ( figure three  eight  .  one  six ) .
flat bone be thin and relatively broad bone that be find where extensive protection of organ be require or where broad surface of muscle attachment be require .
example of flat bone be the sternum ( breast bone ) , rib , scapulae ( shoulder blade ) , and the roof of the skull ( figure three  eight  .  one  six ) .
irregular bone be bone with complex shape .
these bone may have short , flat , notched , or ridge surface .
example of irregular bone be the vertebrae , hip bone , and several skull bone .
sesamoid bone be small , flat bone and be shape similarly to a sesame seed .
the patellae be sesamoid bone ( figure three  eight  .  one  eight ) .
sesamoid bone develop inside tendon and may be find near joint at the knee , hand , and foot .
the patella of the knee be an example of a sesamoid bone .
sutural bone be small , flat , irregularly shape bone .
- pron - may be find between the flat bone of the skull .
- pron - vary in number , shape , size , and position .
bone tissue bones be consider organ because - pron - contain various type of tissue , such as blood , connective tissue , nerve , and bone tissue .
osteocyte , the live cell of bone tissue , form the mineral matrix of bone .
there be two type of bone tissue  compact and spongy .
compact bone tissue compact bone ( or cortical bone ) form the hard external layer of all bone and surround the medullary cavity , or bone marrow .
- pron - provide protection and strength to bone .
compact bone tissue consist of unit call osteon or haversian system .
osteon be cylindrical structure that contain a mineral matrix and living osteocyte connect by canaliculus , which transport blood .
- pron - be align parallel to the long axis of the bone .
each osteon consist of lamellae , which be layer of compact matrix that surround a central canal call the haversian canal .
the haversian canal ( osteonic canal ) contain the bone 's blood vessel and nerve fiber ( figure three  eight  .  one  nine ) .
osteon in compact bone tissue be align in the same direction along line of stress and help the bone resist bend or fracturing .
therefore , compact bone tissue be prominent in area of bone at which stress be apply in only a few direction .
spongy bone tissue
whereas compact bone tissue form the outer layer of all bone , spongy bone or cancellous bone form the inner layer of all bone .
spongy bone tissue do not contain osteon that constitute compact bone tissue .
instead , - pron - consist of trabeculae , which be lamellae that be arrange as rod or plate .
red bone marrow be find between the trabuculae .
blood vessel within this tissue deliver nutrient to osteocyte and remove waste .
the red bone marrow of the femur and the interior of other large bone , such as the ileum , form blood cell .
spongy bone reduce the density of bone and allow the end of long bone to compress as the result of stress apply to the bone .
spongy bone be prominent in area of bone that be not heavily stressed or where stress arrive from many direction .
the epiphysis of bone , such as the neck of the femur , be subject to stress from many direction .
imagine lay a heavy framed picture flat on the floor .
- pron - could hold up one side of the picture with a toothpick if the toothpick be perpendicular to the floor and the picture .
now drill a hole and stick the toothpick into the wall to hang up the picture .
in this case , the function of the toothpick be to transmit the downward pressure of the picture to the wall .
the force on the picture be straight down to the floor , but the force on the toothpick be both the picture wire pull down and the bottom of the hole in the wall push up .
the toothpick will break off right at the wall .
the neck of the femur be horizontal like the toothpick in the wall .
the weight of the body push - pron - down near the joint , but the vertical diaphysis of the femur push - pron - up at the other end .
the neck of the femur must be strong enough to transfer the downward force of the body weight horizontally to the vertical shaft of the femur ( figure three  eight  .  two  zero ) .
cell types in bones bone consist of four type of cell  osteoblast , osteoclast , osteocyte , and osteoprogenitor cell .
osteoblast be bone cell that be responsible for bone formation .
osteoblast synthesize and secrete the organic part and inorganic part of the extracellular matrix of bone tissue , and collagen fiber .
osteoblast become trap in these secretion and differentiate into less active osteocyte .
osteoclast be large bone cell with up to five  zero nucleus .
- pron - remove bone structure by release lysosomal enzyme and acid that dissolve the bony matrix .
these mineral , release from bone into the blood , help regulate calcium concentration in body fluid .
bone may also be resorb for remodeling , if the applied stress have change .
osteocyte be mature bone cell and be the main cell in bony connective tissue  these cell can not divide .
osteocyte maintain normal bone structure by recycle the mineral salt in the bony matrix .
osteoprogenitor cell be squamous stem cell that divide to produce daughter cell that differentiate into osteoblast .
osteoprogenitor cell be important in the repair of fracture .
development of bone ossification , or osteogenesis , be the process of bone formation by osteoblast .
ossification be distinct from the process of calcification  whereas calcification take place during the ossification of bone , - pron - can also occur in other tissue .
ossification begin approximately six week after fertilization in an embryo .
before this time , the embryonic skeleton consist entirely of fibrous membrane and hyaline cartilage .
the development of bone from fibrous membrane be call intramembranous ossification  development from hyaline cartilage be call endochondral ossification .
bone growth continue until approximately age two  five .
bone can grow in thickness throughout life , but after age two  five , ossification function primarily in bone remodeling and repair .
intramembranous ossification intramembranous ossification be the process of bone development from fibrous membrane .
- pron - be involve in the formation of the flat bone of the skull , the mandible , and the clavicle .
ossification begin as mesenchymal cell form a template of the future bone .
- pron - then differentiate into osteoblast at the ossification center .
osteoblast secrete the extracellular matrix and deposit calcium , which harden the matrix .
the non - mineralize portion of the bone or osteoid continue to form around blood vessel , form spongy bone .
connective tissue in the matrix differentiate into red bone marrow in the fetus .
the spongy bone be remodel into a thin layer of compact bone on the surface of the spongy bone .
endochondral ossification endochondral ossification be the process of bone development from hyaline cartilage .
all of the bone of the body , except for the flat bone of the skull , mandible , and clavicle , be form through endochondral ossification .
in long bone , chondrocyt form a template of the hyaline cartilage diaphysis .
respond to complex developmental signal , the matrix begin to calcify .
this calcification prevent diffusion of nutrient into the matrix , result in chondrocyte die and the opening up of cavity in the diaphysis cartilage .
blood vessel invade the cavity , and osteoblast and osteoclast modify the calcify cartilage matrix into spongy bone .
osteoclast then break down some of the spongy bone to create a marrow , or medullary , cavity in the center of the diaphysis .
dense , irregular connective tissue form a sheath ( periosteum ) around the bone .
the periosteum assist in attach the bone to surround tissue , tendon , and ligament .
the bone continue to grow and elongate as the cartilage cell at the epiphysis divide .
in the last stage of prenatal bone development , the center of the epiphysis begin to calcify .
secondary ossification center form in the epiphysis as blood vessel and osteoblast enter these area and convert hyaline cartilage into spongy bone .
until adolescence , hyaline cartilage persist at the epiphyseal plate ( growth plate ) , which be the region between the diaphysis and epiphysis that be responsible for the lengthwise growth of long bone ( figure three  eight  .  two  one ) .
endochondral ossification be the process of bone development from hyaline cartilage .
the periosteum be the connective tissue on the outside of bone that act as the interface between bone , blood vessel , tendon , and ligament .
growth of bone long bone continue to lengthen , potentially until adolescence , through the addition of bone tissue at the epiphyseal plate .
- pron - also increase in width through appositional growth .
lengthening of long bones chondrocyte on the epiphyseal side of the epiphyseal plate divide  one cell remain undifferentiated near the epiphysis , and one cell move toward the diaphysis .
the cell , which be push from the epiphysis , mature and be destroy by calcification .
this process replace cartilage with bone on the diaphyseal side of the plate , result in a lengthening of the bone .
long bone stop grow at around the age of one  eight in female and the age of two  one in male in a process call epiphyseal plate closure .
during this process , cartilage cell stop divide and all of the cartilage be replace by bone .
the epiphyseal plate fade , leave a structure call the epiphyseal line or epiphyseal remnant , and the epiphysis and diaphysis fuse .
thickening of long bones appositional growth be the increase in the diameter of bone by the addition of bony tissue at the surface of bone .
osteoblast at the bone surface secrete bone matrix , and osteoclast on the inner surface break down bone .
the osteoblast differentiate into osteocyte .
a balance between these two process allow the bone to thicken without become too heavy .
bone remodeling and repair bone renewal continue after birth into adulthood .
bone remodeling be the replacement of old bone tissue by new bone tissue .
- pron - involve the process of bone deposition by osteoblast and bone resorption by osteoclast .
normal bone growth require vitamin d , c , and a , plus mineral such as calcium , phosphorous , and magnesium .
hormone such as parathyroid hormone , growth hormone , and calcitonin be also require for proper bone growth and maintenance .
bone turnover rate be quite high , with five to seven percent of bone mass be recycle every week .
difference in turnover rate exist in different area of the skeleton and in different area of a bone .
for example , the bone in the head of the femur may be fully replace every six month , whereas the bone along the shaft be alter much more slowly .
bone remodeling allow bone to adapt to stress by become thick and strong when subject to stress .
bone that be not subject to normal stress , for example when a limb be in a cast , will begin to lose mass .
a fractured or break bone undergoe repair through four stage  one .
blood vessel in the broken bone tear and hemorrhage , result in the formation of clotted blood , or a hematoma , at the site of the break .
the severed blood vessel at the broken end of the bone be seal by the clotting process , and bone cell that be deprive of nutrient begin to die .
two .
within day of the fracture , capillary grow into the hematoma , and phagocytic cell begin to clear away the dead cell .
though fragment of the blood clot may remain , fibroblast and osteoblast enter the area and begin to reform bone .
fibroblast produce collagen fiber that connect the broken bone end , and osteoblast start to form spongy bone .
the repair tissue between the broken bone end be call the fibrocartilaginous callus , as - pron - be compose of both hyaline and fibrocartilage ( figure three  eight  .  two  two ) .
some bone spicule may also appear at this point .
three .
the fibrocartilaginous callus be convert into a bony callus of spongy bone .
- pron - take about two month for the broken bone end to be firmly join together after the fracture .
this be similar to the endochondral formation of bone , as cartilage become ossify  osteoblast , osteoclast , and bone matrix be present .
four .
the bony callus be then remodell by osteoclast and osteoblast , with excess material on the exterior of the bone and within the medullary cavity be remove .
compact bone be add to create bone tissue that be similar to the original , unbroken bone .
this remodeling can take many month , and the bone may remain uneven for year .
after this bone be set , a callus will knit the two end together .
( credit  bill rhodes )
the point at which two or more bone meet be call a joint , or articulation .
joint be responsible for movement , such as the movement of limb , and stability , such as the stability find in the bone of the skull .
classification of joints on the basis of structure
there be two way to classify joint  on the basis of - pron - structure or on the basis of - pron - function .
the structural classification divide joint into bony , fibrous , cartilaginous , and synovial joint depend on the material compose the joint and the presence or absence of a cavity in the joint .
fibrous joints
the bone of fibrous joint be hold together by fibrous connective tissue .
there be no cavity , or space , present between the bone and so most fibrous joint do not move at all , or be only capable of minor movement .
there be three type of fibrous joint  suture , syndesmosis , and gomphosis .
suture be find only in the skull and possess short fiber of connective tissue that hold the skull bone tightly in place ( figure three  eight  .  two  three ) .
suture be fibrous joint find only in the skull .
syndesmosis be joint in which the bone be connect by a band of connective tissue , allow for more movement than in a suture .
an example of a syndesmosis be the joint of the tibia and fibula in the ankle .
the amount of movement in these type of joint be determine by the length of the connective tissue fiber .
gomphosis occur between tooth and - pron - socket  the term refer to the way the tooth fit into the socket like a peg ( figure three  eight  .  two  four ) .
the tooth be connect to the socket by a connective tissue refer to as the periodontal ligament .
gomphosis be fibrous joint between the tooth and - pron - socket .
( credit  modification of work by gray ' s anatomy )
cartilaginous joints cartilaginous joint be joint in which the bone be connect by cartilage .
there be two type of cartilaginous joint  synchondros and symphysis .
in a synchondrosis , the bone be join by hyaline cartilage .
synchondros be find in the epiphyseal plate of grow bone in child .
in symphysis , hyaline cartilage cover the end of the bone but the connection between bone occur through fibrocartilage .
symphysis be find at the joint between vertebrae .
either type of cartilaginous joint allow for very little movement .
synovial joints synovial joint be the only joint that have a space between the adjoin bone ( figure three  eight  .  two  five ) .
this space be refer to as the synovial ( or joint ) cavity and be fill with synovial fluid .
synovial fluid lubricate the joint , reduce friction between the bone and allow for great movement .
the end of the bone be cover with articular cartilage , a hyaline cartilage , and the entire joint be surround by an articular capsule compose of connective tissue that allow movement of the joint while resist dislocation .
articular capsule may also possess ligament that hold the bone together .
synovial joint be capable of the great movement of the three structural joint type  however , the more mobile a joint , the weak the joint .
knee , elbow , and shoulder be example of synovial joint .
classification of joints on the basis of function
the functional classification divide joint into three category  synarthrosis , amphiarthrosis , and diarthrosis .
a synarthrosis be a joint that be immovable .
this include suture , gomphosis , and synchondros .
amphiarthrosis be joint that allow slight movement , include syndesmosis and symphysis .
diarthrosis be joint that allow for free movement of the joint , as in synovial joint .
movement at synovial joints
the wide range of movement allow by synovial joint produce different type of movement .
the movement of synovial joint can be classify as one of four different type  glide , angular , rotational , or special movement .
gliding movement gliding movement occur as relatively flat bone surface move past each other .
glide movement produce very little rotation or angular movement of the bone .
the joint of the carpal and tarsal bone be example of joint that produce glide movement .
angular movement angular movement be produce when the angle between the bone of a joint change .
there be several different type of angular movement , include flexion , extension , hyperextension , abduction , adduction , and circumduction .
flexion , or bend , occur when the angle between the bone decrease .
move the forearm upward at the elbow or move the wrist to move the hand toward the forearm be example of flexion .
extension be the opposite of flexion in that the angle between the bone of a joint increase .
straighten a limb after flexion be an example of extension .
extension past the regular anatomical position be refer to as hyperextension .
this include move the neck back to look upward , or bend the wrist so that the hand move away from the forearm .
abduction occur when a bone move away from the midline of the body .
example of abduction be move the arm or leg laterally to lift - pron - straight out to the side .
adduction be the movement of a bone toward the midline of the body .
movement of the limb inward after abduction be an example of adduction .
circumduction be the movement of a limb in a circular motion , as in move the arm in a circular motion .
rotational movement rotational movement be the movement of a bone as - pron - rotate around - pron - longitudinal axis .
rotation can be toward the midline of the body , which be refer to as medial rotation , or away from the midline of the body , which be refer to as lateral rotation .
movement of the head from side to side be an example of rotation .
special movements
some movement that can not be classify as glide , angular , or rotational be call special movement .
inversion involve the sol of the foot move inward , toward the midline of the body .
eversion be the opposite of inversion , movement of the sole of the foot outward , away from the midline of the body .
protraction be the anterior movement of a bone in the horizontal plane .
retraction occur as a joint move back into position after protraction .
protraction and retraction can be see in the movement of the mandible as the jaw be thrust outward and then back inward .
elevation be the movement of a bone upward , such as when the shoulder be shrug , lift the scapulae .
depression be the opposite of elevation — movement downward of a bone , such as after the shoulder be shrug and the scapulae return to - pron - normal position from an elevated position .
dorsiflexion be a bending at the ankle such that the toe be lift toward the knee .
plantar flexion be a bending at the ankle when the heel be lift , such as when stand on the toe .
supination be the movement of the radius and ulna bone of the forearm so that the palm face forward .
pronation be the opposite movement , in which the palm face backward .
opposition be the movement of the thumb toward the finger of the same hand , make - pron - possible to grasp and hold object .
type of synovial joints synovial joint be further classify into six different category on the basis of the shape and structure of the joint .
the shape of the joint affect the type of movement permit by the joint ( figure three  eight  .  two  six ) .
these joint can be describe as planar , hinge , pivot , condyloid , saddle , or ball - and - socket joint .
different type of joint allow different type of movement .
planar , hinge , pivot , condyloid , saddle , and ball - and - socket be all type of synovial joint .
planar joints planar joint have bone with articulating surface that be flat or slightly curve face .
these joint allow for glide movement , and so the joint be sometimes refer to as glide joint .
the range of motion be limit in these joint and do not involve rotation .
planar joint be find in the carpal bone in the hand and the tarsal bone of the foot , as well as between vertebrae ( figure three  eight  .  two  seven ) .
the joint of the carpal bone in the wrist be example of planar joint .
( credit  modification of work by brian c . goss )
hinge joints
in hinge joint , the slightly rounded end of one bone fit into the slightly hollow end of the other bone .
in this way , one bone move while the other remain stationary , like the hinge of a door .
the elbow be an example of a hinge joint .
the knee be sometimes classify as a modify hinge joint ( figure three  eight  .  two  eight ) .
the elbow joint , where the radius articulate with the humerus , be an example of a hinge joint .
( credit  modification of work by brian c . goss )
pivot joints pivot joint consist of the rounded end of one bone fit into a ring form by the other bone .
this structure allow rotational movement , as the rounded bone move around - pron - own axis .
an example of a pivot joint be the joint of the first and second vertebrae of the neck that allow the head to move back and forth ( figure three  eight  .  two  nine ) .
the joint of the wrist that allow the palm of the hand to be turn up and down be also a pivot joint .
the joint in the neck that allow the head to move back and forth be an example of a pivot joint .
condyloid joints condyloid joint consist of an oval - shaped end of one bone fit into a similarly oval - shape hollow of another bone ( figure three  eight  .  three  zero ) .
this be also sometimes call an ellipsoidal joint .
this type of joint allow angular movement along two ax , as see in the joint of the wrist and finger , which can move both side to side and up and down .
the metacarpophalangeal joint in the finger be example of condyloid joint .
( credit  modification of work by gray ' s anatomy )
saddle joints saddle joint be so name because the end of each bone resemble a saddle , with concave and convex portion that fit together .
saddle joint allow angular movement similar to condyloid joint but with a great range of motion .
an example of a saddle joint be the thumb joint , which can move back and forth and up and down , but more freely than the wrist or finger ( figure three  eight  .  three  one ) .
the carpometacarpal joint in the thumb be example of saddle joint .
( credit  modification of work by brian c . goss )
ball - and - socket joints ball - and - socket joint possess a rounded , ball - like end of one bone fit into a cuplike socket of another bone .
this organization allow the great range of motion , as all movement type be possible in all direction .
example of ball - and - socket joint be the shoulder and hip joint ( figure three  eight  .  three  two ) .
the shoulder joint be an example of a ball - and - socket joint .
muscle cell be specialize for contraction .
muscle allow for motion such as walk , and - pron - also facilitate bodily process such as respiration and digestion .
the body contain three type of muscle tissue  skeletal muscle , cardiac muscle , and smooth muscle ( figure three  eight  .  three  three ) .
the body contain three type of muscle tissue  skeletal muscle , smooth muscle , and cardiac muscle , visualize here use light microscopy .
smooth muscle cell be short , tapered at each end , and have only one plump nucleus in each .
cardiac muscle cell be branch and striate , but short .
the cytoplasm may branch , and - pron - have one nucleus in the center of the cell .
( credit  modification of work by nci , nih  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
skeletal muscle tissue form skeletal muscle , which attach to bone or skin and control locomotion and any movement that can be consciously control .
because - pron - can be control by thought , skeletal muscle be also call voluntary muscle .
skeletal muscle be long and cylindrical in appearance  when view under a microscope , skeletal muscle tissue have a strip or striate appearance .
the striation be cause by the regular arrangement of contractile protein ( actin and myosin ) .
actin be a globular contractile protein that interact with myosin for muscle contraction .
skeletal muscle also have multiple nucleus present in a single cell .
smooth muscle tissue occur in the wall of hollow organ such as the intestine , stomach , and urinary bladder , and around passage such as the respiratory tract and blood vessel .
smooth muscle have no striation , be not under voluntary control , have only one nucleus per cell , be tapered at both end , and be call involuntary muscle .
cardiac muscle tissue be only find in the heart , and cardiac contraction pump blood throughout the body and maintain blood pressure .
like skeletal muscle , cardiac muscle be striate , but unlike skeletal muscle , cardiac muscle can not be consciously control and be call involuntary muscle .
- pron - have one nucleus per cell , be branch , and be distinguish by the presence of intercalated disk .
skeletal muscle fiber structure
each skeletal muscle fiber be a skeletal muscle cell .
these cell be incredibly large , with diameter of up to one  zero  zero μm and length of up to three  zero cm .
the plasma membrane of a skeletal muscle fiber be call the sarcolemma .
the sarcolemma be the site of action potential conduction , which trigger muscle contraction .
within each muscle fiber be myofibril — long cylindrical structure that lie parallel to the muscle fiber .
myofibril run the entire length of the muscle fiber , and because - pron - be only approximately one  .  two μm in diameter , hundred to thousand can be find inside one muscle fiber .
- pron - attach to the sarcolemma at - pron - end , so that as myofibril shorten , the entire muscle cell contract ( figure three  eight  .  three  four ) .
a skeletal muscle cell be surround by a plasma membrane call the sarcolemma with a cytoplasm call the sarcoplasm .
a muscle fiber be compose of many fibril , package into orderly unit .
the striated appearance of skeletal muscle tissue be a result of repeat band of the protein actin and myosin that be present along the length of myofibril .
dark a band and light
i band repeat along myofibril , and the alignment of myofibril in the cell cause the entire cell to appear striate or banded .
each i band have a dense line run vertically through the middle call a z disc or z line .
the z disc mark the border of unit call sarcomere , which be the functional unit of skeletal muscle .
one sarcomere be the space between two consecutive z disc and contain one entire a band and two half of an i band , one on either side of the a band .
a myofibril be compose of many sarcomere run along - pron - length , and as the sarcomere individually contract , the myofibril and muscle cell shorten ( figure three  eight  .  three  five ) .
a sarcomere be the region from one z line to the next z line .
many sarcomere be present in a myofibril , result in the striation pattern characteristic of skeletal muscle .
myofibril be compose of small structure call myofilament .
there be two main type of filament  thick filament and thin filament  each have different composition and location .
thick filament occur only in the a band of a myofibril .
thin filament attach to a protein in the z disc call alpha - actinin and occur across the entire length of the i band and partway into the a band .
the region at which thick and thin filament overlap have a dense appearance , as there be little space between the filament .
thin filament do not extend all the way into the a band , leave a central region of the a band that only contain thick filament .
this central region of the a band look slightly light than the rest of the a band and be call the h zone .
the middle of the h zone have a vertical line call the m line , at which accessory protein hold together thick filament .
both the z disc and the m line hold myofilament in place to maintain the structural arrangement and layering of the myofibril .
myofibril be connect to each other by intermediate , or desmin , filament that attach to the z disc .
thick and thin filament be - pron - compose of protein .
thick filament be compose of the protein myosin .
the tail of a myosin molecule connect with other myosin molecule to form the central region of a thick filament near the m line , whereas the head align on either side of the thick filament where the thin filament overlap .
the primary component of thin filament be the actin protein .
two other component of the thin filament be tropomyosin and troponin .
actin have bind site for myosin attachment .
strand of tropomyosin block the bind site and prevent actin – myosin interaction when the muscle be at rest .
troponin consist of three globular subunit .
one subunit bind to tropomyosin , one subunit bind to actin , and one subunit bind ca two + ion .
slide filament model of contraction
for a muscle cell to contract , the sarcomere must shorten .
however , thick and thin filament —
the component of sarcomere — do not shorten .
instead , - pron - slide by one another , cause the sarcomere to shorten while the filament remain the same length .
the slide filament theory of muscle contraction be develop to fit the difference observe in the name band on the sarcomere at different degree of muscle contraction and relaxation .
the mechanism of contraction be the binding of myosin to actin , form cross - bridge that generate filament movement ( figure three  eight  .  three  six ) .
when ( a ) a sarcomere ( b ) contract , the z line move closer together and the i band get small .
the a band stay the same width and , at full contraction , the thin filament overlap .
when a sarcomere shorten , some region shorten whereas other stay the same length .
a sarcomere be define as the distance between two consecutive z disc or z line  when a muscle contract , the distance between the z discs be reduce .
the h zone — the central region of the a zone — contain only thick filament and be shorten during contraction .
the i band contain only thin filament and also shorten .
the a band do not shorten —
- pron - remain the same length
—
but a band of different sarcomere move closer together during contraction , eventually disappear .
thin filament be pull by the thick filament toward the center of the sarcomere until the z disc approach the thick filament .
the zone of overlap , in which thin filament and thick filament occupy the same area , increase as the thin filament move inward .
atp and muscle contraction
the motion of muscle shortening occur as myosin head bind to actin and pull the actin inward .
this action require energy , which be provide by atp .
myosin bind to actin at a bind site on the globular actin protein .
myosin have another bind site for atp at which enzymatic activity hydrolyz atp to adp , release an inorganic phosphate molecule and energy .
atp bind cause myosin to release actin , allow actin and myosin to detach from each other .
after this happen , the newly bind atp be convert to adp and inorganic phosphate , pi .
the enzyme at the bind site on myosin be call atpase .
the energy release during atp hydrolysis change the angle of the myosin head into a " cocked " position .
the myosin head be then in a position for further movement , possess potential energy , but adp and pi be still attach .
if actin bind site be cover and unavailable , the myosin will remain in the high energy configuration with atp hydrolyze , but still attach .
if the actin bind site be uncover , a cross - bridge will form  that is , the myosin head span the distance between the actin and myosin molecule .
pi be then release , allow myosin to expend the store energy as a conformational change .
the myosin head move toward the m line , pull the actin along with - pron - .
as the actin be pull , the filament move approximately one  zero nm toward the m line .
this movement be call the power stroke , as - pron - be the step at which force be produce .
as the actin be pull toward the m line , the sarcomere shorten and the muscle contract .
when the myosin head be " cock , " - pron - contain energy and be in a high - energy configuration .
this energy be expend as the myosin head move through the power stroke  at the end of the power stroke , the myosin head be in a low - energy position .
after the power stroke , adp be release  however , the cross - bridge form be still in place , and actin and myosin be bind together .
atp can then attach to myosin , which allow the cross - bridge cycle to start again and further muscle contraction can occur ( figure three  eight  .  three  seven ) .
regulatory protein
when a muscle be in a rest state , actin and myosin be separate .
to keep actin from bind to the active site on myosin , regulatory protein block the molecular bind site .
tropomyosin block myosin bind site on actin molecule , prevent cross - bridge formation and prevent contraction in a muscle without nervous input .
troponin bind to tropomyosin and help to position - pron - on the actin molecule  - pron - also bind calcium ion .
to enable a muscle contraction , tropomyosin must change conformation , uncover the myosin - bind site on an actin molecule and allow cross - bridge formation .
this can only happen in the presence of calcium , which be keep at extremely low concentration in the sarcoplasm .
if present , calcium ion bind to troponin , cause conformational change in troponin that allow tropomyosin to move away from the myosin bind site on actin .
once the tropomyosin be remove , a cross - bridge can form between actin and myosin , trigger contraction .
cross - bridge cycling continue until ca two + ion and atp be no longer available and tropomyosin again cover the bind site on actin .
excitation – contraction coupling excitation – contraction coupling be the link ( transduction ) between the action potential generate in the sarcolemma and the start of a muscle contraction .
the trigger for calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the sarcoplasm be a neural signal .
each skeletal muscle fiber be control by a motor neuron , which conduct signal from the brain or spinal cord to the muscle .
the area of the sarcolemma on the muscle fiber that interact with the neuron be call the motor end plate .
the end of the neuron 's axon be call the synaptic terminal , and - pron - do not actually contact the motor end plate .
a small space call the synaptic cleft separate the synaptic terminal from the motor end plate .
electrical signal travel along the neuron 's axon , which branch through the muscle and connect to individual muscle fiber at a neuromuscular junction .
the ability of cell to communicate electrically require that the cell expend energy to create an electrical gradient across - pron - cell membrane .
this charge gradient be carry by ion , which be differentially distribute across the membrane .
each ion exert an electrical influence and a concentration influence .
just as milk will eventually mix with coffee without the need to stir , ion also distribute - pron - evenly , if - pron - be permit to do so .
in this case , - pron - be not permit to return to an evenly mixed state .
the sodium – potassium atpase use cellular energy to move k+ ion inside the cell and na+ ion outside .
this alone accumulate a small electrical charge , but a big concentration gradient .
there be lot of k+ in the cell and lot of na+ outside the cell .
potassium be able to leave the cell through k+ channel that be open nine  zero % of the time , and - pron - do .
however , na+ channel be rarely open , so na+ remain outside the cell .
when k+ leave the cell , obey - pron - concentration gradient , that effectively leave a negative charge behind .
so at rest , there be a large concentration gradient for na+ to enter the cell , and there be an accumulation of negative charge leave behind in the cell .
this be the rest membrane potential .
potential in this context mean a separation of electrical charge that be capable of do work .
- pron - be measure in volt , just like a battery .
however , the transmembrane potential be considerably small ( zero  .  zero  seven v )  therefore , the small value be express as millivolt ( mv ) or seven  zero mv . because the inside of a cell be negative compare with the outside , a minus sign signify the excess of negative charge inside the cell , − seven  zero
mv .
if an event change the permeability of the membrane to na+ ion , - pron - will enter the cell .
that will change the voltage .
this be an electrical event , call an action potential , that can be use as a cellular signal .
communication occur between nerve and muscle through neurotransmitter .
neuron action potential because the release of neurotransmitter from the synaptic terminal into the synaptic cleft , where - pron - can then diffuse across the synaptic cleft and bind to a receptor molecule on the motor end plate .
the motor end plate possess junctional fold
— fold in the sarcolemma that create a large surface area for the neurotransmitter to bind to receptor .
the receptor be actually sodium channel that open to allow the passage of na+ into the cell when - pron - receive neurotransmitter signal .
acetylcholine ( ach ) be a neurotransmitter release by motor neuron that bind to receptor in the motor end plate .
neurotransmitter release occur when an action potential travel down the motor neuron 's axon , result in altered permeability of the synaptic terminal membrane and an influx of calcium .
the ca two + ion allow synaptic vesicle to move to and bind with the presynaptic membrane ( on the neuron ) , and release neurotransmitter from the vesicle into the synaptic cleft .
once release by the synaptic terminal , ach diffuse across the synaptic cleft to the motor end plate , where - pron - bind with ach receptor .
as a neurotransmitter bind , these ion channel open , and na+ ion cross the membrane into the muscle cell .
this reduce the voltage difference between the inside and outside of the cell , which be call depolarization .
as ach bind at the motor end plate , this depolarization be call an end - plate potential .
the depolarization then spread along the sarcolemma , create an action potential as sodium channel adjacent to the initial depolarization site sense the change in voltage and open .
the action potential move across the entire cell , create a wave of depolarization .
ach be break down by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase ( ache ) into acetyl and choline .
ache reside in the synaptic cleft , break down ach so that - pron - do not remain bind to ach receptor , which would because unwanted extended muscle contraction ( figure three  eight  .  three  eight ) .
after depolarization , the membrane return to - pron - rest state .
this be call repolarization , during which voltage - gate sodium channel close .
potassium channel continue at nine  zero % conductance .
because the plasma membrane sodium – potassium atpase always transport ion , the rest state ( negatively charge inside relative to the outside ) be restore .
the period immediately follow the transmission of an impulse in a nerve or muscle , in which a neuron or muscle cell regain - pron - ability to transmit another impulse , be call the refractory period .
during the refractory period , the membrane can not generate another action potential . .
the refractory period allow the voltage - sensitive ion channel to return to - pron - resting configuration .
the sodium potassium atpase continually move na+ back out of the cell and k+ back into the cell , and the k+ leak out leave negative charge behind .
very quickly , the membrane repolariz , so that - pron - can again be depolarize .
control of muscle tension neural control initiate the formation of actin – myosin cross - bridge , lead to the sarcomere shortening involve in muscle contraction .
these contraction extend from the muscle fiber through connective tissue to pull on bone , cause skeletal movement .
the pull exert by a muscle be call tension , and the amount of force create by this tension can vary .
this enable the same muscle to move very light object and very heavy object .
in individual muscle fiber , the amount of tension produce depend on the cross - sectional area of the muscle fiber and the frequency of neural stimulation .
the number of cross - bridge form between actin and myosin determine the amount of tension that a muscle fiber can produce .
cross - bridge can only form where thick and thin filament overlap , allow myosin to bind to actin .
if more cross - bridge be form , more myosin will pull on actin , and more tension will be produce .
the ideal length of a sarcomere during production of maximal tension occur when thick and thin filament overlap to the great degree .
if a sarcomere at rest be stretch past an ideal resting length , thick and thin filament do not overlap to the great degree , and few cross - bridge can form .
this result in few myosin head pull on actin , and less tension be produce .
as a sarcomere be shorten , the zone of overlap be reduce as the thin filament reach the h zone , which be compose of myosin tail .
because - pron - be myosin head that form cross - bridge , actin will not bind to myosin in this zone , reduce the tension produce by this myofiber .
if the sarcomere be shorten even more , thin filament begin to overlap with each other — reduce cross - bridge formation even further , and produce even less tension .
conversely , if the sarcomere be stretch to the point at which thick and thin filament do not overlap at all , no cross - bridge be form and no tension be produce .
this amount of stretching do not usually occur because accessory protein , internal sensory nerve , and connective tissue oppose extreme stretching .
the primary variable determine force production be the number of myofiber within the muscle that receive an action potential from the neuron that control that fiber .
when use the bicep to pick up a pencil , the motor cortex of the brain only signal a few neuron of the bicep , and only a few myofiber respond .
in vertebrate , each myofiber respond fully if stimulate .
when pick up a piano , the motor cortex signal all of the neuron in the bicep and every myofiber participate .
this be close to the maximum force the muscle can produce .
as mention above , increase the frequency of action potential ( the number of signal per second ) can increase the force a bit more , because the tropomyosin be flood with calcium .
 lungs , which appear as nearly transparent tissue surround the heart in this x - ray of a dog ( leave ) , be the central organ of the respiratory system .
the left lung be small than the right lung to accommodate space for the heart .
a dog 's nose ( right ) have a slit on the side of each nostril .
when track a scent , the slit open , block the front of the nostril .
this allow the dog to exhale though the now - open area on the side of the nostril without lose the scent that be be follow .
( credit a  modification of work by geoff stearns  credit b  modification of work by cory zanker )
introduction breathing be an involuntary event .
how often a breath be take and how much air be inhale or exhale be tightly regulate by the respiratory center in the brain .
human , when - pron - be not exert - pron - , breathe approximately one  five time per minute on average .
canine , like the dog in figure three  nine  .  one , have a respiratory rate of about one  five – three  zero breath per minute .
with every inhalation , air fill the lung , and with every exhalation , air rush back out .
that air be do more than just inflate and deflate the lung in the chest cavity .
the air contain oxygen that cross the lung tissue , enter the bloodstream , and travel to organ and tissue .
oxygen ( o two ) enter the cell where - pron - be use for metabolic reaction that produce atp , a high - energy compound .
at the same time , these reaction release carbon dioxide ( co two ) as a by - product .
co two be toxic and must be eliminate .
carbon dioxide exit the cell , enter the bloodstream , travel back to the lung , and be expire out of the body during exhalation .
the primary function of the respiratory system be to deliver oxygen to the cell of the body 's tissue and remove carbon dioxide , a cell waste product .
the main structure of the human respiratory system be the nasal cavity , the trachea , and lung .
all aerobic organism require oxygen to carry out - pron - metabolic function .
along the evolutionary tree , different organism have devise different mean of obtain oxygen from the surround atmosphere .
the environment in which the animal live greatly determine how an animal respire .
the complexity of the respiratory system be correlate with the size of the organism .
as animal size increase , diffusion distance increase and the ratio of surface area to volume drop .
in unicellular organism , diffusion across the cell membrane be sufficient for supply oxygen to the cell ( figure three  nine  .  two ) .
diffusion be a slow , passive transport process .
in order for diffusion to be a feasible mean of provide oxygen to the cell , the rate of oxygen uptake must match the rate of diffusion across the membrane .
in other word , if the cell be very large or thick , diffusion would not be able to provide oxygen quickly enough to the inside of the cell .
therefore , dependence on diffusion as a means of obtain oxygen and remove carbon dioxide remain feasible only for small organism or those with highly - flatten body , such as many flatworm ( platyhelminthes ) .
large organism have to evolve specialize respiratory tissue , such as gill , lung , and respiratory passage accompany by complex circulatory system , to transport oxygen throughout - pron - entire body .
- pron - cell of the unicellular algae ventricaria ventricosa be one of the largest know , reach one to five centimeter in diameter .
like all single - cell organism , v . ventricosa exchange gas across the cell membrane .
direct diffusion for small multicellular organism , diffusion across the outer membrane be sufficient to meet - pron - oxygen need .
gas exchange by direct diffusion across surface membrane be efficient for organism less than one mm in diameter .
in simple organism , such as cnidarian and flatworm , every cell in the body be close to the external environment .
- pron - cell be keep moist and gas diffuse quickly via direct diffusion .
flatworm be small , literally flat worm , which ‘ breathe' through diffusion across the outer membrane ( figure three  nine  .  three ) .
the flat shape of these organism increase the surface area for diffusion , ensure that each cell within the body be close to the outer membrane surface and have access to oxygen .
if the flatworm have a cylindrical body , then the cell in the center would not be able to get oxygen .
this flatworm 's process of respiration work by diffusion across the outer membrane .
( credit  stephen childs ) skin and gills earthworms and amphibian
use - pron - skin ( integument ) as a respiratory organ .
a dense network of capillary lie just below the skin and facilitate gas exchange between the external environment and the circulatory system .
the respiratory surface must be keep moist in order for the gas to dissolve and diffuse across cell membrane .
organism that live in water need to obtain oxygen from the water .
oxygen dissolve in water but at a low concentration than in the atmosphere .
the atmosphere have roughly two  one percent oxygen .
in water , the oxygen concentration be much small than that .
fish and many other aquatic organism have evolve gill to take up the dissolve oxygen from water ( figure three  nine  .  four ) .
gill be thin tissue filament that be highly branched and fold .
when water pass over the gill , the dissolve oxygen in water rapidly diffuse across the gill into the bloodstream .
the circulatory system can then carry the oxygenated blood to the other part of the body .
in animal that contain coelomic fluid instead of blood , oxygen diffus across the gill surface into the coelomic fluid .
gill be find in mollusk , annelid , and crustacean .
this common carp , like many other aquatic organism , have gill that allow - pron - to obtain oxygen from water .
( credit  " guitardude zero  one  two  " / wikimedia commons )
the fold surface of the gill provide a large surface area to ensure that the fish get sufficient oxygen .
diffusion be a process in which material travel from region of high concentration to low concentration until equilibrium be reach .
in this case , blood with a low concentration of oxygen molecule circulate through the gill .
the concentration of oxygen molecule in water be high than the concentration of oxygen molecule in gill .
as a result , oxygen molecule diffuse from water ( high concentration ) to blood ( low concentration ) , as show in figure three  nine  .  five .
similarly , carbon dioxide molecule in the blood diffuse from the blood ( high concentration ) to water ( low concentration ) .
as water flow over the gill , oxygen be transfer to blood via the vein .
( credit " fish "  modification of work by duane raver , noaa )
tracheal systems insect respiration be independent of - pron - circulatory system  therefore , the blood do not play a direct role in oxygen transport .
insect have a highly specialized type of respiratory system call the tracheal system , which consist of a network of small tube that carry oxygen to the entire body .
the tracheal system be the most direct and efficient respiratory system in active animal .
the tube in the tracheal system be make of a polymeric material call chitin .
insect body have opening , call spiracle , along the thorax and abdomen .
these opening connect to the tubular network , allow oxygen to pass into the body ( figure three  nine  .  six ) and regulate the diffusion of co two and water vapor .
air enter and leave the tracheal system through the spiracle .
some insect can ventilate the tracheal system with body movement .
insect perform respiration via a tracheal system .
mammalian systems
in mammal , pulmonary ventilation occur via inhalation ( breathing ) .
during inhalation , air enter the body through the nasal cavity locate just inside the nose ( figure three  nine  .  seven ) .
as air pass through the nasal cavity , the air be warm to body temperature and humidify .
the respiratory tract be coat with mucus to seal the tissue from direct contact with air .
mucus be high in water .
as air cross these surface of the mucous membrane , - pron - pick up water .
these process help equilibrate the air to the body condition , reduce any damage that cold , dry air can because .
particulate matter that be float in the air be remove in the nasal passage via mucus and cilium .
the process of warming , humidify , and remove particle be important protective mechanism that prevent damage to the trachea and lung .
thus , inhalation serve several purpose in addition to bring oxygen into the respiratory system .
from the nasal cavity , air pass through the pharynx ( throat ) and the larynx ( voice box ) , as - pron - make - pron - way to the trachea ( figure three  nine  .  seven ) .
the main function of the trachea be to funnel the inhale air to the lung and the exhale air back out of the body .
the human trachea be a cylinder about one  zero to one  two cm long and two cm in diameter that sit in front of the esophagus and extend from the larynx into the chest cavity where - pron - divide into the two primary bronchi at the midthorax .
- pron - be make of incomplete ring of hyaline cartilage and smooth muscle ( figure three  nine  .  eight ) .
the trachea be line with mucus - produce goblet cell and ciliat epithelia .
the cilium propel foreign particle trap in the mucus toward the pharynx .
the cartilage provide strength and support to the trachea to keep the passage open .
the smooth muscle can contract , decrease the trachea 's diameter , which cause expire air to rush upwards from the lung at a great force .
the force exhalation help expel mucus when - pron - cough .
smooth muscle can contract or relax , depend on stimulus from the external environment or the body 's nervous system .
the trachea and bronchi be make of incomplete ring of cartilage .
( credit  modification of work by gray ' s anatomy ) lungs  bronchi and alveoli
the end of the trachea bifurcate ( divide ) to the right and left lung .
the lung be not identical .
the right lung be large and contain three lobe , whereas the small left lung contain two lobe ( figure three  nine  .  nine ) .
the muscular diaphragm , which facilitate breathe , be inferior to ( below ) the lung and mark the end of the thoracic cavity .
figure three  nine  .  nine
the trachea bifurcate into the right and leave bronchi in the lung .
the right lung be make of three lobe and be large .
to accommodate the heart , the left lung be small and have only two lobe .
in the lung , air be divert into small and small passage , or bronchi .
air enter the lung through the two primary ( main ) bronchi ( singular  bronchus ) .
each bronchus divide into secondary bronchi , then into tertiary bronchi , which in turn divide , create small and small diameter bronchiol as - pron - split and spread through the lung .
like the trachea , the bronchi be make of cartilage and smooth muscle .
at the bronchiole , the cartilage be replace with elastic fiber .
bronchi be innervate by nerve of both the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous system that control muscle contraction ( parasympathetic ) or relaxation ( sympathetic ) in the bronchi and bronchiole , depend on the nervous system 's cue .
in human , bronchiol with a diameter small than zero  .  five mm be the respiratory bronchiole .
- pron - lack cartilage and therefore rely on inhaled air to support - pron - shape .
as the passageway decrease in diameter , the relative amount of smooth muscle increase .
the terminal bronchiol subdivide into microscopic branch call respiratory bronchiole .
the respiratory bronchiole subdivide into several alveolar duct .
numerous alveolus and alveolar sac surround the alveolar duct .
the alveolar sac resemble bunch of grape tether to the end of the bronchiole ( figure three  nine  .  one  zero ) .
in the acinar region , the alveolar duct be attach to the end of each bronchiole .
at the end of each duct be approximately one  zero  zero alveolar sac , each contain two  zero to three  zero alveoli that be two  zero  zero to three  zero  zero micron in diameter .
gas exchange occur only in alveoli .
alveoli be make of thin - walled parenchymal cell , typically one - cell thick , that look like tiny bubble within the sac .
alveoli be in direct contact with capillary ( one - cell thick ) of the circulatory system .
such intimate contact ensure that oxygen will diffuse from alveoli into the blood and be distribute to the cell of the body .
in addition , the carbon dioxide that be produce by cell as a waste product will diffuse from the blood into alveoli to be exhale .
the anatomical arrangement of capillary and alveoli emphasize the structural and functional relationship of the respiratory and circulatory system .
because there be so many alveolus ( ~ three  zero  zero million per lung ) within each alveolar sac and so many sac at the end of each alveolar duct , the lung have a sponge - like consistency .
this organization produce a very large surface area that be available for gas exchange .
the surface area of alveoli in the lung be approximately seven  five m two .
this large surface area , combine with the thin - walled nature of the alveolar parenchymal cell , allow gas to easily diffuse across the cell .
figure three  nine  .  one  zero
terminal bronchiole be connect by respiratory bronchiole to alveolar duct and alveolar sac .
each alveolar sac contain two  zero to three  zero spherical alveoli and have the appearance of a bunch of grape .
air flow into the atrium of the alveolar sac , then circulate into alveoli where gas exchange occur with the capillary .
mucous gland secrete mucous into the airway , keep - pron - moist and flexible .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
watch the follow video ( http / / openstaxcollege . org / l / lungs_pulmonary ) to review the respiratory system .
protective mechanisms
the air that organism breathe contain particulate matter such as dust , dirt , viral particle , and bacteria that can damage the lung or trigger allergic immune response .
the respiratory system contain several protective mechanism to avoid problem or tissue damage .
in the nasal cavity , hair and mucus trap small particle , virus , bacteria , dust , and dirt to prevent - pron - entry .
if particulate do make - pron - beyond the nose , or enter through the mouth , the bronchi and bronchiole of the lung also contain several protective device .
the lung produce mucus — a sticky substance make of mucin , a complex glycoprotein , as well as salt and water — that trap particulate .
the bronchi and bronchiol contain cilium , small hair - like projection that line the wall of the bronchi and bronchiol ( figure three  nine  .  one  one ) .
these cilium beat in unison and move mucus and particle out of the bronchi and bronchiol back up to the throat where - pron - be swallow and eliminate via the esophagus .
in human , for example , tar and other substance in cigarette smoke destroy or paralyze the cilium , make the removal of particle more difficult .
in addition , smoking cause the lung to produce more mucus , which the damage cilium be not able to move .
this cause a persistent cough , as the lung try to rid - pron - of particulate matter , and make smoker more susceptible to respiratory ailment .
figure three  nine  .  one  one
the bronchi and bronchiol contain cilium that help move mucus and other particle out of the lung .
( credit 
louisa howard , modification of work by dartmouth electron microscope facility ) three  nine  .  two  gas exchange across respiratory surfaces
the structure of the lung maximize - pron - surface area to increase gas diffusion .
because of the enormous number of alveoli ( approximately three  zero  zero million in each human lung ) , the surface area of the lung be very large ( seven  five m two ) .
have such a large surface area increase the amount of gas that can diffuse into and out of the lung .
basic principles of gas exchange gas exchange during respiration occur primarily through diffusion .
diffusion be a process in which transport be drive by a concentration gradient .
gas molecule move from a region of high concentration to a region of low concentration .
blood that be low in oxygen concentration and high in carbon dioxide concentration undergo gas exchange with air in the lung .
the air in the lung have a high concentration of oxygen than that of oxygen - deplete blood and a low concentration of carbon dioxide .
this concentration gradient allow for gas exchange during respiration .
partial pressure be a measure of the concentration of the individual component in a mixture of gas .
the total pressure exert by the mixture be the sum of the partial pressure of the component in the mixture .
the rate of diffusion of a gas be proportional to - pron - partial pressure within the total gas mixture .
this concept be discuss further in detail below .
lung volumes and capacities different animal have different lung capacity base on - pron - activity .
cheetah have evolve a much high lung capacity than human  - pron - help provide oxygen to all the muscle in the body and allow - pron - to run very fast .
elephant also have a high lung capacity .
in this case , - pron - be not because - pron - run fast but because - pron - have a large body and must be able to take up oxygen in accordance with - pron - body size .
human lung size be determine by genetic , gender , and height .
at maximal capacity , an average lung can hold almost six liter of air , but lung do not usually operate at maximal capacity .
air in the lung be measure in term of lung volume and lung capacity ( figure three  nine  .  one  two and table three  nine  .  one ) .
volume measure the amount of air for one function ( such as inhalation or exhalation ) .
capacity be any two or more volume ( for example , how much can be inhale from the end of a maximal exhalation ) .
figure three  nine  .  one  two human lung volume and capacity be show .
the total lung capacity of the adult male be six liter .
tidal volume be the volume of air inhale in a single , normal breath .
inspiratory capacity be the amount of air take in during a deep breath , and residual volume be the amount of air leave in the lung after forceful respiration .
the volume in the lung can be divide into four unit  tidal volume , expiratory reserve volume , inspiratory reserve volume , and residual volume .
tidal volume ( tv ) measure the amount of air that be inspire and expire during a normal breath .
on average , this volume be around one - half liter , which be a little less than the capacity of a two  zero  - ounce drink bottle .
the expiratory reserve volume ( erv ) be the additional amount of air that can be exhale after a normal exhalation .
- pron - be the reserve amount that can be exhale beyond what be normal .
conversely , the inspiratory reserve volume ( irv ) be the additional amount of air that can be inhale after a normal inhalation .
the residual volume ( rv ) be the amount of air that be leave after expiratory reserve volume be exhale .
the lung be never completely empty  there be always some air leave in the lung after a maximal exhalation .
if this residual volume do not exist and the lung empty completely , the lung tissue would stick together and the energy necessary to re - inflate the lung could be too great to overcome .
therefore , there be always some air remain in the lung .
residual volume be also important for prevent large fluctuation in respiratory gas ( o two and co two ) .
the residual volume be the only lung volume that can not be measure directly because - pron - be impossible to completely empty the lung of air .
this volume can only be calculate rather than measure .
capacity be measurement of two or more volume .
the vital capacity ( vc ) measure the maximum amount of air that can be inhale or exhale during a respiratory cycle .
- pron - be the sum of the expiratory reserve volume , tidal volume , and inspiratory reserve volume .
the inspiratory capacity ( ic ) be the amount of air that can be inhale after the end of a normal expiration .
- pron - be , therefore , the sum of the tidal volume and inspiratory reserve volume .
the functional residual capacity ( frc ) include the expiratory reserve volume and the residual volume .
the frc measure the amount of additional air that can be exhale after a normal exhalation .
lastly , the total lung capacity ( tlc ) be a measurement of the total amount of air that the lung can hold .
- pron - be the sum of the residual volume , expiratory reserve volume , tidal volume , and inspiratory reserve volume .
lung volume be measure by a technique call spirometry .
an important measurement take during spirometry be the force expiratory volume ( fev ) , which measure how much air can be force out of the lung over a specific period , usually one second ( fev one ) .
in addition , the force vital capacity ( fvc ) , which be the total amount of air that can be forcibly exhale , be measure .
the ratio of these value ( fev one  / fvc ratio ) be use to diagnose lung disease include asthma , emphysema , and fibrosis .
if the fev one  / fvc ratio be high , the lung be not compliant ( mean - pron - be stiff and unable to bend properly ) , and the patient most likely have lung fibrosis .
patient exhale most of the lung volume very quickly .
conversely , when the fev one  / fvc ratio be low , there be resistance in the lung that be characteristic of asthma .
in this instance , - pron - be hard for the patient to get the air out of - pron - or - pron - lung , and - pron - take a long time to reach the maximal exhalation volume .
in either case , breathing be difficult and complication arise .
gas pressure and respiration
the respiratory process can be better understand by examine the property of gas .
gas move freely , but gas particle be constantly hit the wall of - pron - vessel , thereby produce gas pressure .
air be a mixture of gas , primarily nitrogen ( n two  seven  eight  .  six percent ) , oxygen ( o two  two  zero  .  nine percent ) , water vapor ( h two o  zero  .  five percent ) , and carbon dioxide ( co two  zero  .  zero  four percent ) .
each gas component of that mixture exert a pressure .
the pressure for an individual gas in the mixture be the partial pressure of that gas .
approximately two  one percent of atmospheric gas be oxygen .
carbon dioxide , however , be find in relatively small amount , zero  .  zero  four percent .
the partial pressure for oxygen be much great than that of carbon dioxide .
the partial pressure of any gas can be calculate by  patm , the atmospheric pressure , be the sum of all of the partial pressure of the atmospheric gas add together .
the pressure of the atmosphere at sea level be seven  six  zero mm hg .
therefore , the partial pressure of oxygen be  at high altitude , patm decrease but concentration do not change  the partial pressure decrease be due to the reduction in patm .
when the air mixture reach the lung , - pron - have be humidify .
the pressure of the water vapor in the lung do not change the pressure of the air , but - pron - must be include in the partial pressure equation .
for this calculation , the water pressure ( four  seven mm hg ) be subtract from the atmospheric pressure  these pressure determine the gas exchange , or the flow of gas , in the system .
oxygen and carbon dioxide will flow accord to - pron - pressure gradient from high to low .
therefore , understand the partial pressure of each gas will aid in understand how gas move in the respiratory system .
gas exchange across the alveoli
in the body , oxygen be use by cell of the body 's tissue and carbon dioxide be produce as a waste product .
the ratio of carbon dioxide production to oxygen consumption be the respiratory quotient ( rq ) .
rq vary between zero  .  seven and one  .  zero .
if just glucose be use to fuel the body , the rq would equal one .
one mole of carbon dioxide would be produce for every mole of oxygen consume .
glucose , however , be not the only fuel for the body .
protein and fat be also use as fuel for the body .
because of this , less carbon dioxide be produce than oxygen be consume and the rq be , on average , about zero  .  seven for fat and about zero  .  eight for protein .
the rq be use to calculate the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveolar space within the lung , the alveolar po two above , the partial pressure of oxygen in the lung be calculate to be one  five  zero mm hg .
however , lung never fully deflate with an exhalation  therefore , the inspire air mix with this residual air and lower the partial pressure of oxygen within the alveoli .
this mean that there be a low concentration of oxygen in the lung than be find in the air outside the body .
know the rq , the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli can be calculate  with an rq of zero  .  eight and a pco two in the alveoli of four  zero mm hg , the alveolar po two be equal to  notice that this pressure be less than the external air .
therefore , the oxygen will flow from the inspire air in the lung ( po two = one  five  zero mm hg ) into the bloodstream ( po two = one  zero  zero mm hg )
( figure three  nine  .  one  three ) .
in the lung , oxygen diffus out of the alveoli and into the capillary surround the alveoli .
oxygen ( about nine  eight percent ) bind reversibly to the respiratory pigment hemoglobin find in red blood cell ( rbcs ) .
rbc carry oxygen to the tissue where oxygen dissociate from the hemoglobin and diffus into the cell of the tissue .
more specifically , alveolar po two be high in the alveoli ( palvo two = one  zero  zero mm hg ) than blood po two ( four  zero mm hg ) in the capillary .
because this pressure gradient exist , oxygen diffus down - pron - pressure gradient , move out of the alveoli and enter the blood of the capillary where o two bind to hemoglobin .
at the same time , alveolar pco two be low palvo two = four  zero mm hg than blood pco two = ( four  five mm hg ) .
co two diffuse down - pron - pressure gradient , move out of the capillary and enter the alveoli .
oxygen and carbon dioxide move independently of each other  - pron - diffuse down - pron - own pressure gradient .
as blood leave the lung through the pulmonary vein , the venous po two = one  zero  zero mm hg , whereas the venous pco two = four  zero mm hg .
as blood enter the systemic capillary , the blood will lose oxygen and gain carbon dioxide because of the pressure difference of the tissue and blood .
in systemic capillary , po two = one  zero  zero mm hg , but in the tissue cell , po two = four  zero mm hg .
this pressure gradient drive the diffusion of oxygen out of the capillary and into the tissue cell .
at the same time , blood pco two = four  zero mm hg and systemic tissue pco two = four  five mm hg .
the pressure gradient drive co two out of tissue cell and into the capillary .
the blood return to the lung through the pulmonary artery have a venous po two = four  zero mm hg and a pco two = four  five mm hg .
the blood enter the lung capillary where the process of exchange gas between the capillary and alveoli begin again .
in short , the change in partial pressure from the alveoli to the capillary drive the oxygen into the tissue and the carbon dioxide into the blood from the tissue .
the blood be then transport to the lung where difference in pressure in the alveoli result in the movement of carbon dioxide out of the blood into the lung , and oxygen into the blood .
mammalian lung be locate in the thoracic cavity where - pron - be surround and protect by the rib cage , intercostal muscle , and bind by the chest wall .
the bottom of the lung be contain by the diaphragm , a skeletal muscle that facilitate breathe .
breathing require the coordination of the lung , the chest wall , and most importantly , the diaphragm .
type of breathe amphibian have evolve multiple way of breathing .
young amphibian , like tadpole , use gill to breathe , and - pron - do not leave the water .
some amphibian retain gill for life .
as the tadpole grow , the gill disappear and lung grow .
these lung be primitive and not as evolve as mammalian lung .
adult amphibian be lack or have a reduced diaphragm , so breathe via lung be force .
the other mean of breathe for amphibian be diffusion across the skin .
to aid this diffusion , amphibian skin must remain moist .
bird face a unique challenge with respect to breathing  - pron - fly .
fly consume a great amount of energy  therefore , bird require a lot of oxygen to aid - pron - metabolic process .
bird have evolve a respiratory system that supply - pron - with the oxygen need to enable fly .
similar to mammal , bird have lung , which be organ specialize for gas exchange .
oxygenated air , take in during inhalation , diffuse across the surface of the lung into the bloodstream , and carbon dioxide diffuse from the blood into the lung and expel during exhalation .
the detail of breathe between bird and mammal differ substantially .
in addition to lung , bird have air sac inside - pron - body .
air flow in one direction from the posterior air sac to the lung and out of the anterior air sac .
the flow of air be in the opposite direction from blood flow , and gas exchange take place much more efficiently .
this type of breathing enable bird to obtain the requisite oxygen , even at high altitude where the oxygen concentration be low .
this directionality of airflow require two cycle of air intake and exhalation to completely get the air out of the lung .
all mammal have lung that be the main organ for breathing .
lung capacity have evolve to support the animal 's activity .
during inhalation , the lung expand with air , and oxygen diffus across the lung 's surface and enter the bloodstream .
during exhalation , the lung expel air and lung volume decrease .
in the next few section , the process of human breathing will be explain .
the mechanics of human breathing boyle 's
law be the gas law that state that in a close space , pressure and volume be inversely relate .
as volume decrease , pressure increase and vice versa ( figure three  nine  .  one  five ) .
the relationship between gas pressure and volume help to explain the mechanic of breathing .
this graph show datum from boyle 's original one  six  six  two experiment , which show that pressure and volume be inversely relate .
no unit be give as boyle use arbitrary unit in - pron - experiment .
there be always a slightly negative pressure within the thoracic cavity , which aid in keep the airway of the lung open .
during inhalation , volume increase as a result of contraction of the diaphragm , and pressure decrease ( accord to boyle 's law ) .
this decrease of pressure in the thoracic cavity relative to the environment make the cavity less than the atmosphere ( figure three  nine  .  one  six a ) .
because of this drop in pressure , air rush into the respiratory passage .
to increase the volume of the lung , the chest wall expand .
this result from the contraction of the intercostal muscle , the muscle that be connect to the rib cage .
lung volume expand because the diaphragm contract and the intercostal muscle contract , thus expand the thoracic cavity .
this increase in the volume of the thoracic cavity lower pressure compare to the atmosphere , so air rush into the lung , thus increase - pron - volume .
the result increase in volume be largely attribute to an increase in alveolar space , because the bronchiole and bronchi be stiff structure that do not change in size .
the lung , chest wall , and diaphragm be all involve in respiration , both ( a ) inhalation and ( b ) expiration .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
the chest wall expand out and away from the lung .
the lung be elastic  therefore , when air fill the lung , the elastic recoil within the tissue of the lung exert pressure back toward the interior of the lung .
these outward and inward force compete to inflate and deflate the lung with every breath .
upon exhalation , the lung recoil to force the air out of the lung , and the intercostal muscle relax , return the chest wall back to - pron - original position ( figure three  nine  .  one  six b ) .
the diaphragm also relax and move high into the thoracic cavity .
this increase the pressure within the thoracic cavity relative to the environment , and air rush out of the lung .
the movement of air out of the lung be a passive event .
no muscle be contract to expel the air .
each lung be surround by an invaginate sac .
the layer of tissue that cover the lung and dip into space be call the visceral pleura .
a second layer of parietal pleura line the interior of the thorax ( figure three  nine  .  one  seven ) .
the space between these layer , the intrapleural space , contain a small amount of fluid that protect the tissue and reduce the friction generate from rub the tissue layer together as the lung contract and relax .
pleurisy result when these layer of tissue become inflame  - pron - be painful because the inflammation increase the pressure within the thoracic cavity and reduce the volume of the lung .
a tissue layer call pleura surround the lung and interior of the thoracic cavity .
( credit  modification of work by nci )
the work of breathe the number of breath per minute be the respiratory rate .
on average , under non - exertion condition , the human respiratory rate be one  two – one  five breath / minute .
the respiratory rate contribute to the alveolar ventilation , or how much air move into and out of the alveoli .
alveolar ventilation prevent carbon dioxide buildup in the alveoli .
there be two way to keep the alveolar ventilation constant  increase the respiratory rate while decrease the tidal volume of air per breath ( shallow breathing ) , or decrease the respiratory rate while increase the tidal volume per breath .
in either case , the ventilation remain the same , but the work do and type of work need be quite different .
both tidal volume and respiratory rate be closely regulated when oxygen demand increase .
there be two type of work conduct during respiration , flow - resistive and elastic work .
flow - resistive refer to the work of the alveolus and tissue in the lung , whereas elastic work refer to the work of the intercostal muscle , chest wall , and diaphragm .
increase the respiration rate increase the flow - resistive work of the airway and decrease the elastic work of the muscle .
decrease the respiratory rate reverse the type of work require .
surfactant
the air - tissue / water interface of the alveoli have a high surface tension .
this surface tension be similar to the surface tension of water at the liquid - air interface of a water droplet that result in the bonding of the water molecule together .
surfactant be a complex mixture of phospholipid and lipoprotein that work to reduce the surface tension that exist between the alveoli tissue and the air find within the alveoli .
by lower the surface tension of the alveolar fluid , - pron - reduce the tendency of alveoli to collapse .
surfactant work like a detergent to reduce the surface tension and allow for easy inflation of the airway .
when a balloon be first inflated , - pron - take a large amount of effort to stretch the plastic and start to inflate the balloon .
if a little bit of detergent be apply to the interior of the balloon , then the amount of effort or work need to begin to inflate the balloon would decrease , and - pron - would become much easy to start blow up the balloon .
this same principle apply to the airway .
a small amount of surfactant to the airway tissue reduce the effort or work need to inflate those airway .
baby bear prematurely sometimes do not produce enough surfactant .
as a result , - pron - suffer from respiratory distress syndrome , because - pron - require more effort to inflate - pron - lung .
surfactant be also important for prevent collapse of small alveoli relative to large alveoli .
lung resistance and compliance pulmonary disease reduce the rate of gas exchange into and out of the lung .
two main cause of decrease gas exchange be compliance ( how elastic the lung be ) and resistance ( how much obstruction exist in the airway ) .
a change in either can dramatically alter breathing and the ability to take in oxygen and release carbon dioxide .
example of restrictive disease be respiratory distress syndrome and pulmonary fibrosis .
in both disease , the airway be less compliant and - pron - be stiff or fibrotic .
there be a decrease in compliance because the lung tissue can not bend and move .
in these type of restrictive disease , the intrapleural pressure be more positive and the airway collapse upon exhalation , which trap air in the lung .
force or functional vital capacity ( fvc ) , which be the amount of air that can be forcibly exhale after take the deep breath possible , be much low than in normal patient , and the time - pron - take to exhale most of the air be greatly prolong ( figure three  nine  .  one  eight ) .
a patient suffer from these disease can not exhale the normal amount of air .
obstructive disease and condition include emphysema , asthma , and pulmonary edema .
in emphysema , which mostly arise from smoke tobacco , the wall of the alveoli be destroy , decrease the surface area for gas exchange .
the overall compliance of the lung be increase , because as the alveolar wall be damage , lung elastic recoil decrease due to a loss of elastic fiber , and more air be trap in the lung at the end of exhalation .
asthma be a disease in which inflammation be trigger by environmental factor .
inflammation obstruct the airway .
the obstruction may be due to edema ( fluid accumulation ) , smooth muscle spasm in the wall of the bronchiole , increase mucus secretion , damage to the epithelia of the airway , or a combination of these event .
those with asthma or edema experience increase occlusion from increase inflammation of the airway .
this tend to block the airway , prevent the proper movement of gas ( figure three  nine  .  one  eight ) .
those with obstructive disease have large volume of air trap after exhalation and breathe at a very high lung volume to compensate for the lack of airway recruitment .
the ratio of fev one ( the amount of air that can be forcibly exhale in one second after take a deep breath ) to fvc ( the total amount of air that can be forcibly exhale ) can be use to diagnose whether a person have restrictive or obstructive lung disease .
in restrictive lung disease , fvc be reduce but airway be not obstruct , so the person be able to expel air reasonably fast .
in obstructive lung disease , airway obstruction result in slow exhalation as well as reduce fvc .
thus , the fev one  / fvc ratio be low in person with obstructive lung disease ( less than six  nine percent ) than in person with restrictive disease ( eight  eight to nine  zero percent ) .
dead space 
v / q mismatch pulmonary circulation pressure be very low compare to that of the systemic circulation .
- pron - be also independent of cardiac output .
this be because of a phenomenon call recruitment , which be the process of opening airway that normally remain closed when cardiac output increase .
as cardiac output increase , the number of capillary and artery that be perfuse ( fill with blood ) increase .
these capillary and artery be not always in use but be ready if need .
at time , however , there be a mismatch between the amount of air ( ventilation , v ) and the amount of blood ( perfusion , q ) in the lung .
this be refer to as ventilation / perfusion ( v / q ) mismatch .
there be two type of v / q mismatch .
both produce dead space , region of break down or block lung tissue .
dead space can severely impact breathing , because - pron - reduce the surface area available for gas diffusion .
as a result , the amount of oxygen in the blood decrease , whereas the carbon dioxide level increase .
dead space be create when no ventilation and / or perfusion take place .
anatomical dead space or anatomical shunt , arise from an anatomical failure , while physiological dead space or physiological shunt , arise from a functional impairment of the lung or artery .
an example of an anatomical shunt be the effect of gravity on the lung .
the lung be particularly susceptible to change in the magnitude and direction of gravitational force .
when someone be stand or sit upright , the pleural pressure gradient lead to increase ventilation further down in the lung .
as a result , the intrapleural pressure be more negative at the base of the lung than at the top , and more air fill the bottom of the lung than the top .
likewise , - pron - take less energy to pump blood to the bottom of the lung than to the top when in a prone position .
perfusion of the lung be not uniform while stand or sit .
this be a result of hydrostatic force combine with the effect of airway pressure .
an anatomical shunt develop because the ventilation of the airway do not match the perfusion of the artery surround those airway .
as a result , the rate of gas exchange be reduce .
note that this do not occur when lie down , because in this position , gravity do not preferentially pull the bottom of the lung down .
a physiological shunt can develop if there be infection or edema in the lung that obstruct an area .
this will decrease ventilation but not affect perfusion  therefore , the v / q ratio change and gas exchange be affect .
the lung can compensate for these mismatch in ventilation and perfusion .
if ventilation be great than perfusion , the arteriole dilate and the bronchiole constrict .
this increase perfusion and reduce ventilation .
likewise , if ventilation be less than perfusion , the arteriole constrict and the bronchiole dilate to correct the imbalance .
once the oxygen diffuse across the alveoli , - pron - enter the bloodstream and be transport to the tissue where - pron - be unloaded , and carbon dioxide diffuse out of the blood and into the alveoli to be expel from the body .
although gas exchange be a continuous process , the oxygen and carbon dioxide be transport by different mechanism .
transport of oxygen in the blood
although oxygen dissolve in blood , only a small amount of oxygen be transport this way .
only one  .  five percent of oxygen in the blood be dissolve directly into the blood - pron - .
most oxygen— nine  eight  .  five percent — be bind to a protein call hemoglobin and carry to the tissue .
hemoglobin hemoglobin , or hb , be a protein molecule find in red blood cell ( erythrocyte ) make of four subunit  two alpha subunit and two beta subunit ( figure three  nine  .  one  nine ) .
each subunit surround a central heme group that contain iron and bind one oxygen molecule , allow each hemoglobin molecule to bind four oxygen molecule .
molecule with more oxygen bind to the heme group be bright red .
as a result , oxygenate arterial blood where the hb be carry four oxygen molecule be bright red , while venous blood that be deoxygenate be dark red .
the protein inside ( a ) red blood cell that carry oxygen to cell and carbon dioxide to the lung be ( b ) hemoglobin .
hemoglobin be make up of four symmetrical subunit and four heme group .
iron associate with the heme bind oxygen .
- pron - be the iron in hemoglobin that give blood - pron - red color .
- pron - be easy to bind a second and third oxygen molecule to hb than the first molecule .
this be because the hemoglobin molecule change - pron - shape , or conformation , as oxygen bind .
the fourth oxygen be then more difficult to bind .
the binding of oxygen to hemoglobin can be plot as a function of the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood ( x - axis ) versus the relative hb - oxygen saturation ( y - axis ) .
the result graph — an oxygen dissociation
curve
— be sigmoidal , or s - shape ( figure three  nine  .  two  zero ) .
as the partial pressure of oxygen increase , the hemoglobin become increasingly saturate with oxygen .
factor that affect oxygen bind
the oxygen - carry capacity of hemoglobin determine how much oxygen be carry in the blood .
in addition to po two , other environmental factor and disease can affect oxygen carry capacity and delivery .
carbon dioxide level , blood ph , and body temperature affect oxygen - carry capacity ( figure three  nine  .  two  zero ) .
when carbon dioxide be in the blood , - pron - react with water to form bicarbonate ( hco− three ) and hydrogen ion ( h+ ) .
as the level of carbon dioxide in the blood increase , more h+ be produce and the ph decrease .
this increase in carbon dioxide and subsequent decrease in ph reduce the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen .
the oxygen dissociate from the hb molecule , shift the oxygen dissociation curve to the right .
therefore , more oxygen be need to reach the same hemoglobin saturation level as when the ph be high .
a similar shift in the curve also result from an increase in body temperature .
increase temperature , such as from increase activity of skeletal muscle , cause the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen to be reduce .
disease like sickle cell anemia and thalassemia decrease the blood 's ability to deliver oxygen to tissue and - pron - oxygen - carrying capacity .
in sickle cell anemia , the shape of the red blood cell be crescent - shape , elongate , and stiffen , reduce - pron - ability to deliver oxygen ( figure three  nine  .  two  one ) .
in this form , red blood cell can not pass through the capillary .
this be painful when - pron - occur .
thalassemia be a rare genetic disease cause by a defect in either the alpha or the beta subunit of hb .
patient with thalassemia produce a high number of red blood cell , but these cell have low - than - normal level of hemoglobin .
therefore , the oxygen - carry capacity be diminish .
individual with sickle cell anemia have crescent - shape red blood cell .
( credit  modification of work by ed uthman  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
transport of carbon dioxide in the blood carbon dioxide molecule be transport in the blood from body tissue to the lung by one of three method  dissolution directly into the blood , bind to hemoglobin , or carry as a bicarbonate ion .
several property of carbon dioxide in the blood affect - pron - transport .
first , carbon dioxide be more soluble in blood than oxygen .
about five to seven percent of all carbon dioxide be dissolve in the plasma .
second , carbon dioxide can bind to plasma protein or can enter red blood cell and bind to hemoglobin .
this form transport about one  zero percent of the carbon dioxide .
when carbon dioxide bind to hemoglobin , a molecule call carbaminohemoglobin be form .
bind of carbon dioxide to hemoglobin be reversible .
therefore , when - pron - reach the lung , the carbon dioxide can freely dissociate from the hemoglobin and be expel from the body .
third , the majority of carbon dioxide molecule ( eight  five percent ) be carry as part of the bicarbonate buffer system .
in this system , carbon dioxide diffuse into the red blood cell .
carbonic anhydrase ( ca ) within the red blood cell quickly convert the carbon dioxide into carbonic acid ( h two co three ) .
carbonic acid be an unstable intermediate moleculethat immediately dissociate into bicarbonate ion ( hco three ) and hydrogen ( h ) ion .
since carbon dioxide be quickly convert into bicarbonate ion , this reaction allow for the continue uptake of carbon dioxide into the blood down - pron - concentration gradient .
- pron - also result in the production of h+ ion .
if too much h+ be produce , - pron - can alter blood ph .
however , hemoglobin bind to the free h+ ion and thus limit shift in ph . the newly synthesize bicarbonate ion be transport out of the red blood cell into the liquid component of the blood in exchange for a chloride ion ( cl - )  this be call the chloride shift .
when the blood reach the lung , the bicarbonate ion be transport back into the red blood cell in exchange for the chloride ion .
the h+ ion dissociate from the hemoglobin and bind to the bicarbonate ion .
this produce the carbonic acid intermediate , which be convert back into carbon dioxide through the enzymatic action of ca .
the carbon dioxide produce be expel through the lung during exhalation .
the benefit of the bicarbonate buffer system be that carbon dioxide be " soak up " into the blood with little change to the ph of the system .
this be important because - pron - take only a small change in the overall ph of the body for severe injury or death to result .
the presence of this bicarbonate buffer system also allow for people to travel and live at high altitude  when the partial pressure of oxygen and carbon dioxide change at high altitude , the bicarbonate buffer system adjust to regulate carbon dioxide while maintain the correct ph in the body .
carbon monoxide poisoning while carbon dioxide can readily associate and dissociate from hemoglobin , other molecule such as carbon monoxide ( co ) can not .
carbon monoxide have a great affinity for hemoglobin than oxygen .
therefore , when carbon monoxide be present , - pron - bind to hemoglobin preferentially over oxygen .
as a result , oxygen can not bind to hemoglobin , so very little oxygen be transport through the body ( figure three  nine  .  two  two ) .
carbon monoxide be a colorless , odorless gas and be therefore difficult to detect .
- pron - be produce by gas - powered vehicle and tool .
carbon monoxide can because headache , confusion , and nausea  long - term exposure can because brain damage or death .
administer one  zero  zero percent ( pure ) oxygen be the usual treatment for carbon monoxide poisoning .
administration of pure oxygen speed up the separation of carbon monoxide from hemoglobin . 
introduction most animal be complex multicellular organism that require a mechanism for transport nutrient throughout - pron - body and remove waste product .
the circulatory system have evolve over time from simple diffusion through cell in the early evolution of animal to a complex network of blood vessel that reach all part of the human body .
this extensive network supply the cell , tissue , and organ with oxygen and nutrient , and remove carbon dioxide and waste , which be byproduct of respiration .
at the core of the human circulatory system be the heart .
the size of a clenched fist , the human heart be protect beneath the rib cage .
make of specialized and unique cardiac muscle , - pron - pump blood throughout the body and to the heart - pron - .
heart contraction be drive by intrinsic electrical impulse that the brain and endocrine hormone help to regulate .
understand the heart 's basic anatomy and function be important to understand the body 's circulatory and respiratory system .
gas exchange be one essential function of the circulatory system .
a circulatory system be not need in organism with no specialized respiratory organ because oxygen and carbon dioxide diffuse directly between - pron - body tissue and the external environment .
however , in organism that possess lung and gill , oxygen must be transport from these specialized respiratory organ to the body tissue via a circulatory system .
therefore , circulatory system have have to evolve to accommodate the great diversity of body size and body type present among animal .
in all animal , except a few simple type , the circulatory system be use to transport nutrient and gas through the body .
simple diffusion allow some water , nutrient , waste , and gas exchange into primitive animal that be only a few cell layer thick  however , bulk flow be the only method by which the entire body of large more complex organism be access .
circulatory system architecture
the circulatory system be effectively a network of cylindrical vessel  the artery , vein , and capillary that emanate from a pump , the heart .
in all vertebrate organism , as well as some invertebrate , this be a closed - loop system , in which the blood be not free in a cavity .
in a closed circulatory system , blood be contain inside blood vessel and circulate unidirectionally from the heart around the systemic circulatory route , then return to the heart again , as illustrate in figure four  zero  .  two a .
as oppose to a closed system , arthropod — include insect , crustacean , and most mollusk — have an open circulatory system , as illustrate in figure four  zero  .  two b .
in an open circulatory system , the blood be not enclose in the blood vessel but be pump into a cavity call a hemocoel and be call hemolymph because the blood mix with the interstitial fluid .
as the heart beat and the animal move , the hemolymph circulate around the organ within the body cavity and then reenter the heart through opening call ostia .
this movement allow for gas and nutrient exchange .
an open circulatory system do not use as much energy as a closed system to operate or to maintain  however , there be a trade - off with the amount of blood that can be move to metabolically active organ and tissue that require high level of oxygen .
in fact , one reason that insect with wing span of up to two foot wide ( seven  zero cm ) be not around today be probably because - pron - be outcompet by the arrival of bird one  five  zero million year ago .
bird , have a closed circulatory system , be think to have move more agilely , allow - pron - to get food faster and possibly to prey on the insect .
in ( a ) closed circulatory system , the heart pump blood through vessel that be separate from the interstitial fluid of the body .
most vertebrate and some invertebrate , like this annelid earthworm , have a closed circulatory system .
in ( b ) open circulatory system , a fluid call hemolymph be pump through a blood vessel that empty into the body cavity .
hemolymph return to the blood vessel through opening call ostia .
arthropod like this bee and most mollusk have open circulatory system .
circulatory system variation in animals
the circulatory system vary from simple system in invertebrate to more complex system in vertebrate .
the simple animal , such as the sponge ( porifera ) and rotifer ( rotifera ) , do not need a circulatory system because diffusion allow adequate exchange of water , nutrient , and waste , as well as dissolved gas , as show in figure four  zero  .  three a .
organism that be more complex but still only have two layer of cell in - pron - body plan , such as jelly ( cnidaria ) and comb jelly ( ctenophora ) also use diffusion through - pron - epidermis and internally through the gastrovascular compartment .
both - pron - internal and external tissue be bath in an aqueous environment and exchange fluid by diffusion on both side , as illustrate in figure four  zero  .  three b .
exchange of fluid be assist by the pulsing of the jellyfish body .
simple animal consist of a single cell layer such as the ( a ) sponge or only a few cell layer such as the ( b ) jellyfish do not have a circulatory system .
instead , gas , nutrient , and waste be exchange by diffusion .
for more complex organism , diffusion be not efficient for cycling gas , nutrient , and waste effectively through the body  therefore , more complex circulatory system evolve .
most arthropod and many mollusk have open circulatory system .
in an open system , an elongate beat heart push the hemolymph through the body and muscle contraction help to move fluid .
the large more complex crustacean , include lobster , have develop arterial - like vessel to push blood through - pron - body , and the most active mollusk , such as squid , have evolve a closed circulatory system and be able to move rapidly to catch prey .
closed circulatory system be a characteristic of vertebrate  however , there be significant difference in the structure of the heart and the circulation of blood between the different vertebrate group due to adaptation during evolution and associate difference in anatomy .
figure four  zero  .  four illustrate the basic circulatory system of some vertebrate  fish , amphibian , reptile , and mammal .
fish have the simple circulatory system of the vertebrate  blood flow unidirectionally from the two - chamber heart through the gill and then the rest of the body .
( b ) amphibian have two circulatory route  one for oxygenation of the blood through the lung and skin , and the other to take oxygen to the rest of the body .
the blood be pump from a three - chamber heart with two atrium and a single ventricle .
( c ) reptiles also have two circulatory route  however , blood be only oxygenate through the lung .
the heart be three chamber , but the ventricle be partially separate so some mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood occur except in crocodilian and bird .
( d ) mammal and bird have the most efficient heart with four chamber that completely separate the oxygenated and deoxygenated blood  - pron - pump only oxygenate blood through the body and deoxygenated blood to the lung .
as illustrate in figure four  zero  .  four a fish have a single circuit for blood flow and a two - chamber heart that have only a single atrium and a single ventricle .
the atrium collect blood that have return from the body and the ventricle pump the blood to the gill where gas exchange occur and the blood be re - oxygenated  this be call gill circulation .
the blood then continue through the rest of the body before arrive back at the atrium  this be call systemic circulation .
this unidirectional flow of blood produce a gradient of oxygenate to deoxygenated blood around the fish 's systemic circuit .
the result be a limit in the amount of oxygen that can reach some of the organ and tissue of the body , reduce the overall metabolic capacity of fish .
in amphibian , reptile , bird , and mammal , blood flow be direct in two circuit  one through the lung and back to the heart , which be call pulmonary circulation , and the other throughout the rest of the body and - pron - organ include the brain ( systemic circulation ) .
in amphibian , gas exchange also occur through the skin during pulmonary circulation and be refer to as pulmocutaneous circulation .
as show in figure four  zero  .  four b , amphibian have a three - chamber heart that have two atria and one ventricle rather than the two - chamber heart of fish .
the two atria ( superior heart chamber ) receive blood from the two different circuit ( the lung and the system ) , and then there be some mixing of the blood in the heart 's ventricle ( inferior heart chamber ) , which reduce the efficiency of oxygenation .
the advantage to this arrangement be that high pressure in the vessel push blood to the lung and body .
the mixing be mitigate by a ridge within the ventricle that divert oxygen - rich blood through the systemic circulatory system and deoxygenate blood to the pulmocutaneous circuit .
for this reason , amphibian be often describe as have double circulation .
most reptile also have a three - chamber heart similar to the amphibian heart that direct blood to the pulmonary and systemic circuit , as show in figure four  zero  .  four c .
the ventricle be divide more effectively by a partial septum , which result in less mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood .
some reptile ( alligator and crocodile ) be the most primitive animal to exhibit a four - chamber heart .
crocodilians have a unique circulatory mechanism where the heart shunt blood from the lung toward the stomach and other organ during long period of submergence , for instance , while the animal wait for prey or stay underwater wait for prey to rot .
one adaptation include two main artery that leave the same part of the heart  one take blood to the lung and the other provide an alternate route to the stomach and other part of the body .
two other adaptation include a hole in the heart between the two ventricle , call the foraman of panizza , which allow blood to move from one side of the heart to the other , and specialize connective tissue that slow the blood flow to the lung .
together these adaptation have make crocodile and alligator one of the most evolutionarily successful animal group on earth .
in mammal and bird , the heart be also divide into four chamber  two atrium and two ventricle , as illustrate in figure four  zero  .  four d .
the oxygenated blood be separate from the deoxygenated blood , which improve the efficiency of double circulation and be probably require for the warm - blooded lifestyle of mammal and bird .
the four - chamber heart of bird and mammal evolve independently from a three - chamber heart .
the independent evolution of the same or a similar biological trait be refer to as convergent evolution .
hemoglobin be responsible for distribute oxygen , and to a less extent , carbon dioxide , throughout the circulatory system of human , vertebrate , and many invertebrate .
the blood be more than the protein , though .
blood be actually a term use to describe the liquid that move through the vessel and include plasma ( the liquid portion , which contain water , protein , salt , lipid , and glucose ) and the cell ( red and white cell ) and cell fragment call platelet .
blood plasma be actually the dominant component of blood and contain the water , protein , electrolyte , lipid , and glucose .
the cell be responsible for carry the gas ( red cell ) and immune the response ( white ) .
the platelet be responsible for blood clotting .
interstitial fluid that surround cell be separate from the blood , but in hemolymph , - pron - be combine .
in human , cellular component make up approximately four  five percent of the blood and the liquid plasma five  five percent .
blood be two  zero percent of a person 's extracellular fluid and eight percent of weight .
the role of blood in the body blood , like the human blood illustrate in figure four  zero  .  five be important for regulation of the body 's system and homeostasis .
blood help maintain homeostasis by stabilize ph , temperature , osmotic pressure , and by eliminate excess heat .
blood support growth by distribute nutrient and hormone , and by remove waste .
blood play a protective role by transport clotting factor and platelet to prevent blood loss and transport the disease - fight agent or white blood cell to site of infection .
the cell and cellular component of human blood be show .
red blood cell deliver oxygen to the cell and remove carbon dioxide .
white blood cell — include neutrophil , monocyte , lymphocyte , eosinophil , and basophil — be involve in the immune response .
platelet form clot that prevent blood loss after injury .
red blood cell red blood cell , or erythrocyt ( erythro - = " red "  - cyte = " cell " ) , be specialized cell that circulate through the body deliver oxygen to cell  - pron - be form from stem cell in the bone marrow .
in mammal , red blood cell be small biconcave cell that at maturity do not contain a nucleus or mitochondria and be only seven – eight μm in size .
in bird and non - avian reptile , a nucleus be still maintain in red blood cell .
the red coloring of blood come from the iron - contain protein hemoglobin , illustrate in figure four  zero  .  six a .
the principal job of this protein be to carry oxygen , but - pron - also transport carbon dioxide as well .
hemoglobin be pack into red blood cell at a rate of about two  five  zero million molecule of hemoglobin per cell .
each hemoglobin molecule bind four oxygen molecule so that each red blood cell carry one billion molecule of oxygen .
there be approximately two  five trillion red blood cell in the five liter of blood in the human body , which could carry up to two  five sextillion ( two  five × one  zero  two  one ) molecule of oxygen in the body at any time .
in mammal , the lack of organelle in erythrocyte leave more room for the hemoglobin molecule , and the lack of mitochondria also prevent use of the oxygen for metabolic respiration .
only mammal have anucleat red blood cell , and some mammal ( camel , for instance ) even have nucleate red blood cell .
the advantage of nucleate red blood cell be that these cell can undergo mitosis .
anucleat red blood cell metabolize anaerobically ( without oxygen ) , make use of a primitive metabolic pathway to produce atp and increase the efficiency of oxygen transport .
not all organism use hemoglobin as the method of oxygen transport .
invertebrate that utilize hemolymph rather than blood use different pigment to bind to the oxygen .
these pigment use copper or iron to the oxygen .
invertebrates have a variety of other respiratory pigment .
hemocyanin , a blue - green , copper - contain protein , illustrate in figure four  zero  .  six b be find in mollusk , crustacean , and some of the arthropod .
chlorocruorin , a green - colored , iron - contain pigment be find in four family of polychaete tubeworm .
hemerythrin , a red , iron - contain protein be find in some polychaete worm and annelid and be illustrate in figure four  zero  .  six c .
despite the name , hemerythrin do not contain a heme group and - pron - oxygen - carry capacity be poor compare to hemoglobin .
in most vertebrate , ( a ) hemoglobin deliver oxygen to the body and remove some carbon dioxide .
hemoglobin be compose of four protein subunit , two alpha chain and two beta chain , and a heme group that have iron associate with - pron - .
the iron reversibly associate with oxygen , and in so do be oxidize from fe two + to fe three + .
in most mollusk and some arthropod , ( b ) hemocyanin deliver oxygen .
unlike hemoglobin , hemolymph be not carry in blood cell , but float free in the hemolymph .
copper instead of iron bind the oxygen , give the hemolymph a blue - green color .
in annelid , such as the earthworm , and some other invertebrate , ( c ) hemerythrin carry oxygen .
like hemoglobin , hemerythrin be carry in blood cell and have iron associate with - pron - , but despite - pron - name , hemerythrin do not contain heme .
the small size and large surface area of red blood cell allow for rapid diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide across the plasma membrane .
in the lung , carbon dioxide be release and oxygen be take in by the blood .
in the tissue , oxygen be release from the blood and carbon dioxide be bind for transport back to the lung .
study have find that hemoglobin also bind nitrous oxide ( no ) .
no be a vasodilator that relax the blood vessel and capillary and may help with gas exchange and the passage of red blood cell through narrow vessel .
nitroglycerin , a heart medication for angina and heart attack , be convert to no to help relax the blood vessel and increase oxygen flow through the body .
a characteristic of red blood cell be - pron - glycolipid and glycoprotein coating  these be lipid and protein that have carbohydrate molecule attach .
in human , the surface glycoprotein and glycolipid on red blood cell vary between individual , produce the different blood type , such as a , b , and o . red blood cell have an average life span of one  two  zero day , at which time - pron - be break down and recycle in the liver and spleen by phagocytic macrophage , a type of white blood cell .
white blood cells white blood cell , also call leukocyte ( leuko = white ) , make up approximately one percent by volume of the cell in blood .
the role of white blood cell be very different than that of red blood cell  - pron - be primarily involve in the immune response to identify and target pathogen , such as invade bacteria , virus , and other foreign organism .
white blood cell be form continually  some only live for hour or day , but some live for year .
the morphology of white blood cell differ significantly from red blood cell .
- pron - have nucleus and do not contain hemoglobin .
the different type of white blood cell be identify by - pron - microscopic appearance after histologic staining , and each have a different specialized function .
the two main group , both illustrate in figure four  zero  .  seven be the granulocyte , which include the neutrophil , eosinophil , and basophil , and the agranulocyte , which include the monocyte and lymphocyte .
granulocytes — include neutrophil , eosinophil and basophil — be characterize by a lob nucleus and granular inclusion in the cytoplasm .
granulocytes be typically first - responder during injury or infection .
( b ) agranulocyte include lymphocyte and monocyte .
lymphocytes , include b and t cell , be responsible for adaptive immune response .
monocyte differentiate into macrophage and dendritic cell , which in turn respond to infection or injury .
granulocytes contain granule in - pron - cytoplasm  the agranulocyte be so name because of the lack of granule in - pron - cytoplasm .
some leukocyte become macrophage that either stay at the same site or move through the blood stream and gather at site of infection or inflammation where - pron - be attract by chemical signal from foreign particle and damage cell .
lymphocytes be the primary cell of the immune system and include b cell , t cell , and natural killer cell .
b cell destroy bacteria and inactivate - pron - toxin .
- pron - also produce antibody .
t cell attack virus , fungus , some bacteria , transplanted cell , and cancer cell .
t cell attack virus by release toxin that kill the virus .
natural killer cell attack a variety of infectious microbe and certain tumor cell .
one reason that hiv pose significant management challenge be because the virus directly target t cell by gain entry through a receptor .
once inside the cell , hiv then multiply use the t cell 's own genetic machinery .
after the hiv virus replicate , - pron - be transmit directly from the infected t cell to macrophage .
the presence of hiv can remain unrecognized for an extensive period of time before full disease symptom develop .
platelet and coagulation factors blood must clot to heal wound and prevent excess blood loss .
small cell fragment call platelet ( thrombocyte ) be attract to the wound site where - pron - adhere by extend many projection and release - pron - content .
these content activate other platelet and also interact with other coagulation factor , which convert fibrinogen , a water - soluble protein present in blood serum into fibrin ( a non - water soluble protein ) , cause the blood to clot .
many of the clotting factor require vitamin k to work , and vitamin k deficiency can lead to problem with blood clotting .
many platelet converge and stick together at the wound site form a platelet plug ( also call a fibrin clot ) , as illustrate in figure four  zero  .  eight b .
the plug or clot last for a number of day and stop the loss of blood .
platelet be form from the disintegration of large cell call megakaryocyte , like that show in figure four  zero  .  eight a .
for each megakaryocyte , two  zero  zero  zero – three  zero  zero  zero platelet be form with one  five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero to four  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero platelet present in each cubic millimeter of blood .
each platelet be disc shape and two – four μm in diameter .
- pron - contain many small vesicle but do not contain a nucleus .
platelet be form from large cell call megakaryocyte .
the megakaryocyte break up into thousand of fragment that become platelet .
( b ) platelet be require for clotting of the blood .
the platelet collect at a wound site in conjunction with other clotting factor , such as fibrinogen , to form a fibrin clot that prevent blood loss and allow the wound to heal .
plasma and serum
the liquid component of blood be call plasma , and - pron - be separate by spin or centrifuge the blood at high rotation ( three  zero  zero  zero rpm or high ) .
the blood cell and platelet be separate by centrifugal force to the bottom of a specimen tube .
the upper liquid layer , the plasma , consist of nine  zero percent water along with various substance require for maintain the body 's ph , osmotic load , and for protect the body .
the plasma also contain the coagulation factor and antibody .
the plasma component of blood without the coagulation factor be call the serum .
serum be similar to interstitial fluid in which the correct composition of key ion act as electrolyte be essential for normal functioning of muscle and nerve .
other component in the serum include protein that assist with maintain ph and osmotic balance while give viscosity to the blood .
the serum also contain antibody , specialized protein that be important for defense against virus and bacteria .
lipid , include cholesterol , be also transport in the serum , along with various other substance include nutrient , hormone , metabolic waste , plus external substance , such as , drug , virus , and bacteria .
human serum albumin be the most abundant protein in human blood plasma and be synthesize in the liver .
albumin , which constitute about half of the blood serum protein , transport hormone and fatty acid , buffer ph , and maintain osmotic pressure .
immunoglobin be a protein antibody produce in the mucosal line and play an important role in antibody mediate immunity .
the heart be a complex muscle that pump blood through the three division of the circulatory system  the coronary ( vessel that serve the heart ) , pulmonary ( heart and lung ) , and systemic ( system of the body ) , as show in figure four  zero  .  one  zero .
coronary circulation intrinsic to the heart take blood directly from the main artery ( aorta ) come from the heart .
for pulmonary and systemic circulation , the heart have to pump blood to the lung or the rest of the body , respectively .
in vertebrate , the lung be relatively close to the heart in the thoracic cavity .
the short distance to pump mean that the muscle wall on the right side of the heart be not as thick as the left side which must have enough pressure to pump blood all the way to - pron - big toe .
structure of the heart
the heart muscle be asymmetrical as a result of the distance blood must travel in the pulmonary and systemic circuit .
since the right side of the heart send blood to the pulmonary circuit - pron - be small than the left side which must send blood out to the whole body in the systemic circuit , as show in figure four  zero  .  one  one .
in human , the heart be about the size of a clenched fist  - pron - be divide into four chamber  two atrium and two ventricle .
there be one atrium and one ventricle on the right side and one atrium and one ventricle on the left side .
the atria be the chamber that receive blood , and the ventricle be the chamber that pump blood .
the right atrium receive deoxygenate blood from the superior vena cava , which drain blood from the jugular vein that come from the brain and from the vein that come from the arm , as well as from the inferior vena cava which drain blood from the vein that come from the low organ and the leg .
in addition , the right atrium receive blood from the coronary sinus which drain deoxygenated blood from the heart - pron - .
this deoxygenated blood then pass to the right ventricle through the atrioventricular valve or the tricuspid valve , a flap of connective tissue that open in only one direction to prevent the backflow of blood .
the valve separate the chamber on the left side of the heart valve be call the biscuspid or mitral valve .
after - pron - be fill , the right ventricle pump the blood through the pulmonary artery , by - pass the semilunar valve ( or pulmonic valve ) to the lung for re - oxygenation .
after blood pass through the pulmonary artery , the right semilunar valve close prevent the blood from flow backwards into the right ventricle .
the left atrium then receive the oxygen - rich blood from the lung via the pulmonary vein .
this blood pass through the bicuspid valve or mitral valve ( the atrioventricular valve on the left side of the heart ) to the left ventricle where the blood be pump out through aorta , the major artery of the body , take oxygenated blood to the organ and muscle of the body .
once blood be pump out of the left ventricle and into the aorta , the aortic semilunar valve ( or aortic valve ) close prevent blood from flow backward into the left ventricle .
this pattern of pumping be refer to as double circulation and be find in all mammal .
the heart be compose of three layer  the epicardium , the myocardium , and the endocardium , illustrate in figure four  zero  .  one  one .
the inner wall of the heart have a lining call the endocardium .
the myocardium consist of the heart muscle cell that make up the middle layer and the bulk of the heart wall .
the outer layer of cell be call the epicardium , of which the second layer be a membranous layer structure call the pericardium that surround and protect the heart  - pron - allow enough room for vigorous pumping but also keep the heart in place to reduce friction between the heart and other structure .
the heart have - pron - own blood vessel that supply the heart muscle with blood .
the coronary artery branch from the aorta and surround the outer surface of the heart like a crown .
- pron - diverge into capillary where the heart muscle be supply with oxygen before converge again into the coronary vein to take the deoxygenated blood back to the right atrium where the blood will be re - oxygenate through the pulmonary circuit .
the heart muscle will die without a steady supply of blood .
atherosclerosis be the blockage of an artery by the buildup of fatty plaque .
because of the size ( narrow ) of the coronary artery and - pron - function in serve the heart - pron - , atherosclerosis can be deadly in these artery .
the slowdown of blood flow and subsequent oxygen deprivation that result from atherosclerosis cause severe pain , know as angina , and complete blockage of the artery will because myocardial infarction  the death of cardiac muscle tissue , commonly know as a heart attack .
the cardiac cycle
the main purpose of the heart be to pump blood through the body  - pron - do so in a repeat sequence call the cardiac cycle .
the cardiac cycle be the coordination of the filling and emptying of the heart of blood by electrical signal that because the heart muscle to contract and relax .
the human heart beat over one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero time per day .
in each cardiac cycle , the heart contract ( systole ) , push out the blood and pump - pron - through the body  this be follow by a relaxation phase ( diastole ) , where the heart fill with blood , as illustrate in figure four  zero  .  one  two .
the atria contract at the same time , force blood through the atrioventricular valve into the ventricle .
closing of the atrioventricular valve produce a monosyllabic " lup " sound .
follow a brief delay , the ventricle contract at the same time force blood through the semilunar valve into the aorta and the artery transport blood to the lung ( via the pulmonary artery ) .
closing of the semilunar valve produce a monosyllabic " dup " sound .
during ( a ) cardiac diastole , the heart muscle be relaxed and blood flow into the heart .
during ( b ) atrial systole , the atria contract , push blood into the ventricle .
during ( c ) atrial diastole , the ventricle contract , force blood out of the heart .
the pumping of the heart be a function of the cardiac muscle cell , or cardiomyocyte , that make up the heart muscle .
cardiomyocyte , show in figure four  zero  .  one  three , be distinctive muscle cell that be striate like skeletal muscle but pump rhythmically and involuntarily like smooth muscle  - pron - be connect by intercalated disk exclusive to cardiac muscle .
- pron - be self - stimulate for a period of time and isolate cardiomyocyte will beat if give the correct balance of nutrient and electrolyte .
cardiomyocyte be striate muscle cell find in cardiac tissue .
( credit  modification of work by dr . s . girod , anton becker  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
the autonomous beating of cardiac muscle cell be regulate by the heart 's internal pacemaker that use electrical signal to time the beating of the heart .
the electrical signal and mechanical action , illustrate in figure four  zero  .  one  four , be intimately intertwine .
the internal pacemaker start at the sinoatrial ( sa ) node , which be locate near the wall of the right atrium .
electrical charge spontaneously pulse from the sa node cause the two atria to contract in unison .
the pulse reach a second node , call the atrioventricular ( av ) node , between the right atrium and right ventricle where - pron - pause for approximately zero  .  one second before spread to the wall of the ventricle .
from the av node , the electrical impulse enter the bundle of - pron - , then to the left and right bundle branch extend through the interventricular septum .
finally , the purkinje fiber conduct the impulse from the apex of the heart up the ventricular myocardium , and then the ventricle contract .
this pause allow the atria to empty completely into the ventricle before the ventricle pump out the blood .
the electrical impulse in the heart produce electrical current that flow through the body and can be measure on the skin use electrode .
this information can be observe as an electrocardiogram ( ecg ) —a recording of the electrical impulse of the cardiac muscle .
the beating of the heart be regulate by an electrical impulse that cause the characteristic reading of an ecg .
the signal be initiate at the sinoatrial valve .
the signal then ( a ) spread to the atria , cause - pron - to contract .
the signal be ( b ) delay at the atrioventricular node before - pron - be pass on to the ( c ) heart apex .
the delay allow the atria to relax before the ( d ) ventricle contract .
the final part of the ecg cycle prepare the heart for the next beat .
artery , veins , and capillaries
the blood from the heart be carry through the body by a complex network of blood vessel ( figure four  zero  .  one  five ) .
artery take blood away from the heart .
the main artery be the aorta that branch into major artery that take blood to different limb and organ .
these major artery include the carotid artery that take blood to the brain , the brachial artery that take blood to the arm , and the thoracic artery that take blood to the thorax and then into the hepatic , renal , and gastric artery for the liver , kidney , and stomach , respectively .
the iliac artery take blood to the low limb .
the major artery diverge into minor artery , and then small vessel call arteriole , to reach more deeply into the muscle and organ of the body .
the major human artery and vein be show .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
arterioles diverge into capillary bed .
capillary bed contain a large number ( one  zero to one  zero  zero ) of capillary that branch among the cell and tissue of the body .
capillary be narrow - diameter tube that can fit red blood cell through in single file and be the site for the exchange of nutrient , waste , and oxygen with tissue at the cellular level .
fluid also cross into the interstitial space from the capillary .
the capillary converge again into venule that connect to minor vein that finally connect to major vein that take blood high in carbon dioxide back to the heart .
vein be blood vessel that bring blood back to the heart .
the major vein drain blood from the same organ and limb that the major artery supply .
fluid be also bring back to the heart via the lymphatic system .
the structure of the different type of blood vessel reflect - pron - function or layer .
there be three distinct layer , or tunic , that form the wall of blood vessel ( figure four  zero  .  one  six ) .
the first tunic be a smooth , inner lining of endothelial cell that be in contact with the red blood cell .
the endothelial tunic be continuous with the endocardium of the heart .
in capillary , this single layer of cell be the location of diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the endothelial cell and red blood cell , as well as the exchange site via endocytosis and exocytosis .
the movement of material at the site of capillary be regulate by vasoconstriction , narrowing of the blood vessel , and vasodilation , widen of the blood vessel  this be important in the overall regulation of blood pressure .
vein and artery both have two further tunic that surround the endothelium  the middle tunic be compose of smooth muscle and the outermost layer be connective tissue ( collagen and elastic fiber ) .
the elastic connective tissue stretch and support the blood vessel , and the smooth muscle layer help regulate blood flow by alter vascular resistance through vasoconstriction and vasodilation .
the artery have thick smooth muscle and connective tissue than the vein to accommodate the high pressure and speed of freshly pump blood .
the vein be thinner walled as the pressure and rate of flow be much low .
in addition , vein be structurally different than artery in that vein have valve to prevent the backflow of blood .
because vein have to work against gravity to get blood back to the heart , contraction of skeletal muscle assist with the flow of blood back to the heart .
artery and vein consist of three layer  an outer tunica externa , a middle tunica medium , and an inner tunica intima .
capillary consist of a single layer of epithelial cell , the tunica intima .
( credit  modification of work by nci , nih ) blood pressure ( bp ) be the pressure exert by blood on the wall of a blood vessel that help to push blood through the body .
systolic blood pressure measure the amount of pressure that blood exert on vessel while the heart be beat .
the optimal systolic blood pressure be one  two  zero mmhg .
diastolic blood pressure measure the pressure in the vessel between heartbeat .
the optimal diastolic blood pressure be eight  zero mmhg .
many factor can affect blood pressure , such as hormone , stress , exercise , eat , sit , and standing .
blood flow through the body be regulate by the size of blood vessel , by the action of smooth muscle , by one - way valve , and by the fluid pressure of the blood - pron - .
how blood flow through the body blood be push through the body by the action of the pump heart .
with each rhythmic pump , blood be push under high pressure and velocity away from the heart , initially along the main artery , the aorta .
in the aorta , the blood travel at three  zero cm / sec .
as blood move into the artery , arteriole , and ultimately to the capillary bed , the rate of movement slow dramatically to about zero  .  zero  two  six cm / sec , one - thousand time slow than the rate of movement in the aorta .
while the diameter of each individual arteriole and capillary be far narrow than the diameter of the aorta , and accord to the law of continuity , fluid should travel faster through a narrow diameter tube , the rate be actually slow due to the overall diameter of all the combine capillary be far great than the diameter of the individual aorta .
the slow rate of travel through the capillary bed , which reach almost every cell in the body , assist with gas and nutrient exchange and also promote the diffusion of fluid into the interstitial space .
after the blood have pass through the capillary bed to the venule , vein , and finally to the main venae cavae , the rate of flow increase again but be still much slow than the initial rate in the aorta .
blood primarily move in the vein by the rhythmic movement of smooth muscle in the vessel wall and by the action of the skeletal muscle as the body move .
because most vein must move blood against the pull of gravity , blood be prevent from flow backward in the vein by one - way valve .
because skeletal muscle contraction aid in venous blood flow , - pron - be important to get up and move frequently after long period of sit so that blood will not pool in the extremity .
blood flow through the capillary bed be regulate depend on the body 's need and be direct by nerve and hormone signal .
for example , after a large meal , most of the blood be divert to the stomach by vasodilation of vessel of the digestive system and vasoconstriction of other vessel .
during exercise , blood be divert to the skeletal muscle through vasodilation while blood to the digestive system would be lessen through vasoconstriction .
the blood enter some capillary bed be control by small muscle , call precapillary sphincter , illustrate in figure four  zero  .  one  seven .
if the sphincter be open , the blood will flow into the associate branch of the capillary blood .
if all of the sphincter be close , then the blood will flow directly from the arteriole to the venule through the thoroughfare channel ( see figure four  zero  .  one  seven ) .
these muscle allow the body to precisely control when capillary bed receive blood flow .
at any give moment only about five - one  zero % of - pron - capillary bed actually have blood flow through - pron - .
protein and other large solute can not leave the capillary .
the loss of the watery plasma create a hyperosmotic solution within the capillary , especially near the venule .
this cause about eight  five % of the plasma that leave the capillary to eventually diffuse back into the capillary near the venule .
the remain one  five % of blood plasma drain out from the interstitial fluid into nearby lymphatic vessel ( figure four  zero  .  one  eight ) .
the fluid in the lymph be similar in composition to the interstitial fluid .
the lymph fluid pass through lymph node before - pron - return to the heart via the vena cava .
lymph node be specialized organ that filter the lymph by percolation through a maze of connective tissue fill with white blood cell .
the white blood cell remove infectious agent , such as bacteria and virus , to clean the lymph before - pron - return to the bloodstream .
after - pron - be clean , the lymph return to the heart by the action of smooth muscle pumping , skeletal muscle action , and one - way valve join the return blood near the junction of the venae cavae enter the right atrium of the heart .
fluid from the capillary move into the interstitial space and lymph capillary by diffusion down a pressure gradient and also by osmosis .
out of seven  ,  two  zero  zero liter of fluid pump by the average heart in a day , over one  ,  five  zero  zero liter be filter .
( credit  modification of work by nci , nih ) blood pressure
the pressure of the blood flow in the body be produce by the hydrostatic pressure of the fluid ( blood ) against the wall of the blood vessel .
fluid will move from area of high to low hydrostatic pressure .
in the artery , the hydrostatic pressure near the heart be very high and blood flow to the arteriole where the rate of flow be slow by the narrow opening of the arteriole .
during systole , when new blood be enter the artery , the artery wall stretch to accommodate the increase of pressure of the extra blood  during diastole , the wall return to normal because of - pron - elastic property .
the blood pressure of the systole phase and the diastole phase , graph in figure four  zero  .  one  nine , give the two pressure reading for blood pressure .
for example , one  two  zero  /  eight  zero indicate a reading of one  two  zero mm hg during the systole and eight  zero mm hg during diastole .
throughout the cardiac cycle , the blood continue to empty into the arteriole at a relatively even rate .
this resistance to blood flow be call peripheral resistance .
figure four  zero  .  one  nine
blood pressure be relate to the blood velocity in the artery and arteriole .
in the capillary and vein , the blood pressure continue to decease but velocity increase .
blood pressure regulation cardiac output be the volume of blood pump by the heart in one minute .
- pron - be calculate by multiply the number of heart contraction that occur per minute ( heart rate ) time the stroke volume ( the volume of blood pump into the aorta per contraction of the left ventricle ) .
therefore , cardiac output can be increase by increase heart rate , as when exercise .
however , cardiac output can also be increase by increase stroke volume , such as if the heart contract with great strength .
stroke volume can also be increase by speed blood circulation through the body so that more blood enter the heart between contraction .
during heavy exertion , the blood vessel relax and increase in diameter , offset the increase heart rate and ensure adequate oxygenated blood get to the muscle .
stress trigger a decrease in the diameter of the blood vessel , consequently increase blood pressure .
these change can also be cause by nerve signal or hormone , and even stand up or lie down can have a great effect on blood pressure . 
just as human recycle what - pron - can and dump the remain into landfill , - pron - body use and recycle what - pron - can and excrete the remain waste product .
- pron - bodies' complex system have develop way to treat waste and maintain a balanced internal environment .
( credit  modification of work by redwin law )
introduction
the daily intake recommendation for human water consumption be eight to ten glass of water .
in order to achieve a healthy balance , the human body should excrete the eight to ten glass of water every day .
this occur via the process of urination , defecation , sweating and , to a small extent , respiration .
the organ and tissue of the human body be soak in fluid that be maintain at constant temperature , ph , and solute concentration , all crucial element of homeostasis .
the solute in body fluid be mainly mineral salt and sugar , and osmotic regulation be the process by which the mineral salt and water be keep in balance .
osmotic homeostasis be maintain despite the influence of external factor like temperature , diet , and weather condition .
osmosis be the diffusion of water across a membrane in response to osmotic pressure cause by an imbalance of molecule on either side of the membrane .
osmoregulation be the process of maintenance of salt and water balance ( osmotic balance ) across membrane within the body 's fluid , which be compose of water , plus electrolyte and non - electrolyte .
an electrolyte be a solute that dissociate into ion when dissolve in water .
a non - electrolyte , in contrast , do not dissociate into ion during water dissolution .
both electrolyte and non - electrolyte contribute to the osmotic balance .
the body 's fluid include blood plasma , the cytosol within cell , and interstitial fluid , the fluid that exist in the space between cell and tissue of the body .
the membrane of the body ( such as the pleural , serous , and cell membrane ) be semi - permeable membrane .
semi - permeable membrane be permeable ( or permissive ) to certain type of solute and water .
solution on two side of a semi - permeable membrane tend to equalize in solute concentration by movement of solute and / or water across the membrane .
as see in figure four  one  .  two , a cell place in water tend to swell due to gain of water from the hypotonic or " low salt " environment .
a cell place in a solution with high salt concentration , on the other hand , tend to make the membrane shrivel up due to loss of water into the hypertonic or " high salt " environment .
isotonic cell have an equal concentration of solute inside and outside the cell  this equalize the osmotic pressure on either side of the cell membrane which be a semi - permeable membrane .
cell place in a hypertonic environment tend to shrink due to loss of water .
in a hypotonic environment , cell tend to swell due to intake of water .
the blood maintain an isotonic environment so that cell neither shrink nor swell .
( credit  mariana ruiz villareal )
the body do not exist in isolation .
there be a constant input of water and electrolyte into the system .
while osmoregulation be achieve across membrane within the body , excess electrolyte and waste be transport to the kidney and excrete , help to maintain osmotic balance .
need for osmoregulation biological system constantly interact and exchange water and nutrient with the environment by way of consumption of food and water and through excretion in the form of sweat , urine , and fece .
without a mechanism to regulate osmotic pressure , or when a disease damage this mechanism , there be a tendency to accumulate toxic waste and water , which can have dire consequence .
mammalian system have evolve to regulate not only the overall osmotic pressure across membrane , but also specific concentration of important electrolyte in the three major fluid compartment  blood plasma , extracellular fluid , and intracellular fluid .
since osmotic pressure be regulate by the movement of water across membrane , the volume of the fluid compartment can also change temporarily .
because blood plasma be one of the fluid component , osmotic pressure have a direct bearing on blood pressure .
transport of electrolytes across cell membranes electrolytes , such as sodium chloride , ionize in water , mean that - pron - dissociate into - pron - component ion .
in water , sodium chloride ( nacl ) , dissociate into the sodium ion ( na+ ) and the chloride ion ( cl– ) .
the most important ion , whose concentration be very closely regulated in body fluid , be the cation sodium ( na+ ) , potassium ( k+ ) , calcium ( ca+ two ) , magnesium ( mg+ two ) , and the anion chloride ( cl - ) , carbonate ( co three - two ) , bicarbonate ( hco three  - ) , and phosphate ( po three  - ) .
electrolyte be lose from the body during urination and perspiration .
for this reason , athlete be encourage to replace electrolyte and fluid during period of increase activity and perspiration .
osmotic pressure be influence by the concentration of solute in a solution .
- pron - be directly proportional to the number of solute atom or molecule and not dependent on the size of the solute molecule .
because electrolyte dissociate into - pron - component ion , - pron - , in essence , add more solute particle into the solution and have a great effect on osmotic pressure , per mass than compound that do not dissociate in water , such as glucose .
water can pass through membrane by passive diffusion .
if electrolyte ion could passively diffuse across membrane , - pron - would be impossible to maintain specific concentration of ion in each fluid compartment therefore - pron - require special mechanism to cross the semi - permeable membrane in the body .
this movement can be accomplish by facilitated diffusion and active transport .
facilitate diffusion require protein - base channel for move the solute .
active transport require energy in the form of atp conversion , carrier protein , or pump in order to move ion against the concentration gradient .
concept of osmolality and milliequivalent
in order to calculate osmotic pressure , - pron - be necessary to understand how solute concentration be measure .
the unit for measuring solute be the mole .
one mole be define as the gram molecular weight of the solute .
for example , the molecular weight of sodium chloride be five  eight  .  four  four .
thus , one mole of sodium chloride weigh five  eight  .  four  four gram .
the molarity of a solution be the number of mole of solute per liter of solution .
the molality of a solution be the number of mole of solute per kilogram of solvent .
if the solvent be water , one kilogram of water be equal to one liter of water .
while molarity and molality be use to express the concentration of solution , electrolyte concentration be usually express in term of milliequivalent per liter ( meq / l ) 
the meq / l be equal to the ion concentration ( in millimole ) multiply by the number of electrical charge on the ion .
the unit of milliequivalent take into consideration the ion present in the solution ( since electrolyte form ion in aqueous solution ) and the charge on the ion .
thus , for ion that have a charge of one , one milliequivalent be equal to one millimole .
for ion that have a charge of two ( like calcium ) , one milliequivalent be equal to zero  .  five millimole .
another unit for the expression of electrolyte concentration be the milliosmole ( mosm ) , which be the number of milliequivalent of solute per kilogram of solvent .
body fluid be usually maintain within the range of two  eight  zero to three  zero  zero mosm .
osmoregulators and osmoconformers persons lose at sea without any fresh water to drink be at risk of severe dehydration because the human body can not adapt to drink seawater , which be hypertonic in comparison to body fluid .
organism such as goldfish that can tolerate only a relatively narrow range of salinity be refer to as stenohaline .
about nine  zero percent of all bony fish be restrict to either freshwater or seawater .
- pron - be incapable of osmotic regulation in the opposite environment .
- pron - be possible , however , for a few fish like salmon to spend part of - pron - life in fresh water and part in sea water .
organism like the salmon and molly that can tolerate a relatively wide range of salinity be refer to as euryhaline organism .
this be possible because some fish have evolve osmoregulatory mechanism to survive in all kind of aquatic environment .
when - pron - live in fresh water , - pron - body tend to take up water because the environment be relatively hypotonic , as illustrate in figure four  one  .  three a .
in such hypotonic environment , these fish do not drink much water .
instead , - pron - pass a lot of very dilute urine , and - pron - achieve electrolyte balance by active transport of salt through the gill .
when - pron - move to a hypertonic marine environment , these fish start drink sea water  - pron - excrete the excess salt through - pron - gill and - pron - urine , as illustrate in figure four  one  .  three b .
most marine invertebrat , on the other hand , may be isotonic with sea water ( osmoconformer ) .
- pron - body fluid concentration conform to change in seawater concentration .
cartilaginous fishes' salt composition of the blood be similar to bony fish  however , the blood of shark contain the organic compound urea and trimethylamine oxide ( tmao ) .
this do not mean that - pron - electrolyte composition be similar to that of sea water .
- pron - achieve isotonicity with the sea by store large concentration of urea .
these animal that secrete urea be call ureotelic animal .
tmao stabilize protein in the presence of high urea level , prevent the disruption of peptide bond that would occur in other animal expose to similar level of urea .
shark be cartilaginous fish with a rectal gland to secrete salt and assist in osmoregulation .
fish be osmoregulator , but must use different mechanism to survive in ( a ) freshwater or ( b ) saltwater environment .
( credit  modification of work by duane raver , noaa )
although the kidney be the major osmoregulatory organ , the skin and lung also play a role in the process .
water and electrolyte be lose through sweat gland in the skin , which help moisturize and cool the skin surface , while the lung expel a small amount of water in the form of mucous secretion and via evaporation of water vapor .
kidney 
the main osmoregulatory organ the kidney , illustrate in figure four  one  .  four , be a pair of bean - shape structure that be locate just below and posterior to the liver in the peritoneal cavity .
the adrenal gland sit on top of each kidney and be also call the suprarenal gland .
kidney filter blood and purify - pron - .
all the blood in the human body be filter many time a day by the kidney  these organ use up almost two  five percent of the oxygen absorb through the lung to perform this function .
oxygen allow the kidney cell to efficiently manufacture chemical energy in the form of atp through aerobic respiration .
the filtrate come out of the kidney be call urine .
kidney filter the blood , produce urine that be store in the bladder prior to elimination through the urethra .
( credit  modification of work by nci )
kidney structure externally , the kidney be surround by three layer , illustrate in figure four  one  .  five .
the outermost layer be a tough connective tissue layer call the renal fascia .
the second layer be call the perirenal fat capsule , which help anchor the kidney in place .
the third and innermost layer be the renal capsule .
internally , the kidney have three region — an outer cortex , a medulla in the middle , and the renal pelvis in the region call the hilum of the kidney .
the hilum be the concave part of the bean - shape where blood vessel and nerve enter and exit the kidney  - pron - be also the point of exit for the ureter .
the renal cortex be granular due to the presence of nephron — the functional unit of the kidney .
the medulla consist of multiple pyramidal tissue mass , call the renal pyramid .
in between the pyramid be space call renal column through which the blood vessel pass .
the tip of the pyramid , call renal papillae , point toward the renal pelvi .
there be , on average , eight renal pyramid in each kidney .
the renal pyramid along with the adjoining cortical region be call the lobe of the kidney .
the renal pelvis lead to the ureter on the outside of the kidney .
on the inside of the kidney , the renal pelvis branch out into two or three extension call the major calyx , which further branch into the minor calyx .
the ureter be urine - bear tube that exit the kidney and empty into the urinary bladder .
because the kidney filter blood , - pron - network of blood vessel be an important component of - pron - structure and function .
the artery , vein , and nerve that supply the kidney enter and exit at the renal hilum .
renal blood supply start with the branching of the aorta into the renal artery ( which be each name base on the region of the kidney - pron - pass through ) and end with the exiting of the renal vein to join the inferior vena cava .
the renal artery split into several segmental artery upon enter the kidney .
each segmental artery split further into several interlobar artery and enter the renal column , which supply the renal lobe .
the interlobar artery split at the junction of the renal cortex and medulla to form the arcuate artery .
the arcuate " bow shaped " artery form arc along the base of the medullary pyramid .
cortical radiate artery , as the name suggest , radiate out from the arcuate artery .
the cortical radiate artery branch into numerous afferent arteriole , and then enter the capillary supply the nephron .
vein trace the path of the artery and have similar name , except there be no segmental vein .
as mention previously , the functional unit of the kidney be the nephron , illustrate in figure four  one  .  six .
each kidney be make up of over one million nephron that dot the renal cortex , give - pron - a granular appearance when section sagittally .
there be two type of nephrons— cortical nephron ( eight  five percent ) , which be deep in the renal cortex , and juxtamedullary nephron ( one  five percent ) , which lie in the renal cortex close to the renal medulla .
a nephron consist of three part — a renal corpuscle , a renal tubule , and the associated capillary network , which originate from the cortical radiate artery .
renal corpuscle
the renal corpuscle , locate in the renal cortex , be make up of a network of capillary know as the glomerulus and the capsule , a cup - shape chamber that surround - pron - , call the glomerular or bowman ' s capsule .
renal tubule
the renal tubule be a long and convoluted structure that emerge from the glomerulus and can be divide into three part base on function .
the first part be call the proximal convoluted tubule ( pct ) due to - pron - proximity to the glomerulus  - pron - stay in the renal cortex .
the second part be call the loop of henle , or nephritic loop , because - pron - form a loop ( with descend and ascend limb ) that go through the renal medulla .
the third part of the renal tubule be call the distal convoluted tubule ( dct ) and this part be also restrict to the renal cortex .
the dct , which be the last part of the nephron , connect and empty - pron - content into collect duct that line the medullary pyramid .
the collect duct amass content from multiple nephron and fuse together as - pron - enter the papillae of the renal medulla .
capillary network within the nephron the capillary network that originate from the renal artery supply the nephron with blood that need to be filter .
the branch that enter the glomerulus be call the afferent arteriole .
the branch that exit the glomerulus be call the efferent arteriole .
within the glomerulus , the network of capillary be call the glomerular capillary bed .
once the efferent arteriole exit the glomerulus , - pron - form the peritubular capillary network , which surround and interact with part of the renal tubule .
in cortical nephron , the peritubular capillary network surround the pct and dct .
in juxtamedullary nephron , the peritubular capillary network form a network around the loop of henle and be call the vasa recta .
kidney function and physiology kidneys filter blood in a three - step process .
first , the nephron filter blood that run through the capillary network in the glomerulus .
almost all solute , except for protein , be filter out into the glomerulus by a process call glomerular filtration .
second , the filtrate be collect in the renal tubule .
most of the solute get reabsorb in the pct by a process call tubular reabsorption .
in the loop of henle , the filtrate continue to exchange solute and water with the renal medulla and the peritubular capillary network .
water be also reabsorb during this step .
then , additional solute and waste be secrete into the kidney tubule during tubular secretion , which be , in essence , the opposite process to tubular reabsorption .
the collect duct collect filtrate come from the nephron and fuse in the medullary papillae .
from here , the papillae deliver the filtrate , now call urine , into the minor calyx that eventually connect to the ureter through the renal pelvis .
this entire process be illustrate in figure four  one  .  seven .
each part of the nephron perform a different function in filter waste and maintain homeostatic balance .
( one )
the glomerulus force small solute out of the blood by pressure .
( two )
the proximal convoluted tubule reabsorbs ion , water , and nutrient from the filtrate into the interstitial fluid , and actively transport toxin and drug from the interstitial fluid into the filtrate .
the proximal convoluted tubule also adjust blood ph by selectively secrete ammonia ( nh three ) into the filtrate , where - pron - react with h+ to form nh four + .
the more acidic the filtrate , the more ammonia be secrete .
( three )
the descend loop of henle be line with cell contain aquaporin that allow water to pass from the filtrate into the interstitial fluid .
( four )
in the thin part of the ascend loop of henle , na+ and cl - ion diffuse into the interstitial fluid .
in the thick part , these same ion be actively transport into the interstitial fluid .
because salt but not water be lose , the filtrate become more dilute as - pron - travel up the limb .
( five )
in the distal convoluted tubule , k+ and h+ ion be selectively secreted into the filtrate , while na+ , cl - , and hco three  - ion be reabsorb to maintain ph and electrolyte balance in the blood .
( six )
the collect duct reabsorbs solute and water from the filtrate , form dilute urine .
( credit  modification of work by niddk )
glomerular filtration glomerular filtration filter out most of the solute due to high blood pressure and specialize membrane in the afferent arteriole .
the blood pressure in the glomerulus be maintain independent of factor that affect systemic blood pressure .
the " leaky " connection between the endothelial cell of the glomerular capillary network allow solute to pass through easily .
all solute in the glomerular capillary , except for macromolecule like protein , pass through by passive diffusion .
there be no energy requirement at this stage of the filtration process .
glomerular filtration rate ( gfr ) be the volume of glomerular filtrate form per minute by the kidney .
gfr be regulate by multiple mechanism and be an important indicator of kidney function .
tubular reabsorption and secretion tubular reabsorption occur in the pct part of the renal tubule .
almost all nutrient be reabsorb , and this occur either by passive or active transport .
reabsorption of water and some key electrolyte be regulate and can be influence by hormone .
sodium ( na+ ) be the most abundant ion and most of - pron - be reabsorb by active transport and then transport to the peritubular capillary .
because na+ be actively transport out of the tubule , water follow - pron - to even out the osmotic pressure .
water be also independently reabsorb into the peritubular capillary due to the presence of aquaporin , or water channel , in the pct .
this occur due to the low blood pressure and high osmotic pressure in the peritubular capillary .
however , every solute have a transport maximum and the excess be not reabsorb .
in the loop of henle , the permeability of the membrane change .
the descend limb be permeable to water , not solut  the opposite be true for the ascend limb .
additionally , the loop of henle invade the renal medulla , which be naturally high in salt concentration and tend to absorb water from the renal tubule and concentrate the filtrate .
the osmotic gradient increase as - pron - move deeper into the medulla .
because two side of the loop of henle perform oppose function , as illustrate in figure four  one  .  eight , - pron - act as a countercurrent multipli .
the vasa recta around - pron - act as the countercurrent exchanger .
by the time the filtrate reach the dct , most of the urine and solute have be reabsorb .
if the body require additional water , all of - pron - can be reabsorb at this point .
further reabsorption be control by hormone , which will be discuss in a later section .
excretion of waste occur due to lack of reabsorption combine with tubular secretion .
undesirable product like metabolic waste , urea , uric acid , and certain drug , be excrete by tubular secretion .
most of the tubular secretion happen in the dct , but some occur in the early part of the collecting duct .
kidneys also maintain an acid - base balance by secrete excess h+ ion .
although part of the renal tubule be name proximal and distal , in a cross - section of the kidney , the tubule be place close together and in contact with each other and the glomerulus .
this allow for exchange of chemical messenger between the different cell type .
for example , the dct ascend limb of the loop of henle have mass of cell call macula densa , which be in contact with cell of the afferent arteriole call juxtaglomerular cell .
together , the macula densa and juxtaglomerular cell form the juxtaglomerular complex ( jgc ) .
the jgc be an endocrine structure that secrete the enzyme renin and the hormone erythropoietin .
when hormone trigger the macula densa cell in the dct due to variation in blood volume , blood pressure , or electrolyte balance , these cell can immediately communicate the problem to the capillary in the afferent and efferent arteriole , which can constrict or relax to change the glomerular filtration rate of the kidney .
microorganism and invertebrate animal use more primitive and simple mechanism to get rid of - pron - metabolic waste than the mammalian system of kidney and urinary function .
three excretory system evolve in organism before complex kidney  vacuole , flame cell , and malpighian tubule .
contractile vacuoles in microorganisms
the most fundamental feature of life be the presence of a cell .
in other word , a cell be the simple functional unit of a life .
bacteria be unicellular , prokaryotic organism that have some of the least complex life process in place  however , prokaryote such as bacteria do not contain membrane - bind vacuole .
the cell of microorganism like bacteria , protozoa , and fungus be bind by cell membrane and use - pron - to interact with the environment .
some cell , include some leucocyte in human , be able to engulf food by endocytosis — the formation of vesicle by involution of the cell membrane within the cell .
the same vesicle be able to interact and exchange metabolite with the intracellular environment .
in some unicellular eukaryotic organism such as the amoeba , show in figure four  one  .  nine , cellular waste and excess water be excrete by exocytosis , when the contractile vacuole merge with the cell membrane and expel waste into the environment .
contractile vacuole ( cv ) should not be confuse with vacuole , which store food or water .
some unicellular organism , such as the amoeba , ingest food by endocytosis .
the food vesicle fuse with a lysosome , which digest the food .
waste be excrete by exocytosis .
flame cells of planaria and nephridia of worms
as multi - cellular system evolve to have organ system that divide the metabolic need of the body , individual organ evolve to perform the excretory function .
planaria be flatworm that live in fresh water .
- pron - excretory system consist of two tubule connect to a highly branched duct system .
the cell in the tubule be call flame cell ( or protonephridia ) because - pron - have a cluster of cilium that look like a flickering flame when view under the microscope , as illustrate in figure four  one  .  one  zero a .
the cilia propel waste matter down the tubule and out of the body through excretory pore that open on the body surface  cilium also draw water from the interstitial fluid , allow for filtration .
any valuable metabolite be recover by reabsorption .
flame cell be find in flatworm , include parasitic tapeworm and free - live planaria .
- pron - also maintain the organism 's osmotic balance .
in the excretory system of the ( a ) planaria , cilium of flame cell propel waste through a tubule form by a tube cell .
tubule be connect into branched structure that lead to pore locate all along the side of the body .
the filtrate be secrete through these pore .
in ( b ) annelid such as earthworm , nephridia filter fluid from the coelom , or body cavity .
beat cilium at the opening of the nephridium draw water from the coelom into a tubule .
as the filtrate pass down the tubule , nutrient and other solute be reabsorb by capillary .
filter fluid contain nitrogenous and other waste be store in a bladder and then secrete through a pore in the side of the body .
earthworm ( annelid ) have slightly more evolved excretory structure call nephridia , illustrate in figure four  one  .  one  zero b .
a pair of nephridia be present on each segment of the earthworm .
- pron - be similar to flame cell in that - pron - have a tubule with cilium .
excretion occur through a pore call the nephridiopore .
- pron - be more evolve than the flame cell in that - pron - have a system for tubular reabsorption by a capillary network before excretion .
malpighian tubules of insect malpighian tubule be find line the gut of some specie of arthropod , such as the bee illustrate in figure four  one  .  one  one .
- pron - be usually find in pair and the number of tubule vary with the specie of insect .
malpighian tubule be convoluted , which increase - pron - surface area , and - pron - be line with microvilli for reabsorption and maintenance of osmotic balance .
malpighian tubule work cooperatively with specialized gland in the wall of the rectum .
body fluid be not filter as in the case of nephridia  urine be produce by tubular secretion mechanism by the cell line the malpighian tubule that be bath in hemolymph ( a mixture of blood and interstitial fluid that be find in insect and other arthropod as well as most mollusk ) .
metabolic waste like uric acid freely diffuse into the tubule .
there be exchange pump line the tubule , which actively transport h+ ion into the cell and k+ or na+ ion out  water passively follow to form urine .
the secretion of ion alter the osmotic pressure which draw water , electrolyte , and nitrogenous waste ( uric acid ) into the tubule .
water and electrolyte be reabsorb when these organism be face with low - water environment , and uric acid be excrete as a thick paste or powder .
not dissolve waste in water help these organism to conserve water  this be especially important for life in dry environment .
malpighian tubule of insect and other terrestrial arthropod remove nitrogenous waste and other solute from the hemolymph .
na+
and / or k+ ion be actively transport into the luman of the tubule .
water then enter the tubule via osmosis , form urine .
the urine pass through the intestine , and into the rectum .
there , nutrient diffuse back into the hemolymph .
na+
and / or k+ ion be pump into the hemolymph , and water follow .
the concentrated waste be then excrete .
of the four major macromolecule in biological system , both protein and nucleic acid contain nitrogen .
during the catabolism , or breakdown , of nitrogen - contain macromolecule , carbon , hydrogen , and oxygen be extract and store in the form of carbohydrate and fat .
excess nitrogen be excrete from the body .
nitrogenous waste tend to form toxic ammonia , which raise the ph of body fluid .
the formation of ammonia - pron - require energy in the form of atp and large quantity of water to dilute - pron - out of a biological system .
animal that live in aquatic environment tend to release ammonia into the water .
animal that excrete ammonia be say to be ammonotelic .
terrestrial organism have evolve other mechanism to excrete nitrogenous waste .
the animal must detoxify ammonia by convert - pron - into a relatively nontoxic form such as urea or uric acid .
mammal , include human , produce urea , whereas reptile and many terrestrial invertebrate produce uric acid .
animal that secrete urea as the primary nitrogenous waste material be call ureotelic animal .
nitrogenous waste in terrestrial animals 
the urea cycle
the urea cycle be the primary mechanism by which mammal convert ammonia to urea .
urea be make in the liver and excrete in urine .
the overall chemical reaction by which ammonia be convert to urea be two nh three ( ammonia ) + co two + three atp + h two o → h two n - co - nh two ( urea ) + two adp + four pi + amp .
the urea cycle utilize five intermediate step , catalyze by five different enzyme , to convert ammonia to urea , as show in figure four  one  .  one  two .
the amino acid l - ornithine get convert into different intermediate before be regenerate at the end of the urea cycle .
hence , the urea cycle be also refer to as the ornithine cycle .
the enzyme ornithine transcarbamylase catalyze a key step in the urea cycle and - pron - deficiency can lead to accumulation of toxic level of ammonia in the body .
the first two reaction occur in the mitochondria and the last three reaction occur in the cytosol .
urea concentration in the blood , call blood urea nitrogen or bun , be use as an indicator of kidney function .
nitrogenous waste in birds and reptiles 
uric acid birds , reptile , and most terrestrial arthropod convert toxic ammonia to uric acid or the closely related compound guanine ( guano ) instead of urea .
mammal also form some uric acid during breakdown of nucleic acid .
uric acid be a compound similar to purine find in nucleic acid .
- pron - be water insoluble and tend to form a white paste or powder  - pron - be excrete by bird , insect , and reptile .
conversion of ammonia to uric acid require more energy and be much more complex than conversion of ammonia to urea figure four  one  .  one  three .
nitrogenous waste be excrete in different form by different specie .
these include ( a ) ammonia , ( b ) urea , and ( c ) uric acid .
( credit a  modification of work by eric engbretson , usfws  credit b  modification of work by b . " moose " peterson , usfws  credit c  modification of work by dave menke , usfws )
while the kidney operate to maintain osmotic balance and blood pressure in the body , - pron - also act in concert with hormone .
hormone be small molecule that act as messenger within the body .
hormone be typically secrete from one cell and travel in the bloodstream to affect a target cell in another portion of the body .
different region of the nephron bear specialized cell that have receptor to respond to chemical messenger and hormone .
table four  one  .  one summarize the hormone that control the osmoregulatory function .
epinephrine and norepinephrine epinephrine and norepinephrine be release by the adrenal medulla and nervous system respectively .
- pron - be the flight / fight hormone that be release when the body be under extreme stress .
during stress , much of the body 's energy be use to combat imminent danger .
kidney function be halt temporarily by epinephrine and norepinephrine .
these hormone function by act directly on the smooth muscle of blood vessel to constrict - pron - .
once the afferent arteriole be constrict , blood flow into the nephron stop .
these hormone go one step further and trigger the renin - angiotensin - aldosterone system .
renin - angiotensin - aldosterone
the renin - angiotensin - aldosterone system , illustrate in figure four  one  .  one  five proceed through several step to produce angiotensin ii , which act to stabilize blood pressure and volume .
renin ( secrete by a part of the juxtaglomerular complex ) be produce by the granular cell of the afferent and efferent arteriole .
thus , the kidney control blood pressure and volume directly .
renin act on angiotensinogen , which be make in the liver and convert - pron - to angiotensin i . angiotensin convert enzyme ( ace ) convert angiotensin i to angiotensin ii .
angiotensin ii raise blood pressure by constrict blood vessel .
- pron - also trigger the release of the mineralocorticoid aldosterone from the adrenal cortex , which in turn stimulate the renal tubule to reabsorb more sodium .
angiotensin ii also trigger the release of anti - diuretic hormone ( adh ) from the hypothalamus , lead to water retention in the kidney .
- pron - act directly on the nephron and decrease glomerular filtration rate .
medically , blood pressure can be control by drug that inhibit ace ( call ace inhibitor ) .
the renin - angiotensin - aldosterone system increase blood pressure and volume .
the hormone anp have antagonistic effect .
( credit  modification of work by mikael häggström )
mineralocorticoids mineralocorticoid be hormone synthesize by the adrenal cortex that affect osmotic balance .
aldosterone be a mineralocorticoid that regulate sodium level in the blood .
almost all of the sodium in the blood be reclaim by the renal tubule under the influence of aldosterone .
because sodium be always reabsorb by active transport and water follow sodium to maintain osmotic balance , aldosterone manage not only sodium level but also the water level in body fluid .
in contrast , the aldosterone also stimulate potassium secretion concurrently with sodium reabsorption .
in contrast , absence of aldosterone mean that no sodium get reabsorb in the renal tubule and all of - pron - get excrete in the urine .
in addition , the daily dietary potassium load be not secreted and the retention of k+ can because a dangerous increase in plasma k+ concentration .
patient who have addison ' s disease have a fail adrenal cortex and can not produce aldosterone .
- pron - lose sodium in - pron - urine constantly , and if the supply be not replenish , the consequence can be fatal .
antidiurectic hormone
as previously discuss , antidiuretic hormone or adh ( also call vasopressin ) , as the name suggest , help the body conserve water when body fluid volume , especially that of blood , be low .
- pron - be form by the hypothalamus and be store and release from the posterior pituitary .
- pron - act by insert aquaporin in the collect duct and promote reabsorption of water .
adh also act as a vasoconstrictor and increase blood pressure during hemorrhage .
atrial natriuretic peptide hormone
the atrial natriuretic peptide ( anp ) lower blood pressure by act as a vasodilator .
- pron - be release by cell in the atrium of the heart in response to high blood pressure and in patient with sleep apnea .
anp affect salt release , and because water passively follow salt to maintain osmotic balance , - pron - also have a diuretic effect .
anp also prevent sodium reabsorption by the renal tubule , decrease water reabsorption ( thus act as a diuretic ) and lower blood pressure .
- pron - action suppress the action of aldosterone , adh , and renin .
in this compound light micrograph purple - stain neutrophil ( upper left ) and eosinophil ( low right ) be white blood cell that float among red blood cell in this blood smear .
neutrophils provide an early , rapid , and nonspecific defense against invade pathogen .
eosinophil play a variety of role in the immune response .
red blood cell be about seven – eight μm in diameter , and a neutrophil be about one  zero – one  two μm .
the environment consist of numerous pathogen , which be agent , usually microorganism , that because disease in - pron - host .
a host be the organism that be invade and often harm by a pathogen .
pathogen include bacteria , protist , fungus and other infectious organism .
- pron - be constantly expose to pathogen in food and water , on surface , and in the air .
mammalian immune system evolve for protection from such pathogen  - pron - be compose of an extremely diverse array of specialized cell and soluble molecule that coordinate a rapid and flexible defense system capable of provide protection from a majority of these disease agent .
component of the immune system constantly search the body for sign of pathogen .
when pathogen be find , immune factor be mobilize to the site of an infection .
the immune factor identify the nature of the pathogen , strengthen the correspond cell and molecule to combat - pron - efficiently , and then halt the immune response after the infection be clear to avoid unnecessary host cell damage .
the immune system can remember pathogen to which - pron - have be expose to create a more efficient response upon re - exposure .
this memory can last several decade .
feature of the immune system , such as pathogen identification , specific response , amplification , retreat , and remembrance be essential for survival against pathogen .
the immune response can be classify as either innate or active .
the innate immune response be always present and attempt to defend against all pathogen rather than focus on specific one .
conversely , the adaptive immune response store information about past infection and mount pathogen - specific defense .
innate immune response
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  describe physical and chemical immune barrier explain immediate and induce innate immune response discuss natural killer cell describe major histocompatibility class
i molecul
summarize how the protein in a complement system function to destroy extracellular pathogen
the immune system comprise both innate and adaptive immune response .
innate immunity occur naturally because of genetic factor or physiology  - pron - be not induce by infection or vaccination but work to reduce the workload for the adaptive immune response .
both the innate and adaptive level of the immune response involve secreted protein , receptor - mediate signaling , and intricate cell - to - cell communication .
the innate immune system develop early in animal evolution , roughly a billion year ago , as an essential response to infection .
innate immunity have a limited number of specific target  any pathogenic threat trigger a consistent sequence of event that can identify the type of pathogen and either clear the infection independently or mobilize a highly specialize adaptive immune response .
for example , tear and mucus secretion contain microbicidal factor .
physical and chemical barriers
before any immune factor be trigger , the skin function as a continuous , impassable barrier to potentially infectious pathogen .
pathogen be kill or inactivate on the skin by desiccation ( dry out ) and by the skin 's acidity .
in addition , beneficial microorganism that coexist on the skin compete with invade pathogen , prevent infection .
region of the body that be not protect by skin ( such as the eye and mucus membrane ) have alternative method of defense , such as tear and mucus secretion that trap and rinse away pathogen , and cilium in the nasal passage and respiratory tract that push the mucus with the pathogen out of the body .
throughout the body be other defense , such as the low ph of the stomach ( which inhibit the growth of pathogen ) , blood protein that bind and disrupt bacterial cell membrane , and the process of urination ( which flush pathogen from the urinary tract ) .
despite these barrier , pathogen may enter the body through skin abrasion or puncture , or by collect on mucosal surface in large number that overcome the mucus or cilium .
some pathogen have evolve specific mechanism that allow - pron - to overcome physical and chemical barrier .
when pathogen do enter the body , the innate immune system respond with inflammation , pathogen engulfment , and secretion of immune factor and protein .
pathogen recognition
an infection may be intracellular or extracellular , depend on the pathogen .
all virus infect cell and replicate within those cell ( intracellularly ) , whereas bacteria and other parasite may replicate intracellularly or extracellularly , depend on the specie .
the innate immune system must respond accordingly  by identify the extracellular pathogen and / or by identify host cell that have already be infect .
when a pathogen enter the body , cell in the blood and lymph detect the specific pathogen - associate molecular pattern ( pamps ) on the pathogen 's surface .
pamp be carbohydrate , polypeptide , and nucleic acid " signature " that be express by virus , bacteria , and parasite but which differ from molecule on host cell .
the immune system have specific cell , describe in figure four  two  .  two and show in figure four  two  .  three , with receptor that recognize these pamp .
a macrophage be a large phagocytic cell that engulfs foreign particle and pathogen .
macrophage recognize pamps via complementary pattern recognition receptor ( prr ) .
prr be molecule on macrophage and dendritic cell which be in contact with the external environment .
a monocyte be a type of white blood cell that circulate in the blood and lymph and differentiate into macrophage after - pron - move into infected tissue .
dendritic cell bind molecular signature of pathogen and promote pathogen engulfment and destruction .
toll - like receptor ( tlr ) be a type of prr that recognize molecule that be share by pathogen but distinguishable from host molecule ) .
tlr be present in invertebrate as well as vertebrate , and appear to be one of the most ancient component of the immune system .
tlr have also be identify in the mammalian nervous system .
the characteristic and location of cell involve in the innate immune system be describe .
cell of the blood include ( one ) monocyte , ( two ) lymphocyte , ( three ) neutrophil , ( four ) red blood cell , and ( five ) platelet .
note the very similar morphology of the leukocyte ( one , two , three ) .
cytokine release affect the binding of prr with pamp
trigger the release of cytokine , which signal that a pathogen be present and need to be destroy along with any infected cell .
a cytokine be a chemical messenger that regulate cell differentiation ( form and function ) , proliferation ( production ) , and gene expression to affect immune response .
at least four  zero type of cytokine exist in human that differ in term of the cell type that produce - pron - , the cell type that respond to - pron - , and the change - pron - produce .
one type cytokine , interferon , be illustrate in figure four  two  .  four .
one subclass of cytokine be the interleukin ( il ) , so name because - pron - mediate interaction between leukocyte ( white blood cell ) .
interleukin be involve in bridge the innate and adaptive immune response .
in addition to be release from cell after pamp recognition , cytokine be release by the infected cell which bind to nearby uninfected cell and induce those cell to release cytokine , which result in a cytokine burst .
a second class of early - act cytokine be interferon , which be release by infected cell as a warning to nearby uninfected cell .
one of the function of an interferon be to inhibit viral replication .
- pron - also have other important function , such as tumor surveillance .
interferon work by signal neighbor uninfected cell to destroy rna and reduce protein synthesis , signal neighboring infected cell to undergo apoptosis ( program cell death ) , and activate immune cell .
in response to interferon , uninfected cell alter - pron - gene expression , which increase the cells' resistance to infection .
one effect of interferon - induce gene expression be a sharply reduce cellular protein synthesis .
virally infected cell produce more virus by synthesize large quantity of viral protein .
thus , by reduce protein synthesis , a cell become resistant to viral infection .
interferon be cytokine that be release by a cell infect with a virus .
response of neighbor cell to interferon help stem the infection .
phagocytosis and inflammation
the first cytokine to be produce be pro - inflammatory  that is , - pron - encourage inflammation , the localize redness , swelling , heat , and pain that result from the movement of leukocyte and fluid through increasingly permeable capillary to a site of infection .
the population of leukocyte that arrive at an infection site depend on the nature of the infect pathogen .
both macrophage and dendritic cell engulf pathogen and cellular debris through phagocytosis .
a neutrophil be also a phagocytic leukocyte that engulfs and digest pathogen .
neutrophil , show in figure four  two  .  three , be the most abundant leukocyte of the immune system .
neutrophil have a nucleus with two to five lobe , and - pron - contain organelle , call lysosome , that digest engulf pathogen .
an eosinophil be a leukocyte that work with other eosinophil to surround a parasite  - pron - be involve in the allergic response and in protection against helminthe ( parasitic worm ) .
neutrophil and eosinophil be particularly important leukocyte that engulf large pathogen , such as bacteria and fungus .
a mast cell be a leukocyte that produce inflammatory molecule , such as histamine , in response to large pathogen .
a basophil be a leukocyte that , like a neutrophil , release chemical to stimulate the inflammatory response as illustrate in figure four  two  .  five .
basophil be also involve in allergy and hypersensitivity response and induce specific type of inflammatory response .
eosinophil and basophil produce additional inflammatory mediator to recruit more leukocyte .
a hypersensitive immune response to harmless antigen , such as in pollen , often involve the release of histamine by basophil and mast cell .
in response to a cut , mast cell secrete histamin that because nearby capillary to dilate .
neutrophil and monocyte leave the capillary .
monocyte mature into macrophage .
neutrophil , dendritic cell and macrophage release chemical to stimulate the inflammatory response .
neutrophil and macrophage also consume invade bacteria by phagocytosis .
cytokine also send feedback to cell of the nervous system to bring about the overall symptom of feel sick , which include lethargy , muscle pain , and nausea .
these effect may have evolve because the symptom encourage the individual to rest and prevent - pron - from spread the infection to other .
cytokine also increase the core body temperature , cause a fever , which cause the liver to withhold iron from the blood .
without iron , certain pathogen , such as some bacteria , be unable to replicate  this be call nutritional immunity .
natural killer cells lymphocytes be leukocyte that be histologically identifiable by - pron - large , darkly staining nucleus  - pron - be small cell with very little cytoplasm , as show in figure four  two  .  six .
infected cell be identify and destroy by natural killer ( nk ) cell , lymphocyt that can kill cell infect with virus or tumor cell ( abnormal cell that uncontrollably divide and invade other tissue ) .
t cell and b cell of the adaptive immune system also be classify as lymphocyte .
t cell be lymphocyte that mature in the thymus gland , and b cell be lymphocyte that mature in the bone marrow .
nk cell identify intracellular infection , especially from virus , by the altered expression of major histocompatibility class ( mhc )
i molecul on the surface of infected cell .
mhc
i molecule be protein on the surface of all nucleate cell , thus - pron - be scarce on red blood cell and platelet which be non - nucleate .
the function of mhc
i molecule be to display fragment of protein from the infectious agent within the cell to t - cell  healthy cell will be ignore , while " non - self " or foreign protein will be attack by the immune system .
mhc ii molecule be find mainly on cell contain antigen ( " non - self protein " ) and on lymphocyte .
mhc ii molecule interact with helper t - cell to trigger the appropriate immune response , which may include the inflammatory response .
lymphocyte , such as nk cell , be characterize by - pron - large nucleus that actively absorb wright stain and therefore appear dark color under a microscope .
an infected cell ( or a tumor cell ) be usually incapable of synthesize and display mhc
i molecule appropriately .
the metabolic resource of cell infect by some virus produce protein that interfere with mhc
i process and / or traffic to the cell surface .
the reduced mhc
i on host cell vary from virus to virus and result from active inhibitor be produce by the virus .
this process can deplete host mhc
i molecul on the cell surface , which nk cell detect as " unhealthy " or " abnormal " while search for cellular mhc
i molecule .
similarly , the dramatically alter gene expression of tumor cell lead to expression of extremely deformed or absent mhc
i molecul that also signal " unhealthy " or " abnormal .
"
nk cell be always active  an interaction with normal , intact mhc
i molecul on a healthy cell disable the kill sequence , and the nk cell move on .
after the nk cell detect an infected or tumor cell , - pron - cytoplasm secrete granule comprise of perforin , a destructive protein that create a pore in the target cell .
granzyme be release along with the perforin in the immunological synapse .
a granzyme be a protease that digest cellular protein and induce the target cell to undergo programmed cell death , or apoptosis .
phagocytic cell then digest the cell debris leave behind .
nk cell be constantly patrol the body and be an effective mechanism for control potential infection and prevent cancer progression .
complement an array of approximately two  zero type of soluble protein , call a complement system , function to destroy extracellular pathogen .
cell of the liver and macrophage synthesize complement protein continuously  these protein be abundant in the blood serum and be capable of respond immediately to infect microorganism .
the complement system be so name because - pron - be complementary to the antibody response of the adaptive immune system .
complement protein bind to the surface of microorganism and be particularly attract to pathogen that be already bind by antibody .
bind of complement protein occur in a specific and highly regulated sequence , with each successive protein be activate by cleavage and / or structural change induce upon bind of the precede protein ( s ) .
after the first few complement protein bind , a cascade of sequential binding event follow in which the pathogen rapidly become coat in complement protein .
complement protein perform several function .
the protein serve as a marker to indicate the presence of a pathogen to phagocytic cell , such as macrophage and b cell , and enhance engulfment  this process be call opsonization .
certain complement protein can combine to form attack complex that open pore in microbial cell membrane .
these structure destroy pathogen by cause - pron - content to leak , as illustrate in figure four  two  .  seven .
the classic pathway for the complement cascade involve the attachment of several initial complement protein to an antibody - bind pathogen follow by rapid activation and bind of many more complement protein and the creation of destructive pore in the microbial cell envelope and cell wall .
the alternate pathway do not involve antibody activation .
rather , c three convertase spontaneously break down c three .
endogenous regulatory protein prevent the complement complex from bind to host cell .
pathogen lack these regulatory protein be lysed .
adaptive immune response
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  explain adaptive immunity compare and contrast adaptive and innate immunity describe cell - mediate immune response and humoral immune response describe immune tolerance the adaptive , or acquire , immune response take day or even week to become establish — much long than the innate response  however , adaptive immunity be more specific to pathogen and have memory .
adaptive immunity be an immunity that occur after exposure to an antigen either from a pathogen or a vaccination .
this part of the immune system be activate when the innate immune response be insufficient to control an infection .
in fact , without information from the innate immune system , the adaptive response could not be mobilize .
there be two type of adaptive response  the cellmediated immune response , which be carry out by t cell , and the humoral immune response , which be control by activate b cell and antibody .
activate t cell and b cell that be specific to molecular structure on the pathogen proliferate and attack the invade pathogen .
- pron - attack can kill pathogen directly or secrete antibody that enhance the phagocytosis of pathogen and disrupt the infection .
adaptive immunity also involve a memory to provide the host with long - term protection from reinfection with the same type of pathogen  on re - exposure , this memory will facilitate an efficient and quick response .
antigen - present cells unlike nk cell of the innate immune system , b cell ( b lymphocyte ) be a type of white blood cell that give rise to antibody , whereas t cell ( t lymphocyte ) be a type of white blood cell that play an important role in the immune response .
t cell be a key component in the cell - mediate response — the specific immune response that utilize t cell to neutralize cell that have be infect with virus and certain bacteria .
there be three type of t cell  cytotoxic , helper , and suppressor t cell .
cytotoxic t cell destroy virus - infect cell in the cell - mediate immune response , and helper t cell play a part in activate both the antibody and the cell - mediate immune response .
suppressor t cell deactivate t cell and b cell when need , and thus prevent the immune response from become too intense .
an antigen be a foreign or " non - self " macromolecule that react with cell of the immune system .
not all antigen will provoke a response .
for instance , individual produce innumerable " self " antigen and be constantly expose to harmless foreign antigen , such as food protein , pollen , or dust component .
the suppression of immune response to harmless macromolecule be highly regulated and typically prevent process that could be damaging to the host , know as tolerance .
the innate immune system contain cell that detect potentially harmful antigen , and then inform the adaptive immune response about the presence of these antigen .
an antigen - present cell ( apc ) be an immune cell that detect , engulfs , and inform the adaptive immune response about an infection .
when a pathogen be detect , these apc will phagocytose the pathogen and digest - pron - to form many different fragment of the antigen .
antigen fragment will then be transport to the surface of the apc , where - pron - will serve as an indicator to other immune cell .
dendritic cell be immune cell that process antigen material  - pron - be present in the skin ( langerhans cell ) and the lining of the nose , lung , stomach , and intestine .
sometimes a dendritic cell present on the surface of other cell to induce an immune response , thus function as an antigen - present cell .
macrophage also function as apc .
before activation and differentiation , b cell can also function as apc .
after phagocytosis by apc , the phagocytic vesicle fuse with an intracellular lysosome form phagolysosome .
within the phagolysosome , the component be break down into fragment  the fragment be then load onto mhc class
i or mhc class ii molecule and be transport to the cell surface for antigen presentation , as illustrate in figure four  two  .  eight .
note that t lymphocyte can not properly respond to the antigen unless - pron - be process and embed in an mhc ii molecule .
apc express mhc on - pron - surface , and when combine with a foreign antigen , these complex signal a " non - self " invader .
once the fragment of antigen be embed in the mhc ii molecule , the immune cell can respond .
helper t - cell be one of the main lymphocyte that respond to antigen - present cell .
recall that all other nucleated cell of the body express mhc
i molecule , which signal " healthy " or " normal .
"
an apc , such as a macrophage , engulfs and digest a foreign bacterium .
an antigen from the bacterium be present on the cell surface in conjunction with an mhc ii molecule lymphocytes of the adaptive immune response interact with antigen - embed mhc ii molecule to mature into functional immune cell .
t and b lymphocytes lymphocytes in human circulate blood be approximately eight  zero to nine  zero percent t cell , show in figure four  two  .  nine , and one  zero to two  zero percent b cell .
recall that the t cell be involve in the cell - mediate immune response , whereas b cell be part of the humoral immune response .
t cell encompass a heterogeneous population of cell with extremely diverse function .
some t cell respond to apc of the innate immune system , and indirectly induce immune response by release cytokine .
other t cell stimulate b cell to prepare - pron - own response .
another population of t cell detect apc signal and directly kill the infected cell .
other t cell be involve in suppress inappropriate immune reaction to harmless or " self
" antigen .
this scan electron micrograph show a t lymphocyte , which be responsible for the cell - mediate immune response .
t cell be able to recognize antigen .
t and b cell exhibit a common theme of recognition / binding of specific antigen via a complementary receptor , follow by activation and self - amplification / maturation to specifically bind to the particular antigen of the infect pathogen .
t and b lymphocyte be also similar in that each cell only express one type of antigen receptor .
any individual may possess a population of t and b cell that together express a near limitless variety of antigen receptor that be capable of recognize virtually any infect pathogen .
t and b cell be activate when - pron - recognize small component of antigen , call epitope , present by apc , illustrate in figure four  two  .  one  zero .
note that recognition occur at a specific epitope rather than on the entire antigen  for this reason , epitope be know as " antigenic determinant .
"
in the absence of information from apc , t and b cell remain inactive , or naïve , and be unable to prepare an immune response .
the requirement for information from the apc of innate immunity to trigger b cell or t cell activation illustrate the essential nature of the innate immune response to the functioning of the entire immune system .
an antigen be a macromolecule that react with component of the immune system .
a give antigen may contain several motif that be recognize by immune cell .
each motif be an epitope .
in this figure , the entire structure be an antigen , and the orange , salmon and green component project from - pron - represent potential epitope .
naïve t cell can express one of two different molecule , cd four or cd eight , on - pron - surface , as show in figure four  two  .  one  one , and be accordingly classify as cd four + or cd eight + cell .
these molecule be important because - pron - regulate how a t cell will interact with and respond to an apc .
naïve cd four + cell bind apc via - pron - antigen - embed mhc ii molecule and be stimulate to become helper t ( th ) lymphocyt , cell that go on to stimulate b cell ( or cytotoxic t cell ) directly or secrete cytokine to inform more and various target cell about the pathogenic threat .
in contrast , cd eight + cell engage antigen - embed mhc
i molecul on apc and be stimulate to become cytotoxic t lymphocyte ( ctl ) , which directly kill infected cell by apoptosis and emit cytokine to amplify the immune response .
the two population of t cell have different mechanism of immune protection , but both bind mhc molecule via - pron - antigen receptor call t cell receptor ( tcr ) .
the cd four or cd eight surface molecule differentiate whether the tcr will engage an mhc ii or an mhc
i molecule .
because - pron - assist in binding specificity , the cd four and cd eight molecule be describe as coreceptor .
consider the innumerable possible antigen that an individual will be expose to during a lifetime .
the mammalian adaptive immune system be adept in respond appropriately to each antigen .
mammal have an enormous diversity of t cell population , result from the diversity of tcr .
each tcr consist of two polypeptide chain that span the t cell membrane , as illustrate in figure four  two  .  one  two  the chain be link by a disulfide bridge .
each polypeptide chain be comprise of a constant domain and a variable domain  a domain , in this sense , be a specific region of a protein that may be regulatory or structural .
the intracellular domain be involve in intracellular signaling .
a single t cell will express thousand of identical copy of one specific tcr variant on - pron - cell surface .
the specificity of the adaptive immune system occur because - pron - synthesize million of different t cell population , each express a tcr that differ in - pron - variable domain .
this tcr diversity be achieve by the mutation and recombination of gene that encode these receptor in stem cell precursor of t cell .
the bind between an antigen - display mhc molecule and a complementary tcr " match " indicate that the adaptive immune system need to activate and produce that specific t cell because - pron - structure be appropriate to recognize and destroy the invade pathogen .
a t cell receptor span the membrane and project variable binding region into the extracellular space to bind process antigen via mhc molecule on apc .
helper t lymphocytes the th lymphocyte function indirectly to identify potential pathogen for other cell of the immune system .
these cell be important for extracellular infection , such as those cause by certain bacteria , helminth , and protozoa .
th lymphocyte recognize specific antigen display in the mhc ii complex of apc .
there be two major population of th cell  th one and th two .
th one cell secrete cytokine to enhance the activity of macrophage and other t cell .
th one cell activate the action of cyotoxic t cell , as well as macrophage .
th two cell stimulate naïve b cell to destroy foreign invader via antibody secretion .
whether a th one or a th two immune response develop depend on the specific type of cytokine secrete by cell of the innate immune system , which in turn depend on the nature of the invade pathogen .
the th one  - mediated response involve macrophage and be associate with inflammation .
recall the frontline defense of macrophage involve in the innate immune response .
some intracellular bacteria , such as mycobacterium tuberculosis , have evolve to multiply in macrophage after - pron - have be engulf .
these pathogen evade attempt by macrophage to destroy and digest the pathogen .
when m . tuberculosis infection occur , macrophage can stimulate naïve t cell to become th one cell .
these stimulate t cell secrete specific cytokine that send feedback to the macrophage to stimulate - pron - digestive capability and allow - pron - to destroy the colonize m . tuberculosis .
in the same manner , th one  - activated macrophage also become better suit to ingest and kill tumor cell .
in summary  th one response be direct toward intracellular invader while th two response be aim at those that be extracellular .
b lymphocytes when stimulate by the th two pathway , naïve b cell differentiate into antibody - secrete plasma cell .
a plasma cell be an immune cell that secret antibody  these cell arise from b cell that be stimulate by antigen .
similar to t cell , naïve b cell initially be coat in thousand of b cell receptor ( bcr ) , which be membrane - bind form of ig ( immunoglobulin , or an antibody ) .
the b cell receptor have two heavy chain and two light chain connect by disulfide linkage .
each chain have a constant and a variable region  the latter be involve in antigen bind .
two other membrane protein , ig alpha and ig beta , be involve in signal .
the receptor of any particular b cell , as show in figure four  two  .  one  three be all the same , but the hundred of million of different b cell in an individual have distinct recognition domain that contribute to extensive diversity in the type of molecular structure to which - pron - can bind .
in this state , b cell function as apc .
- pron - bind and engulf foreign antigen via - pron - bcr and then display process antigen in the context of mhc ii molecule to th two cell .
when a th two cell detect that a b cell be bind to a relevant antigen , - pron - secrete specific cytokine that induce the b cell to proliferate rapidly , which make thousand of identical ( clonal ) copy of - pron - , and then - pron - synthesize and secrete antibody with the same antigen recognition pattern as the bcr .
the activation of b cell correspond to one specific bcr variant and the dramatic proliferation of that variant be know as clonal selection .
this phenomenon drastically , but briefly , change the proportion of bcr variant express by the immune system , and shift the balance toward bcr specific to the infect pathogen .
b cell receptor be embed in the membrane of b cell and bind a variety of antigen through - pron - variable region .
the signal transduction region transfer the signal into the cell .
t and b cell differ in one fundamental way  whereas t cell bind antigen that have be digest and embed in mhc molecule by apc , b cell function as apc that bind intact antigen that have not be process .
although t and b cell both react with molecule that be term " antigen , " these lymphocyte actually respond to very different type of molecule .
b cell must be able to bind intact antigen because - pron - secrete antibody that must recognize the pathogen directly , rather than digest remnant of the pathogen .
bacterial carbohydrate and lipid molecule can activate b cell independently from the t cell .
cytotoxic t lymphocytes ctl , a subclass of t cell , function to clear infection directly .
the cell - mediate part of the adaptive immune system consist of ctl that attack and destroy infected cell .
ctl be particularly important in protect against viral infection  this be because virus replicate within cell where - pron - be shield from extracellular contact with circulate antibody .
when apc phagocytize pathogen and present mhc
i - embed antigen to naïve cd eight + t cell that express complementary tcr , the cd eight + t cell become activate to proliferate accord to clonal selection .
these result ctl then identify non - apcs display the same mhc i - embed antigen ( for example , viral proteins ) —for example , the ctl identify infected host cell .
intracellularly , infected cell typically die after the infect pathogen replicate to a sufficient concentration and lys the cell , as many virus do .
ctl attempt to identify and destroy infected cell before the pathogen can replicate and escape , thereby halt the progression of intracellular infection .
ctl also support nk lymphocyt to destroy early cancer .
cytokine secrete by the th one response that stimulate macrophage also stimulate ctl and enhance - pron - ability to identify and destroy infected cell and tumor .
ctl sense mhc i - embed antigen by directly interact with infected cell via - pron - tcr .
bind of tcr with antigen activate ctl to release perforin and granzyme , degradative enzyme that will induce apoptosis of the infected cell .
recall that this be a similar destruction mechanism to that use by nk cell .
in this process , the ctl do not become infected and be not harm by the secretion of perforin and granzyme .
in fact , the function of nk cell and ctl be complementary and maximize the removal of infected cell , as illustrate in figure four  two  .  one  four .
if the nk cell can not identify the " miss self " pattern of down - regulated mhc
i molecule
, then the ctl can identify - pron - by the complex of mhc
i with foreign antigen , which signal " altered self .
"
similarly , if the ctl can not detect antigen - embed mhc i because the receptor be deplete from the cell surface , nk cell will destroy the cell instead .
ctl also emit cytokine , such as interferon , that alter surface protein expression in other infected cell , such that the infected cell can be easily identify and destroy .
moreover , these interferon can also prevent virally infected cell from release virus particle .
plasma cell and ctl be collectively call effector cell  - pron - represent differentiate version of - pron - naïve counterpart , and - pron - be involve in bring about the immune defense of kill pathogen and infected host cell .
mucosal surfaces and immune tolerance
the innate and adaptive immune response discuss thus far comprise the systemic immune system ( affect the whole body ) , which be distinct from the mucosal immune system .
mucosal immunity be form by mucosa - associate lymphoid tissue , which function independently of the systemic immune system , and which have - pron - own innate and adaptive component .
mucosa - associate lymphoid tissue ( malt ) , illustrate in figure four  two  .  one  five , be a collection of lymphatic tissue that combine with epithelial tissue line the mucosa throughout the body .
this tissue function as the immune barrier and response in area of the body with direct contact to the external environment .
the systemic and mucosal immune system use many of the same cell type .
foreign particle that make - pron - way to malt be take up by absorptive epithelial cell call m cell and deliver to apc locate directly below the mucosal tissue .
m cell function in the transport describe , and be locate in the peyer 's patch , a lymphoid nodule .
apc of the mucosal immune system be primarily dendritic cell , with b cell and macrophage have minor role .
process antigen display on apc be detect by t cell in the malt and at various mucosal induction site , such as the tonsil , adenoid , appendix , or the mesenteric lymph node of the intestine .
activate t cell then migrate through the lymphatic system and into the circulatory system to mucosal site of infection .
the topology and function of intestinal malt be show .
pathogen be take up by m cell in the intestinal epithelium and excrete into a pocket form by the inner surface of the cell .
the pocket contain antigen - present cell such as dendritic cell , which engulf the antigen , then present - pron - with mhc ii molecule on the cell surface .
the dendritic cell migrate to an underlying tissue call a peyer 's patch .
antigen - present cell , t cell , and b cell aggregate within the peyer 's patch , form organize lymphoid follicle .
there , some t cell and b cell be activate .
other antigen - loaded dendritic cell migrate through the lymphatic system where - pron - activate b cell , t cell , and plasma cell in the lymph node .
the activate cell then return to malt tissue effector site .
iga and other antibody be secrete into the intestinal luman .
malt be a crucial component of a functional immune system because mucosal surface , such as the nasal passage , be the first tissue onto which inhale or ingest pathogen be deposit .
the mucosal tissue include the mouth , pharynx , and esophagus , and the gastrointestinal , respiratory , and urogenital tract .
the immune system have to be regulate to prevent wasteful , unnecessary response to harmless substance , and more importantly so that - pron - do not attack " self .
"
the acquire ability to prevent an unnecessary or harmful immune response to a detect foreign substance know not to because disease be describe as immune tolerance .
immune tolerance be crucial for maintain mucosal homeostasis give the tremendous number of foreign substance ( such as food protein ) that apc of the oral cavity , pharynx , and gastrointestinal mucosa encounter .
immune tolerance be bring about by specialized apc in the liver , lymph node , small intestine , and lung that present harmless antigen to an exceptionally diverse population of regulatory t ( treg ) cell , specialize lymphocyte that suppress local inflammation and inhibit the secretion of stimulatory immune factor .
the combined result of treg cell be to prevent immunologic activation and inflammation in undesired tissue compartment and to allow the immune system to focus on pathogen instead .
in addition to promote immune tolerance of harmless antigen , other subset of treg cell be involve in the prevention of the autoimmune response , which be an inappropriate immune response to host cell or self - antigen .
another treg class suppress immune response to harmful pathogen after the infection have clear to minimize host cell damage induce by inflammation and cell lysis .
immunological memory
the adaptive immune system possess a memory component that allow for an efficient and dramatic response upon reinvasion of the same pathogen .
memory be handle by the adaptive immune system with little reliance on cue from the innate response .
during the adaptive immune response to a pathogen that have not be encounter before , call a primary response , plasma cell secrete antibody and differentiate t cell increase , then plateau over time .
as b and t cell mature into effector cell , a subset of the naïve population differentiate into b and t memory cell with the same antigen specificity , as illustrate in figure four  two  .  one  six .
a memory cell be an antigen - specific b or t lymphocyte that do not differentiate into effector cell during the primary immune response , but that can immediately become effector cell upon re - exposure to the same pathogen .
during the primary immune response , memory cell do not respond to antigen and do not contribute to host defense .
as the infection be clear and pathogenic stimulus subside , the effector be no longer need , and - pron - undergo apoptosis .
in contrast , the memory cell persist in the circulation .
if the pathogen be never encounter again during the individual 's lifetime , b and t memory cell will circulate for a few year or even several decade and will gradually die off , have never function as effector cell .
however , if the host be re - expose to the same pathogen type , circulate memory cell will immediately differentiate into plasma cell and ctl without input from apc or th cell .
one reason the adaptive immune response be delay be because - pron - take time for naïve b and t cell with the appropriate antigen specificity to be identify and activate .
upon reinfection , this step be skip , and the result be a more rapid production of immune defense .
memory b cell that differentiate into plasma cell output ten to hundred - fold great antibody amount than be secrete during the primary response , as the graph in figure four  two  .  one  seven illustrate .
this rapid and dramatic antibody response may stop the infection before - pron - can even become establish , and the individual may not realize - pron - have be expose .
in the primary response to infection , antibody be secrete first from plasma cell .
upon re - exposure to the same pathogen , memory cell differentiate into antibody - secrete plasma cell that output a great amount of antibody for a long period of time .
vaccination be base on the knowledge that exposure to noninfectious antigen , derive from know pathogen , generate a mild primary immune response .
the immune response to vaccination may not be perceive by the host as illness but still confer immune memory .
when expose to the correspond pathogen to which an individual be vaccinated , the reaction be similar to a secondary exposure .
because each reinfection generate more memory cell and increase resistance to the pathogen , and because some memory cell die , certain vaccine course involve one or more booster vaccination to mimic repeat exposure  for instance , tetanus booster be necessary every ten year because the memory cell only live that long .
mucosal immune memory a subset of t and b cell of the mucosal immune system differentiate into memory cell just as in the systemic immune system .
upon reinvasion of the same pathogen type , a pronounce immune response occur at the mucosal site where the original pathogen deposit , but a collective defense be also organize within interconnected or adjacent mucosal tissue .
for instance , the immune memory of an infection in the oral cavity would also elicit a response in the pharynx if the oral cavity be expose to the same pathogen .
primary centers of the immune system
although the immune system be characterize by circulate cell throughout the body , the regulation , maturation , and intercommunication of immune factor occur at specific site .
the blood circulate immune cell , protein , and other factor through the body .
approximately zero  .  one percent of all cell in the blood be leukocyte , which encompass monocyte ( the precursor of macrophage ) and lymphocyte .
the majority of cell in the blood be erythrocyte ( red blood cell ) .
lymph be a watery fluid that bath tissue and organ with protective white blood cell and do not contain erythrocyte .
cell of the immune system can travel between the distinct lymphatic and blood circulatory system , which be separate by interstitial space , by a process call extravasation ( pass through to surround tissue ) .
the cell of the immune system originate from hematopoietic stem cell in the bone marrow .
cytokine stimulate these stem cell to differentiate into immune cell .
b cell maturation occur in the bone marrow , whereas naïve t cell transit from the bone marrow to the thymus for maturation .
in the thymus , immature t cell that express tcr complementary to self - antigen be destroy .
this process help prevent autoimmune response .
on maturation , t and b lymphocyte circulate to various destination .
lymph node scatter throughout the body , as illustrate in figure four  two  .  two  zero , house large population of t and b cell , dendritic cell , and macrophage .
lymph gather antigen as - pron - drain from tissue .
these antigen then be filter through lymph node before the lymph be return to circulation .
apc in the lymph node capture and process antigen and inform nearby lymphocyte about potential pathogen .
( a ) lymphatic vessel carry a clear fluid call lymph throughout the body .
the liquid enter ( b ) lymph node through afferent vessel .
lymph node be fill with lymphocyte that purge infect cell .
the lymph then exit through efferent vessel .
the spleen house b and t cell , macrophage , dendritic cell , and nk cell .
the spleen , show in figure four  two  .  two  one , be the site where apc that have trap foreign particle in the blood can communicate with lymphocyte .
antibody be synthesize and secrete by activate plasma cell in the spleen , and the spleen filter foreign substance and antibody - complex pathogen from the blood .
functionally , the spleen be to the blood as lymph node be to the lymph .
the spleen be similar to a lymph node but be much large and filter blood instead of lymph .
blood enter the spleen through artery and exit through vein .
the spleen contain two type of tissue  red pulp and white pulp .
red pulp consist of cavity that store blood .
within the red pulp , damage red blood cell be remove and replace by new one .
white pulp be rich in lymphocyte that remove antigen - coat bacteria from the blood .
antibody
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  explain cross - reactivity describe the structure and function of antibody discuss antibody production an antibody , also know as an immunoglobulin ( ig ) , be a protein that be produce by plasma cell after stimulation by an antigen .
antibody be the functional basis of humoral immunity .
antibody occur in the blood , in gastric and mucus secretion , and in breast milk .
antibody in these bodily fluid can bind pathogen and mark - pron - for destruction by phagocyte before - pron - can infect cell .
antibody structure
an antibody molecule be comprise of four polypeptide  two identical heavy chain ( large peptide unit ) that be partially bind to each other in a " y " formation , which be flank by two identical light chain ( small peptide unit ) , as illustrate in figure four  two  .  two  two .
bond between the cysteine amino acid in the antibody molecule attach the polypeptide to each other .
the area where the antigen be recognize on the antibody be variable domain and the antibody base be compose of constant domain .
in germ - line b cell , the variable region of the light chain gene have four  zero variable ( v ) and five joining ( j ) segment .
an enzyme call dna recombinase randomly excise most of these segment out of the gene , and splice one v segment to one j segment .
during rna processing , all but one v and j segment be splice out .
recombination and splicing may result in over one  zero  six possible vj combination .
as a result , each differentiate b cell in the human body typically have a unique variable chain .
the constant domain , which do not bind antibody , be the same for all antibody .
( a )
as a germ - line b cell mature , an enzyme call dna recombinase randomly excise v and j segment from the light chain gene .
splicing at the mrna level result in further gene rearrangement .
as a result , ( b ) each antibody have a unique variable region capable of bind a different antigen .
similar to tcr and bcr , antibody diversity be produce by the mutation and recombination of approximately three  zero  zero different gene segment encode the light and heavy chain variable domain in precursor cell that be destine to become b cell .
the variable domain from the heavy and light chain interact to form the bind site through which an antibody can bind a specific epitope on an antigen .
the number of repeat constant domain in ig class be the same for all antibody correspond to a specific class .
antibody be structurally similar to the extracellular component of the bcr , and b cell maturation to plasma cell can be visualize in simple term as the cell acquire the ability to secrete the extracellular portion of - pron - bcr in large quantity .
antibody classes antibodies can be divide into five class — igm , igg , iga , igd , ige — base on - pron - physiochemical , structural , and immunological property .
iggs , which make up about eight  zero percent of all antibody , have heavy chain that consist of one variable domain and three identical constant domain .
iga and igd also have three constant domain per heavy chain , whereas igm and ige each have four constant domain per heavy chain .
the variable domain determine bind specificity and the constant domain of the heavy chain determine the immunological mechanism of action of the correspond antibody class .
- pron - be possible for two antibody to have the same binding specificity but be in different class and , therefore , to be involve in different function .
after an adaptive defense be produce against a pathogen , typically plasma cell first secrete igm into the blood .
bcr on naïve b cell be of the igm class and occasionally igd class .
igm molecule make up approximately ten percent of all antibody .
prior to antibody secretion , plasma cell assemble igm molecule into pentamer ( five individual antibody ) link by a joining ( j ) chain , as show in figure four  two  .  two  three .
the pentamer arrangement mean that these macromolecule can bind ten identical antigen .
however , igm molecule release early in the adaptive immune response do not bind to antigen as stably as iggs , which be one of the possible type of antibody secrete in large quantity upon re - exposure to the same pathogen .
figure four  two  .  two  three summarize the property of immunoglobulin and illustrate - pron - basic structure .
immunoglobulin have different function , but all be compose of light and heavy chain that form a y - shape structure .
iga populate the saliva , tear , breast milk , and mucus secretion of the gastrointestinal , respiratory , and genitourinary tract .
collectively , these bodily fluid coat and protect the extensive mucosa ( four  zero  zero  zero square foot in human ) .
the total number of iga molecule in these bodily secretion be great than the number of igg molecule in the blood serum .
a small amount of iga be also secrete into the serum in monomeric form .
conversely , some igm be secrete into bodily fluid of the mucosa .
similar to igm , iga molecule be secrete as polymeric structure link with a j chain .
however , igas be secrete mostly as dimeric molecule , not pentamer .
ige be present in the serum in small quantity and be best characterize in - pron - role as an allergy mediator .
igd be also present in small quantity .
similar to igm , bcr of the igd class be find on the surface of naïve b cell .
this class support antigen recognition and maturation of b cell to plasma cell .
antibody functions differentiated plasma cell be crucial player in the humoral response , and the antibody - pron - secrete be particularly significant against extracellular pathogen and toxin .
antibody circulate freely and act independently of plasma cell .
antibody can be transfer from one individual to another to temporarily protect against infectious disease .
for instance , a person who have recently produce a successful immune response against a particular disease agent can donate blood to a nonimmune recipient and confer temporary immunity through antibody in the donor 's blood serum .
this phenomenon be call passive immunity  - pron - also occur naturally during breastfeed , which make breastfed infant highly resistant to infection during the first few month of life .
antibody coat extracellular pathogen and neutralize - pron - , as illustrate in figure four  two  .  two  four , by block key site on the pathogen that enhance - pron - infectivity ( such as receptor that " dock " pathogen on host cell ) .
antibody neutralization can prevent pathogen from enter and infect host cell , as oppose to the ctl - mediate approach of kill cell that be already infect to prevent progression of an established infection .
the neutralized antibody - coat pathogen can then be filter by the spleen and eliminate in urine or fece .
antibody may inhibit infection by ( a ) prevent the antigen from bind - pron - target , ( b ) tag a pathogen for destruction by macrophage or neutrophil , or ( c ) activate the complement cascade .
antibody also mark pathogen for destruction by phagocytic cell , such as macrophage or neutrophil , because phagocytic cell be highly attract to macromolecule complex with antibody .
phagocytic enhancement by antibody be call opsonization .
in a process call complement fixation , igm and igg in serum bind to antigen and provide docking site onto which sequential complement protein can bind .
the combination of antibody and complement enhance opsonization even further and promote rapid clearing of pathogen .
affinity , avidity , and cross reactivity
not all antibody bind with the same strength , specificity , and stability .
in fact , antibody exhibit different affinity ( attraction ) depend on the molecular complementarity between antigen and antibody molecule , as illustrate in figure four  two  .  two  five .
an antibody with a high affinity for a particular antigen would bind more strongly and stably , and thus would be expect to present a more challenging defense against the pathogen correspond to the specific antigen .
( a ) affinity refer to the strength of single interaction between antigen and antibody , while avidity refer to the strength of all interaction combine .
( b )
an antibody may cross react with different epitope .
the term avidity describe bind by antibody class that be secrete as joined , multivalent structure ( such as igm and iga ) .
although avidity measure the strength of bind , just as affinity do , the avidity be not simply the sum of the affinity of the antibody in a multimeric structure .
the avidity depend on the number of identical bind site on the antigen be detect , as well as other physical and chemical factor .
typically , multimeric antibody , such as pentameric igm , be classify as have low affinity than monomeric antibody , but high avidity .
essentially , the fact that multimeric antibody can bind many antigen simultaneously balance - pron - slightly low binding strength for each antibody / antigen interaction .
antibody secrete after bind to one epitope on an antigen may exhibit cross reactivity for the same or similar epitope on different antigen .
because an epitope correspond to such a small region ( the surface area of about four to six amino acid ) , - pron - be possible for different macromolecule to exhibit the same molecular identity and orientation over short region .
cross reactivity describe when an antibody bind not to the antigen that elicit - pron - synthesis and secretion , but to a different antigen .
cross reactivity can be beneficial if an individual develop immunity to several relate pathogen despite have only be expose to or vaccinate against one of - pron - .
for instance , antibody cross reactivity may occur against the similar surface structure of various gram - negative bacteria .
conversely , antibody raise against pathogenic molecular component that resemble self molecule may incorrectly mark host cell for destruction and because autoimmune damage .
patient who develop systemic lupus erythematosus ( sle ) commonly exhibit antibody that react with - pron - own dna .
these antibody may have be initially raise against the nucleic acid of microorganism but later cross - react with self - antigen .
this phenomenon be also call molecular mimicry .
antibody of the mucosal immune system antibodies synthesize by the mucosal immune system include iga and igm . activated b cell differentiate into mucosal plasma cell that synthesize and secrete dimeric iga , and to a less extent , pentameric igm . secreted iga be abundant in tear , saliva , breast milk , and in secretion of the gastrointestinal and respiratory tract .
antibody secretion result in a local humoral response at epithelial surface and prevent infection of the mucosa by bind and neutralize pathogen .
disruption in the immune system by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  describe hypersensitivity define autoimmunity
a function immune system be essential for survival , but even the sophisticated cellular and molecular defense of the mammalian immune response can be defeat by pathogen at virtually every step .
in the competition between immune protection and pathogen evasion , pathogen have the advantage of more rapid evolution because of - pron - short generation time and other characteristic .
for instance , streptococcus pneumoniae ( bacterium that because pneumonia and meningitis ) surround - pron - with a capsule that inhibit phagocyte from engulf - pron - and display antigen to the adaptive immune system .
staphylococcus aureus ( bacterium that can because skin infection , abscess , and meningitis ) synthesize a toxin call leukocidin that kill phagocyte after - pron - engulf the bacterium .
other pathogen can also hinder the adaptive immune system .
hiv infect th cell via - pron - cd four surface molecule , gradually deplete the number of th cell in the body  this inhibit the adaptive immune system 's capacity to generate sufficient response to infection or tumor .
as a result , hiv - infect individual often suffer from infection that would not because illness in people with healthy immune system but which can because devastate illness to immune - compromise individual .
maladaptive response of immune cell and molecule - pron - can also disrupt the proper functioning of the entire system , lead to host cell damage that could become fatal .
immunodeficiency failures , insufficiency , or delay at any level of the immune response can allow pathogen or tumor cell to gain a foothold and replicate or proliferate to high enough level that the immune system become overwhelmed .
immunodeficiency be the failure , insufficiency , or delay in the response of the immune system , which may be acquire or inherit .
immunodeficiency can be acquire as a result of infection with certain pathogen ( such as hiv ) , chemical exposure ( include certain medical treatment ) , malnutrition , or possibly by extreme stress .
for instance , radiation exposure can destroy population of lymphocyte and elevate an individual 's susceptibility to infection and cancer .
dozen of genetic disorder result in immunodeficiency , include severe combined immunodeficiency ( scid ) , bare lymphocyte syndrome , and mhc ii deficiency .
rarely , primary immunodeficiency that be present from birth may occur .
neutropenia be one form in which the immune system produce a below - average number of neutrophil , the body 's most abundant phagocyte .
as a result , bacterial infection may go unrestricted in the blood , cause serious complication .
hypersensitivity maladaptive immune response toward harmless foreign substance or self antigen that occur after tissue sensitization be term hypersensitivity .
the type of hypersensitivity include immediate , delay , and autoimmunity .
a large proportion of the population be affect by one or more type of hypersensitivity .
allergies
the immune reaction that result from immediate hypersensitivity in which an antibody - mediate immune response occur within minute of exposure to a harmless antigen be call an allergy .
in the united states , two  zero percent of the population exhibit symptom of allergy or asthma , whereas five  five percent test positive against one or more allergen .
upon initial exposure to a potential allergen , an allergic individual synthesize antibody of the ige class via the typical process of apc present process antigen to th cell that stimulate b cell to produce ige .
this class of antibody also mediate the immune response to parasitic worm .
the constant domain of the ige molecule interact with mast cell embed in connective tissue .
this process prime , or sensitize , the tissue .
upon subsequent exposure to the same allergen , ige molecule on mast cell bind the antigen via - pron - variable domain and stimulate the mast cell to release the modify amino acid histamine and serotonin  these chemical mediator then recruit eosinophil which mediate allergic response .
figure four  two  .  two  six show an example of an allergic response to ragweed pollen .
the effect of an allergic reaction range from mild symptom like sneeze and itchy , watery eye to more severe or even life - threaten reaction involve intensely itchy welt or hive , airway contraction with severe respiratory distress , and plummet blood pressure .
this extreme reaction be know as anaphylactic shock .
if not treat with epinephrine to counter the blood pressure and breathing effect , this condition can be fatal .
on first exposure to an allergen , an ige antibody be synthesize by plasma cell in response to a harmless antigen .
the ige molecule bind to mast cell , and on secondary exposure , the mast cell release histamine and other modulator that affect the symptom of allergy .
delayed hypersensitivity be a cell - mediate immune response that take approximately one to two day after secondary exposure for a maximal reaction to be observe .
this type of hypersensitivity involve the th one cytokine - mediate inflammatory response and may manifest as local tissue lesion or contact dermatitis ( rash or skin irritation ) .
delayed hypersensitivity occur in some individual in response to contact with certain type of jewelry or cosmetic .
delayed hypersensitivity facilitate the immune response to poison ivy and be also the reason why the skin test for tuberculosis result in a small region of inflammation on individual who be previously expose to mycobacterium tuberculosis .
that be also why cortisone be use to treat such response  - pron - will inhibit cytokine production .
autoimmunity autoimmunity be a type of hypersensitivity to self antigen that affect approximately five percent of the population .
most type of autoimmunity involve the humoral immune response .
antibody that inappropriately mark self component as foreign be term autoantibody .
in patient with the autoimmune disease myasthenia gravis , muscle cell receptor that induce contraction in response to acetylcholine be target by antibody .
the result be muscle weakness that may include mark difficultly with fine and / or gross motor function .
in systemic lupus erythematosus , a diffuse autoantibody response to the individual 's own dna and protein result in various systemic disease .
as illustrate in figure four  two  .  two  seven , systemic lupus erythematosus may affect the heart , joint , lung , skin , kidney , central nervous system , or other tissue , cause tissue damage via antibody binding , complement recruitment , lysis , and inflammation .
systemic lupus erythematosus be characterize by autoimmunity to the individual 's own dna and / or protein , which lead to varied dysfunction of the organ .
autoimmunity can develop with time , and - pron - cause may be root in molecular mimicry .
antibody and tcr may bind self antigen that be structurally similar to pathogen antigen , which the immune receptor first raise .
as an example , infection with streptococcus pyogene ( bacterium that cause strep throat ) may generate antibody or t cell that react with heart muscle , which have a similar structure to the surface of s . pyogene .
these antibody can damage heart muscle with autoimmune attack , lead to rheumatic fever .
insulin - dependent ( type one ) diabetes mellitus arise from a destructive inflammatory th one response against insulin - produce cell of the pancrea .
patient with this autoimmunity must be inject with insulin that originate from other source .
female seahorse produce egg for reproduction that be then fertilize by the male .
unlike almost all other animal , the male seahorse then gestate the young until birth .
animal reproduction be necessary for the survival of a species .
in the animal kingdom , there be innumerable way that speci reproduce .
asexual reproduction produce genetically identical organism ( clone ) , whereas in sexual reproduction , the genetic material of two individual combine to produce offspring that be genetically different from - pron - parent .
during sexual reproduction the male gamete ( sperm ) may be place inside the female 's body for internal fertilization , or the sperm and egg may be release into the environment for external fertilization .
seahorse , like the one show in figure four  three  .  one , provide an example of the latter .
follow a mating dance , the female lay egg in the male seahorse 's abdominal brood pouch where - pron - be fertilize .
the egg hatch and the offspring develop in the pouch for several week .
reproduction methods
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  describe advantage and disadvantage of asexual and sexual reproduction discuss asexual reproduction method discuss sexual reproduction method animal produce offspring through asexual and / or sexual reproduction .
both method have advantage and disadvantage .
asexual reproduction produce offspring that be genetically identical to the parent because the offspring be all clone of the original parent .
a single individual can produce offspring asexually and large number of offspring can be produce quickly .
in a stable or predictable environment , asexual reproduction be an effective mean of reproduction because all the offspring will be adapt to that environment .
in an unstable or unpredictable environment asexually - reproduce specie may be at a disadvantage because all the offspring be genetically identical and may not have the genetic variation to survive in new or different condition .
on the other hand , the rapid rate of asexual reproduction may allow for a speedy response to environmental change if individual have mutation .
an additional advantage of asexual reproduction be that colonization of new habitat may be easy when an individual do not need to find a mate to reproduce .
during sexual reproduction the genetic material of two individual be combine to produce genetically diverse offspring that differ from - pron - parent .
the genetic diversity of sexually produce offspring be think to give specie a good chance of survive in an unpredictable or change environment .
specie that reproduce sexually must maintain two different type of individual , male and female , which can limit the ability to colonize new habitat as both sex must be present .
asexual reproduction asexual reproduction occur in prokaryotic microorganism ( bacteria ) and in some eukaryotic single - cell and multicell organism .
there be a number of way that animal reproduce asexually .
fission fission , also call binary fission , occur in prokaryotic microorganism and in some invertebrate , multi - cell organism .
after a period of growth , an organism split into two separate organism .
some unicellular eukaryotic organism undergo binary fission by mitosis .
in other organism , part of the individual separate and form a second individual .
this process occur , for example , in many asteroid echinoderm through splitting of the central disk .
some sea anemone and some coral polyp ( figure four  three  .  two ) also reproduce through fission .
bud budding be a form of asexual reproduction that result from the outgrowth of a part of a cell or body region lead to a separation from the original organism into two individual .
bud occur commonly in some invertebrate animal such as coral and hydra .
in hydra , a bud form that develop into an adult and break away from the main body , as illustrate in figure four  three  .  three , whereas in coral budding , the bud do not detach and multiplie as part of a new colony .
hydra reproduce asexually through bud .
fragmentation fragmentation be the breaking of the body into two part with subsequent regeneration .
if the animal be capable of fragmentation , and the part be big enough , a separate individual will regrow .
for example , in many sea star , asexual reproduction be accomplish by fragmentation .
figure four  three  .  four illustrate a sea star for which an arm of the individual be break off and regenerate a new sea star .
fishery worker have be know to try to kill the sea star eat - pron - clam or oyster bed by cut - pron - in half and throw - pron - back into the ocean .
unfortunately for the worker , the two part can each regenerate a new half , result in twice as many sea star to prey upon the oyster and clam .
fragmentation also occur in annelid worm , turbellarian , and poriferan .
sea star can reproduce through fragmentation .
the large arm , a fragment from another sea star , be develop into a new individual .
note that in fragmentation , there be generally a noticeable difference in the size of the individual , whereas in fission , two individual of approximate size be form .
parthenogenesis parthenogenesis be a form of asexual reproduction where an egg develop into a complete individual without be fertilize .
the result offspring can be either haploid or diploid , depend on the process and the specie .
parthenogenesis occur in invertebrate such as water flee , rotifer , aphid , stick insect , some ant , wasp , and bee .
bee use parthenogenesis to produce haploid male ( drone ) and diploid female ( worker ) .
if an egg be fertilize , a queen be produce .
the queen bee control the reproduction of the hive bee to regulate the type of bee produce .
some vertebrate animal — such as certain reptile , amphibian , and fish — also reproduce through parthenogenesis .
although more common in plant , parthenogenesis have be observe in animal specie that be segregate by sex in terrestrial or marine zoo .
two female komodo dragon , a hammerhead shark , and a blacktop shark have produce parthenogenic young when the female have be isolate from male .
sexual reproduction sexual reproduction be the combination of ( usually haploid ) reproductive cell from two individual to form a third ( usually diploid ) unique offspring .
sexual reproduction produce offspring with novel combination of gene .
this can be an adaptive advantage in unstable or unpredictable environment .
as human , - pron - be use to think of animal as have two separate sex — male and female — determine at conception .
however , in the animal kingdom , there be many variation on this theme .
hermaphroditism hermaphroditism occur in animal where one individual have both male and female reproductive part .
invertebrate such as earthworm , slug , tapeworm and snail , show in figure four  three  .  five , be often hermaphroditic .
hermaphrodite may selffertilize or may mate with another of - pron - specie , fertilize each other and both produce offspring .
self fertilization be common in animal that have limit mobility or be not motile , such as barnacle and clam .
many snail be hermaphrodite .
when two individual mate , - pron - can produce up to one hundred egg each .
sex determination mammalian sex determination be determine genetically by the presence of x and y chromosome .
individual homozygous for x ( xx ) be female and heterozygous individual ( xy ) be male .
the presence of a y chromosome cause the development of male characteristic and - pron - absence result in female characteristic .
the xy system be also find in some insect and plant .
avian sex determination be dependent on the presence of z and w chromosome .
homozygous for z ( zz ) result in a male and heterozygous ( zw ) result in a female .
the w appear to be essential in determine the sex of the individual , similar to the y chromosome in mammal .
some fish , crustacean , insect ( such as butterfly and moth ) , and reptil use this system .
the sex of some specie be not determine by genetic but by some aspect of the environment .
sex determination in some crocodile and turtle , for example , be often dependent on the temperature during critical period of egg development .
this be refer to as environmental sex determination , or more specifically as temperature - dependent sex determination .
in many turtle , cool temperature during egg incubation produce male and warm temperature produce female .
in some crocodile , moderate temperature produce male and both warm and cool temperature produce female .
in some specie , sex be both genetic - and temperature - dependent .
individual of some specie change - pron - sex during - pron - life , alternate between male and female .
if the individual be female first , - pron - be term protogyny or " first female , " if - pron - be male first , - pron - term protandry or " first male .
"
oyster , for example , be bear male , grow , and become female and lie egg  some oyster specie change sex multiple time .
fertilization
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  discuss internal and external method of fertilization describe the method use by animal for development of offspring during gestation describe the anatomical adaption that occur in animal to facilitate reproduction sexual reproduction start with the combination of a sperm and an egg in a process call fertilization .
this can occur either inside ( internal fertilization ) or outside ( external fertilization ) the body of the female .
human provide an example of the former whereas seahorse reproduction be an example of the latter .
external fertilization external fertilization usually occur in aquatic environment where both egg and sperm be release into the water .
after the sperm reach the egg , fertilization take place .
most external fertilization happen during the process of spawn where one or several female release - pron - egg and the male ( s ) release sperm in the same area , at the same time .
the release of the reproductive material may be trigger by water temperature or the length of daylight .
nearly all fish spawn , as do crustacean ( such as crab and shrimp ) , mollusk ( such as oyster ) , squid , and echinoderm ( such as sea urchin and sea cucumber ) .
figure four  three  .  six show salmon spawning in a shallow stream .
frog , like those show in figure four  three  .  seven , coral , molluscs , and sea cucumber also spawn .
salmon reproduce through spawn .
during sexual reproduction in toad , the male grasp the female from behind and externally fertilize the egg as - pron - be deposit .
pair of fish that be not broadcast spawner may exhibit courtship behavior .
this allow the female to select a particular male .
the trigger for egg and sperm release ( spawning ) cause the egg and sperm to be place in a small area , enhance the possibility of fertilization .
external fertilization in an aquatic environment protect the egg from dry out .
broadcast spawning can result in a great mixture of the gene within a group , lead to high genetic diversity and a great chance of species survival in a hostile environment .
for sessile aquatic organism like sponge , broadcast spawning be the only mechanism for fertilization and colonization of new environment .
the presence of the fertilize egg and develop young in the water provide opportunity for predation result in a loss of offspring .
therefore , million of egg must be produce by individual , and the offspring produce through this method must mature rapidly .
the survival rate of egg produce through broadcast spawning be low .
internal fertilization internal fertilization occur most often in land - base animal , although some aquatic animal also use this method .
there be three way that offspring be produce follow internal fertilization .
in oviparity , fertilize egg be lay outside the female 's body and develop there , receive nourishment from the yolk that be a part of the egg .
this occur in most bony fish , many reptile , some cartilaginous fish , most amphibian , two mammal , and all bird .
reptile and insect produce leathery egg , while bird and turtle produce egg with high concentration of calcium carbonate in the shell , make - pron - hard .
chicken egg be an example of this second type .
in ovoviparity , fertilize egg be retain in the female , but the embryo obtain - pron - nourishment from the egg 's yolk and the young be fully develop when - pron - be hatch .
this occur in some bony fish ( like the guppy lebistes reticulatus ) , some shark , some lizard , some snake ( such as the garter snake thamnophis sirtali ) , some viper , and some invertebrate animal ( like the madagascar hiss cockroach gromphadorhina portentosa ) .
in viviparity the young develop within the female , receive nourishment from the mother 's blood through a placenta .
the offspring develop in the female and be bear alive .
this occur in most mammal , some cartilaginous fish , and a few reptile .
internal fertilization have the advantage of protect the fertilize egg from dehydration on land .
the embryo be isolate within the female , which limit predation on the young .
internal fertilization enhance the fertilization of egg by a specific male .
few offspring be produce through this method , but - pron - survival rate be high than that for external fertilization .
the evolution of reproduction once multicellular organism evolve and develop specialized cell , some also develop tissue and organ with specialized function .
an early development in reproduction occur in the annelids .
these organism produce sperm and egg from undifferentiated cell in - pron - coelom and store - pron - in that cavity .
when the coelom become fill , the cell be release through an excretory opening or by the body splitting open .
reproductive organ evolve with the development of gonad that produce sperm and egg .
these cell go through meiosis , an adaption of mitosis , which reduce the number of chromosome in each reproductive cell by half , while increase the number of cell through cell division .
complete reproductive system be develop in insect , with separate sex .
sperm be make in testis and then travel through coil tube to the epididymis for storage .
egg mature in the ovary .
when - pron - be release from the ovary , - pron - travel to the uterine tube for fertilization .
some insect have a specialized sac , call a spermatheca , which store sperm for later use , sometimes up to a year .
fertilization can be time with environmental or food condition that be optimal for offspring survival .
vertebrates have similar structure , with a few difference . non - mammal , such as bird and reptile , have a common body opening , call a cloaca , for the digestive , excretory and reproductive system .
couple between bird usually involve position the cloaca opening opposite each other for transfer of sperm .
mammal have separate opening for the system in the female and a uterus for support of develop offspring .
the uterus have two chamber in specie that produce large number of offspring at a time , while specie that produce one offspring , such as primate , have a single uterus .
sperm transfer from the male to the female during reproduction range from release the sperm into the watery environment for external fertilization , to the joining of cloaca in bird , to the development of a penis for direct delivery into the female 's vagina in mammal .
human reproductive anatomy and gametogenesis
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  describe human male and female reproductive anatomy
discuss the human sexual response describe spermatogenesis and oogenesis and discuss - pron - difference and similarity
as animal become more complex , specific organ and organ system develop to support specific function for the organism .
the reproductive structure that evolve in land animal allow male and female to mate , fertilize internally , and support the growth and development of offspring .
human reproductive anatomy
the reproductive tissue of male and female human develop similarly in utero until a low level of the hormone testosterone be release from male gonad .
testosterone cause the undeveloped tissue to differentiate into male sexual organ .
when testosterone be absent , the tissue develop into female sexual tissue .
primitive gonad become testis or ovary .
tissue that produce a penis in male produce a clitoris in female .
the tissue that will become the scrotum in a male become the labia in a female  that is , - pron - be homologous structure .
male reproductive anatomy
in the male reproductive system , the scrotum house the testicle or testis ( singular  testis ) , include provide passage for blood vessel , nerve , and muscle relate to testicular function .
the testis be a pair of male reproductive organ that produce sperm and some reproductive hormone .
each testis be approximately two  .  five by three  .  eight cm ( one  .  five by one in ) in size and divide into wedge - shape lobule by connective tissue call septa .
coil in each wedge be seminiferous tubule that produce sperm .
sperm be immobile at body temperature  therefore , the scrotum and penis be external to the body , as illustrate in figure four  three  .  eight so that a proper temperature be maintain for motility .
in land mammal , the pair of testis must be suspend outside the body at about two ° c low than body temperature to produce viable sperm .
infertility can occur in land mammal when the testis do not descend through the abdominal cavity during fetal development .
sperm mature in seminiferous tubule that be coil inside the testis , as illustrate in figure four  three  .  eight .
the wall of the seminiferous tubule be make up of the develop sperm cell , with the least developed sperm at the periphery of the tubule and the fully develop sperm in the luman .
the sperm cell be mixed with " nursemaid " cell call sertoli cell which protect the germ cell and promote - pron - development .
other cell mix in the wall of the tubule be the interstitial cell of leydig .
these cell produce high level of testosterone once the male reach adolescence .
when the sperm have develop flagella and be nearly mature , - pron - leave the testicle and enter the epididymis , show in figure four  three  .  eight .
this structure resemble a comma and lie along the top and posterior portion of the testis  - pron - be the site of sperm maturation .
the sperm leave the epididymis and enter the vas deferen ( or ductus deferen ) , which carry the sperm , behind the bladder , and form the ejaculatory duct with the duct from the seminal vesicle .
during a vasectomy , a section of the vas deferen be remove , prevent sperm from be pass out of the body during ejaculation and prevent fertilization .
semen be a mixture of sperm and spermatic duct secretion ( about one  zero percent of the total ) and fluid from accessory gland that contribute most of the seman 's volume .
sperm be haploid cell , consist of a flagellum as a tail , a neck that contain the cell 's energy - produce mitochondria , and a head that contain the genetic material .
figure four  three  .  nine show a micrograph of human sperm as well as a diagram of the part of the sperm .
an acrosome be find at the top of the head of the sperm .
this structure contain lysosomal enzyme that can digest the protective covering that surround the egg to help the sperm penetrate and fertilize the egg .
an ejaculate will contain from two to five milliliter of fluid with from five  zero – one  two  zero million sperm per milliliter .
human sperm , visualize use scanning electron microscopy , have a flagellum , neck , and head .
the bulk of the semen come from the accessory gland associate with the male reproductive system .
these be the seminal vesicle , the prostate gland , and the bulbourethral gland , all of which be illustrate in figure four  three  .  eight .
the seminal vesicle be a pair of gland that lie along the posterior border of the urinary bladder .
the gland make a solution that be thick , yellowish , and alkaline .
as sperm be only motile in an alkaline environment , a basic ph be important to reverse the acidity of the vaginal environment .
the solution also contain mucus , fructose ( a sperm mitochondrial nutrient ) , a coagulate enzyme , ascorbic acid , and local - act hormone call prostaglandin .
the seminal vesicle gland account for six  zero percent of the bulk of seman .
the penis , illustrate in figure four  three  .  eight , be an organ that drain urine from the renal bladder and function as a copulatory organ during intercourse .
the penis contain three tube of erectile tissue run through the length of the organ .
these consist of a pair of tube on the dorsal side , call the corpus cavernosum , and a single tube of tissue on the ventral side , call the corpus spongiosum .
this tissue will become engorge with blood , become erect and hard , in preparation for intercourse .
the organ be insert into the vagina culminate with an ejaculation .
during intercourse , the smooth muscle sphincter at the opening to the renal bladder close and prevent urine from enter the penis .
an orgasm be a two - stage process  first , gland and accessory organ connect to the testis contract , then seman ( contain sperm ) be expel through the urethra during ejaculation .
after intercourse , the blood drain from the erectile tissue and the penis become flaccid .
the walnut - shape prostate gland surround the urethra , the connection to the urinary bladder .
- pron - have a series of short duct that directly connect to the urethra .
the gland be a mixture of smooth muscle and glandular tissue .
the muscle provide much of the force need for ejaculation to occur .
the glandular tissue make a thin , milky fluid that contain citrate ( a nutrient ) , enzyme , and prostate specific antigen ( psa ) .
psa be a proteolytic enzyme that help to liquefy the ejaculate several minute after release from the male .
prostate gland secretion account for about three  zero percent of the bulk of seman .
the bulbourethral gland , or cowper 's gland , release - pron - secretion prior to the release of the bulk of the seman .
- pron - neutralize any acid residue in the urethra leave over from urine .
this usually account for a couple of drop of fluid in the total ejaculate and may contain a few sperm .
withdrawal of the penis from the vagina before ejaculation to prevent pregnancy may not work if sperm be present in the bulbourethral gland secretion .
the location and function of the male reproductive organ be summarize in table four  three  .  one .
female reproductive anatomy
a number of reproductive structure be exterior to the female 's body .
these include the breast and the vulva , which consist of the mon pubis , clitoris , labia majora , labia minora , and the vestibular gland , all illustrate in figure four  three  .  one  zero .
the location and function of the female reproductive organ be summarize in table four  three  .  two .
the vulva be an area associate with the vestibule which include the structure find in the inguinal ( groin ) area of woman .
the mon pubis be a round , fatty area that overlie the pubic symphysis .
the clitoris be a structure with erectile tissue that contain a large number of sensory nerve and serve as a source of stimulation during intercourse .
the labia majora be a pair of elongate fold of tissue that run posterior from the mon pubis and enclose the other component of the vulva .
the labia majora derive from the same tissue that produce the scrotum in a male .
the labia minora be thin fold of tissue centrally locate within the labia majora .
these labia protect the opening to the vagina and urethra .
the mon pubis and the anterior portion of the labia majora become cover with hair during adolescence  the labia minora be hairless .
the great vestibular gland be find at the side of the vaginal opening and provide lubrication during intercourse .
the reproductive structure of the human female be show .
the breast consist of mammary gland and fat .
the size of the breast be determine by the amount of fat deposit behind the gland .
each gland consist of one  five to two  five lobe that have duct that empty at the nipple and that supply the nursing child with nutrient - and antibody - rich milk to aid development and protect the child .
internal female reproductive structure include ovary , oviduct , the uterus , and the vagina , show in figure four  three  .  one  zero .
the pair of ovary be hold in place in the abdominal cavity by a system of ligament .
ovary consist of a medulla and cortex  the medulla contain nerve and blood vessel to supply the cortex with nutrient and remove waste .
the outer layer of cell of the cortex be the functional part of the ovary .
the cortex be make up of follicular cell that surround egg that develop during fetal development in utero .
during the menstrual period , a batch of follicular cell develop and prepare the egg for release .
at ovulation , one follicle rupture and one egg be release , as illustrate in figure four  three  .  one  one a .
oocyte develop in ( a ) follicle , locate in the ovary .
at the beginning of the menstrual cycle , the follicle mature .
at ovulation , the follicle rupture , release the egg .
the follicle become a corpus luteum , which eventually degenerate .
the ( b ) follicle in this light micrograph have an oocyte at - pron - center .
the oviduct , or fallopian tube , extend from the uterus in the low abdominal cavity to the ovary , but - pron - be not in contact with the ovary .
the lateral end of the oviduct flare out into a trumpet - like structure and have a fringe of fingerlike projection call fimbriae , illustrate in figure four  three  .  one  zero b .
when an egg be release at ovulation , the fimbrae help the non - motile egg enter into the tube and passage to the uterus .
the wall of the oviduct be ciliat and be make up mostly of smooth muscle .
the cilium beat toward the middle , and the smooth muscle contract in the same direction , move the egg toward the uterus .
fertilization usually take place within the oviduct and the develop embryo be move toward the uterus for development .
- pron - usually take the egg or embryo a week to travel through the oviduct .
sterilization in woman be call a tubal ligation  - pron - be analogous to a vasectomy in male in that the oviduct be sever and seal .
the uterus be a structure about the size of a woman 's fist .
this be line with an endometrium rich in blood vessel and mucus gland .
the uterus support the develop embryo and fetus during gestation .
the thick portion of the wall of the uterus be make of smooth muscle .
contraction of the smooth muscle in the uterus aid in pass the baby through the vagina during labor .
a portion of the lining of the uterus slough off during each menstrual period , and then build up again in preparation for an implantation .
part of the uterus , call the cervix , protrude into the top of the vagina .
the cervix function as the birth canal .
the vagina be a muscular tube that serve several purpose .
- pron - allow menstrual flow to leave the body .
- pron - be the receptacle for the penis during intercourse and the vessel for the delivery of offspring .
- pron - be line by stratified squamous epithelial cell to protect the underlying tissue .
sexual response during intercourse the sexual response in human be both psychological and physiological .
both sex experience sexual arousal through psychological and physical stimulation .
there be four phase of the sexual response .
during phase one , call excitement , vasodilation lead to vasocongestion in erectile tissue in both man and woman .
the nipple , clitoris , labia , and penis engorge with blood and become enlarged .
vaginal secretion be release to lubricate the vagina to facilitate intercourse .
during the second phase , call the plateau , stimulation continue , the outer third of the vaginal wall enlarge with blood , and breathing and heart rate increase .
during phase three , or orgasm , rhythmic , involuntary contraction of muscle occur in both sex .
in the male , the reproductive accessory gland and tubule constrict place seman in the urethra , then the urethra contract expel the seman through the penis .
in woman , the uterus and vaginal muscle contract in wave that may last slightly less than a second each .
during phase four , or resolution , the process describe in the first three phase reverse - pron - and return to - pron - normal state .
man experience a refractory period in which - pron - can not maintain an erection or ejaculate for a period of time range from minute to hour .
gametogenesis ( spermatogenesis and oogenesis ) gametogenesis , the production of sperm and egg , take place through the process of meiosis .
during meiosis , two cell division separate the pair chromosome in the nucleus and then separate the chromatid that be make during an early stage of the cell 's life cycle .
meiosis produce haploid cell with half of each pair of chromosome normally find in diploid cell .
the production of sperm be call spermatogenesis and the production of egg be call oogenesis .
spermatogenesis
during spermatogenesis , four sperm result from each primary spermatocyte .
spermatogenesis , illustrate in figure four  three  .  one  two , occur in the wall of the seminiferous tubule ( figure four  three  .  eight ) , with stem cell at the periphery of the tube and the spermatozoa at the luman of the tube .
immediately under the capsule of the tubule be diploid , undifferentiated cell .
these stem cell , call spermatogonia ( singular  spermatagonium ) , go through mitosis with one offspring go on to differentiate into a sperm cell and the other give rise to the next generation of sperm .
meiosis start with a cell call a primary spermatocyte .
at the end of the first meiotic division , a haploid cell be produce call a secondary spermatocyte .
this cell be haploid and must go through another meiotic cell division .
the cell produce at the end of meiosis be call a spermatid and when - pron - reach the luman of the tubule and grow a flagellum , - pron - be call a sperm cell .
four sperm result from each primary spermatocyte that go through meiosis .
stem cell be deposit during gestation and be present at birth through the beginning of adolescence , but in an inactive state .
during adolescence , gonadotropic hormone from the anterior pituitary because the activation of these cell and the production of viable sperm .
this continue into old age .
oogenesis oogenesis , illustrate in figure four  three  .  one  three , occur in the outermost layer of the ovary .
as with sperm production , oogenesis start with a germ cell , call an oogonium ( plural  oogonia ) , but this cell undergo mitosis to increase in number , eventually result in up to about one to two million cell in the embryo .
the process of oogenesis occur in the ovary 's outermost layer .
the cell start meiosis be call a primary oocyte , as show in figure four  three  .  one  three .
this cell will start the first meiotic division and be arrest in - pron - progress in the first prophase stage .
at the time of birth , all future egg be in the prophase stage .
at adolescence , anterior pituitary hormone because the development of a number of follicle in an ovary .
this result in the primary oocyte finish the first meiotic division .
the cell divide unequally , with most of the cellular material and organell go to one cell , call a secondary oocyte , and only one set of chromosome and a small amount of cytoplasm go to the other cell .
this second cell be call a polar body and usually die .
a secondary meiotic arrest occur , this time at the metaphase ii stage .
at ovulation , this secondary oocyte will be release and travel toward the uterus through the oviduct .
if the secondary oocyte be fertilize , the cell continue through the meiosis ii , produce a second polar body and a fertilize egg contain all four  six chromosome of a human being , half of - pron - come from the sperm .
egg production begin before birth , be arrest during meiosis until puberty , and then individual cell continue through at each menstrual cycle .
one egg be produce from each meiotic process , with the extra chromosome and chromatid go into polar body that degenerate and be reabsorb by the body .
hormonal control of human reproduction
by the end of this chapter , - pron - will be able to  describe the role of male and female reproductive hormone
discuss the interplay of the ovarian and menstrual cycle
describe the process of menopause
the human male and female reproductive cycle be control by the interaction of hormone from the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary with hormone from reproductive tissue and organ .
in both sex , the hypothalamus monitor and cause the release of hormone from the pituitary gland .
when the reproductive hormone be require , the hypothalamus send a gonadotropin - release hormone ( gnrh ) to the anterior pituitary .
this cause the release of follicle stimulate hormone ( fsh ) and luteiniz hormone ( lh ) from the anterior pituitary into the blood .
note that the body must reach puberty in order for the adrenal to release the hormone that must be present for gnrh to be produce .
although fsh and lh be name after - pron - function in female reproduction , - pron - be produce in both sex and play important role in control reproduction .
other hormone have specific function in the male and female reproductive system .
male hormones
at the onset of puberty , the hypothalamus cause the release of fsh and lh into the male system for the first time .
fsh enter the testis and stimulate the sertoli cell to begin facilitate spermatogenesis use negative feedback , as illustrate in figure four  three  .  one  four .
lh also enter the testis and stimulate the interstitial cell of leydig to make and release testosterone into the testis and the blood .
testosterone , the hormone responsible for the secondary sexual characteristic that develop in the male during adolescence , stimulate spermatogenesis .
these secondary sex characteristic include a deepening of the voice , the growth of facial , axillary , and pubic hair , and the beginning of the sex drive .
hormone control sperm production in a negative feedback system .
a negative feedback system occur in the male with rise level of testosterone act on the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary to inhibit the release of gnrh , fsh , and lh .
the sertoli cell produce the hormone inhibin , which be release into the blood when the sperm count be too high .
this inhibit the release of gnrh and fsh , which will because spermatogenesis to slow down .
if the sperm count reach two  zero million / ml , the sertoli cell cease the release of inhibin , and the sperm count increase .
female hormones
the control of reproduction in female be more complex .
as with the male , the anterior pituitary hormone because the release of the hormone fsh and lh .
in addition , estrogen and progesterone be release from the develop follicle .
estrogen be the reproductive hormone in female that assist in endometrial regrowth , ovulation , and calcium absorption  - pron - be also responsible for the secondary sexual characteristic of female .
these include breast development , flare of the hip , and a short period necessary for bone maturation .
progesterone assist in endometrial re - growth and inhibition of fsh and lh release .
in female , fsh stimulate development of egg cell , call ova , which develop in structure call follicle .
follicle cell produce the hormone inhibin , which inhibit fsh production .
lh also play a role in the development of ova , induction of ovulation , and stimulation of estradiol and progesterone production by the ovary .
estradiol and progesterone be steroid hormone that prepare the body for pregnancy .
estradiol produce secondary sex characteristic in female , while both estradiol and progesterone regulate the menstrual cycle .
the ovarian cycle and the menstrual cycle
the ovarian cycle govern the preparation of endocrine tissue and release of egg , while the menstrual cycle govern the preparation and maintenance of the uterine lining .
these cycle occur concurrently and be coordinate over a two  two – three  two day cycle , with an average length of two  eight day .
the first half of the ovarian cycle be the follicular phase show in figure four  three  .  one  five .
slowly rise level of fsh and lh because the growth of follicle on the surface of the ovary .
this process prepare the egg for ovulation .
as the follicle grow , - pron - begin release estrogen and a low level of progesterone .
progesterone maintain the endometrium to help ensure pregnancy .
the trip through the fallopian tube take about seven day .
at this stage of development , call the morula , there be three  zero - six  zero cell .
if pregnancy implantation do not occur , the lining be slough off .
after about five day , estrogen level rise and the menstrual cycle enter the proliferative phase .
the endometrium begin to regrow , replace the blood vessel and gland that deteriorate during the end of the last cycle .
just prior to the middle of the cycle ( approximately day one  four ) , the high level of estrogen cause fsh and especially lh to rise rapidly , then fall .
the spike in lh cause ovulation  the most mature follicle , like that show in figure four  three  .  one  six , rupture and release - pron - egg .
the follicle that do not rupture degenerate and - pron - egg be lose .
the level of estrogen decrease when the extra follicle degenerate .
this mature egg follicle may rupture and release an egg .
follow ovulation , the ovarian cycle enter - pron - luteal phase , illustrate in figure four  three  .  one  five and the menstrual cycle enter - pron - secretory phase , both of which run from about day one  five to two  eight .
the luteal and secretory phase refer to change in the ruptured follicle .
the cell in the follicle undergo physical change and produce a structure call a corpus luteum .
the corpus luteum produce estrogen and progesterone .
the progesterone facilitate the regrowth of the uterine lining and inhibit the release of further fsh and lh .
the uterus be be prepare to accept a fertilize egg , should - pron - occur during this cycle .
the inhibition of fsh and lh prevent any further egg and follicle from develop , while the progesterone be elevated .
the level of estrogen produce by the corpus luteum increase to a steady level for the next few day .
if no fertilized egg be implant into the uterus , the corpus luteum degenerate and the level of estrogen and progesterone decrease .
the endometrium begin to degenerate as the progesterone level drop , initiate the next menstrual cycle .
the decrease in progesterone also allow the hypothalamus to send gnrh to the anterior pituitary , release fsh and lh and start the cycle again .
figure four  three  .  one  seven visually compare the ovarian and uterine cycle as well as the commensurate hormone level .
menopause
as woman approach - pron - mid -  four  zero to mid -  five  zero , - pron - ovary begin to lose - pron - sensitivity to fsh and lh .
menstrual period become less frequent and finally cease  this be menopause .
there be still egg and potential follicle on the ovary , but without the stimulation of fsh and lh , - pron - will not produce a viable egg to be release .
the outcome of this be the inability to have child .
the side effect of menopause include hot flash , heavy sweating ( especially at night ) , headache , some hair loss , muscle pain , vaginal dryness , insomnia , depression , weight gain , and mood swing .
estrogen be involve in calcium metabolism and , without - pron - , blood level of calcium decrease .
to replenish the blood , calcium be lose from bone which may decrease the bone density and lead to osteoporosis .
supplementation of estrogen in the form of hormone replacement therapy ( hrt ) can prevent bone loss , but the therapy can have negative side effect .
while hrt be think to give some protection from colon cancer , osteoporosis , heart disease , macular degeneration , and possibly depression , - pron - negative side effect include increase risk of  stroke or heart attack , blood clot , breast cancer , ovarian cancer , endometrial cancer , gall bladder disease , and possibly dementia .
human pregnancy and birth
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  explain fetal development during the three trimester of gestation describe labor and delivery compare the efficacy and duration of various type of contraception discuss cause of infertility and the therapeutic option available pregnancy begin with the fertilization of an egg and continue through to the birth of the individual .
the length of time of gestation vary among animal , but be very similar among the great ape  human gestation be two  six  six day , while chimpanzee gestation be two  three  seven day , a gorilla
's be two  five  seven day , and orangutan gestation be two  six  zero day long .
the fox have a five  seven  - day gestation .
dog and cat have similar gestation average six  zero day .
the long gestation for a land mammal be an african elephant at six  four  zero day .
the long gestation among marine mammal be the beluga and sperm whale at four  six  zero day .
human gestation twenty - four hour before fertilization , the egg have finish meiosis and become a mature oocyte .
when fertilize ( at conception ) the egg become know as a zygote .
the zygote travel through the oviduct to the uterus ( figure four  three  .  one  eight ) .
the develop embryo must implant into the wall of the uterus within seven day , or - pron - will deteriorate and die .
the outer layer of the zygote ( blastocyst ) grow into the endometrium by digest the endometrial cell , and wound healing of the endometrium close up the blastocyst into the tissue .
another layer of the blastocyst , the chorion , begin release a hormone call human beta chorionic gonadotropin ( β - hcg ) which make - pron - way to the corpus luteum and keep that structure active .
this ensure adequate level of progesterone that will maintain the endometrium of the uterus for the support of the develop embryo .
pregnancy test determine the level of β - hcg in urine or serum .
if the hormone be present , the test be positive .
in human , fertilization occur soon after the oocyte leave the ovary .
implantation occur eight or nine day later .
the gestation period be divide into three equal period or trimester .
during the first two to four week of the first trimester , nutrition and waste be handle by the endometrial lining through diffusion .
as the trimester progress , the outer layer of the embryo begin to merge with the endometrium , and the placenta form .
this organ take over the nutrient and waste requirement of the embryo and fetus , with the mother 's blood pass nutrient to the placenta and remove waste from - pron - .
chemical from the fetus , such as bilirubin , be process by the mother 's liver for elimination .
some of the mother 's immunoglobulin will pass through the placenta , provide passive immunity against some potential infection .
internal organ and body structure begin to develop during the first trimester .
by five week , limb bud , eye , the heart , and liver have be basically form .
by eight week , the term fetus apply , and the body be essentially form , as show in figure four  three  .  one  nine .
the individual be about five centimeter ( two inch ) in length and many of the organ , such as the lung and liver , be not yet function .
exposure to any toxin be especially dangerous during the first trimester , as all of the body 's organ and structure be go through initial development .
anything that affect that development can have a severe effect on the fetus' survival .
fetal development be show at nine week gestation .
during the second trimester , the fetus grow to about three  zero cm ( one  two inch ) , as show in figure four  three  .  two  zero .
- pron - become active and the mother usually feel the first movement .
all organ and structure continue to develop .
the placenta have take over the function of nutrition and waste and the production of estrogen and progesterone from the corpus luteum , which have degenerate .
the placenta will continue function up through the delivery of the baby .
this fetus be just enter the second trimester , when the placenta take over more of the function perform as the baby develop .
during the third trimester , the fetus grow to three to four kg ( six ½ -  eight ½ lb . )
and about five  zero cm ( one  nine - two  zero inch ) long , as illustrate in figure four  three  .  two  one .
this be the period of the most rapid growth during the pregnancy .
organ development continue to birth ( and some system , such as the nervous system and liver , continue to develop after birth ) .
the mother will be at - pron - most uncomfortable during this trimester .
- pron - may urinate frequently due to pressure on the bladder from the fetus .
there may also be intestinal blockage and circulatory problem , especially in - pron - leg .
clot may form in - pron - leg due to pressure from the fetus on return vein as - pron - enter the abdominal cavity .
there be rapid fetal growth during the third trimester .
labor and birth labor be the physical effort of expulsion of the fetus and the placenta from the uterus during birth ( parturition ) .
toward the end of the third trimester , estrogen cause receptor on the uterine wall to develop and bind the hormone oxytocin .
at this time , the baby reorient , face forward and down with the back or crown of the head engage the cervix ( uterine opening ) .
this cause the cervix to stretch and nerve impulse be send to the hypothalamus , which signal for the release of oxytocin from the posterior pituitary .
the oxytocin cause the smooth muscle in the uterine wall to contract .
at the same time , the placenta release prostaglandin into the uterus , increase the contraction .
a positive feedback relay occur between the uterus , hypothalamus , and the posterior pituitary to assure an adequate supply of oxytocin .
as more smooth muscle cell be recruit , the contraction increase in intensity and force .
there be three stage to labor .
during stage one , the cervix thin and dilate .
this be necessary for the baby and placenta to be expel during birth .
the cervix will eventually dilate to about one  zero cm .
during stage two , the baby be expel from the uterus .
the uterus contract and the mother push as - pron - compress - pron - abdominal muscle to aid the delivery .
the last stage be the passage of the placenta after the baby have be bear and the organ have completely disengage from the uterine wall .
if labor should stop before stage two be reach , synthetic oxytocin , know as pitocin , can be administer to restart and maintain labor .
an alternative to labor and delivery be the surgical delivery of the baby through a procedure call a caesarian section .
this be major abdominal surgery and can lead to post - surgical complication for the mother , but in some case - pron - may be the only way to safely deliver the baby .
the mother 's
mammary gland go through change during the third trimester to prepare for lactation and breastfeeding .
when the baby begin suckling at the breast , signal be send to the hypothalamus cause the release of prolactin from the anterior pituitary .
prolactin cause the mammary gland to produce milk .
oxytocin be also release , promote the release of the milk .
the milk contain nutrient for the baby 's development and growth as well as immunoglobulin to protect the child from bacterial and viral infection .
contraception and birth control
the prevention of a pregnancy come under the term contraception or birth control .
strictly speak , contraception refer to prevent the sperm and egg from join .
both term be , however , frequently use interchangeably .
table four  three  .  three list common method of contraception .
the failure rate list be not the ideal rate that could be realize , but the typical rate that occur .
a failure rate be the number of pregnancy result from the method 's use over a twelve - month period .
barrier method , such as condom , cervical cap , and diaphragms , block sperm from enter the uterus , prevent fertilization .
spermicide be chemical that be place in the vagina that kill sperm .
sponge , which be saturate with spermicide , be place in the vagina at the cervical opening .
combination of spermicidal chemical and barrier method achieve low failure rate than do the method when use separately .
nearly a quarter of the couple use barrier method , natural family planning , or withdrawal can expect a failure of the method .
natural family planning be base on the monitoring of the menstrual cycle and have intercourse only during time when the egg be not available .
a woman 's body temperature may rise a degree celsius at ovulation and the cervical mucus may increase in volume and become more pliable .
these change give a general indication of when intercourse be more or less likely to result in fertilization .
withdrawal involve the removal of the penis from the vagina during intercourse , before ejaculation occur .
this be a risky method with a high failure rate due to the possible presence of sperm in the bulbourethral gland 's secretion , which may enter the vagina prior to remove the penis .
hormonal method use synthetic progesterone ( sometimes in combination with estrogen ) , to inhibit the hypothalamus from release fsh or lh , and thus prevent an egg from be available for fertilization .
the method of administer the hormone affect failure rate .
the most reliable method , with a failure rate of less than one percent , be the implantation of the hormone under the skin .
the same rate can be achieve through the sterilization procedure of vasectomy in the man or of tubal ligation in the woman , or by use an intrauterine device ( iud ) .
iud be insert into the uterus and establish an inflammatory condition that prevent fertilize egg from implant into the uterine wall .
compliance with the contraceptive method be a strong contributor to the success or failure rate of any particular method .
the only method that be completely effective at prevent conception be abstinence .
the choice of contraceptive method depend on the goal of the woman or couple .
tubal ligation and vasectomy be consider permanent prevention , while other method be reversible and provide short - term contraception .
termination of an exist pregnancy can be spontaneous or voluntary .
spontaneous termination be a miscarriage and usually occur very early in the pregnancy , usually within the first few week .
this occur when the fetus can not develop properly and the gestation be naturally terminate .
voluntary termination of a pregnancy be an abortion .
law regulate abortion vary between state and tend to view fetal viability as the criterion for allow or prevent the procedure .
infertility infertility be the inability to conceive a child or carry a child to birth .
about seven  five percent of cause of infertility can be identify  these include disease , such as sexually transmit disease that can because scar of the reproductive tube in either man or woman , or developmental problem frequently relate to abnormal hormone level in one of the individual .
inadequate nutrition , especially starvation , can delay menstruation .
stress can also lead to infertility .
short - term stress can affect hormone level , while long - term stress can delay puberty and because less frequent menstrual cycle .
other factor that affect fertility include toxin ( such as cadmium ) , tobacco smoking , marijuana use , gonadal injury , and age .
if infertility be identify , several assist reproductive technology ( art ) be available to aid conception .
a common type of art be in vitro fertilization ( ivf ) where an egg and sperm be combine outside the body and then place in the uterus .
egg be obtain from the woman after extensive hormonal treatment that prepare mature egg for fertilization and prepare the uterus for implantation of the fertilize egg .
sperm be obtain from the man and - pron - be combine with the egg and support through several cell division to ensure viability of the zygote .
when the embryo have reach the eight - cell stage , one or more be implant into the woman 's uterus .
if fertilization be not accomplish by simple ivf , a procedure that inject the sperm into an egg can be use .
this be call intracytoplasmic sperm injection ( icsi ) and be show in figure four  three  .  two  two .
ivf procedure produce a surplus of fertilize egg and embryo that can be freeze and store for future use .
the procedure can also result in multiple birth .
a sperm be insert into an egg for fertilization during intracytoplasmic sperm injection ( icsi ) .
the process in which an organism develop from a single - cell zygote to a multi - cellular organism be complex and wellregulat .
the early stage of embryonic development be also crucial for ensure the fitness of the organism .
fertilization fertilization , picture in figure four  three  .  two  three a be the process in which gamete ( an egg and sperm ) fuse to form a zygote .
the egg and sperm each contain one set of chromosome .
to ensure that the offspring have only one complete diploid set of chromosome , only one sperm must fuse with one egg .
in mammal , the egg be protect by a layer of extracellular matrix consist mainly of glycoprotein call the zona pellucida .
when a sperm bind to the zona pellucida , a series of biochemical event , call the acrosomal reaction , take place .
in placental mammal , the acrosome contain digestive enzyme that initiate the degradation of the glycoprotein matrix protect the egg and allow the sperm plasma membrane to fuse with the egg plasma membrane , as illustrate in figure four  three  .  two  three b .
the fusion of these two membrane create an opening through which the sperm nucleus be transfer into the ovum .
the nuclear membrane of the egg and sperm break down and the two haploid genome condense to form a diploid genome .
( a ) fertilization be the process in which sperm and egg fuse to form a zygote .
( b ) acrosomal reaction help the sperm degrade the glycoprotein matrix protect the egg and allow the sperm to transfer - pron - nucleus .
to ensure that no more than one sperm fertilize the egg , once the acrosomal reaction take place at one location of the egg membrane , the egg release protein in other location to prevent other sperm from fuse with the egg .
if this mechanism fail , multiple sperm can fuse with the egg , result in polyspermy .
the result embryo be not genetically viable and die within a few day .
cleavage and blastula stage
the development of multi - cellular organism begin from a single - cell zygote , which undergo rapid cell division to form the blastula .
the rapid , multiple round of cell division be term cleavage .
cleavage be illustrate in ( figure four  three  .  two  four a ) .
after the cleavage have produce over one  zero  zero cell , the embryo be call a blastula .
the blastula be usually a spherical layer of cell ( the blastoderm ) surround a fluid - fill or yolk - fill cavity ( the blastocoel ) .
mammal at this stage form a structure call the blastocyst , characterize by an inner cell mass that be distinct from the surround blastula , show in figure four  three  .  two  four b .
during cleavage , the cell divide without an increase in mass  that is , one large single - cell zygote divide into multiple small cell .
each cell within the blastula be call a blastomere .
( a )
during cleavage , the zygote rapidly divide into multiple cell without increase in size .
( b )
the cell rearrange - pron - to form a hollow ball with a fluid - fill or yolk - fill cavity call the blastula .
cleavage can take place in two way  holoblastic ( total ) cleavage or meroblastic ( partial ) cleavage .
the type of cleavage depend on the amount of yolk in the egg .
in placental mammal ( include human ) where nourishment be provide by the mother 's body , the egg have a very small amount of yolk and undergo holoblastic cleavage .
other specie , such as bird , with a lot of yolk in the egg to nourish the embryo during development , undergo meroblastic cleavage .
in mammal , the blastula form the blastocyst in the next stage of development .
here the cell in the blastula arrange - pron - in two layer  the inner cell mass , and an outer layer call the trophoblast .
the inner cell mass be also know as the embryoblast and this mass of cell will go on to form the embryo .
at this stage of development , illustrate in figure four  three  .  two  five the inner cell mass consist of embryonic stem cell that will differentiate into the different cell type need by the organism .
the trophoblast will contribute to the placenta and nourish the embryo .
the rearrangement of the cell in the mammalian blastula to two layer — the inner cell mass and the trophoblast — result in the formation of the blastocyst .
gastrulation
the typical blastula be a ball of cell .
the next stage in embryonic development be the formation of the body plan .
the cell in the blastula rearrange - pron - spatially to form three layer of cell .
this process be call gastrulation .
during gastrulation , the blastula fold upon - pron - to form the three layer of cell .
each of these layer be call a germ layer and each germ layer differentiate into different organ system .
the three germ layer , show in figure four  three  .  two  six , be the endoderm , the ectoderm , and the mesoderm .
the ectoderm give rise to the nervous system and the epidermis .
the mesoderm give rise to the muscle cell and connective tissue in the body .
the endoderm give rise to columnar cell find in the digestive system and many internal organ .
the three germ layer give rise to different cell type in the animal body .
four  three  .  seven  organogenesis and vertebrate formation by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to 

describe the process of organogenesis 
identify the anatomical ax form in vertebrate gastrulation lead to the formation of the three germ layer that give rise , during further development , to the different organ in the animal body .
this process be call organogenesis .
organogenesis be characterize by rapid and precise movement of the cell within the embryo .
organogenesis organs form from the germ layer through the process of differentiation .
during differentiation , the embryonic stem cell express specific set of gene which will determine - pron - ultimate cell type .
for example , some cell in the ectoderm will express the gene specific to skin cell .
as a result , these cell will differentiate into epidermal cell .
the process of differentiation be regulate by cellular signaling cascade .
scientist study organogenesis extensively in the lab in fruit fly ( drosophila ) and the nematode caenorhabditis elegan .
drosophila have segment along - pron - body , and the patterning associate with the segment formation have allow scientist to study which gene play important role in organogenesis along the length of the embryo at different time point .
the nematode c . elegan have roughly one  zero  zero  zero somatic cell and scientist have study the fate of each of these cell during - pron - development in the nematode life cycle .
there be little variation in pattern of cell lineage between individual , unlike in mammal where cell development from the embryo be dependent on cellular cue .
in vertebrate , one of the primary step during organogenesis be the formation of the neural system .
the ectoderm form epithelial cell and tissue , and neuronal tissue .
during the formation of the neural system , special signaling molecule call growth factor signal some cell at the edge of the ectoderm to become epidermis cell .
the remain cell in the center form the neural plate .
if the signaling by growth factor be disrupt , then the entire ectoderm would differentiate into neural tissue .
the neural plate undergo a series of cell movement where - pron - roll up and form a tube call the neural tube , as illustrate in figure four  three  .  two  eight .
in further development , the neural tube will give rise to the brain and the spinal cord .
the central region of the ectoderm form the neural tube , which give rise to the brain and the spinal cord .
the mesoderm that lie on either side of the vertebrate neural tube will develop into the various connective tissue of the animal body .
a spatial pattern of gene expression reorganize the mesoderm into group of cell call somite with space between - pron - .
the somite , illustrate in figure four  three  .  two  nine will further develop into the rib , lung , and segmental ( spine ) muscle .
the mesoderm also form a structure call the notochord , which be rod - shape and form the central axis of the animal body .
in this five - week old human embryo , somite be segment along the length of the body .
vertebrate axis formation
even as the germ layer form , the ball of cell still retain - pron - spherical shape .
however , animal body have lateral - medial ( left - right ) , dorsal - ventral ( back - belly ) , and anterior - posterior ( head - foot ) ax , illustrate in figure four  three  .  three  zero .
animal body have three ax for symmetry .
how be these establish ?
in one of the most seminal experiment ever to be carry out in developmental biology , spemann and mangold take dorsal cell from one embryo and transplant - pron - into the belly region of another embryo .
- pron - find that the transplanted embryo now have two notochord  one at the dorsal site from the original cell and another at the transplanted site .
this suggest that the dorsal cell be genetically program to form the notochord and define the axis .
since then , researcher have identify many gene that be responsible for axis formation .
mutation in these gene lead to the loss of symmetry require for organism development .
animal body have externally visible symmetry .
however , the internal organ be not symmetric .
for example , the heart be on the left side and the liver on the right .
the formation of the central left - right axis be an important process during development .
this internal asymmetry be establish very early during development and involve many gene .
research be still ongoing to fully understand the developmental implication of these gene .
the ( a ) deer tick carry the bacterium that produce lyme disease in human , often evident in ( b ) a symptomatic bull 's eye rash .
the ( c ) white - footed mouse be one well - know host to deer tick carry the lyme disease bacterium . 
why study ecology ?
perhaps - pron - be interested in learn about the natural world and how live thing have adapt to the physical condition of - pron - environment .
or , perhaps - pron - be a future physician seek to understand the connection between human health and ecology .
human be a part of the ecological landscape , and human health be one important part of human interaction with - pron - physical and living environment .
lyme disease , for instance , serve as one modern - day example of the connection between - pron - health and the natural world ( figure four  four  .  one ) .
more formally know as lyme borreliosis , lyme disease be a bacterial infection that can be transmit to human when - pron - be bite by the deer tick ( ixodes scapularis ) , which be the primary vector for this disease .
however , not all deer tick carry the bacteria that will because lyme disease in human , and i . scapularis can have other host besides deer .
in fact , - pron - turn out that the probability of infection depend on the type of host upon which the tick develop  a high proportion of tick that live on white - footed mouse carry the bacterium than do tick that live on deer .
knowledge about the environment and population density in which the host specie be abundant would help a physician or an epidemiologist better understand how lyme disease be transmit and how - pron - incidence could be reduce .
- pron - scope of ecology
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  define ecology and the four level of ecological research describe example of the way in which ecology require the integration of different scientific discipline distinguish between abiotic and biotic component of the environment
recognize the relationship between abiotic and biotic component of the environment
ecology be the study of the interaction of live organism with - pron - environment .
one core goal of ecology be to understand the distribution and abundance of live thing in the physical environment .
attainment of this goal require the integration of scientific discipline inside and outside of biology , such as biochemistry , physiology , evolution , biodiversity , molecular biology , geology , and climatology .
some ecological research also apply aspect of chemistry and physics , and - pron - frequently use mathematical model .
level of ecological study
when a discipline such as biology be study , - pron - be often helpful to subdivide - pron - into small , relate area .
for instance , cell biologist interested in cell signaling need to understand the chemistry of the signal molecule ( which be usually protein ) as well as the result of cell signaling .
ecologist interested in the factor that influence the survival of an endanger specie may use mathematical model to predict how current conservation effort affect endanger organism .
to produce a sound set of management option , a conservation biologist need to collect accurate datum , include current population size , factor affect reproduction ( like physiology and behavior ) , habitat requirement ( such as plant and soil ) , and potential human influence on the endanger population and - pron - habitat ( which may be derive through study in sociology and urban ecology ) .
within the discipline of ecology , researcher work at four specific level , sometimes discretely and sometimes with overlap  organism , population , community , and ecosystem .
ecologist study within several biological level of organization .
organismal ecology researcher study ecology at the organismal level be interested in the adaptation that enable individual to live in specific habitat .
these adaptation can be morphological , physiological , and behavioral .
for instance , the karner blue butterfly ( lycaeides melissa samueli ) ( figure four  four  .  three ) be consider a specialist because the female preferentially oviposit ( that is , lie egg ) on wild lupine .
this preferential adaptation mean that the karner blue butterfly be highly dependent on the presence of wild lupine plant for - pron - continued survival .
the karner blue butterfly ( lycaeides melissa samueli ) be a rare butterfly that live only in open area with few tree or shrub , such as pine barren and oak savanna .
- pron - can only lay - pron - egg on lupine plant .
after hatch , the larval caterpillar emerge and spend four to six week feed solely on wild lupine ( figure four  four  .  four ) .
the caterpillar pupate ( undergo metamorphosis ) and emerge as butterfly after about four week .
the adult butterfly feed on the nectar of flower of wild lupine and other plant specie .
a researcher interested in study karner blue butterfly at the organismal level may , in addition to ask question about egg lay , ask question about the butterflies' prefer temperature ( a physiological question ) or the behavior of the caterpillar when - pron - be at different larval stage ( a behavioral question ) .
the wild lupine ( lupinus perennis ) be the host plant for the karner blue butterfly .
population ecology a population be a group of interbreed organism that be member of the same specie live in the same area at the same time .
( organism that be all member of the same specie be call conspecific . )
a population be identify , in part , by where - pron - live , and - pron - area of population may have natural or artificial boundary  natural boundary may be river , mountain , or desert , while example of artificial boundary include mow grass , manmade structure , or road .
the study of population ecology focus on the number of individual in an area and how and why population size change over time .
population ecologist be particularly interested in count the karner blue butterfly , for example , because - pron - be classify as federally endanger .
however , the distribution and density of this species be highly influence by the distribution and abundance of wild lupine .
researcher may ask question about the factor lead to the decline of wild lupine and how these affect karner blue butterfly .
for example , ecologist know that wild lupine thrif in open area where tree and shrub be largely absent .
in natural setting , intermittent wildfire regularly remove tree and shrub , help to maintain the open area that wild lupine require .
mathematical model can be use to understand how wildfire suppression by human have lead to the decline of this important plant for the karner blue butterfly .
community ecology
a biological community consist of the different specie within an area , typically a three - dimensional space , and the interaction within and among these specie .
community ecologist be interested in the process drive these interaction and - pron - consequence .
question about conspecific interaction often focus on competition among member of the same specie for a limited resource .
ecologist also study interaction among various specie  member of different specie be call heterospecific .
example of heterospecific interaction include predation , parasitism , herbivory , competition , and pollination .
these interaction can have regulate effect on population size and can impact ecological and evolutionary process affect diversity .
for example , karner blue butterfly larvae form mutualistic relationship with ant .
mutualism be a form of a longterm relationship that have coevolv between two specie and from which each species benefit .
for mutualism to exist between individual organism , each specie must receive some benefit from the other as a consequence of the relationship .
researcher have show that there be an increase in the probability of survival when karner blue butterfly larvae ( caterpillar ) be tend by ant .
this may be because the larvae spend less time in each life stage when tend by ant , which provide an advantage for the larvae .
meanwhile , the karner blue butterfly larvae secrete a carbohydraterich substance that be an important energy source for the ant .
both the karner blue larvae and the ant benefit from - pron - interaction .
ecosystem ecology ecosystem ecology be an extension of organismal , population , and community ecology .
the ecosystem be compose of all the biotic component ( live thing ) in an area along with the abiotic component ( non - live thing ) of that area .
some of the abiotic component include air , water , and soil .
ecosystem biologist ask question about how nutrient and energy be store and how - pron - move among organism and the surround atmosphere , soil , and water .
the karner blue butterfly and the wild lupine live in an oak - pine barren habitat .
this habitat be characterize by natural disturbance and nutrient - poor soil that be low in nitrogen .
the availability of nutrient be an important factor in the distribution of the plant that live in this habitat .
researcher interested in ecosystem ecology could ask question about the importance of limited resource and the movement of resource , such as nutrient , though the biotic and abiotic portion of the ecosystem .
biogeography
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  define biogeography list and describe abiotic factor that affect the global distribution of plant and animal specie compare the impact of abiotic force on aquatic and terrestrial environment 
summarize the affect of abiotic factor on net primary productivity
many force influence the community of live organism present in different part of the biosphere ( all of the part of earth inhabit by life ) .
the biosphere extend into the atmosphere ( several kilometer above earth ) and into the depth of the ocean .
despite - pron - apparent vastness to an individual human , the biosphere occupy only a minute space when compare to the know universe .
many abiotic force influence where life can exist and the type of organism find in different part of the biosphere .
the abiotic factor influence the distribution of biome  large area of land with similar climate , flora , and fauna .
biogeography biogeography be the study of the geographic distribution of live thing and the abiotic factor that affect - pron - distribution .
abiotic factor such as temperature and rainfall vary base mainly on latitude and elevation .
as these abiotic factor change , the composition of plant and animal community also change .
for example , if - pron - be to begin a journey at the equator and walk north , - pron - would notice gradual change in plant community .
at the beginning of - pron - journey , - pron - would see tropical wet forest with broad - leave evergreen tree , which be characteristic of plant community find near the equator .
as - pron - continue to travel north , - pron - would see these broad - leave evergreen plant eventually give rise to seasonally dry forest with scatter tree .
- pron - would also begin to notice change in temperature and moisture .
at about three  zero degree north , these forest would give way to desert , which be characterize by low precipitation .
move farther north , - pron - would see that desert be replace by grassland or prairie .
eventually , grassland be replace by deciduous temperate forest .
these deciduous forest give way to the boreal forest find in the subarctic , the area south of the arctic circle .
finally , - pron - would reach the arctic tundra , which be find at the most northern latitude .
this trek north reveal gradual change in both climate and the type of organism that have adapt to environmental factor associate with ecosystem find at different latitude .
however , different ecosystem exist at the same latitude due in part to abiotic factor such as jet stream , the gulf stream , and ocean current .
if - pron - be to hike up a mountain , the change - pron - would see in the vegetation would parallel those as - pron - move to high latitude .
ecologist who study biogeography examine pattern of species distribution .
no species exist everywhere  for example , the venus flytrap be endemic to a small area in north and south carolina .
an endemic species be one which be naturally find only in a specific geographic area that be usually restrict in size .
other specie be generalist  specie which live in a wide variety of geographic area  the raccoon , for example , be native to most of north and central america .
specie distribution pattern be base on biotic and abiotic factor and - pron - influence during the very long period of time require for specie evolution  therefore , early study of biogeography be closely link to the emergence of evolutionary thinking in the eighteenth century .
some of the most distinctive assemblage of plant and animal occur in region that have be physically separate for million of year by geographic barrier .
biologist estimate that australia , for example , have between six  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero and seven  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero specie of plant and animal .
approximately three  /  four of live plant and mammal specie be endemic specie find solely in australia ( figure four  four  .  six ab ) .
australia be home to many endemic specie .
the ( a ) wallaby ( wallabia bicolor ) , a medium - sized member of the kangaroo family , be a pouched mammal , or marsupial .
the ( b ) echidna ( tachyglossus aculeatus ) be an egg - lay mammal .
sometimes ecologist discover unique pattern of specie distribution by determine where specie be not find .
hawaii , for example , have no native land specie of reptile or amphibian , and have only one native terrestrial mammal , the hoary bat .
most of new guinea , as another example , lack placental mammal .
plant can be endemic or generalist  endemic plant be find only on specific region of the earth , while generalist be find on many region .
isolated land mass — such as australia , hawaii , and madagascar — often have large number of endemic plant specie .
some of these plant be endanger due to human activity .
the forest gardenia ( gardenia brighamii ) , for instance , be endemic to hawaii  only an estimate one  five – two  zero tree be think to exist .
list as federally endanger , the forest gardenia be a small tree with distinctive flower .
- pron - be find only in five of the hawaiian islands in small population consist of a few individual specimen .
energy sources energy from the sun be capture by green plant , algae , cyanobacteria , and photosynthetic protist .
these organism convert solar energy into the chemical energy need by all live thing .
light availability can be an important force directly affect the evolution of adaptation in photosynthesizer .
for instance , plant in the understory of a temperate forest be shade when the tree above - pron - in the canopy completely leaf out in the late spring .
not surprisingly , understory plant have adaptation to successfully capture available light .
one such adaptation be the rapid growth of spring ephemeral plant such as the spring beauty ( figure four  four  .  eight ) .
these spring flower achieve much of - pron - growth and finish - pron - life cycle ( reproduce ) early in the season before the tree in the canopy develop leaf .
the spring beauty be an ephemeral spring plant that flower early in the spring to avoid compete with large forest tree for sunlight .
in aquatic ecosystem , the availability of light may be limit because sunlight be absorb by water , plant , suspend particle , and resident microorganism .
toward the bottom of a lake , pond , or ocean , there be a zone that light can not reach .
photosynthesis can not take place there and , as a result , a number of adaptation have evolve that enable live thing to survive without light .
for instance , aquatic plant have photosynthetic tissue near the surface of the water  for example , think of the broad , float leaf of a water lily — water lily can not survive without light .
in environment such as hydrothermal vent , some bacteria extract energy from inorganic chemical because there be no light for photosynthesis .
the availability of nutrient in aquatic system be also an important aspect of energy or photosynthesis .
many organism sink to the bottom of the ocean when - pron - die in the open water  when this occur , the energy find in that live organism be sequester for some time unless ocean upwelling occur .
ocean upwelling be the rise of deep ocean water that occur when prevail wind blow along surface water near a coastline ( figure four  four  .  nine ) .
as the wind push ocean water offshore , water from the bottom of the ocean move up to replace this water .
as a result , the nutrient once contain in dead organism become available for reuse by other live organism .
ocean upwelling be an important process that recycle nutrient and energy in the ocean .
as wind ( green arrow ) push offshore , - pron - cause water from the ocean bottom ( red arrow ) to move to the surface , bring up nutrient from the ocean depth .
in freshwater system , the recycling of nutrient occur in response to air temperature change .
the nutrient at the bottom of lake be recycle twice each year  in the spring and fall turnover .
the spring and fall turnover be a seasonal process that recycle nutrient and oxygen from the bottom of a freshwater ecosystem to the top of a body of water ( figure four  four  .  one  zero ) .
these turnover be cause by the formation of a thermocline  a layer of water with a temperature that be significantly different from that of the surround layer .
in wintertime , the surface of lake find in many northern region be freeze .
however , the water under the ice be slightly warm , and the water at the bottom of the lake be warm yet at four ° c to five ° c ( three  nine  .  two ° f to four  one ° f ) .
water be dense at four ° c  therefore , the deep water be also the dense .
the deep water be oxygen poor because the decomposition of organic material at the bottom of the lake use up available oxygen that can not be replace by mean of oxygen diffusion into the water due to the surface ice layer .
in springtime , air temperature increase and surface ice melt .
when the temperature of the surface water begin to reach four ° c , the water become heavy and sink to the bottom .
the water at the bottom of the lake be then displace by the heavy surface water and , thus , rise to the top .
as that water rise to the top , the sediment and nutrient from the lake bottom be bring along with - pron - .
during the summer month , the lake water stratifie , or form layer , with the warm water at the lake surface .
as air temperature drop in the fall , the temperature of the lake water cool to four ° c  therefore , this cause fall turnover as the heavy cold water sink and displace the water at the bottom .
the oxygen - rich water at the surface of the lake then move to the bottom of the lake , while the nutrient at the bottom of the lake rise to the surface ( figure four  four  .  one  zero ) .
during the winter , the oxygen at the bottom of the lake be use by decomposer and other organism require oxygen , such as fish .
temperature temperature affect the physiology of live thing as well as the density and state of water .
temperature exert an important influence on live thing because few live thing can survive at temperature below zero
° c ( three  two ° f ) due to metabolic constraint .
- pron - be also rare for live thing to survive at temperature exceed four  five ° c ( one  one  three ° f )  this be a reflection of evolutionary response to typical temperature .
enzyme be most efficient within a narrow and specific range of temperature  enzyme degradation can occur at high temperature .
therefore , organism either must maintain an internal temperature or - pron - must inhabit an environment that will keep the body within a temperature range that support metabolism .
some animal have adapt to enable - pron - body to survive significant temperature fluctuation , such as see in hibernation or reptilian torpor .
similarly , some bacteria be adapt to survive in extremely hot temperature such as geyser .
such bacteria be example of extremophile  organism that thrive in extreme environment .
temperature can limit the distribution of live thing .
animal face with temperature fluctuation may respond with adaptation , such as migration , in order to survive .
migration , the movement from one place to another , be an adaptation find in many animal , include many that inhabit seasonally cold climate .
migration solve problem relate to temperature , locate food , and find a mate .
in migration , for instance , the arctic tern ( sterna paradisaea ) make a four  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero km ( two  four  ,  zero  zero  zero mi ) round trip flight each year between - pron - feeding ground in the southern hemisphere and - pron - breeding ground in the arctic ocean .
monarch butterfly ( danaus plexippus ) live in the eastern united states in the warm month and migrate to mexico and the southern united states in the wintertime .
some specie of mammal also make migratory foray .
reindeer ( rangifer tarandus ) travel about five  ,  zero  zero  zero km ( three  ,  one  zero  zero mi ) each year to find food .
amphibian and reptile be more limited in - pron - distribution because - pron - lack migratory ability .
not all animal that can migrate do so  migration carry risk and come at a high energy cost .
some animal hibernate or estivate to survive hostile temperature .
hibernation enable animal to survive cold condition , and estivation allow animal to survive the hostile condition of a hot , dry climate .
animal that hibernate or estivate enter a state know as torpor  a condition in which - pron - metabolic rate be significantly lower .
this enable the animal to wait until - pron - environment better support - pron - survival .
some amphibian , such as the wood frog ( rana sylvatica ) , have an antifreeze - like chemical in - pron - cell , which retain the cells' integrity and prevent - pron - from burst .
water water be require by all live thing because - pron - be critical for cellular process .
since terrestrial organism lose water to the environment by simple diffusion , - pron - have evolve many adaptation to retain water .

plant have a number of interesting feature on - pron - leaf , such as leaf hair and a waxy cuticle , that serve to decrease the rate of water loss via transpiration .

freshwater organism be surround by water and be constantly in danger of have water rush into - pron - cell because of osmosis .
many adaptation of organism live in freshwater environment have evolve to ensure that solute concentration in - pron - body remain within appropriate level .
one such adaptation be the excretion of dilute urine .
 marine organism be surround by water with a high solute concentration than the organism and , thus , be in danger of lose water to the environment because of osmosis .
these organism have morphological and physiological adaptation to retain water and release solut into the environment .
for example , marine iguana ( amblyrhynchus cristatus ) , sneeze out water vapor that be high in salt in order to maintain solute concentration within an acceptable range while swim in the ocean and eat marine plant .
inorganic nutrients and soil inorganic nutrient , such as nitrogen and phosphoru , be important in the distribution and the abundance of live thing .
plant obtain these inorganic nutrient from the soil when water move into the plant through the root .
therefore , soil structure ( particle size of soil component ) , soil ph , and soil nutrient content play an important role in the distribution of plant .
animal obtain inorganic nutrient from the food - pron - consume .
therefore , animal distribution be relate to the distribution of what - pron - eat .
in some case , animal will follow - pron - food resource as - pron - move through the environment .
other aquatic factor
some abiotic factor , such as oxygen , be important in aquatic ecosystem as well as terrestrial environment .
terrestrial animal obtain oxygen from the air - pron - breathe .
oxygen availability can be an issue for organism live at very high elevation , however , where there be few molecule of oxygen in the air .
in aquatic system , the concentration of dissolve oxygen be relate to water temperature and the speed at which the water move .
cold water have more dissolve oxygen than warm water .
in addition , salinity , current , and tide can be important abiotic factor in aquatic ecosystem .
other terrestrial factors wind can be an important abiotic factor because - pron - influence the rate of evaporation and transpiration .
the physical force of wind be also important because - pron - can move soil , water , or other abiotic factor , as well as an ecosystem 's organism .
fire be another terrestrial factor that can be an important agent of disturbance in terrestrial ecosystem .
some organism be adapt to fire and , thus , require the high heat associate with fire to complete a part of - pron - life cycle .
for example , the jack pine — a coniferous tree — require heat from fire for - pron - seed cone to open ( figure four  four  .  one  one ) .
through the burning of pine needle , fire add nitrogen to the soil and limit competition by destroy undergrowth .
the mature cone of the jack pine ( pinus banksiana ) open only when expose to high temperature , such as during a forest fire .
a fire be likely to kill most vegetation , so a seedling that germinate after a fire be more likely to receive ample sunlight than one that germinate under normal condition .
abiotic factors influencing plant growth temperature and moisture be important influence on plant production ( primary productivity ) and the amount of organic matter available as food ( net primary productivity ) .
net primary productivity be an estimation of all of the organic matter available as food  - pron - be calculate as the total amount of carbon fix per year minus the amount that be oxidize during cellular respiration .
in terrestrial environment , net primary productivity be estimate by measure the aboveground biomass per unit area , which be the total mass of live plant , exclude root .
this mean that a large percentage of plant biomass which exist underground be not include in this measurement .
net primary productivity be an important variable when consider difference in biome .
very productive biome have a high level of aboveground biomass .
annual biomass production be directly relate to the abiotic component of the environment .
environment with the great amount of biomass have condition in which photosynthesis , plant growth , and the result net primary productivity be optimize .
the climate of these area be warm and wet .
photosynthesis can proceed at a high rate , enzyme can work most efficiently , and stoma can remain open without the risk of excessive transpiration  together , these factor lead to the maximal amount of carbon dioxide ( co two ) move into the plant , result in high biomass production .
the aboveground biomass produce several important resource for other live thing , include habitat and food .
conversely , dry and cold environment have low photosynthetic rate and therefore less biomass .
the animal community live there will also be affect by the decrease in available food .
terrestrial biomes
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  identify the two major abiotic factor that determine terrestrial biomes recognize distinguish characteristic of each of the eight major terrestrial biomes the earth 's biome be categorize into two major group  terrestrial and aquatic .
terrestrial biome be base on land , while aquatic biome include both ocean and freshwater biome .
the eight major terrestrial biome on earth be each distinguish by characteristic temperature and amount of precipitation .
compare the annual total of precipitation and fluctuation in precipitation from one biome to another provide clue as to the importance of abiotic factor in the distribution of biome .
temperature variation on a daily and seasonal basis be also important for predict the geographic distribution of the biome and the vegetation type in the biome .
the distribution of these biome show that the same biome can occur in geographically distinct area with similar climate .
tropical wet forest tropical wet forest be also refer to as tropical rainforest .
this biome be find in equatorial region ( figure four  four  .  one  two ) .
the vegetation be characterize by plant with broad leaf that fall off throughout the year .
unlike the tree of deciduous forest , the tree in this biome do not have a seasonal loss of leaf associate with variation in temperature and sunlight  these forest be " evergreen " year - round .
the temperature and sunlight profile of tropical wet forest be very stable in comparison to that of other terrestrial biome , with the temperature range from two  zero ° c to three  four ° c ( six  eight ° f to nine  three
° f ) .
when one compare the annual temperature variation of tropical wet forest with that of other forest biome , the lack of seasonal temperature variation in the tropical wet forest become apparent .
this lack of seasonality lead to year - round plant growth , rather than the seasonal ( spring , summer , and fall ) growth see in other biome .
in contrast to other ecosystem , tropical ecosystem do not have long day and short day during the yearly cycle .
instead , a constant daily amount of sunlight ( one  one – one  two hrs per day ) provide more solar radiation , thereby , a long period of time for plant growth .
the annual rainfall in tropical wet forest range from one  two  five to six  six  zero cm ( five  zero – two  zero  zero in ) with some monthly variation .
while sunlight and temperature remain fairly consistent , annual rainfall be highly variable .
tropical wet forest have wet month in which there can be more than three  zero cm ( one  one – one  two in ) of precipitation , as well as dry month in which there be few than one  zero cm ( three  .  five in ) of rainfall .
however , the dry month of a tropical wet forest still exceed the annual rainfall of some other biome , such as desert .
tropical wet forest have high net primary productivity because the annual temperature and precipitation value in these area be ideal for plant growth .
therefore , the extensive biomass present in the tropical wet forest lead to plant community with very high species diversity ( figure four  four  .  one  three ) .
tropical wet forest have more specie of tree than any other biome  on average between one  zero  zero and three  zero  zero specie of tree be present in a single hectare ( two  .  five acre ) of south america .
one way to visualize this be to compare the distinctive horizontal layer within the tropical wet forest biome .
on the forest floor be a sparse layer of plant and decay plant matter .
above that be an understory of short shrubby foliage .
a layer of tree rise above this understory and be top by a closed upper canopy — the uppermost overhead layer of branch and leaf .
some additional tree emerge through this close upper canopy .
these layer provide diverse and complex habitat for the variety of plant , fungus , animal , and other organism within the tropical wet forest .
for instance , epiphyte be plant that grow on other plant , which typically be not harm .
epiphyte be find throughout tropical wet forest biome .
many specie of animal use the variety of plant and the complex structure of the tropical wet forest for food and shelter .
some organism live several meter above ground and have adapt to this arboreal lifestyle .
tropical wet forest , such as these forest of madre de dios , peru , near the amazon river , have high specie diversity .
savannas savannas be grassland with scatter tree , and - pron - be locate in africa , south america , and northern australia ( figure four  four  .  one  two ) .
savanna be hot , tropical area with temperature average from two  four ° c to two  nine ° c ( seven  five ° f to eight  four ° f ) and an annual rainfall of one  zero – four  zero cm ( three  .  nine – one  five  .  seven in ) .
savanna have an extensive dry season  for this reason , forest tree do not grow as well as - pron - do in the tropical wet forest ( or other forest biome ) .
as a result , within the grass and forb ( herbaceous flower plant ) that dominate the savanna , there be relatively few tree ( figure four  four  .  one  four ) .
since fire be an important source of disturbance in this biome , plant have evolve well - develop root system that allow - pron - to quickly re - sprout after a fire .
savannas , like this one in taita hills wildlife sanctuary in kenya , be dominate by grass .
subtropical desert subtropical desert exist between one  five ° and three  zero ° north and south latitude and be center on the tropics of cancer and capricorn ( figure four  four  .  one  two ) .
this biome be very dry  in some year , evaporation exceed precipitation .
subtropical hot desert can have daytime soil surface temperature above six  zero ° c ( one  four  zero ° f ) and nighttime temperature approach zero
° c ( three  two ° f ) .
in cold desert , temperature can be as high as two  five ° c and can drop below -  three  zero ° c ( -  two  two ° f ) .
subtropical desert be characterize by low annual precipitation of few than three  zero cm ( one  two in ) with little monthly variation and lack of predictability in rainfall .
in some case , the annual rainfall can be as low as two cm ( zero  .  eight in ) in subtropical desert locate in central australia ( "
the outback " ) and northern africa .
the vegetation and low animal diversity of this biome be closely related to this low and unpredictable precipitation .
very dry desert lack perennial vegetation that live from one year to the next  instead , many plant be annual that grow quickly and reproduce when rainfall do occur , then - pron - die .
many other plant in these area be characterize by have a number of adaptation that conserve water , such as deep root , reduce foliage , and water - storing stem ( figure four  four  .  one  five ) .
seed plant in the desert produce seed that can be in dormancy for extended period between rain .
adaptation in desert animal include nocturnal behavior and burrowing .
to reduce water loss , many desert plant have tiny leaf or no leaf at all .
the leaf of ocotillo ( fouquieria splenden ) , show here in the sonora desert near gila bend , arizona , appear only after rainfall , and then be shed .
chaparral the chaparral be also call the scrub forest and be find in california , along the mediterranean sea , and along the southern coast of australia ( figure four  four  .  one  two ) .
the annual rainfall in this biome range from six  five cm to seven  five cm ( two  five  .  six – two  nine  .  five in ) , and the majority of the rain fall in the winter .
summer be very dry and many chaparral plant be dormant during the summertime .
the chaparral vegetation , show in figure four  four  .  one  six , be dominate by shrub and be adapt to periodic fire , with some plant produce seed that only germinate after a hot fire .
the ash leave behind after a fire be rich in nutrient like nitrogen that fertilize the soil and promote plant regrowth .
the chaparral be dominate by shrub .
temperate grasslands temperate grassland be find throughout central north america , where - pron - be also know as prairie  - pron - be also in eurasia , where - pron - be know as steppe ( figure four  four  .  one  two ) .
temperate grassland have pronounce annual fluctuation in temperature with hot summer and cold winter .
the annual temperature variation produce specific grow season for plant .
plant growth be possible when temperature be warm enough to sustain plant growth and when ample water be available , which occur in the spring , summer , and fall .
during much of the winter , temperature be low , and water , which be store in the form of ice , be not available for plant growth .
annual precipitation range from two  five cm to seven  five cm ( nine  .  eight – two  nine  .  five in ) .
because of relatively low annual precipitation in temperate grassland , there be few tree except for those find grow along river or stream .
the dominant vegetation tend to consist of grass and some prairie sustain population of grazing animal figure four  four  .  one  seven .
the vegetation be very dense and the soil be fertile because the subsurface of the soil be pack with the root and rhizome ( underground stem ) of these grass .
the root and rhizome act to anchor plant into the ground and replenish the organic material ( humus ) in the soil when - pron - die and decay .
the american bison ( bison bison ) , more commonly call the buffalo , be a grazing mammal that once populate american prairie in huge number .
fire , mainly cause by lightning , be a natural disturbance in temperate grassland .
when fire be suppress in temperate grassland , the vegetation eventually convert to scrub and dense forest .
often , the restoration or management of temperate grassland require the use of control burn to suppress the growth of tree and maintain the grass .
temperate forests temperate forest be the most common biome in eastern north america , western europe , eastern asia , chile , and new zealand ( figure four  four  .  one  two ) .
this biome be find throughout mid - latitude region .
temperature range between -  three  zero ° c and three  zero ° c
( -  two  two ° f to eight  six ° f ) and drop to below freezing on an annual basis .
these temperature mean that temperate forest have define grow season during the spring , summer , and early fall .
precipitation be relatively constant throughout the year and range between seven  five cm and one  five  zero cm ( two  nine  .  five – five  nine in ) .
because of the moderate annual rainfall and temperature , deciduous tree be the dominant plant in this biome ( figure four  four  .  one  eight ) .
deciduous tree lose - pron - leaf each fall and remain leafless in the winter .
thus , no photosynthesis occur in the deciduous tree during the dormant winter period .
each spring , new leaf appear as the temperature increase .
because of the dormant period , the net primary productivity of temperate forest be less than that of tropical wet forest .
in addition , temperate forest show less diversity of tree specie than tropical wet forest biome .
deciduous tree be the dominant plant in the temperate forest .
the tree of the temperate forest leaf out and shade much of the ground  however , this biome be more open than tropical wet forest because tree in the temperate forest do not grow as tall as the tree in tropical wet forest .
the soil of the temperate forest be rich in inorganic and organic nutrient .
this be due to the thick layer of leaf litter on forest floor .
as this leaf litter decay , nutrient be return to the soil .
the leaf litter also protect soil from erosion , insulate the ground , and provide habitat for invertebrate ( such as the pill bug or roly - poly , armadillidium vulgare ) and - pron - predator , such as the red - back salamander ( plethodon cinereus ) .
boreal forests
the boreal forest , also know as taiga or coniferous forest , be find south of the arctic circle and across most of canada , alaska , russia , and northern europe ( figure four  four  .  one  two ) .
this biome have cold , dry winter and short , cool , wet summer .
the annual precipitation be from four  zero cm to one  zero  zero cm ( one  five  .  seven – three  nine in ) and usually take the form of snow .
little evaporation occur because of the cold temperature .
the long and cold winter in the boreal forest have lead to the predominance of cold - tolerant cone - bear plant .
these be evergreen coniferous tree like pine , spruce , and fir , which retain - pron - needle - shape leaf year - round .
evergreen tree can photosynthesize earlier in the spring than deciduous tree because less energy from the sun be require to warm a needle - like leaf than a broad leaf .
this benefit evergreen tree , which grow faster than deciduous tree in the boreal forest .
in addition , soil in boreal forest region tend to be acidic with little available nitrogen .
leaf be a nitrogen - rich structure and deciduous tree must produce a new set of these nitrogen - rich structure each year .
therefore , coniferous tree that retain nitrogen - rich needle may have a competitive advantage over the broad - leafed deciduous tree .
the net primary productivity of boreal forest be low than that of temperate forest and tropical wet forest .
the aboveground biomass of boreal forest be high because these slow - grow tree specie be long live and accumulate stand biomass over time .
plant specie diversity be less than that see in temperate forest and tropical wet forest .
boreal forest lack the pronounced element of the layer forest structure see in tropical wet forest .
the structure of a boreal forest be often only a tree layer and a ground layer (
figure four  four  .  one  nine ) .
when conifer needle be drop , - pron - decompose more slowly than broad leaf  therefore , few nutrient be return to the soil to fuel plant growth .
the boreal forest ( taiga ) have low lie plant and conifer tree .
arctic tundra
the arctic tundra lie north of the subarctic boreal forest and be locate throughout the arctic region of the northern hemisphere ( figure four  four  .  one  two ) .
the average winter temperature be -  three  four
° c (
-  three  four ° f ) and the average summer temperature be from three ° c to one  two ° c ( three  seven ° f– five  two ° f ) .
plant in the arctic tundra have a very short grow season of approximately one  zero – one  two week .
however , during this time , there be almost two  four hour of daylight and plant growth be rapid .
the annual precipitation of the arctic tundra be very low with little annual variation in precipitation .
and , as in the boreal forest , there be little evaporation due to the cold temperature .
plant in the arctic tundra be generally low to the ground ( figure four  four  .  two  zero ) .
there be little specie diversity , low net primary productivity , and low aboveground biomass .
the soil of the arctic tundra may remain in a perennially frozen state refer to as permafrost .
the permafrost make - pron - impossible for root to penetrate deep into the soil and slow the decay of organic matter , which inhibit the release of nutrient from organic matter .
during the grow season , the ground of the arctic tundra can be completely cover with plant or lichen .
low - grow plant such as shrub willow dominate the tundra landscape , show here in the arctic national wildlife refuge .
aquatic biomes
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to 
describe the effect of abiotic factor on the composition of plant and animal community in aquatic biome compare and contrast the characteristic of the ocean zone summarize the characteristic of stand water and flow water freshwater biomes
abiotic factors influence aquatic biomes
like terrestrial biome , aquatic biome be influence by a series of abiotic factor .
the aquatic medium —
water— have different physical and chemical property than air , however .
even if the water in a pond or other body of water be perfectly clear ( there be no suspend particle ) , water , on - pron - own , absorb light .
as one descend into a deep body of water , there will eventually be a depth which the sunlight can not reach .
while there be some abiotic and biotic factor in a terrestrial ecosystem that may obscure light ( like fog , dust , or insect swarm ) , usually these be not permanent feature of the environment .
the importance of light in aquatic biome be central to the community of organism find in both freshwater and marine ecosystem .
in freshwater system , stratification due to difference in density be perhaps the most critical abiotic factor and be relate to the energy aspect of light .
the thermal property of water ( rate of heating and cooling ) be significant to the function of marine system and have major impact on global climate and weather pattern .
marine system be also influence by large - scale physical water movement , such as current  these be less important in most freshwater lake .
the ocean be categorize by several area or zone ( figure four  four  .  two  one ) .
all of the ocean 's open water be refer to as the pelagic realm ( or zone ) .
the benthic realm ( or zone ) extend along the ocean bottom from the shoreline to the deep part of the ocean floor .
within the pelagic realm be the photic zone , which be the portion of the ocean that light can penetrate ( approximately two  zero  zero m or six  five  zero ft ) .
at depth great than two  zero  zero m , light can not penetrate  thus , this be refer to as the aphotic zone .
the majority of the ocean be aphotic and lack sufficient light for photosynthesis .
the deep part of the ocean , the challenger deep ( in the mariana trench , locate in the western pacific ocean ) , be about one  one  ,  zero  zero  zero m ( about six  .  eight mi ) deep .
to give some perspective on the depth of this trench , the ocean be , on average , four  two  six  seven m or one  four  ,  zero  zero  zero ft deep .
these realm and zone be relevant to freshwater lake as well .
marine biomes
the ocean be the large marine biome .
- pron - be a continuous body of salt water that be relatively uniform in chemical composition  - pron - be a weak solution of mineral salt and decay biological matter .
within the ocean , coral reef be a second kind of marine biome .
estuary , coastal area where salt water and fresh water mix , form a third unique marine biome .
ocean
the physical diversity of the ocean be a significant influence on plant , animal , and other organism .
the ocean be categorize into different zone base on how far light reach into the water .
each zone have a distinct group of specie adapt to the biotic and abiotic condition particular to that zone .
the intertidal zone , which be the zone between high and low tide , be the oceanic region that be close to land ( figure four  four  .  two  one ) .
generally , most people think of this portion of the ocean as a sandy beach .
in some case , the intertidal zone be indeed a sandy beach , but - pron - can also be rocky or muddy .
the intertidal zone be an extremely variable environment because of tide .
organism be expose to air and sunlight at low tide and be underwater most of the time , especially during high tide .
therefore , live thing that thrive in the intertidal zone be adapt to be dry for long period of time .
the shore of the intertidal zone be also repeatedly strike by wave , and the organism find there be adapt to withstand damage from the pound action of the wave ( figure four  four  .  two  two ) .
the exoskeleton of shoreline crustacean ( such as the shore crab , carcinus maena ) be tough and protect - pron - from desiccation ( dry out ) and wave damage .
another consequence of the pound wave be that few algae and plant establish - pron - in the constantly move rock , sand , or mud .
sea urchin , mussel shell , and starfish be often find in the intertidal zone , show here in kachemak bay , alaska .
the neritic zone ( figure four  four  .  two  one ) extend from the intertidal zone to depth of about two  zero  zero m ( or six  five  zero ft ) at the edge of the continental shelf .
since light can penetrate this depth , photosynthesis can occur in the neritic zone .
the water here contain silt and be well - oxygenated , low in pressure , and stable in temperature .
phytoplankton and float sargassum ( a type of free - float marine seaweed ) provide a habitat for some sea life find in the neritic zone .
zooplankton , protist , small fish , and shrimp be find in the neritic zone and be the base of the food chain for most of the world 's fishery .
beyond the neritic zone be the open ocean area know as the oceanic zone ( figure four  four  .  two  one ) .
within the oceanic zone there be thermal stratification where warm and cold water mix because of ocean current .
abundant plankton serve as the base of the food chain for large animal such as whale and dolphin .
nutrient be scarce and this be a relatively less productive part of the marine biome .
when photosynthetic organism and the protist and animal that feed on - pron - die , - pron - body fall to the bottom of the ocean where - pron - remain  unlike freshwater lake , the open ocean lack a process for bring the organic nutrient back up to the surface .
the majority of organism in the aphotic zone include sea cucumber ( phylum echinodermata ) and other organism that survive on the nutrient contain in the dead body of organism in the photic zone .
beneath the pelagic zone be the benthic realm , the deepwater region beyond the continental shelf ( figure four  four  .  two  one ) .
the bottom of the benthic realm be comprise of sand , silt , and dead organism .
temperature decrease , remain above freezing , as water depth increase .
this be a nutrient - rich portion of the ocean because of the dead organism that fall from the upper layer of the ocean .
because of this high level of nutrient , a diversity of fungus , sponge , sea anemone , marine worm , sea star , fish , and bacteria exist .
the deep part of the ocean be the abyssal zone , which be at depth of four  zero  zero  zero m or great .
the abyssal zone ( figure four  four  .  two  one ) be very cold and have very high pressure , high oxygen content , and low nutrient content .
there be a variety of invertebrate and fish find in this zone , but the abyssal zone do not have plant because of the lack of light .
hydrothermal vent be find primarily in the abyssal zone  chemosynthetic bacteria utilize the hydrogen sulfide and other mineral emit from the vent .
these chemosynthetic bacteria use the hydrogen sulfide as an energy source and serve as the base of the food chain find in the abyssal zone .
coral reefs coral reef be ocean ridge form by marine invertebrate live in warm shallow water within the photic zone of the ocean .
- pron - be find within three  zero ˚ north and south of the equator .
the great barrier reef be a well - know reef system locate several mile off the northeastern coast of australia .
other coral reef system be fringe island , which be directly adjacent to land , or atoll , which be circular reef system surround a former landmass that be now underwater .
the coral organism ( member of phylum cnidaria ) be colony of saltwater polyp that secrete a calcium carbonate skeleton .
these calcium - rich skeleton slowly accumulate , form the underwater reef ( figure four  four  .  two  three ) .
coral find in shallow water ( at a depth of approximately six  zero m or about two  zero  zero ft ) have a mutualistic relationship with photosynthetic unicellular algae .
the relationship provide coral with the majority of the nutrition and the energy - pron - require .
the water in which these coral live be nutritionally poor and , without this mutualism , - pron - would not be possible for large coral to grow .
some coral live in deep and cold water do not have a mutualistic relationship with algae  these coral attain energy and nutrient use stinging cell on - pron - tentacle to capture prey .
- pron - be estimate that more than four  ,  zero  zero  zero fish specie inhabit coral reef .
these fish can feed on coral , the cryptofauna ( invertebrat find within the calcium carbonate substrate of the coral reef ) , or the seaweed and algae that be associate with the coral .
in addition , some fish specie inhabit the boundary of a coral reef  these specie include predator , herbivore , or planktivore .
predator be animal specie that hunt and be carnivore or " flesh eater .
"
herbivore eat plant material , and planktivore eat plankton .
coral reef be form by the calcium carbonate skeleton of coral organism , which be marine invertebrate in the phylum cnidaria .
estuary  where the ocean meet fresh water estuaries be biome that occur where a source of fresh water , such as a river , meet the ocean .
therefore , both fresh water and salt water be find in the same vicinity  mix result in a diluted ( brackish ) saltwater .
estuary form protect area where many of the young offspring of crustacean , mollusk , and fish begin - pron - life .
salinity be a very important factor that influence the organism and the adaptation of the organism find in estuary .
the salinity of estuary vary and be base on the rate of flow of - pron - freshwater source .
once or twice a day , high tide bring salt water into the estuary .
low tide occur at the same frequency reverse the current of salt water .
the short - term and rapid variation in salinity due to the mixing of fresh water and salt water be a difficult physiological challenge for the plant and animal that inhabit estuary .
many estuarine plant specie be halophyte  plant that can tolerate salty condition .
halophytic plant be adapt to deal with the salinity result from saltwater on - pron - root or from sea spray .
in some halophyte , filter in the root remove the salt from the water that the plant absorb .
other plant be able to pump oxygen into - pron - root .
animal , such as mussel and clam ( phylum mollusca ) , have develop behavioral adaptation that expend a lot of energy to function in this rapidly change environment .
when these animal be expose to low salinity , - pron - stop feed , close - pron - shell , and switch from aerobic respiration ( in which - pron - use gill ) to anaerobic respiration ( a process that do not require oxygen ) .
when high tide return to the estuary , the salinity and oxygen content of the water increase , and these animal open - pron - shell , begin feed , and return to aerobic respiration .
freshwater biomes freshwater biome include lake and pond ( stand water ) as well as river and stream ( flow water ) .
- pron - also include wetland , which will be discuss later .
human rely on freshwater biome to provide aquatic resource for drinking water , crop irrigation , sanitation , and industry .
these various role and human benefit be refer to as ecosystem service .
lake and pond be find in terrestrial landscape and be , therefore , connect with abiotic and biotic factor influence these terrestrial biome .
lakes and ponds lakes and pond can range in area from a few square meter to thousand of square kilometer .
temperature be an important abiotic factor affect live thing find in lake and pond .
in the summer , thermal stratification of lake and pond occur when the upper layer of water be warm by the sun and do not mix with deep , cool water .
light can penetrate within the photic zone of the lake or pond .
phytoplankton ( algae and cyanobacteria ) be find here and carry out photosynthesis , provide the base of the food web of lake and pond .
zooplankton , such as rotifer and small crustacean , consume these phytoplankton .
at the bottom of lake and pond , bacteria in the aphotic zone break down dead organism that sink to the bottom .
nitrogen and phosphoru be important limit nutrient in lake and pond .
because of this , - pron - be determine factor in the amount of phytoplankton growth in lake and pond .
when there be a large input of nitrogen and phosphoru ( from sewage and runoff from fertilize lawn and farm , for example ) , the growth of algae skyrocket , result in a large accumulation of algae call an algal bloom .
algal bloom ( figure four  four  .  two  four ) can become so extensive that - pron - reduce light penetration in water .
as a result , the lake or pond become aphotic and photosynthetic plant can not survive .
when the algae die and decompose , severe oxygen depletion of the water occur .
fish and other organism that require oxygen be then more likely to die , and result dead zone be find across the globe .
lake erie and the gulf of mexico represent freshwater and marine habitat where phosphorus control and storm water runoff pose significant environmental challenge .
the uncontrolled growth of algae in this lake have result in an algal bloom .
river and streams rivers and stream be continuously move body of water that carry large amount of water from the source , or headwater , to a lake or ocean .
the large river include the nile river in africa , the amazon river in south america , and the mississippi river in north america .
abiotic feature of river and stream vary along the length of the river or stream .
stream begin at a point of origin refer to as source water .
the source water be usually cold , low in nutrient , and clear .
the channel ( the width of the river or stream ) be narrow than at any other place along the length of the river or stream .
because of this , the current be often faster here than at any other point of the river or stream .
the fast - move water result in minimal silt accumulation at the bottom of the river or stream  therefore , the water be clear .
photosynthesis here be mostly attribute to algae that be grow on rock  the swift current inhibit the growth of phytoplankton .
an additional input of energy can come from leaf or other organic material that fall into the river or stream from tree and other plant that border the water .
when the leaf decompose , the organic material and nutrient in the leaf be return to the water .
plant and animal have adapt to this fast - move water .
for instance , leech ( phylum annelida ) have elongate body and sucker on both end .
these sucker attach to the substrate , keep the leech anchor in place .
freshwater trout specie ( phylum chordata ) be an important predator in these fast - move river and stream .
as the river or stream flow away from the source , the width of the channel gradually widen and the current slow .
this slow - move water , cause by the gradient decrease and the volume increase as tributary unite , have more sedimentation .
phytoplankton can also be suspend in slow - move water .
therefore , the water will not be as clear as - pron - be near the source .
the water be also warm .
worms ( phylum annelida ) and insect ( phylum arthropoda ) can be find burrow into the mud .
the high order predator vertebrate ( phylum chordata ) include waterfowl , frog , and fish .
these predator must find food in these slow moving , sometimes murky , water and , unlike the trout in the water at the source , these vertebrate may not be able to use vision as - pron - primary sense to find food .
instead , - pron - be more likely to use taste or chemical cue to find prey .
wetlands wetlands be environment in which the soil be either permanently or periodically saturate with water .
wetland be different from lake because wetland be shallow body of water whereas lake vary in depth .
emergent vegetation consist of wetland plant that be root in the soil but have portion of leaf , stem , and flower extend above the water 's surface .
there be several type of wetland include marsh , swamp , bog , mudflat , and salt marsh ( figure four  four  .  two  five ) .
the three share characteristic among these type — what make - pron - wetland
— be - pron - hydrology , hydrophytic vegetation , and hydric soil .
locate in southern florida , everglades national park be vast array of wetland environment , include sawgrass marsh , cypress swamp , and estuarine mangrove forest .
here , a great egret walk among cypress tree .
freshwater marsh and swamp be characterize by slow and steady water flow .
bog develop in depression where water flow be low or nonexistent .
bog usually occur in area where there be a clay bottom with poor percolation .
percolation be the movement of water through the pore in the soil or rock .
the water find in a bog be stagnant and oxygen deplete because the oxygen that be use during the decomposition of organic matter be not replace .
as the oxygen in the water be deplete , decomposition slow .
this lead to organic acid and other acid build up and lower the ph of the water .
at a low ph , nitrogen become unavailable to plant .
this create a challenge for plant because nitrogen be an important limit resource .
some type of bog plant ( such as sundew , pitcher plant , and venus flytrap ) capture insect and extract the nitrogen from - pron - body .
bog have low net primary productivity because the water find in bog have low level of nitrogen and oxygen .
climate and the effects of global climate change
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  define global climate change
summarize the effect of the industrial revolution on global atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration describe three natural factor affect long - term global climate list two or more greenhouse gas and describe - pron - role in the greenhouse effect all biome be universally affect by global condition , such as climate , that ultimately shape each biome 's environment .
scientist who study climate have note a series of marked change that have gradually become increasingly evident during the last sixty year .
global climate change be the term use to describe altered global weather pattern , include a worldwide increase in temperature , due largely to rise level of atmospheric carbon dioxide .
climate and weather
a common misconception about global climate change be that a specific weather event occur in a particular region ( for example , a very cool week in june in central indiana ) be evidence of global climate change .
however , a cold week in june be a weather - relate event and not a climate - relate one .
these misconception often arise because of confusion over the term climate and weather .
climate refer to the long - term , predictable atmospheric condition of a specific area .
the climate of a biome be characterize by have consistent temperature and annual rainfall range .
climate do not address the amount of rain that fall on one particular day in a biome or the cold - than - average temperature that occur on one day .
in contrast , weather refer to the condition of the atmosphere during a short period of time .
weather forecast be usually make for four  eight  - hour cycle .
long - range weather forecast be available but can be unreliable .
to better understand the difference between climate and weather , imagine that - pron - be plan an outdoor event in northern wisconsin .
- pron - would be think about climate when - pron - plan the event in the summer rather than the winter because - pron - have long - term knowledge that any give saturday in the month of may to august would be a good choice for an outdoor event in wisconsin than any give saturday in january .
however , - pron - can not determine the specific day that the event should be hold on because - pron - be difficult to accurately predict the weather on a specific day .
climate can be consider " average " weather .
global climate change climate change can be understand by approach three area of study   current and past global climate change  cause of past and present - day global climate change
 ancient and current result of climate change
- pron - be helpful to keep these three different aspect of climate change clearly separate when consume medium report about global climate change .
- pron - be common for report and discussion about global climate change to confuse the datum show that earth 's climate be change with the factor that drive this climate change .
evidence for global climate change
since scientist can not go back in time to directly measure climatic variable , such as average temperature and precipitation , - pron - must instead indirectly measure temperature .
to do this , scientist rely on historical evidence of earth 's past climate .
antarctic ice core be a key example of such evidence .
these ice core be sample of polar ice obtain by mean of drill that reach thousand of meter into ice sheet or high mountain glacier .
view the ice core be like travel backwards through time  the deep the sample , the earlier the time period .
trap within the ice be bubble of air and other biological evidence that can reveal temperature and carbon dioxide datum .
antarctic ice core have be collect and analyze to indirectly estimate the temperature of the earth over the past four  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year ( figure four  four  .  two  six a ) .
the zero ° c on this graph
refer to the long - term average .
temperature that be great than zero ° c exceed earth 's long - term average temperature .
conversely , temperature that be less than zero ° c be less than earth 's average temperature .
this figure show that there have be periodic cycle of increase and decrease temperature .
before the late one  eight  zero  zero , the earth have be as much as nine ° c cooler and about three ° c warmer .
note that the graph in figure four  four  .  two  six b show that the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide have also rise and fall in periodic cycle  note the relationship between carbon dioxide concentration and temperature .
figure four  four  .  two  six b show that carbon dioxide level in the atmosphere have historically cycle between one  eight  zero and three  zero  zero part per million ( ppm ) by volume .
ice at the russian vostok station in east antarctica be lay down over the course four  two  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year and reach a depth of over three  ,  zero  zero  zero m . by measure the amount of co two trap in the ice , scientist have determine past atmospheric co two concentration .
temperature relative to modern day be determine from the amount of deuterium ( an isotope of hydrogen ) present .
figure four  four  .  two  six a do not show the last two  ,  zero  zero  zero year with enough detail to compare the change of earth 's temperature during the last four  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year with the temperature change that have occur in the more recent past .
two significant temperature anomaly , or irregularity , have occur in the last two  zero  zero  zero year .
these be the medieval climate anomaly ( or the medieval warm period ) and the little ice age .
a third temperature anomaly align with the industrial era .
the medieval climate anomaly occur between nine  zero  zero and one  three  zero  zero ad .
during this time period , many climate scientist think that slightly warm weather condition prevail in many part of the world  the high - than - average temperature change vary between zero  .  one  zero ° c and zero  .  two  zero ° c above the norm .
although zero  .  one  zero ° c do not seem large enough to produce any noticeable change , - pron - do free sea of ice .
because of this warming , the vikings be able to colonize greenland .
the little ice age be a cold period that occur between one  five  five  zero ad and one  eight  five  zero ad .
during this time , a slight cooling of a little less than one ° c be observe in north america , europe , and possibly other area of the earth .
this one ° c change in global temperature be a seemingly small deviation in temperature ( as be observe during the medieval climate anomaly )  however , - pron - also result in noticeable change .
historical account reveal a time of exceptionally harsh winter with much snow and frost .
the industrial revolution , which begin around one  seven  five  zero , be characterize by change in much of human society .
advance in agriculture increase the food supply , which improve the standard of live for people in europe and the united states .
new technology be invent and provide job and cheap good .
these new technology be power use fossil fuel , especially coal .
the industrial revolution start in the early nineteenth century usher in the beginning of the industrial era .
when a fossil fuel be burn , carbon dioxide be release .
with the beginning of the industrial era , atmospheric carbon dioxide begin to rise .
the atmospheric concentration of co two have rise steadily since the beginning of industrialization .
current and past drivers of global climate change
since - pron - be not possible to go back in time to directly observe and measure climate , scientist use indirect evidence to determine the driver , or factor , that may be responsible for climate change .
the indirect evidence include datum collect use ice core , borehole ( a narrow shaft bore into the ground ) , tree ring , glacier length , pollen remain , and ocean sediment .
the data show a correlation between the timing of temperature change and driver of climate change  before the industrial era ( pre -  one  seven  eight  zero ) , there be three driver of climate change that be not relate to human activity or atmospheric gas .
the first of these be the milankovitch cycle .
the milankovitch cycle describe the effect of slight change in the earth 's orbit on earth 's climate .
the length of the milankovitch cycles range between one  nine  ,  zero  zero  zero and one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year .
in other word , one could expect to see some predictable change in the earth 's climate associate with change in the earth 's orbit at a minimum of every one  nine  ,  zero  zero  zero year .
the variation in the sun 's intensity be the second natural factor responsible for climate change .
solar intensity be the amount of solar power or energy the sun emit in a give amount of time .
there be a direct relationship between solar intensity and temperature .
as solar intensity increase ( or decrease ) , the earth 's temperature correspondingly increase ( or decrease ) .
change in solar intensity have be propose as one of several possible explanation for the little ice age .
finally , volcanic eruption be a third natural driver of climate change .
volcanic eruption can last a few day , but the solid and gas release during an eruption can influence the climate over a period of a few year , cause short - term climate change .
the gas and solid release by volcanic eruption can include carbon dioxide , water vapor , sulfur dioxide , hydrogen sulfide , hydrogen , and carbon monoxide .
generally , volcanic eruption cool the climate .
this occur in one  seven  eight  three when volcano in iceland erupt and cause the release of large volume of sulfuric oxide .
this lead to haze - effect cooling , a global phenomenon that occur when dust , ash , or other suspend particle block out sunlight and trigger low global temperature as a result  haze - effect cooling usually extend for one or more year .
in europe and north america , hazeeffect cool produce some of the low average winter temperature on record in one  seven  eight  three and one  seven  eight  four .
greenhouse gas be probably the most significant driver of the climate .
when heat energy from the sun strike the earth , gas know as greenhouse gas trap the heat in the atmosphere , as do the glass pane of a greenhouse keep heat from escape .
the greenhouse gas that affect earth include carbon dioxide , methane , water vapor , nitrous oxide , and ozone .
approximately half of the radiation from the sun pass through these gas in the atmosphere and strike the earth .
this radiation be convert into thermal radiation on the earth 's surface , and then a portion of that energy be re - radiate back into the atmosphere .
greenhouse gas , however , reflect much of the thermal energy back to the earth 's surface .
the more greenhouse gas there be in the atmosphere , the more thermal energy be reflect back to the earth 's surface .
greenhouse gas absorb and emit radiation and be an important factor in the greenhouse effect  the warming of earth due to carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas in the atmosphere .
evidence support the relationship between atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide and temperature  as carbon dioxide rise , global temperature rise .
since one  nine  five  zero , the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide have increase from about two  eight  zero ppm to three  eight  two ppm in two  zero  zero  six .
in two  zero  one  one , the atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration be three  nine  two ppm .
however , the planet would not be inhabitable by current life form if water vapor do not produce - pron - drastic greenhouse warming effect .
scientist look at pattern in datum and try to explain difference or deviation from these pattern .
the atmospheric carbon dioxide datum reveal a historical pattern of carbon dioxide increase and decrease , cycle between a low of one  eight  zero ppm and a high of three  zero  zero ppm .
scientist have conclude that - pron - take around five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year for the atmospheric carbon dioxide level to increase from - pron - low minimum concentration to - pron - high maximum concentration .
however , start recently , atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration have increase beyond the historical maximum of three  zero  zero ppm .
the current increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide have happen very quickly — in a matter of hundred of year rather than thousand of year .
what be the reason for this difference in the rate of change and the amount of increase in carbon dioxide ?
a key factor that must be recognize when compare the historical datum and the current data be the presence of modern human society  no other driver of climate change have yield change in atmospheric carbon dioxide level at this rate or to this magnitude .
human activity release carbon dioxide and methane , two of the most important greenhouse gas , into the atmosphere in several way .
the primary mechanism that release carbon dioxide be the burning of fossil fuel , such as gasoline , coal , and natural gas ( figure four  four  .  two  eight ) .
deforestation , cement manufacture , animal agriculture , the clearing of land , and the burning of forest be other human activity that release carbon dioxide .
methane ( ch four ) be produce when bacteria break down organic matter under anaerobic condition .
anaerobic condition can happen when organic matter be trap underwater ( such as in rice paddy ) or in the intestine of herbivore .
methane can also be release from natural gas field and the decomposition that occur in landfill .
another source of methane be the melting of clathrate .
clathrate be frozen chunk of ice and methane find at the bottom of the ocean .
when water warm , these chunk of ice melt and methane be release .
as the ocean 's water temperature increase , the rate at which clathrat melt be increase , release even more methane .
this lead to increase level of methane in the atmosphere , which further accelerate the rate of global warming .
this be an example of the positive feedback loop that be lead to the rapid rate of increase of global temperature .
the burning of fossil fuel in industry and by vehicle release carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas into the atmosphere .
documented results of climate change 
past and present scientist have geological evidence of the consequence of long - ago climate change .
modern - day phenomenon such as retreat glacier and melt polar ice because a continual rise in sea level .
meanwhile , change in climate can negatively affect organism .
geological climate change global warming have be associate with at least one planet - wide extinction event during the geological past .
the permian extinction event occur about two  five  one million year ago toward the end of the roughly five  zero  - million - year - long geological time span know as the permian period .
this geologic time period be one of the three warm period in earth 's geologic history .
scientist estimate that approximately seven  zero percent of the terrestrial plant and animal specie and eight  four percent of marine specie become extinct , vanish forever near the end of the permian period .
organism that have adapt to wet and warm climatic condition , such as annual rainfall of three  zero  zero – four  zero  zero cm ( one  one  eight – one  five  seven in ) and two  zero ° c– three  zero ° c ( six  eight ° f– eight  six ° f ) in the tropical wet forest , may not have be able to survive the permian climate change .
present climate change
a number of global event have occur that may be attribute to climate change during - pron - lifetime .
glacier national park in montana be undergo the retreat of many of - pron - glacier , a phenomenon know as glacier recession .
in one  eight  five  zero , the area contain approximately one  five  zero glacier .
by two  zero  one  zero , however , the park contain only about two  four glacier great than two  five acre in size .
one of these glacier be the grinnell glacier ( figure four  four  .  two  nine ) at mount gould .
between one  nine  six  six and two  zero  zero  five , the size of grinnell glacier shrink by four  zero percent .
similarly , the mass of the ice sheet in greenland and the antarctic be decrease  greenland lose one  five  zero – two  five  zero km three of ice per year between two  zero  zero  two and two  zero  zero  six .
in addition , the size and thickness of the arctic sea ice be decrease .
the effect of global warming can be see in the continue retreat of grinnel glacier .
the mean annual temperature in the park have increase one  .  three  three ° c since one  nine  zero  zero .
the loss of a glacier result in the loss of summer meltwater , sharply reduce seasonal water supply and severely affect local ecosystem .
this loss of ice be lead to increase in the global sea level .
on average , the sea be rise at a rate of one  .  eight mm per year .
however , between one  nine  nine  three and two  zero  one  zero the rate of sea level increase range between two  .  nine and three  .  four mm per year .
a variety of factor affect the volume of water in the ocean , include the temperature of the water ( the density of water be relate to - pron - temperature ) and the amount of water find in river , lake , glacier , polar ice cap , and sea ice .
as glacier and polar ice cap melt , there be a significant contribution of liquid water that be previously freeze .
in addition to some abiotic condition change in response to climate change , many organism be also be affect by the change in temperature .
temperature and precipitation play key role in determine the geographic distribution and phenology of plant and animal .
( phenology be the study of the effect of climatic condition on the timing of periodic lifecycle event , such as flower in plant or migration in bird . )
researcher have show that three  eight  five plant specie in great britain be flower four  .  five day sooner than be record earlier during the previous four  zero year .
in addition , insect - pollinate specie be more likely to flower earlier than wind - pollinate specie .
the impact of change in flower date would be mitigate if the insect pollinator emerge earlier .
this mismatched timing of plant and pollinator could result in injurious ecosystem effect because , for continued survival , insect - pollinate plant must flower when - pron - pollinator be present .
asian carp jump out of the water in response to electrofish .
the asian carp in the inset photograph be harvest from the little calumet river in illinois in may , two  zero  one  zero , use rotenone , a toxin often use as an insecticide , in an effort to learn more about the population of the specie .
imagine sail down a river in a small motorboat on a weekend afternoon  the water be smooth and - pron - be enjoy the warm sunshine and cool breeze when suddenly - pron - be hit in the head by a two  zero  - pound silver carp .
this be a risk now on many river and canal system in illinois and missouri because of the presence of asian carp .
this fish — actually a group of specie include the silver , black , grass , and big head carp — have be farm and eat in china for over one  zero  zero  zero year .
- pron - be one of the most important aquaculture food resource worldwide .
in the united states , however , asian carp be consider a dangerous invasive specie that disrupt community structure and composition to the point of threaten native specie .
population demography
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  describe how ecologist measure population size and density describe three different pattern of population distribution
use life table to calculate mortality rate
describe the three type of survivorship curve and relate - pron - to specific population population be dynamic entity .
population consist all of the specie live within a specific area , and population fluctuate base on a number of factor  seasonal and yearly change in the environment , natural disaster such as forest fire and volcanic eruption , and competition for resource between and within specie .
the statistical study of population dynamic , demography , use a series of mathematical tool to investigate how population respond to change in - pron - biotic and abiotic environment .
many of these tool be originally design to study human population .
for example , life table , which detail the life expectancy of individual within a population , be initially develop by life insurance company to set insurance rate .
in fact , while the term " demographic " be commonly use when discuss human , all live population can be study use this approach .
population size and density
the study of any population usually begin by determine how many individual of a particular specie exist , and how closely associated - pron - be with each other .
within a particular habitat , a population can be characterize by - pron - population size ( n ) , the total number of individual , and - pron - population density , the number of individual within a specific area or volume .
population size and density be the two main characteristic use to describe and understand population .
for example , population with more individual may be more stable than small population base on - pron - genetic variability , and thus - pron - potential to adapt to the environment .
alternatively , a member of a population with low population density ( more spread out in the habitat ) , may have more difficulty find a mate to reproduce compare to a population of high density .
as be show in figure four  five  .  two , small organism tend to be more densely distribute than large organism .
population research methods
the most accurate way to determine population size be to simply count all of the individual within the habitat .
however , this method be often not logistically or economically feasible , especially when study large habitat .
thus , scientist usually study population by sample a representative portion of each habitat and use this datum to make inference about the habitat as a whole .
a variety of method can be use to sample population to determine - pron - size and density .
for immobile organism such as plant , or for very small and slow - move organism , a quadrat may be use ( figure four  five  .  three ) .
a quadrat be a way of mark off square area within a habitat , either by stake out an area with stick and string , or by the use of a wood , plastic , or metal square place on the ground .
after set the quadrat , researcher then count the number of individual that lie within - pron - boundary .
multiple quadrat sample be perform throughout the habitat at several random location .
all of this datum can then be use to estimate the population size and population density within the entire habitat .
the number and size of quadrat sample depend on the type of organism under study and other factor , include the density of the organism .
for example , if sample daffodil , a one m two quadrat may be use whereas with giant redwood , which be large and live much further apart from each other , a large quadrat of one  zero  zero m two may be employ .
this ensure that enough individual of the specie be count to get an accurate sample that correlate with the habitat , include area not sample .
a scientist use a quadrat to measure population size and density .
for mobile organism , such as mammal , bird , or fish , a technique call mark and recapture be often use .
this method involve mark a sample of capture animal in some way ( such as tag , band , paint , or other body marking ) , and then release - pron - back into the environment to allow - pron - to mix with the rest of the population  later , a new sample be collect , include some individual that be mark ( recapture ) and some individual that be unmarked .
mark and recapture be use to measure the population size of mobile animal such as ( a ) bighorn sheep , ( b ) the california condor , and ( c ) salmon .
use the ratio of marked and unmarked individual , scientist determine how many individual be in the sample .
from this , calculation be use to estimate the total population size .
this method assume that the large the population , the low the percentage of tag organism that will be recapture since - pron - will have mix with more untagged individual .
for example , if eight  zero deer be capture , tag , and release into the forest , and later one  zero  zero deer be capture and two  zero of - pron - be already mark , - pron - can determine the population size ( n ) use the following equation 
therefore , there be an estimate four  zero  zero total individual in the original population .
there be some limitation to the mark and recapture method .
some animal from the first catch may learn to avoid capture in the second round , thus inflate population estimate .
alternatively , animal may preferentially be retrapp ( especially if a food reward be offer ) , result in an underestimate of population size .
also , some specie may be harm by the mark technique , reduce - pron - survival .
a variety of other technique have be develop , include the electronic tracking of animal tag with radio transmitter and the use of datum from commercial fishing and trap operation to estimate the size and health of population and community .
specie distribution
in addition to measure simple density , further information about a population can be obtain by look at the distribution of the individual .
speci dispersion pattern ( or distribution pattern ) show the spatial relationship between member of a population within a habitat at a particular point in time .
in other word , - pron - show whether member of the specie live close together or far apart , and what pattern be evident when - pron - be space apart .
individual in a population can be more or less equally space apart , disperse randomly with no predictable pattern , or cluster in group .
these be know as uniform , random , and clump dispersion pattern , respectively ( figure four  five  .  five ) .
uniform dispersion be observe in plant that secrete substanc inhibit the growth of nearby individual ( such as the release of toxic chemical by the sage plant salvia leucophylla , a phenomenon call allelopathy ) and in animal like the penguin that maintain a define territory .
an example of random dispersion occur with dandelion and other plant that have wind - disperse seed that germinate wherever - pron - happen to fall in a favorable environment .
a clump dispersion may be see in plant that drop - pron - seed straight to the ground , such as oak tree , or animal that live in group ( school of fish or herd of elephant ) .
clumped dispersion may also be a function of habitat heterogeneity .
thus , the dispersion of the individual within a population provide more information about how - pron - interact with each other than do a simple density measurement .
just as low density specie may have more difficulty find a mate , solitary specie with a random distribution may have a similar difficulty when compare to social specie clump together in group .
specie may have uniform , random , or clump distribution .
territorial bird such as penguin tend to have uniform distribution .
plant such as dandelion with wind - disperse seed tend to be randomly distribute .
animal such as elephant that travel in group exhibit clumped distribution .
demography
while population size and density describe a population at one particular point in time , scientist must use demography to study the dynamic of a population .
demography be the statistical study of population change over time  birth rate , death rate , and life expectancy .
each of these measure , especially birth rate , may be affect by the population characteristic describe above .
for example , a large population size result in a high birth rate because more potentially reproductive individual be present .
in contrast , a large population size can also result in a high death rate because of competition , disease , and the accumulation of waste .
similarly , a high population density or a clump dispersion pattern result in more potential reproductive encounter between individual , which can increase birth rate .
lastly , a female - biased sex ratio ( the ratio of male to female ) or age structure ( the proportion of population member at specific age range ) compose of many individual of reproductive age can increase birth rate .
in addition , the demographic characteristic of a population can influence how the population grow or decline over time .
if birth and death rate be equal , the population remain stable .
however , the population size will increase if birth rate exceed death rate  the population will decrease if birth rate be less than death rate .
life expectancy be another important factor  the length of time individual remain in the population impact local resource , reproduction , and the overall health of the population .
these demographic characteristic be often display in the form of a life table .
life tables life table provide important information about the life history of an organism .
life table divide the population into age group and often sex , and show how long a member of that group be likely to live .
- pron - be model after actuarial table use by the insurance industry for estimate human life expectancy .
life table may include the probability of individual die before - pron - next birthday ( i . e . , - pron - mortality rate ) , the percentage of survive individual die at a particular age interval , and - pron - life expectancy at each interval .
an example of a life table be show in table four  five  .  one from a study of dall mountain sheep , a species native to northwestern north america .
notice that the population be divide into age interval ( column a ) .
the mortality rate ( per one  zero  zero  zero ) , show in column d , be base on the number of individual die during the age interval ( column b ) divide by the number of individual survive at the beginning of the interval ( column c ) , multiply by one  zero  zero  zero .
for example , between age three and four , one  two individual die out of the seven  seven  six that be remain from the original one  zero  zero  zero sheep .
this number be then multiply by one  zero  zero  zero to get the mortality rate per thousand .
as can be see from the mortality rate datum ( column d ) , a high death rate occur when the sheep be between six and one  two month old , and then increase even more from eight to one  two year old , after which there be few survivor .
the datum indicate that if a sheep in this population be to survive to age one , - pron - could be expect to live another seven  .  seven year on average , as show by the life expectancy number in column e . survivorship curves
another tool use by population ecologist be a survivorship curve , which be a graph of the number of individual survive at each age interval plot versus time ( usually with datum compile from a life table ) .
these curve allow - pron - to compare the life history of different population ( figure four  five  .  six ) .
human and most primate exhibit a type i survivorship curve because a high percentage of offspring survive - pron - early and middle year — death occur predominantly in old individual .
these type of specie usually have small number of offspring at one time , and - pron - give a high amount of parental care to - pron - to ensure - pron - survival .
bird be an example of an intermediate or type ii survivorship curve because bird die more or less equally at each age interval .
these organism also may have relatively few offspring and provide significant parental care .
tree , marine invertebrate , and most fish exhibit a type iii survivorship curve because very few of these organism survive - pron - young year  however , those that make - pron - to an old age be more likely to survive for a relatively long period of time .
organism in this category usually have a very large number of offspring , but once - pron - be bear , little parental care be provide .
thus these offspring be " on - pron - own " and vulnerable to predation , but - pron - sheer number assure the survival of enough individual to perpetuate the specie .
survivorship curve show the distribution of individual in a population accord to age .
human and most mammal have a type i survivorship curve because death primarily occur in the old year .
bird have a type ii survivorship curve , as death at any age be equally probable .
tree have a type iii survivorship curve because very few survive the young year , but after a certain age , individual be much more likely to survive .
four  five  .  two  life histories and natural selection
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to 

describe how life history pattern be influence by natural selection 
explain different life history pattern and how different reproductive strategy affect species' survival a species' life history describe the series of event over - pron - lifetime , such as how resource be allocate for growth , maintenance , and reproduction .
life history trait affect the life table of an organism .
a species' life history be genetically determine and shape by the environment and natural selection .
life history patterns and energy budgets energy be require by all live organism for - pron - growth , maintenance , and reproduction  at the same time , energy be often a major limiting factor in determine an organism 's survival .
plant , for example , acquire energy from the sun via photosynthesis , but must expend this energy to grow , maintain health , and produce energy - rich seed to produce the next generation .
animal have the additional burden of use some of - pron - energy reserve to acquire food .
furthermore , some animal must expend energy care for - pron - offspring .
thus , all specie have an energy budget  - pron - must balance energy intake with - pron - use of energy for metabolism , reproduction , parental care , and energy storage ( such as bear build up body fat for winter hibernation ) .
parental care and fecundity fecundity be the potential reproductive capacity of an individual within a population .
in other word , fecundity describe how many offspring could ideally be produce if an individual have as many offspring as possible , repeat the reproductive cycle as soon as possible after the birth of the offspring .
in animal , fecundity be inversely related to the amount of parental care give to an individual offspring .
specie , such as many marine invertebrate , that produce many offspring usually provide little if any care for the offspring ( - pron - would not have the energy or the ability to do so anyway ) .
most of - pron - energy budget be use to produce many tiny offspring .
animal with this strategy be often self - sufficient at a very early age .
this be because of the energy tradeoff these organism have make to maximize - pron - evolutionary fitness .
because - pron - energy be use for produce offspring instead of parental care , - pron - make sense that these offspring have some ability to be able to move within - pron - environment and find food and perhaps shelter .
even with these ability , - pron - small size make - pron - extremely vulnerable to predation , so the production of many offspring allow enough of - pron - to survive to maintain the specie .
animal specie that have few offspring during a reproductive event usually give extensive parental care , devote much of - pron - energy budget to these activity , sometimes at the expense of - pron - own health .
this be the case with many mammal , such as human , kangaroo , and panda .
the offspring of these specie be relatively helpless at birth and need to develop before - pron - achieve self - sufficiency .
plant with low fecundity produce few energy - rich seed ( such as coconut and chestnut ) with each have a good chance to germinate into a new organism  plant with high fecundity usually have many small , energy - poor seed ( like orchid ) that have a relatively poor chance of survive .
although - pron - may seem that coconut and chestnut have a good chance of survive , the energy tradeoff of the orchid be also very effective .
- pron - be a matter of where the energy be use , for large number of seed or for few seed with more energy .
early versus late reproduction
the timing of reproduction in a life history also affect specie survival .
organism that reproduce at an early age have a great chance of produce offspring , but this be usually at the expense of - pron - growth and the maintenance of - pron - health .
conversely , organism that start reproduce later in life often have great fecundity or be better able to provide parental care , but - pron - risk that - pron - will not survive to reproductive age .
example of this can be see in fish .
small fish like guppy use - pron - energy to reproduce rapidly , but never attain the size that would give - pron - defense against some predator .
large fish , like the bluegill or shark , use - pron - energy to attain a large size , but do so with the risk that - pron - will die before - pron - can reproduce or at least reproduce to - pron - maximum .
these different energy strategy and tradeoff be key to understand the evolution of each specie as - pron - maximize - pron - fitness and fill - pron - niche .
in term of energy budgeting , some specie " blow - pron - all " and use up most of - pron - energy reserve to reproduce early before - pron - die .
other specie delay have reproduction to become strong , more experienced individual and to make sure that - pron - be strong enough to provide parental care if necessary .
single versus multiple reproductive event
some life history trait , such as fecundity , timing of reproduction , and parental care , can be group together into general strategy that be use by multiple specie .
semelparity occur when a species reproduce only once during - pron - lifetime and then die .
such specie use most of - pron - resource budget during a single reproductive event , sacrifice - pron - health to the point that - pron - do not survive .
example of semelparity be bamboo , which flower once and then die , and the chinook salmon ( figure four  five  .  seven a ) , which use most of - pron - energy reserve to migrate from the ocean to - pron - freshwater nesting area , where - pron - reproduce and then die .
scientist have posit alternate explanation for the evolutionary advantage of the chinook 's post - reproduction death  a program suicide cause by a massive release of corticosteroid hormone , presumably so the parent can become food for the offspring , or simple exhaustion cause by the energy demand of reproduction  these be still be debate .
iteroparity describe specie that reproduce repeatedly during - pron - life .
some animal be able to mate only once per year , but survive multiple mating season .
the pronghorn antelope be an example of an animal that go into a seasonal estrus cycle ( " heat " )  a hormonally induce physiological condition prepare the body for successful mating ( figure four  five  .  seven b ) .
female of these specie mate only during the estrus phase of the cycle .
a different pattern be observe in primate , include human and chimpanzee , which may attempt reproduction at any time during - pron - reproductive year , even though - pron - menstrual cycle make pregnancy likely only a few day per month during ovulation .
the ( a ) chinook salmon mate once and die .
the ( b ) pronghorn antelope mate during specific time of the year during - pron - reproductive life .
primate , such as human and ( c ) chimpanzee , may mate on any day , independent of ovulation .
four  five  .  three  environmental limits to population growth
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  
explain the characteristic of and difference between exponential and logistic growth pattern  give example of exponential and logistic growth in natural population 
describe how natural selection and environmental adaptation lead to the evolution of particular life history pattern although life history describe the way many characteristic of a population ( such as - pron - age structure ) change over time in a general way
, population ecologist make use of a variety of method to model population dynamic mathematically .
these more precise model can then be use to accurately describe change occur in a population and good predict future change .
certain model that have be accept for decade be now be modify or even abandon due to - pron - lack of predictive ability , and scholar strive to create effective new model .
exponential growth charles darwin , in - pron - theory of natural selection , be greatly influence by the english clergyman thomas malthus .
malthu publish a book in one  seven  nine  eight state that population with unlimited natural resource grow very rapidly , and then population growth decrease as resource become deplete .
this accelerate pattern of increase population size be call exponential growth .
the good example of exponential growth be see in bacteria .
bacteria be prokaryote that reproduce by prokaryotic fission .
this division take about an hour for many bacterial specie .
if one  zero  zero  zero bacteria be place in a large flask with an unlimited supply of nutrient ( so the nutrient will not become depleted ) , after an hour , there be one round of division and each organism divide , result in two  zero  zero  zero organism — an increase of one  zero  zero  zero .
in another hour , each of the two  zero  zero  zero organism will double , produce four  zero  zero  zero , an increase of two  zero  zero  zero organism .
after the third hour , there should be eight  zero  zero  zero bacteria in the flask , an increase of four  zero  zero  zero organism .
the important concept of exponential growth be that the population growth rate — the number of organism add in each reproductive generation — be accelerate  that is , - pron - be increase at a great and great rate .
after one day and two  four of these cycle , the population would have increase from one  zero  zero  zero to more than one  six billion .
when the population size , n , be plot over time , a j - shape growth curve be produce ( figure four  five  .  nine ) .
the bacteria example be not representative of the real world where resource be limit .
furthermore , some bacteria will die during the experiment and thus not reproduce , lower the growth rate .
therefore , when calculate the growth rate of a population , the death rate ( d ) ( number organism that die during a particular time interval ) be subtract from the birth rate ( b ) ( number organism that be bear during that interval ) .
this be show in the follow formula  the birth rate be usually express on a per capita ( for each individual ) basis .
thus , b ( birth rate ) = bn ( the per capita birth rate "
b " multiply by the number of individual
" n " ) and d ( death rate ) =
dn ( the per capita death rate "
d " multiply by the number of individual " n " ) .
additionally , ecologist be interested in the population at a particular point in time , an infinitely small time interval .
for this reason , the terminology of differential calculus be use to obtain the " instantaneous " growth rate , replace the change in number and time with an instant - specific measurement of number and time .
notice that the " d " associate with the first term refer to the derivative ( as the term be use in calculus ) and be different from the death rate , also call " d .
"
the difference between birth and death rate be further simplify by substitute the term " r " ( intrinsic rate of increase ) for the relationship between birth and death rate 
the value " r
" can be positive , mean the population be increase in size  or negative , mean the population be decrease in size  or zero , where the population 's size be unchanging , a condition know as zero population growth .
a further refinement of the formula recognize that different specie have inherent difference in - pron - intrinsic rate of increase ( often think of as the potential for reproduction ) , even under ideal condition .
obviously , a bacterium can reproduce more rapidly and have a high intrinsic rate of growth than a human .
the maximal growth rate for a species be - pron - biotic potential , or rmax , thus change the equation to  when resource be unlimited , population exhibit exponential growth , result in a j - shape curve .
when resource be limit , population exhibit logistic growth .
in logistic growth , population expansion decrease as resource become scarce , and - pron - level off when the carrying capacity of the environment be reach , result in an s - shape curve .
logistic growth exponential growth be possible only when infinite natural resource be available  this be not the case in the real world .
charles darwin recognize this fact in - pron - description of the " struggle for existence , " which state that individual will compete ( with member of - pron - own or other specie ) for limited resource .
the successful one will survive to pass on - pron - own characteristic and trait ( which - pron - know now be transfer by gene ) to the next generation at a great rate ( natural selection ) .
to model the reality of limited resource , population ecologist develop the logistic growth model .
carry capacity and the logistic model
in the real world , with - pron - limited resource , exponential growth can not continue indefinitely .
exponential growth may occur in environment where there be few individual and plentiful resource , but when the number of individual get large enough , resource will be deplete , slow the growth rate .
eventually , the growth rate will plateau or level off
( figure four  five  .  nine ) .
this population size , which represent the maximum population size that a particular environment can support , be call the carrying capacity , or k . the formula - pron - use to calculate logistic growth add the carry capacity as a moderate force in the growth rate .
the expression "
k – n
" be indicative of how many individual may be add to a population at a give stage , and " k – n " divide by " k "
be the fraction of the carrying capacity available for further growth .
thus , the exponential growth model be restrict by this factor to generate the logistic growth equation 
notice that when n be very small , ( k - n ) / k become close to k / k or one , and the right side of the equation reduce to rmaxn , which mean the population be grow exponentially and be not influence by carry capacity .
on the other hand , when n be large , ( k - n ) / k come close to zero , which mean that population growth will be slow greatly or even stop .
thus , population growth be greatly slow in large population by the carrying capacity k . this model also allow for the population of a negative population growth , or a population decline .
this occur when the number of individual in the population exceed the carrying capacity ( because the value of ( k - n ) / k be negative ) .
a graph of this equation yield an s - shape curve ( figure four  five  .  nine ) , and - pron - be a more realistic model of population growth than exponential growth .
there be three different section to an s - shape curve .
initially , growth be exponential because there be few individual and ample resource available .
then , as resource begin to become limited , the growth rate decrease .
finally , growth level off at the carrying capacity of the environment , with little change in population size over time .
role of intraspecific competition
the logistic model assume that every individual within a population will have equal access to resource and , thus , an equal chance for survival .
for plant , the amount of water , sunlight , nutrient , and the space to grow be the important resource , whereas in animal , important resource include food , water , shelter , nesting space , and mate .
in the real world , phenotypic variation among individual within a population mean that some individual will be better adapt to - pron - environment than other .
the result competition between population member of the same specie for resource be term intraspecific competition ( intra - = " within "  - specific = " specie " ) .
intraspecific competition for resource may not affect population that be well below - pron - carrying capacity — resource be plentiful and all individual can obtain what - pron - need .
however , as population size increase , this competition intensify .
in addition , the accumulation of waste product can reduce an environment 's carrying capacity .
example of logistic growth yeast , a microscopic fungus use to make bread and alcoholic beverage , exhibit the classical s - shape curve when grow in a test tube ( figure four  five  .  one  zero a ) .
- pron - growth level off as the population deplete the nutrient that be necessary for - pron - growth .
in the real world , however , there be variation to this idealized curve .
example in wild population include sheep and harbor seal ( figure four  five  .  one  zero b ) .
in both example , the population size exceed the carrying capacity for short period of time and then fall below the carrying capacity afterwards .
this fluctuation in population size continue to occur as the population oscillate around - pron - carrying capacity .
still , even with this oscillation , the logistic model be confirm .
population dynamics and regulation
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  give example of how the carry capacity of a habitat may change compare and contrast density - dependent growth regulation and density - independent growth regulation , give example give example of exponential and logistic growth in wild animal population describe
how natural selection and environmental adaptation lead to the evolution of particular life - history pattern the logistic model of population growth , while valid in many natural population and a useful model , be a simplification of real - world population dynamic .
implicit in the model be that the carry capacity of the environment do not change , which be not the case .
the carrying capacity vary annually  for example , some summer be hot and dry whereas other be cold and wet .
in many area , the carrying capacity during the winter be much low than - pron - be during the summer .
also , natural event such as earthquake , volcano , and fire can alter an environment and hence - pron - carrying capacity .
additionally , population do not usually exist in isolation .
- pron - engage in interspecific competition  that is , - pron - share the environment with other specie , compete with - pron - for the same resource .
these factor be also important to understand how a specific population will grow .
nature regulate population growth in a variety of way .
these be group into density - dependent factor , in which the density of the population at a give time affect growth rate and mortality , and density - independent factor , which influence mortality in a population regardless of population density .
note that in the former , the effect of the factor on the population depend on the density of the population at onset .
conservation biologist want to understand both type because this help - pron - manage population and prevent extinction or overpopulation .
density - dependent regulation most density - dependent factor be biological in nature ( biotic ) , and include predation , inter - and intraspecific competition , accumulation of waste , and disease such as those cause by parasite .
usually , the denser a population be , the great - pron - mortality rate .
for example , during intra - and interspecific competition , the reproductive rate of the individual will usually be low , reduce - pron - population 's rate of growth .
in addition , low prey density increase the mortality of - pron - predator because - pron - have more difficulty locate - pron - food source .
an example of density - dependent regulation be show in figure four  five  .  one  one with result from a study focus on the giant intestinal roundworm ( ascaris lumbricoid ) , a parasite of human and other mammal .
[ four ] denser population of the parasite exhibit low fecundity  - pron - contain few egg .
one possible explanation for this be that female would be small in more dense population ( due to limited resource ) and that small female would have few egg .
this hypothesis be test and disprove in a two  zero  zero  nine study which show that female weight have no influence .
[ five ]
the actual because of the densitydependence of fecundity in this organism be still unclear and await further investigation .
in this population of roundworm , fecundity ( number of egg ) decrease with population density .
[ six ] density - independent regulation and interaction with densitydependent factors
many factor , typically physical or chemical in nature ( abiotic ) , influence the mortality of a population regardless of - pron - density , include weather , natural disaster , and pollution .
an individual deer may be kill in a forest fire regardless of how many deer happen to be in that area .
- pron - chance of survival be the same whether the population density be high or low .
the same hold true for cold winter weather .
in real - life situation , population regulation be very complicated and density - dependent and independent factor can interact .
a dense population that be reduce in a density - independent manner by some environmental factor ( ) will be able to recover differently than a sparse population .
for example , a population of deer affect by a harsh winter will recover faster if there be more deer remain to reproduce .
life histories of k - select and r - select specie while reproductive strategy play a key role in life history , - pron - do not account for important factor like limited resource and competition .
the regulation of population growth by these factor can be use to introduce a classical concept in population biology , that of k - select versus r - select specie .
early theories about life history  k - select and r - select specie by the second half of the twentieth century , the concept of k - and r - select specie be use extensively and successfully to study population .
the concept relate not only reproductive strategy , but also to a species' habitat and behavior , especially in the way that - pron - obtain resource and care for - pron - young .
- pron - include length of life and survivorship factor as well .
for this analysis , population biologist have group specie into the two large category — k - select and rselected— although - pron - be really two end of a continuum .
k - select specie be specie select by stable , predictable environment .
population of k - select specie tend to exist close to - pron - carrying capacity ( hence the term k - select ) where intraspecific competition be high .
these specie have few , large offspring , a long gestation period , and often give long - term care to - pron - offspring ( table b four  five _ zero  four _ zero  one ) .
while large in size when bear , the offspring be relatively helpless and immature at birth .
by the time - pron - reach adulthood , - pron - must develop skill to compete for natural resource .
in plant , scientist think of parental care more broadly  how long fruit take to develop or how long - pron - remain on the plant be determine factor in the time to the next reproductive event .
example of k - select specie be primate include human ) , elephant , and plant such as oak tree ( figure four  five  .  one  three a ) .
oak tree grow very slowly and take , on average , two  zero year to produce - pron - first seed , know as acorn .
as many as five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero acorn can be produce by an individual tree , but the germination rate be low as many of these rot or be eat by animal such as squirrel .
in some year , oak may produce an exceptionally large number of acorn , and these year may be on a two - or three - year cycle depend on the specie of oak ( r - selection ) .
as oak tree grow to a large size and for many year before - pron - begin to produce acorn , - pron - devote a large percentage of - pron - energy budget to growth and maintenance .
the tree 's height and size
allow - pron - to dominate other plant in the competition for sunlight , the oak 's primary energy resource .
furthermore , when - pron - do reproduce , the oak produce large , energy - rich seed that use - pron - energy reserve to become quickly establish ( k - selection ) .
in contrast , r - select specie have a large number of small offspring ( hence - pron - r designation ( table four  five  .  two ) .
this strategy be often employ in unpredictable or change environment .
animal that be r - select do not give long - term parental care and the offspring be relatively mature and self - sufficient at birth .
example of r - select specie be marine invertebrate , such as jellyfish , and plant , such as the dandelion ( figure four  five  .  one  three b ) .
dandelion have small seed that be wind disperse long distance .
many seed be produce simultaneously to ensure that at least some of - pron - reach a hospitable environment .
seed that land in inhospitable environment have little chance for survival since - pron - seed be low in energy content .
note that survival be not necessarily a function of energy store in the seed - pron - .
( a ) elephant be consider k - select specie as - pron - live long , mature late , and provide long - term parental care to few offspring .
oak tree produce many offspring that do not receive parental care , but be consider k - select specie base on longevity and late maturation .
( b ) dandelion and jellyfish be both consider r - select specie as - pron - mature early , have short lifespan , and produce many offspring that receive no parental care .
modern theories of life history
the r - and k - selection theory , although accept for decade and use for much groundbreaking research , have now be reconsider , and many population biologist have abandon or modify - pron - .
over the year , several study attempt to confirm the theory , but these attempt have largely fail .
many specie be identify that do not follow the theory 's prediction .
furthermore , the theory ignore the age - specific mortality of the population which scientist now know be very important .
new demographic - base model of life history evolution have be develop which incorporate many ecological concept include in r - and k - selection theory as well as population age structure and mortality factor .
human population growth
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to 
discuss how human population growth can be exponential explain how human have expand the carry capacity of - pron - habitat relate population growth and age structure to the level of economic development in different country
discuss the long - term implication of unchecked human population growth concepts of animal population dynamic can be apply to human population growth .
human be not unique in - pron - ability to alter - pron - environment .
for example , beaver dam alter the stream environment where - pron - be build .
human , however , have the ability to alter - pron - environment to increase - pron - carrying capacity sometimes to the detriment of other specie ( e . g . , via artificial selection for crop that have a high yield ) .
earth 's human population be grow rapidly , to the extent that some worry about the ability of the earth 's environment to sustain this population , as long - term exponential growth carry the potential risk of famine , disease , and large - scale death .
although human have increase the carry capacity of - pron - environment , the technology use to achieve this transformation have cause unprecedented change to earth 's environment , alter ecosystem to the point where some may be in danger of collapse .
the depletion of the ozone layer , erosion due to acid rain , and damage from global climate change be cause by human activity .
the ultimate effect of these change on - pron - carrying capacity be unknown .
as some point out , - pron - be likely that the negative effect of increase carrying capacity will outweigh the positive one
— the carrying capacity of the world for human being may actually decrease .
the world 's human population be currently experience exponential growth even though human reproduction be far below - pron - biotic potential ( figure four  five  .  one  four ) .
to reach - pron - biotic potential , all female would have to become pregnant every nine month or so during - pron - reproductive year .
also , resource would have to be such that the environment would support such growth .
neither of these two condition exist .
in spite of this fact , human population be still grow exponentially .
human population growth since one  zero  zero  zero ad be exponential ( dark blue line ) .
notice that while the population in asia ( yellow line ) , which have many economically underdeveloped country , be increase exponentially , the population in europe ( light blue line ) , where most of the country be economically develop , be grow much more slowly .
a consequence of exponential human population growth be the time that - pron - take to add a particular number of human to the earth be become short .
figure four  five  .  one  five show that one  two  three year be necessary to add one billion human in one  nine  three  zero , but - pron - only take two  four year to add two billion people between one  nine  seven  five and one  nine  nine  nine .
as already discuss , at some point - pron - would appear that - pron - ability to increase - pron - carrying capacity indefinitely on a finite world be uncertain .
without new technological advance , the human growth rate have be predict to slow in the come decade .
however , the population will still be increase and the threat of overpopulation remain .
the time between the addition of each billion human being to earth decrease over time .
overcome density - dependent regulation human be unique in - pron - ability to alter - pron - environment with the conscious purpose of increase - pron - carrying capacity .
this ability be a major factor responsible for human population growth and a way of overcome density - dependent growth regulation .
much of this ability be relate to human intelligence , society , and communication .
human can construct shelter to protect - pron - from the element and have develop agriculture and domesticate animal to increase - pron - food supply .
in addition , human use language to communicate this technology to new generation , allow - pron - to improve upon previous accomplishment .
other factor in human population growth be migration and public health .
human originate in africa , but have since migrate to nearly all inhabitable land on the earth .
public health , sanitation , and the use of antibiotic and vaccine have decrease the ability of infectious disease to limit human population growth .
in the past , disease such as the bubonic plaque of the fourteenth century kill between three  zero and six  zero percent of europe 's population and reduce the overall world population by as many as one  zero  zero million people .
today , the threat of infectious disease , while not go , be certainly less severe .
accord to the world health organization , global death from infectious disease decline from one  six  .  four million in one  nine  nine  three to one  four  .  seven million in one  nine  nine  two .
to compare to some of the epidemic of the past , the percentage of the world ' s population kill between one  nine  nine  three and two  zero  zero  two decrease from zero  .  three  zero percent of the world ' s population to zero  .  two  four percent .
thus , - pron - appear that the influence of infectious disease on human population growth be become less significant .
age structure , population growth , and economic development
the age structure of a population be an important factor in population dynamic .
age structure be the proportion of a population at different age range .
age structure allow good prediction of population growth , plus the ability to associate this growth with the level of economic development in the region .
country with rapid growth have a pyramidal shape in - pron - age structure diagram , show a preponderance of young individual , many of whom be of reproductive age or will be soon ( figure four  five  .  one  six ) .
this pattern be most often observe in underdeveloped country where individual do not live to old age because of less - than - optimal living condition .
age structure of area with slow growth , include develop country such as the united states , still have a pyramidal structure , but with many few young and reproductive - aged individual and a great proportion of old individual .
other develop country , such as italy , have zero population growth .
the age structure of these population be more conical , with an even great percentage of middle - aged and old individual .
the actual growth rate in different country be show in figure four  five  .  one  seven , with the high rate tend to be in the less economically develop country of africa and asia .
the percent growth rate of population in different country be show .
notice that the high growth be occur in less economically develop country in africa and asia .
long - term consequences of exponential human population
growth many dire prediction have be make about the world 's population lead to a major crisis call the " population explosion .
"
in the one  nine  six  eight book the population bomb , biologist dr . paul r . ehrlich write , " the battle to feed all of humanity be over .
in the one  nine  seven  zero hundred of million of people will starve to death in spite of any crash program embark upon now .
at this late date nothing can prevent a substantial increase in the world death rate .
"
[ nine ] while many critic view this statement as an exaggeration , the law of exponential population growth be still in effect , and unchecked human population growth can not continue indefinitely .
effort to control population growth lead to the one - child policy in china , which use to include more severe consequence , but now impose fine on urban couple who have more than one child .
due to the fact that some couple wish to have a male heir , many chinese couple continue to have more than one child .
the policy - pron - , - pron - social impact , and the effectiveness of limit overall population growth be controversial .
in spite of population control policy , the human population continue to grow .
at some point the food supply may run out because of the subsequent need to produce more and more food to feed - pron - population .
the united nations estimate that future world population growth may vary from six billion ( a decrease ) to one  six billion people by the year two  one  zero  zero .
there be no way to know whether human population growth will moderate to the point where the crisis describe by dr . ehrlich will be avert .
another result of population growth be the endangerment of the natural environment .
many country have attempt to reduce the human impact on climate change by reduce - pron - emission of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide .
however , these treaty have not be ratify by every country , and many underdeveloped country try to improve - pron - economic condition may be less likely to agree with such provision if - pron - mean slow economic development .
furthermore , the role of human activity in cause climate change have become a hotly debate socio - political issue in some develop country , include the united states .
thus , - pron - enter the future with considerable uncertainty about - pron - ability to curb human population growth and protect - pron - environment .
community ecology
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to
 discuss the predator - prey cycle give example of defense against predation and herbivory
describe the competitive exclusion principle
give example of symbiotic relationship between specie describe community structure and succession populations rarely , if ever , live in isolation from population of other specie .
in most case , numerous specie share a habitat .
the interaction between these population play a major role in regulate population growth and abundance .
all population occupy the same habitat form a community  population inhabit a specific area at the same time .
the number of specie occupy the same habitat and - pron - relative abundance be know as specie diversity .
area with low diversity , such as the glacier of antarctica , still contain a wide variety of live thing , whereas the diversity of tropical rainforest be so great that - pron - can not be count .
ecology be study at the community level to understand how specie interact with each other and compete for the same resource .
predation and herbivory
perhaps the classical example of species interaction be predation  the hunting of prey by - pron - predator .
nature show on television highlight the drama of one live organism kill another .
population of predator and prey in a community be not constant over time  in most case , - pron - vary in cycle that appear to be relate .
the most often cite example of predator - prey dynamic be see in the cycling of the lynx ( predator ) and the snowshoe hare ( prey ) , use nearly two  zero  zero year - old trapping datum from north american forest ( figure four  five  .  one  eight ) .
this cycle of predator and prey last approximately one  zero year , with the predator population lag one – two year behind that of the prey population .
as the hare number increase , there be more food available for the lynx , allow the lynx population to increase as well .
when the lynx population grow to a threshold level , however , - pron - kill so many hare that hare population begin to decline , follow by a decline in the lynx population because of scarcity of food .
when the lynx population be low , the hare population size begin to increase due , at least in part , to low predation pressure , start the cycle anew .
the cycling of lynx and snowshoe hare population in northern ontario be an example of predator - prey dynamic .
the idea that the population cycling of the two specie be entirely control by predation model have come under question .
more recent study have point to undefined density - dependent factor as be important in the cycling , in addition to predation .
one possibility be that the cycling be inherent in the hare population due to density - dependent effect such as low fecundity ( maternal stress ) cause by crowd when the hare population get too dense .
the hare cycling would then induce the cycling of the lynx because - pron - be the lynxes' major food source .
the more - pron - study community , the more complexity - pron - find , allow ecologist to derive more accurate and sophisticated model of population dynamic .
herbivory describe the consumption of plant by insect and other animal , and - pron - be another interspecific relationship that affect population .
unlike animal , most plant can not outrun predator or use mimicry to hide from hungry animal .
some plant have develop mechanism to defend against herbivory .
other specie have develop mutualistic relationship  for example , herbivory provide a mechanism of seed distribution that aid in plant reproduction .
defense mechanisms against predation and herbivory
the study of community must consider evolutionary force that act on the member of the various population contain within - pron - .
specie be not static , but slowly change and adapt to - pron - environment by natural selection and other evolutionary force .
specie have evolve numerous mechanism to escape predation and herbivory .
these defense may be mechanical , chemical , physical , or behavioral .
mechanical defense , such as the presence of thorn on plant or the hard shell on turtle , discourage animal predation and herbivory by cause physical pain to the predator or by physically prevent the predator from be able to eat the prey .
chemical defense be produce by many animal as well as plant , such as the foxglove which be extremely toxic when eat .
figure four  five  .  one  nine show some organisms' defense against predation and herbivory .
the ( a ) honey locust tree ( gleditsia triacanthos ) use thorn , a mechanical defense , against herbivore , while the ( b ) florida red - bellied turtle ( pseudemys nelsoni ) use - pron - shell as a mechanical defense against predator .
( c ) foxglove ( digitalis sp . )
use a chemical defense  toxin produce by the plant can because nausea , vomiting , hallucination , convulsion , or death when consume .
( d )
the north american millipede ( narceus americanus ) use both mechanical and chemical defense  when threaten , the millipede curl into a defensive ball and produce a noxious substance that irritate eye and skin .
many specie use - pron - body shape and coloration to avoid be detect by predator .
the tropical walking stick be an insect with the coloration and body shape of a twig which make - pron - very hard to see when stationary against a background of real twig ( figure four  five  .  two  zero a ) .
in another example , the chameleon can change - pron - color to match - pron - surrounding ( figure four  five  .  two  zero b ) .
both of these be example of camouflage , or avoid detection by blend in with the background .
( a )
the tropical walking stick and ( b ) the chameleon use body shape and / or coloration to prevent detection by predator .
some specie use coloration as a way of warning predator that - pron - be not good to eat .
for example , the cinnabar moth caterpillar , the fire - belly toad , and many specie of beetle have bright color that warn of a foul taste , the presence of toxic chemical , and / or the ability to st or bite , respectively .
predator that ignore this coloration and eat the organism will experience - pron - unpleasant taste or presence of toxic chemical and learn not to eat - pron - in the future .
this type of defensive mechanism be call aposematic coloration , or warn coloration .
( a )
the strawberry poison dart frog ( oophaga pumilio ) use aposematic coloration to warn predator that - pron - be toxic , while the ( b ) strip skunk ( mephitis mephitis ) use aposematic coloration to warn predator of the unpleasant odor - pron - produce .
while some predator learn to avoid eat certain potential prey because of - pron - coloration , other specie have evolve mechanism to mimic this coloration to avoid be eat , even though - pron - - pron - may not be unpleasant to eat or contain toxic chemical .
in batesian mimicry , a harmless specie imitate the warn coloration of a harmful one .
assume - pron - share the same predator , this coloration then protect the harmless one , even though - pron - do not have the same level of physical or chemical defense against predation as the organism - pron - mimic .
many insect specie mimic the coloration of wasp or bee , which be stinging , venomous insect , thereby discourage predation .
batesian mimicry occur when a harmless species mimic the coloration of a harmful specie , as be see with the ( a ) bumblebee and ( b ) bee - like robber fly .
in müllerian mimicry , multiple specie share the same warning coloration , but all of - pron - actually have defense .
figure four  five  .  two  three show a variety of foul - tasting butterfly with similar coloration .
in emsleyan / mertensian mimicry , a deadly prey mimic a less dangerous one , such as the venomous coral snake mimic the non - venomous milk snake .
this type of mimicry be extremely rare and more difficult to understand than the previous two type .
for this type of mimicry to work , - pron - be essential that eat the milk snake have unpleasant but not fatal consequence .
then , these predator learn not to eat snake with this coloration , protect the coral snake as well .
if the snake be fatal to the predator , there would be no opportunity for the predator to learn not to eat - pron - , and the benefit for the less toxic specie would disappear .
several unpleasant - taste heliconius butterfly specie share a similar color pattern with better - taste variety , an example of müllerian mimicry .
competitive exclusion principle resources be often limit within a habitat and multiple specie may compete to obtain - pron - .
all specie have an ecological niche in the ecosystem , which describe how - pron - acquire the resource - pron - need and how - pron - interact with other specie in the community .
the competitive exclusion principle state that two specie can not occupy the same niche in a habitat .
in other word , different specie can not coexist in a community if - pron - be compete for all the same resource .
an example of this principle be show in figure four  five  .  two  four , with two protozoan specie , paramecium aurelia and paramecium caudatum .
when grow individually in the laboratory , - pron - both thrive .
but when - pron - be place together in the same test tube ( habitat ) , p . aurelia outcompet p . caudatum for food , lead to the latter 's eventual extinction .
paramecium aurelia and paramecium caudatum grow well individually , but when - pron - compete for the same resource , the p . aurelia outcompet the p . caudatum .
this exclusion may be avoid if a population evolf to make use of a different resource , a different area of the habitat , or feed during a different time of day , call resource partitioning .
the two organism be then say to occupy different micronich .
these organism coexist by minimize direct competition .
symbiosis symbiotic relationship , or symbios ( plural ) , be close interaction between individual of different specie over an extended period of time which impact the abundance and distribution of the associate population .
most scientist accept this definition , but some restrict the term to only those specie that be mutualistic , where both individual benefit from the interaction .
in this discussion , the broad definition will be use .
commensalism a commensal relationship occur when one species benefit from the close , prolonged interaction , while the other neither benefit nor be harm .
bird nest in tree provide an example of a commensal relationship ( figure four  five  .  two  five ) .
the tree be not harm by the presence of the nest among - pron - branch .
the nest be light and produce little strain on the structural integrity of the branch , and most of the leaf , which the tree use to get energy by photosynthesis , be above the nest so - pron - be unaffected .
the bird , on the other hand , benefit greatly .
if the bird have to nest in the open , - pron - egg and young would be vulnerable to predator .
another example of a commensal relationship be the clown fish and the sea anemone .
the sea anemone be not harm by the fish , and the fish benefit with protection from predator who would be sting upon near the sea anemone .
the southern masked - weaver bird be start to make a nest in a tree in zambezi valley , zambia .
this be an example of a commensal relationship , in which one specie ( the bird ) benefit , while the other ( the tree ) neither benefit nor be harm .
mutualism
a second type of symbiotic relationship be call mutualism , where two specie benefit from - pron - interaction .
some scientist believe that these be the only true example of symbiosis .
for example , termite have a mutualistic relationship with protozoa that live in the insect 's gut ( figure four  five  .  two  six a ) .
the termite benefit from the ability of bacterial symbiont within the protozoa to digest cellulose .
the termite - pron - can not do this , and without the protozoa , - pron - would not be able to obtain energy from - pron - food ( cellulose from the wood - pron - chew and eat ) .
the protozoa and the bacterial symbiont benefit by have a protective environment and a constant supply of food from the wood chew action of the termite .
lichen have a mutualistic relationship between fungus and photosynthetic algae or bacteria ( figure four  five  .  two  six b ) .
as these symbiont grow together , the glucose produce by the algae provide nourishment for both organism , whereas the physical structure of the lichen protect the algae from the element and make certain nutrient in the atmosphere more available to the algae .
( a ) termites form a mutualistic relationship with symbiotic protozoa in - pron - gut , which allow both organism to obtain energy from the cellulose the termite consume .
( b )
lichen be a fungus that have symbiotic photosynthetic algae live inside - pron - cell .
parasitism
a parasite be an organism that live in or on another live organism and derive nutrient from - pron - .
in this relationship , the parasite benefit , but the organism be feed upon , the host be harm .
the host be usually weaken by the parasite as - pron - siphon resource the host would normally use to maintain - pron - .
the parasite , however , be unlikely to kill the host , especially not quickly , because this would allow no time for the organism to complete - pron - reproductive cycle by spread to another host .
the reproductive cycle of parasite be often very complex , sometimes require more than one host specie .
a tapeworm be a parasite that cause disease in human when contaminate , undercook meat such as pork , fish , or beef be consume ( figure four  five  .  two  seven ) .
the tapeworm can live inside the intestine of the host for several year , benefit from the food the host be bring into - pron - gut by eat , and may grow to be over five  zero ft long by add segment .
the parasite move from specie to specie in a cycle , make two host necessary to complete - pron - life cycle .
another common parasite be plasmodium falciparum , the protozoan because of malaria , a significant disease in many part of the world .
live in human liver and red blood cell , the organism reproduce asexually in the gut of blood - feeding mosquito to complete - pron - life cycle .
thus malaria be spread from human to human by mosquito , one of many arthropod - bear infectious disease .
this diagram show the life cycle of a pork tapeworm ( taenia solium ) , a human worm parasite .
characteristics of communities communities be complex entity that can be characterize by - pron - structure ( the type and number of specie present ) and dynamic ( how community change over time ) .
understand community structure and dynamic enable community ecologist to manage ecosystem more effectively .
foundation species foundation specie be consider the " base " or " bedrock " of a community , have the great influence on - pron - overall structure .
- pron - be usually the primary producer  organism that bring most of the energy into the community .
kelp , brown algae , be a foundation specie , form the basis of the kelp forest off the coast of california .
foundation specie may physically modify the environment to produce and maintain habitat that benefit the other organism that use - pron - .
an example be the photosynthetic coral of the coral reef ( figure four  five  .  two  eight ) .
coral - pron - be not photosynthetic , but harbor symbiont within - pron - body tissue ( dinoflagellate call zooxanthellae ) that perform photosynthesis  this be another example of a mutualism .
the exoskeleton of living and dead coral make up most of the reef structure , which protect many other specie from wave and ocean current .
coral be the foundation specie of coral reef ecosystem .
biodiversity , species richness , and relative species abundance biodiversity describe a community 's biological complexity  - pron - be measure by the number of different specie ( species richness ) in a particular area and - pron - relative abundance ( specie evenness ) .
the area in question could be a habitat , a biome , or the entire biosphere .
specie richness be the term that be use to describe the number of specie live in a habitat or biome .
specie richness vary across the globe ( figure four  five  .  two  nine ) .
one factor in determine specie richness be latitude , with the great specie richness occur in ecosystem near the equator , which often have warm temperature , large amount of rainfall , and low seasonality .
the low species richness occur near the pole , which be much cold , dry , and thus less conducive to life in geologic time ( time since glaciation ) .
the predictability of climate or productivity be also an important factor .
other factor influence specie richness as well .
for example , the study of island biogeography attempt to explain the relatively high specie richness find in certain isolated island chain , include the galápagos islands that inspire the young darwin .
relative specie abundance be the number of individual in a species relative to the total number of individual in all specie within a habitat , ecosystem , or biome .
foundation specie often have the high relative abundance of specie .
the great specie richness for mammal in north and south america be associate with the equatorial latitude .
keystone species
a keystone species be one whose presence be key to maintain biodiversity within an ecosystem and to uphold an ecological community 's structure .
the intertidal sea star , pisaster ochraceus , of the northwestern united states be a keystone specie ( figure four  five  .  three  zero ) .
study have show that when this organism be remove from community , population of - pron - natural prey ( mussel ) increase , completely alter the species composition and reduce biodiversity .
another keystone species be the banded tetra , a fish in tropical stream , which supply nearly all of the phosphorus , a necessary inorganic nutrient , to the rest of the community .
if these fish be to become extinct , the community would be greatly affect .
the pisaster ochraceus sea star be a keystone species .
community dynamics community dynamic be the change in community structure and composition over time .
sometimes these change be induce by environmental disturbance such as volcano , earthquake , storm , fire , and climate change .
community with a stable structure be say to be at equilibrium .
follow a disturbance , the community may or may not return to the equilibrium state .
succession describe the sequential appearance and disappearance of specie in a community over time .
in primary succession , newly expose or newly form land be colonize by live thing  in secondary succession , part of an ecosystem be disturb and remnant of the previous community remain .
primary succession and pioneer species primary succession occur when new land be form or rock be expose  for example , follow the eruption of volcano , such as those on the big island of hawaii .
as lava flow into the ocean , new land be continually be form .
on the big island , approximately three  two acre of land be add each year .
first , weather and other natural force break down the substrate enough for the establishment of certain hearty plant and lichen with few soil requirement , know as pioneer specie ( figure four  five  .  three  two ) .
these specie help to further break down the mineral rich lava into soil where other , less hardy specie will grow and eventually replace the pioneer specie .
in addition , as these early specie grow and die , - pron - add to an ever - grow layer of decompose organic material and contribute to soil formation .
over time the area will reach an equilibrium state , with a set of organism quite different from the pioneer specie .
during primary succession in lava on maui , hawaii , succulent plant be the pioneer specie .
secondary succession
a classic example of secondary succession occur in oak and hickory forest clear by wildfire ( figure four  five  .  three  three ) .
wildfire will burn most vegetation and kill those animal unable to flee the area .
- pron - nutrient , however , be return to the ground in the form of ash .
thus , even when area be devoid of life due to severe fire , the area will soon be ready for new life to take hold .
before the fire , the vegetation be dominate by tall tree with access to the major plant energy resource  sunlight .
- pron - height give - pron - access to sunlight while also shade the ground and other low - lying specie .
after the fire , though , these tree be no longer dominant .
thus , the first plant to grow back be usually annual plant follow within a few year by quickly grow and spread grass and other pioneer specie .
due to , at least in part , change in the environment bring on by the growth of the grass and other specie , over many year , shrub will emerge along with small pine , oak , and hickory tree .
these organism be call intermediate specie .
eventually , over one  five  zero year , the forest will reach - pron - equilibrium point where species composition be no longer change and resemble the community before the fire .
this equilibrium state be refer to as the climax community , which will remain stable until the next disturbance .
secondary succession be show in an oak and hickory forest after a forest fire .
four  five  .  seven  behavioral biology 
proximate and ultimate causes of behavior
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  
compare innate and learn behavior 
discuss how movement and migration behavior be a result of natural selection  discuss the different way member of a population communicate with each other  give example of how specie use energy for mating display and other courtship behavior  differentiate between various mating system 
describe different way that specie learn behavior be the change in activity of an organism in response to a stimulus .
behavioral biology be the study of the biological and evolutionary base for such change .
the idea that behavior evolve as a result of the pressure of natural selection be not new .
animal behavior have be study for decade , by biologist in the science of ethology , by psychologist in the science of comparative psychology , and by scientist of many discipline in the study of neurobiology .
although there be overlap between these discipline , scientist in these behavioral field take different approach .
comparative psychology be an extension of work do in human and behavioral psychology .
ethology be an extension of genetic , evolution , anatomy , physiology , and other biological discipline .
still , one can not study behavioral biology without touch on both comparative psychology and ethology .
one goal of behavioral biology be to dissect out the innate behavior , which have a strong genetic component and be largely independent of environmental influence , from the learn behavior , which result from environmental conditioning .
innate behavior , or instinct , be important because there be no risk of an incorrect behavior be learn .
- pron - be " hard wire " into the system .
on the other hand , learn behavior , although risky , be flexible , dynamic , and can be alter accord to change in the environment .
innate behaviors  movement and migration innate or instinctual behavior
rely on response to stimulus .
the simple example of this be a reflex action , an involuntary and rapid response to stimulus .
to test the " knee - jerk " reflex , a doctor tap the patellar tendon below the kneecap with a rubber hammer .
the stimulation of the nerve there lead to the reflex of extend the leg at the knee .
this be similar to the reaction of someone who touch a hot stove and instinctually pull - pron - or - pron - hand away .
even human , with - pron - great capacity to learn , still exhibit a variety of innate behavior .
kinesis and taxis
another activity or movement of innate behavior be kinesis , or the undirected movement in response to a stimulus .
orthokinesis be the increased or decrease speed of movement of an organism in response to a stimulus .
woodlice , for example , increase - pron - speed of movement when expose to high or low temperature .
this movement , although random , increase the probability that the insect spend less time in the unfavorable environment .
another example be klinokinesis , an increase in turn behavior .
- pron - be exhibit by bacteria such as e . coli which , in association with orthokinesis , help the organism randomly find a more hospitable environment .
a similar , but more direct version of kinesis be taxi  the direct movement towards or away from a stimulus .
this movement can be in response to light ( phototaxi ) , chemical signal ( chemotaxis ) , or gravity ( geotaxi ) and can be direct toward ( positive ) or away ( negative ) from the source of the stimulus .
an example of a positive chemotaxi be exhibit by the unicellular protozoan tetrahymena thermophila .
this organism swim use - pron - cilium , at time move in a straight line , and at other time make turn .
the attract chemotactic agent alter the frequency of turn as the organism move directly toward the source , follow the increase concentration gradient .
fix action patterns
a fix action pattern be a series of movement elicit by a stimulus such that even when the stimulus be remove , the pattern go on to completion .
an example of such a behavior occur in the three - spin stickleback , a small freshwater fish ( figure four  five  .  three  four ) .
male of this specie develop a red belly during breed season and show instinctual aggressiveness to other male during this time .
in laboratory experiment , researcher expose such fish to object that in no way resemble a fish in - pron - shape , but which be paint red on - pron - low half .
the male stickleback respond aggressively to the object just as if - pron - be real male stickleback .
male three - spin stickleback fish exhibit a fix action pattern .
during mat season , the male , which develop a bright red belly , react strongly to red - bottom object that in no way resemble fish .
migration migration be the long - range seasonal movement of animal .
- pron - be an evolve , adapt response to variation in resource availability , and - pron - be a common phenomenon find in all major group of animal .
bird fly south for the winter to get to warm climate with sufficient food , and salmon migrate to - pron - spawning ground .
the popular two  zero  zero  five documentary march of the penguins follow the six  two  - mile migration of emperor penguin through antarctica to bring food back to - pron - breeding site and to - pron - young .
wildebeests ( figure four  five  .  three  five ) migrate over one  eight  zero  zero mile each year in search of new grassland .
wildebeest migrate in a clockwise fashion over one  eight  zero  zero mile each year in search of rain - ripen grass .
although migration be think of as innate behavior , only some migrating specie always migrate ( obligate migration ) .
animal that exhibit facultative migration can choose to migrate or not .
additionally , in some animal , only a portion of the population migrate , whereas the rest do not migrate ( incomplete migration ) .
for example , owl that live in the tundra may migrate in year when - pron - food source , small rodent , be relatively scarce , but not migrate during the year when rodent be plentiful .
forage foraging be the act of search for and exploit food resource .
feed behavior that maximize energy gain and minimize energy expenditure be call optimal foraging behavior , and these be favor by natural section .
the paint stork , for example , use - pron - long beak to search the bottom of a freshwater marshland for crab and other food .
the paint stork use - pron - long beak to forage .
innate behaviors  live in groups not all animal live in group , but even those that live relatively solitary life , with the exception of those that can reproduce asexually , must mate .
mating usually involve one animal signal another so as to communicate the desire to mate .
there be several type of energy - intensive behavior or display associate with mating , call mat ritual .
other behavior find in population that live in group be describe in term of which animal benefit from the behavior .
in selfish behavior , only the animal in question benefit  in altruistic behavior , one animal 's action benefit another animal  cooperative behavior describe when both animal benefit .
all of these behavior involve some sort of communication between population member .
communication within a species animal communicate with each other use stimulus know as signal .
an example of this be see in the three - spin stickleback , where the visual signal of a red region in the low half of a fish signal male to become aggressive and signal female to mate .
other signal be chemical ( pheromone ) , aural ( sound ) , visual ( courtship and aggressive display ) , or tactile ( touch ) .
these type of communication may be instinctual or learn or a combination of both .
these be not the same as the communication - pron - associate with language , which have be observe only in human and perhaps in some specie of primate and cetacean .
a pheromone be a secreted chemical signal use to obtain a response from another individual of the same specie .
the purpose of pheromone be to elicit a specific behavior from the receive individual .
pheromone be especially common among social insect , but - pron - be use by many specie to attract the opposite sex , to sound alarm , to mark food trail , and to elicit other , more complex behavior .
even human be think to respond to certain pheromone call axillary steroid .
these chemical influence human perception of other people , and in one study be responsible for a group of woman synchronize - pron - menstrual cycle .
the role of pheromone in human - to - human communication be still somewhat controversial and continue to be research .
song be an example of an aural signal , one that need to be hear by the recipient .
perhaps the best know of these be song of bird , which identify the specie and be use to attract mate .
other well - know song be those of whale , which be of such low frequency that - pron - can travel long distance underwater .
dolphin communicate with each other use a wide variety of vocalization .
male cricket make chirping sound use a specialized organ to attract a mate , repel other male , and to announce a successful mating .
courtship display be a series of ritualized visual behavior ( signal ) design to attract and convince a member of the opposite sex to mate .
these display be ubiquitous in the animal kingdom .
often these display involve a series of step , include an initial display by one member follow by a response from the other .
if at any point , the display be perform incorrectly or a proper response be not give , the mating ritual be abandon and the mating attempt will be unsuccessful .
the mating display of the common stork be show in figure four  five  .  three  seven .
aggressive display be also common in the animal kingdom .
an example be when a dog bar - pron - tooth when - pron - want another dog to back down .
presumably , these display communicate not only the willingness of the animal to fight , but also - pron - fighting ability .
although these display do signal aggression on the part of the sender , - pron - be think that these display be actually a mechanism to reduce the amount of actual fighting that occur between member of the same specie  - pron - allow individual to assess the fight ability of - pron - opponent and thus decide whether - pron - be " worth the fight .
"
the testing of certain hypothesis use game theory have lead to the conclusion that some of these display may overstate an animal 's actual fighting ability and be use to " bluff
"
the opponent .
this type of interaction , even if " dishonest , " would be favor by natural selection if - pron - be successful more time than not .
this stork 's courtship display be design to attract potential mate .
distraction display be see in bird and some fish .
- pron - be design to attract a predator away from the nest that contain - pron - young .
this be an example of an altruistic behavior  - pron - benefit the young more than the individual perform the display , which be put - pron - at risk by do so .
many animal , especially primate , communicate with other member in the group through touch .
activity such as grooming , touch the shoulder or root of the tail , embrace , lip contact , and greeting ceremony have all be observe in the indian langur , an old world monkey .
similar behavior be find in other primate , especially in the great ape .
altruistic behaviors behaviors that lower the fitness of the individual but increase the fitness of another individual be term altruistic .
example of such behavior be see widely across the animal kingdom .
social insect such as worker bee have no ability to reproduce , yet - pron - maintain the queen so - pron - can populate the hive with - pron - offspring .
meerkat keep a sentry stand guard to warn the rest of the colony about intruder , even though the sentry be put - pron - at risk .
wolf and wild dog bring meat to pack member not present during a hunt .
lemur take care of infant unrelated to - pron - .
although on the surface , these behavior appear to be altruistic , - pron - may not be so simple .
there have be much discussion over why altruistic behavior exist .
do these behavior lead to overall evolutionary advantage for - pron - specie ?
do - pron - help the altruistic individual pass on - pron - own gene ?
and what about such activity between unrelated individual ?
one explanation for altruistic - type behavior be find in the genetic of natural selection .
in the one  nine  seven  six book , the selfish gene , scientist richard dawkins attempt to explain many seemingly altruistic behavior from the viewpoint of the gene - pron - .
although a gene obviously can not be selfish in the human sense , - pron - may appear that way if the sacrifice of an individual benefit relate individual that share gene that be identical by descent ( present in relative because of common lineage ) .
mammal parent make this sacrifice to take care of - pron - offspring .
emperor penguin migrate mile in harsh condition to bring food back for - pron - young .
selfish gene theory have be controversial over the year and be still discuss among scientist in related field .
even less - relate individual , those with less genetic identity than that share by parent and offspring , benefit from seemingly altruistic behavior .
the activity of social insect such as bee , wasp , ant , and termite be good example .
sterile worker in these society take care of the queen because - pron - be closely related to - pron - , and as the queen have offspring , - pron - be pass on gene from the worker indirectly .
thus , - pron - be of fitness benefit for the worker to maintain the queen without have any direct chance of pass on - pron - gene due to - pron - sterility .
the lowering of individual fitness to enhance the reproductive fitness of a relative and thus one 's inclusive fitness evolf through kin selection .
this phenomenon can explain many superficially altruistic behavior see in animal .
however , these behavior may not be truly define as altruism in these case because the actor be actually increase - pron - own fitness either directly ( through - pron - own offspring ) or indirectly ( through the inclusive fitness - pron - gain through relative that share gene with - pron - ) .
unrelated individual may also act altruistically to each other , and this seem to defy the " selfish gene " explanation .
an example of this observe in many monkey specie where a monkey will present - pron - back to an unrelated monkey to have that individual pick the parasite from - pron - fur .
after a certain amount of time , the role be reverse and the first monkey now groom the second monkey .
thus , there be reciprocity in the behavior .
both benefit from the interaction and - pron - fitness be raise more than if neither cooperate nor if one cooperate and the other do not cooperate .
this behavior be still not necessarily altruism , as the " give " behavior of the actor be base on the expectation that - pron - will be the " receiver " of the behavior in the future , term reciprocal altruism .
reciprocal altruism require that individual repeatedly encounter each other , often the result of live in the same social group , and that cheater ( those that never " give back " ) be punish .
evolutionary game theory , a modification of classical game theory in mathematic , have show that many of these so - call " altruistic behavior " be not altruistic at all .
the definition of " pure " altruism , base on human behavior , be an action that benefit another without any direct benefit to oneself .
most of the behavior previously describe do not seem to satisfy this definition , and game theorist be good at find " selfish " component in - pron - .
other have argue that the term " selfish " and " altruistic " should be drop completely when discuss animal behavior , as - pron - describe human behavior and may not be directly applicable to instinctual animal activity .
what be clear , though , be that heritable behavior that improve the chance of pass on one 's gene or a portion of one 's gene be favor by natural selection and will be retain in future generation as long as those behavior convey a fitness advantage .
these instinctual behavior may then be apply , in special circumstance , to other specie , as long as - pron - do not lower the animal 's fitness .
find sex partner not all animal reproduce sexually , but many that do have the same challenge  - pron - need to find a suitable mate and often have to compete with other individual to obtain one .
significant energy be spend in the process of locate , attract , and mat with the sex partner .
two type of selection occur during this process and can lead to trait that be important to reproduction call secondary sexual characteristic  intersexual selection , the choosing of a mate where individual of one sex choose mate of the other sex , and intrasexual selection , the competition for mate between species member of the same sex .
intersexual selection be often complex because choose a mate may be base on a variety of visual , aural , tactile , and chemical cue .
an example of intersexual selection be when female peacock choose to mate with the male with the bright plumage .
this type of selection often lead to trait in the choose sex that do not enhance survival , but be those trait most attractive to the opposite sex ( often at the expense of survival ) .
intrasexual selection involve mating display and aggressive mating ritual such as ram butt head — the winner of these battle be the one that be able to mate .
many of these ritual use up considerable energy but result in the selection of the healthy , strong , and / or most dominant individual for mat .
three general mating system , all involve innate as oppose to learn behavior , be see in animal population  monogamous , polygynous , and polyandrous .
in monogamous system , one male and one female be pair for at least one breeding season .
in some animal , such as the gray wolf , these association can last much longer , even a lifetime .
several explanation have be propose for this type of mating system .
the " mate - guard hypothesis " state that male stay with the female to prevent other male from mat with - pron - .
this behavior be advantageous in such situation where mate be scarce and difficult to find .
another explanation be the " male - assistance hypothesis , " where male that remain with a female to help guard and rear - pron - young will have more and healthy offspring .
monogamy be observe in many bird population where , in addition to the parental care from the female , the male be also a major provider of parental care for the chick .
a third explanation for the evolutionary advantage of monogamy be the " female - enforcement hypothesis .
"
in this scenario , the female ensure that the male do not have other offspring that may compete with - pron - own , so - pron - actively interfere with the male 's signaling to attract other mate .
polygynous mating refer to one male mating with multiple female .
in these situation , the female must be responsible for most of the parental care as the single male be not capable of provide care to that many offspring .
in resourc - base polygyny , male compete for territory with the good resource , and then mate with female that enter the territory , draw to - pron - resource richness .
the female benefit by mat with a dominant , genetically fit male  however , - pron - be at the cost of have no male help in care for the offspring .
an example be see in the yellow - rump honeyguide , a bird whose male defend beehiv because the female feed on - pron - wax .
as the female approach , the male defend the nest will mate with - pron - .
harem mating structure be a type of polygynous system where certain male dominate mat while control a territory with resource .
elephant seal , where the alpha male dominate the mating within the group be an example .
a third type of polygyny be a lek system .
here there be a communal courting area where several male perform elaborate display for female , and the female choose - pron - mate from this group .
this behavior be observe in several bird specie include the sage grouse and the prairie chicken .
in polyandrous mating system , one female mate with many male .
these type of system be much rare than monogamous and polygynous mating system .
in pipefish and seahorse , male receive the egg from the female , fertilize - pron - , protect - pron - within a pouch , and give birth to the offspring ( figure four  five  .  three  eight ) .
therefore , the female be able to provide egg to several male without the burden of carry the fertilize egg .
polyandrous mating , in which one female mate with many male , occur in the ( a ) seahorse and the ( b ) pipefish .
simple learned behaviors
the majority of the behavior previously discuss be innate or at least have an innate component ( variation on the innate behavior may be learn ) .
- pron - be inherit and the behavior do not change in response to signal from the environment .
conversely , learn behavior , even though - pron - may have instinctive component , allow an organism to adapt to change in the environment and be modify by previous experience .
simple learn behavior include habituation and imprint — both be important to the maturation process of young animal .
habituation habituation be a simple form of learn in which an animal stop respond to a stimulus after a period of repeat exposure .
this be a form of non - associative learning , as the stimulus be not associate with any punishment or reward .
prairie dog typically sound an alarm call when threaten by a predator , but - pron - become habituated to the sound of human footstep when no harm be associate with this sound , therefore , - pron - no longer respond to - pron - with an alarm call .
in this example , habituation be specific to the sound of human footstep , as the animal still respond to the sound of potential predator .
imprint imprinting be a type of learning that occur at a particular age or a life stage that be rapid and independent of the specie involve .
hatchl duck recognize the first adult - pron - see , - pron - mother , and make a bond with - pron - .
a familiar sight be duckling walk or swimming after - pron - mother ( figure four  five  .  three  nine ) .
this be another type of non - associative learning , but be very important in the maturation process of these animal as - pron - encourage - pron - to stay near - pron - mother so - pron - will be protect , greatly increase - pron - chance of survival .
however , if newborn duck see a human before - pron - see - pron - mother , - pron - will imprint on the human and follow - pron - in just the same manner as - pron - would follow - pron - real mother .
the attachment of duckling to - pron - mother be an example of imprint .
condition behavior conditioned behavior be type of associative learning , where a stimulus become associate with a consequence .
during operant conditioning , the behavioral response be modify by - pron - consequence , with regard to - pron - form , strength , or frequency .
classical conditioning
in classical conditioning , a response call the condition response be associate with a stimulus that - pron - have previously not be associate with , the condition stimulus .
the response to the original , unconditioned stimulus be call the unconditioned response .
the most cite example of classical conditioning be ivan pavlov 's experiment with dog ( figure four  five  .  four  zero ) .
in pavlov 's experiment , the unconditioned response be the salivation of dog in response to the unconditioned stimulus of see or smell - pron - food .
the conditioning stimulus that researcher associate with the unconditioned response be the ringing of a bell .
during conditioning , every time the animal be give food , the bell be ring .
this be repeat during several trial .
after some time , the dog learn to associate the ringing of the bell with food and to respond by salivate .
after the conditioning period be finish , the dog would respond by salivate when the bell be ring , even when the unconditioned stimulus , the food , be absent .
thus , the ringing of the bell become the conditioned stimulus and the salivation become the condition response .
although - pron - be think by some scientist that the unconditioned and condition response be identical , even pavlov discover that the saliva in the condition dog have characteristic difference when compare to the unconditioned dog .
in the classic pavlovian response , the dog become condition to associate the ringing of the bell with food .
- pron - have be think by some scientist that this type of conditioning require multiple exposure to the paired stimulus and response , but - pron - be now know that this be not necessary in all case , and that some conditioning can be learn in a single pair experiment .
classical conditioning be a major tenet of behaviorism , a branch of psychological philosophy that propose that all action , thought , and emotion of live thing be behavior that can be treat by behavior modification and change in the environment .
operant conditioning
in operant conditioning , the conditioned behavior be gradually modify by - pron - consequence as the animal respond to the stimulus .
a major proponent of such conditioning be psychologist b . f . skinner , the inventor of the skinner box .
skinner put rat in - pron - box that contain a lever that would dispense food to the rat when depressed .
while initially the rat would push the lever a few time by accident , - pron - eventually associate push the lever with get the food .
this type of learning be an example of operant conditioning .
operant learning be the basis of most animal training .
the conditioned behavior be continually modify by positive or negative reinforcement , often a reward such as food or some type of punishment , respectively .
in this way , the animal be condition to associate a type of behavior with the punishment or reward , and , over time , can be induce to perform behavior that - pron - would not have do in the wild , such as the " trick " dolphin perform at marine amusement park show .
the training of dolphin by reward - pron - with food be an example of positive reinforcement operant conditioning .
cognitive learning classical and operant conditioning be inefficient way for human and other intelligent animal to learn .
some primate , include human , be able to learn by imitate the behavior of other and by take instruction .
the development of complex language by human have make cognitive learning , the manipulation of information use the mind , the most prominent method of human learning .
in fact , that be how student be learn right now by read this book .
as student read , - pron - can make mental image of object or organism and imagine change to - pron - , or behavior by - pron - , and anticipate the consequence .
in addition to visual processing , cognitive learning be also enhance by remember past experience , touch physical object , hearing sound , taste food , and a variety of other sensory - base input .
cognitive learning be so powerful that - pron - can be use to understand conditioning in detail .
in the reverse scenario , conditioning can not help someone learn about cognition .
classic work on cognitive learning be do by wolfgang köhler with chimpanzee .
- pron - demonstrate that these animal be capable of abstract think by show that - pron - could learn how to solve a puzzle .
when a banana be hang in - pron - cage too high for - pron - to reach , and several box be place randomly on the floor , some of the chimp be able to stack the box one on top of the other , climb on top of - pron - , and get the banana .
this imply that - pron - could visualize the result of stack the box even before - pron - have perform the action .
this type of learning be much more powerful and versatile than conditioning .
cognitive learning be not limit to primate , although - pron - be the most efficient in use - pron - .
maze run experiment do with rat by h . c . blodgett in the one  nine  two  zero s be the first to show cognitive skill in a simple mammal .
the motivation for the animal to work - pron - way through the maze be a piece of food at - pron - end .
in these study , the animal in group i be run in one trial per day and have food available to - pron - each day on completion of the run ( figure four  five  .  four  two ) .
group ii rat be not feed in the maze for the first six day and then subsequent run be do with food for several day after .
group iii rat have food available on the third day and every day thereafter .
the result be that the control rat , group i , learn quickly , and figure out how to run the maze in seven day .
group iii do not learn much during the three day without food , but rapidly catch up to the control group when give the food reward .
group ii learn very slowly for the six day with no reward to motivate - pron - , and - pron - do not begin to catch up to the control group until the day food be give , and then - pron - take two day longer to learn the maze .
group i ( the green solid line ) find food at the end of each trial , group ii ( the blue dash line ) do not find food for the first six day , and group iii ( the red dotted line ) do not find food during run on the first three day .
notice that rat give food earlier learn faster and eventually catch up to the control group .
the orange dot on the group ii and iii line show the day when food reward be add to the maze .
- pron - may not be immediately obvious that this type of learning be different than conditioning .
although one may be tempt to believe that the rat simply learn how to find - pron - way through a condition series of right and leave turn , e . c . tolman prove a decade later that the rat be make a representation of the maze in - pron - mind , which - pron - call a " cognitive map .
"
this be an early demonstration of the power of cognitive learning and how these ability be not just limit to human .
sociobiology sociobiology be an interdisciplinary science originally popularize by social insect researcher e . o . wilson in the one  nine  seven  zero .
wilson define the science as " the extension of population biology and evolutionary theory to social organization .
"
[ one  zero ]
the main thrust of sociobiology be that animal and human behavior , include aggressiveness and other social interaction , can be explain almost solely in term of genetic and natural selection .
this science be controversial  note scientist such as the late stephen jay gould criticize the approach for ignore the environmental effect on behavior .
this be another example of the " nature versus nurture
" debate of the role of genetic versus the role of environment in determine an organism 's characteristic .
sociobiology also link gene with behavior and have be associate with " biological determinism , " the belief that all behavior be hardwir into - pron - gene .
no one dispute that certain behavior can be inherit and that natural selection play a role retain - pron - .
- pron - be the application of such principle to human behavior that spark this controversy , which remain active today .
in the southwestern united states , rainy weather cause an increase in production of pinyon nut , cause the deer mouse population to explode .
deer mouse may carry a virus call sin nombre ( a hantavirus ) that cause respiratory disease in human and have a high fatality rate .
in one  nine  nine  two – one  nine  nine  three , wet el niño weather cause a sin nombre epidemic .
navajo healer , who be aware of the link between this disease and weather , predict the outbreak .
in one  nine  nine  three , an interesting example of ecosystem dynamic occur when a rare lung disease strike inhabitant of the southwestern united states .
this disease have an alarming rate of fatality , kill more than half of early patient , many of whom be native americans .
these formerly healthy young adult die from complete respiratory failure .
the disease be unknown , and the centers for disease control ( cdc ) , the united states government agency responsible for manage potential epidemic , be bring in to investigate .
the scientist could have learn about the disease have - pron - know to talk with the navajo healer who live in the area and who have observe the connection between rainfall and mice population , thereby predict the one  nine  nine  three outbreak .
the because of the disease , determine within a few week by the cdc investigator , be the hantavirus know as sin nombre , the virus with " no name .
"
with insight from traditional navajo medicine , scientist be able to characterize the disease rapidly and institute effective health measure to prevent - pron - spread .
this example illustrate the importance of understand the complexity of ecosystem and how - pron - respond to change in the environment .
ecology of ecosystems
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  describe the basic type of ecosystem on earth explain the method that ecologist use to study ecosystem structure and dynamic identify the different method of ecosystem model differentiate between food chain and food webs and recognize the importance of each life in an ecosystem be often about competition for limited resource , a characteristic of the theory of natural selection .
competition in community ( all live thing within specific habitat ) be observe both within specie and among different specie .
the resource for which organism compete include organic material from live or previously live organism , sunlight , and mineral nutrient , which provide the energy for living process and the matter to make up organisms' physical structure .
other critical factor influence community dynamic be the component of - pron - physical and geographic environment  a habitat 's latitude , amount of rainfall , topography ( elevation ) , and available specie .
these be all important environmental variable that determine which organism can exist within a particular area .
an ecosystem be a community of live organism and - pron - interaction with - pron - abiotic ( non - living ) environment .
ecosystem can be small , such as the tide pool find near the rocky shore of many ocean , or large , such as the amazon rainforest in brazil .
a ( a ) tidal pool ecosystem in matinicus island in maine be a small ecosystem , while the ( b ) amazon rainforest in brazil be a large ecosystem .
there be three broad category of ecosystem base on - pron - general environment  freshwater , ocean water , and terrestrial .
within these broad category be individual ecosystem type base on the organism present and the type of environmental habitat .
ocean ecosystem be the most common , comprise seven  five percent of the earth ' s surface and consist of three basic type  shallow ocean , deep ocean water , and deep ocean surface ( the low depth area of the deep ocean ) .
the shallow ocean ecosystem include extremely biodiverse coral reef ecosystem , and the deep ocean surface be know for - pron - large number of plankton and krill ( small crustacean ) that support - pron - .
these two environment be especially important to aerobic respirator worldwide as the phytoplankton perform four  zero percent of all photosynthesis on earth .
although not as diverse as the other two , deep ocean ecosystem contain a wide variety of marine organism .
such ecosystem exist even at the bottom of the ocean where light be unable to penetrate through the water .
freshwater ecosystem be the rare , occur on only one  .  eight percent of the earth ' s surface .
lake , river , stream , and spring comprise these system  - pron - be quite diverse , and - pron - support a variety of fish , amphibian , reptile , insect , phytoplankton , fungus , and bacteria .
terrestrial ecosystem , also know for - pron - diversity , be group into large category call biome , such as tropical rain forest , savanna , desert , coniferous forest , deciduous forest , and tundra .
group these ecosystem into just a few biome category obscure the great diversity of the individual ecosystem within - pron - .
for example , there be great variation in desert vegetation  the saguaro cacti and other plant life in the sonoran desert , in the united states , be relatively abundant compare to the desolate rocky desert of boa vista , an island off the coast of western africa .
desert ecosystem , like all ecosystem , can vary greatly .
the desert in ( a ) saguaro national park , arizona , have abundant plant life , while the rocky desert of ( b ) boa vista island , cape verde , africa , be devoid of plant life .
ecosystem be complex with many interact part .
- pron - be routinely expose to various disturbance , or change in the environment that effect - pron - composition  yearly variation in rainfall and temperature and the slow process of plant growth , which may take several year .
many of these disturbance be a result of natural process .
for example , when lightning cause a forest fire and destroy part of a forest ecosystem , the ground be eventually populate by grass , then by bush and shrub , and later by mature tree , restore the forest to - pron - former state .
the impact of environmental disturbance cause by human activity be as important as the change work by natural process .
human agricultural practice , air pollution , acid rain , global deforestation , overfish , eutrophication , oil spill , and illegal dumping on land and into the ocean be all issue of concern to conservationist .
equilibrium be the steady state of an ecosystem where all organism be in balance with - pron - environment and with each other .
in ecology , two parameter be use to measure change in ecosystem  resistance and resilience .
the ability of an ecosystem to remain at equilibrium in spite of disturbance be call resistance .
the speed at which an ecosystem recover equilibrium after be disturb , call - pron - resilience .
ecosystem resistance and resilience be especially important when consider human impact .
the nature of an ecosystem may change to such a degree that - pron - can lose - pron - resilience entirely .
this process can lead to the complete destruction or irreversible altering of the ecosystem .
food chains and food webs
the term " food chain " be sometimes use metaphorically to describe human social situation .
in this sense , food chain be think of as a competition for survival , such as " who eat whom ?
"
someone eat and someone be eat .
therefore , - pron - be not surprising that in - pron - competitive " dog - eat - dog " society , individual who be consider successful be see as be at the top of the food chain , consume all other for - pron - benefit , whereas the less successful be see as be at the bottom .
the scientific understanding of a food chain be more precise than in - pron - everyday usage .
in ecology , a food chain be a linear sequence of organism through which nutrient and energy pass  primary producer , primary consumer , and high - level consumer be use to describe ecosystem structure and dynamic .
there be a single path through the chain .
each organism in a food chain occupy what be call a trophic level .
depend on - pron - role as producer or consumer , specie or group of specie can be assign to various trophic level .
in many ecosystem , the bottom of the food chain consist of photosynthetic organism ( plant and / or phytoplankton ) , which be call primary producer .
the organism that consume the primary producer be herbivore  the primary consumer .
secondary consumer be usually carnivore that eat the primary consumer .
tertiary consumer be carnivore that eat other carnivore .
high - level consumer feed on the next low tropic level , and so on , up to the organism at the top of the food chain  the apex consumer .
in the lake ontario food chain show in figure four  six  .  four , the chinook salmon be the apex consumer at the top of this food chain .
these be the trophic level of a food chain in lake ontario at the united states - canada border .
energy and nutrient flow from photosynthetic green algae at the bottom to the top of the food chain  the chinook salmon .
one major factor that limit the length of food chain be energy .
energy be lose as heat between each trophic level due to the second law of thermodynamic .
thus , after a limited number of trophic energy transfer , the amount of energy remain in the food chain may not be great enough to support viable population at yet a high trophic level .
the loss of energy between trophic level be illustrate by the pioneering study of howard t . odum in the silver springs , florida , ecosystem in the one  nine  four  zero s ( figure four  six  .  five ) .
the primary producer generate two  zero  ,  eight  one  nine kcal / m two  / yr ( kilocalorie per square meter per year ) , the primary consumer generate three  three  six  eight kcal / m two  / yr , the secondary consumer generate three  eight  three kcal / m two  / yr , and the tertiary consumer only generate two  one kcal / m two  / yr .
thus , there be little energy remain for another level of consumer in this ecosystem .
the relative energy in trophic level in a silver springs , florida , ecosystem be show .
each trophic level have less energy available and support few organism at the next level .
there be a one problem when use food chain to accurately describe most ecosystem .
even when all organism be group into appropriate trophic level , some of these organism can feed on specie from more than one trophic level  likewise , some of these organism can be eat by specie from multiple trophic level .
in other word , the linear model of ecosystem , the food chain , be not completely descriptive of ecosystem structure .
a holistic model — which account for all the interaction between different specie and - pron - complex interconnect relationship with each other and with the environment
— be a more accurate and descriptive model for ecosystem .
a food web be a graphic representation of a holistic , non - linear web of primary producer , primary consumer , and high - level consumer use to describe ecosystem structure and dynamic .
this food web show the interaction between organism across trophic level in the lake ontario ecosystem .
primary producer be outline in green , primary consumer in orange , secondary consumer in blue , and tertiary ( apex ) consumer in purple .
arrow point from an organism that be consume to the organism that consume - pron - .
notice how some line point to more than one trophic level .
for example , the opossum shrimp eat both primary producer and primary consumer .
a comparison of the two type of structural ecosystem model show strength in both .
food chain be more flexible for analytical modeling , be easy to follow , and be easy to experiment with , whereas food web model more accurately represent ecosystem structure and dynamic , and datum can be directly use as input for simulation modeling .
two general type of food webs be often show interact within a single ecosystem .
a grazing food web ( such as the lake ontario food web in figure four  six  .  six ) have plant or other photosynthetic organism at - pron - base , follow by herbivore and various carnivore .
a detrital food web consist of a base of organism that feed on decay organic matter ( dead organism ) , call decomposer or detritivore .
these organism be usually bacteria or fungus that recycle organic material back into the biotic part of the ecosystem as - pron - - pron - be consume by other organism .
as all ecosystem require a method to recycle material from dead organism , most grazing food webs have an associate detrital food web .
for example , in a meadow ecosystem , plant may support a grazing food web of different organism , primary and other level of consumer , while at the same time support a detrital food web of bacteria , fungus , and detrivorous invertebrate feed off dead plant and animal .
research into ecosystem dynamics  ecosystem experimentation and modeling
the study of the change in ecosystem structure cause by change in the environment ( disturbance ) or by internal force be call ecosystem dynamic .
ecosystem be characterize use a variety of research methodology .
some ecologist study ecosystem use control experimental system , while some study entire ecosystem in - pron - natural state , and other use both approach .
a holistic ecosystem model attempt to quantify the composition , interaction , and dynamic of entire ecosystem  - pron - be the most representative of the ecosystem in - pron - natural state .
a food web be an example of a holistic ecosystem model .
however , this type of study be limit by time and expense , as well as the fact that - pron - be neither feasible nor ethical to do experiment on large natural ecosystem .
to quantify all different specie in an ecosystem and the dynamic in - pron - habitat be difficult , especially when study large habitat such as the amazon rainforest , which cover one  .  four billion acre ( five  .  five million km two ) of the earth 's surface .
for these reason , scientist study ecosystem under more control condition .
experimental system usually involve either partition a part of a natural ecosystem that can be use for experiment , term a mesocosm , or by re - create an ecosystem entirely in an indoor or outdoor laboratory environment , which be refer to as a microcosm .
a major limitation to these approach be that remove individual organism from - pron - natural ecosystem or alter a natural ecosystem through partitioning may change the dynamic of the ecosystem .
these change be often due to difference in specie number and diversity and also to environment alteration cause by partition ( mesocosm ) or re - create ( microcosm ) the natural habitat .
thus , these type of experiment be not totally predictive of change that would occur in the ecosystem from which - pron - be gather .
as both of these approach have - pron - limitation , some ecologist suggest that result from these experimental system should be use only in conjunction with holistic ecosystem study to obtain the most representative datum about ecosystem structure , function , and dynamic .
scientist use the datum generate by these experimental study to develop ecosystem model that demonstrate the structure and dynamic of ecosystem .
three basic type of ecosystem modeling be routinely use in research and ecosystem management  a conceptual model , an analytical model , and a simulation model .
a conceptual model be an ecosystem model that consist of flow chart to show interaction of different compartment of the living and nonliv component of the ecosystem .
a conceptual model describe ecosystem structure and dynamic and show how environmental disturbance affect the ecosystem  however , - pron - ability to predict the effect of these disturbance be limit .
analytical and simulation model , in contrast , be mathematical method of describe ecosystem that be indeed capable of predict the effect of potential environmental change without direct experimentation , although with some limitation as to accuracy .
an analytical model be an ecosystem model that be create use simple mathematical formula to predict the effect of environmental disturbance on ecosystem structure and dynamic .
a simulation model be an ecosystem model that be create use complex computer algorithm to holistically model ecosystem and to predict the effect of environmental disturbance on ecosystem structure and dynamic .
ideally , these model be accurate enough to determine which component of the ecosystem be particularly sensitive to disturbance , and - pron - can serve as a guide to ecosystem manager ( such as conservation ecologist or fishery biologist ) in the practical maintenance of ecosystem health .
conceptual models conceptual model be useful for describe ecosystem structure and dynamic and for demonstrate the relationship between different organism in a community and - pron - environment .
conceptual model be usually depict graphically as flow chart .
the organism and - pron - resource be group into specific compartment with arrow show the relationship and transfer of energy or nutrient between - pron - .
thus , these diagram be sometimes call compartment model .
to model the cycling of mineral nutrient , organic and inorganic nutrient be subdivide into those that be bioavailable ( ready to be incorporate into biological macromolecule ) and those that be not .
for example , in a terrestrial ecosystem near a deposit of coal , carbon will be available to the plant of this ecosystem as carbon dioxide gas in a short - term period , not from the carbon - rich coal - pron - .
however , over a long period , microorganism capable of digest coal will incorporate - pron - carbon or release - pron - as natural gas ( methane , ch four ) , change this unavailable organic source into an available one .
this conversion be greatly accelerate by the combustion of fossil fuel by human , which release large amount of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere .
this be think to be a major factor in the rise of the atmospheric carbon dioxide level in the industrial age .
the carbon dioxide release from burn fossil fuel be produce faster than photosynthetic organism can use - pron - .
this process be intensify by the reduction of photosynthetic tree because of worldwide deforestation .
most scientist agree that high atmospheric carbon dioxide be a major because of global climate change .
conceptual model be also use to show the flow of energy through particular ecosystem .
figure four  six  .  eight be base on howard t . odum 's classical study of the silver springs , florida , holistic ecosystem in the mid - twentieth century .
[ two ] this study show the energy content and transfer between various ecosystem compartment .
analytical and simulation models
the major limitation of conceptual model be - pron - inability to predict the consequence of change in ecosystem specie and / or environment .
ecosystem be dynamic entity and subject to a variety of abiotic and biotic disturbance cause by natural force and / or human activity .
ecosystem alter from - pron - initial equilibrium state can often recover from such disturbance and return to a state of equilibrium .
as most ecosystem be subject to periodic disturbance and be often in a state of change , - pron - be usually either move toward or away from - pron - equilibrium state .
there be many of these equilibrium state among the various component of an ecosystem , which affect the ecosystem overall .
furthermore , as human have the ability to greatly and rapidly alter the specie content and habitat of an ecosystem , the need for predictive model that enable understanding of how ecosystem respond to these change become more crucial .
analytical model often use simple , linear component of ecosystem , such as food chain , and be know to be complex mathematically  therefore , - pron - require a significant amount of mathematical knowledge and expertise .
although analytical model have great potential , - pron - simplification of complex ecosystem be think to limit - pron - accuracy .
simulation model that use computer program be better able to deal with the complexity of ecosystem structure .
a recent development in simulation modeling use supercomputer to create and run individual - base simulation , which account for the behavior of individual organism and - pron - effect on the ecosystem as a whole .
these simulation be consider to be the most accurate and predictive of the complex response of ecosystem to disturbance .
energy flow through ecosystems
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  describe how organism acquire energy in a food web and in associate food chain explain how the efficiency of energy transfer between trophic level affect ecosystem structure and dynamic discuss trophic level and how ecological pyramid be use to model - pron - all live thing require energy in one form or another .
energy be require by most complex metabolic pathway ( often in the form of adenosine triphosphate , atp ) , especially those responsible for build large molecule from small compound , and life - pron - be an energy - drive process .
live organism would not be able to assemble macromolecule ( protein , lipid , nucleic acid , and complex carbohydrate ) from - pron - monomeric subunit without a constant energy input .
- pron - be important to understand how organism acquire energy and how that energy be pass from one organism to another through food webs and - pron - constituent food chain .
food webs illustrate how energy flow directionally through ecosystem , include how efficiently organism acquire - pron - , use - pron - , and how much remain for use by other organism of the food web .
how organisms acquire energy in a food web energy be acquire by live thing in three way  photosynthesis , chemosynthesis , and the consumption and digestion of other living or previously live organism by heterotroph .
photosynthetic and chemosynthetic organism be both group into a category know as autotroph  organism capable of synthesize - pron - own food ( more specifically , capable of use inorganic carbon as a carbon source ) .
photosynthetic autotroph ( photoautotroph ) use sunlight as an energy source , whereas chemosynthetic autotroph ( chemoautotroph ) use inorganic molecule as an energy source .
autotroph be critical for all ecosystem .
without these organism , energy would not be available to other live organism and life - pron - would not be possible .
photoautotroph , such as plant , algae , and photosynthetic bacteria , serve as the energy source for a majority of the world 's ecosystem .
these ecosystem be often describe by graze food webs .
photoautotroph harness the solar energy of the sun by convert - pron - to chemical energy in the form of atp ( and nadp ) .
the energy store in atp be use to synthesize complex organic molecule , such as glucose .
chemoautotroph be primarily bacteria that be find in rare ecosystem where sunlight be not available , such as in those associate with dark cave or hydrothermal vent at the bottom of the ocean ( figure four  six  .  nine ) .
many chemoautotroph in hydrothermal vent use hydrogen sulfide ( h two s ) , which be release from the vent as a source of chemical energy .
this allow chemoautotroph to synthesize complex organic molecule , such as glucose , for - pron - own energy and in turn supply energy to the rest of the ecosystem .
swimming shrimp , a few squat lobster , and hundred of vent mussel be see at a hydrothermal vent at the bottom of the ocean .
as no sunlight penetrate to this depth , the ecosystem be support by chemoautotrophic bacteria and organic material that sink from the ocean 's surface .
this picture be take in two  zero  zero  six at the submerged nw eifuku volcano off the coast of japan by the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) .
the summit of this highly active volcano lie one  five  three  five m below the surface .
productivity within trophic levels productivity within an ecosystem can be define as the percentage of energy enter the ecosystem incorporate into biomass in a particular trophic level .
biomass be the total mass , in a unit area at the time of measurement , of living or previously live organism within a trophic level .
ecosystem have characteristic amount of biomass at each trophic level .
for example , in the english channel ecosystem the primary producer account for a biomass of four g / m two ( gram per meter squared ) , while the primary consumer exhibit a biomass of two  one g / m two .
the productivity of the primary producer be especially important in any ecosystem because these organism bring energy to other live organism by photoautotrophy or chemoautotrophy .
the rate at which photosynthetic primary producer incorporate energy from the sun be call gross primary productivity .
an example of gross primary productivity be show in the compartment diagram of energy flow within the silver springs aquatic ecosystem as show ( figure four  six  .  eight ) .
in this ecosystem , the total energy accumulate by the primary producer ( gross primary productivity ) be show to be two  zero  ,  eight  one  zero kcal / m two  / yr .
because all organism need to use some of this energy for - pron - own function ( like respiration and result metabolic heat loss ) scientist often refer to the net primary productivity of an ecosystem .
net primary productivity be the energy that remain in the primary producer after account for the organisms' respiration and heat loss .
the net productivity be then available to the primary consumer at the next trophic level .
in - pron - silver spring example , one  three  ,  one  eight  seven of the two  zero  ,  eight  one  zero kcal / m two  / yr be use for respiration or be lose as heat , leave seven  ,  six  three  two kcal / m two  / yr of energy for use by the primary consumer .
ecological efficiency 
the transfer of energy between trophic levels
as illustrate in figure four  six  .  eight , large amount of energy be lose from the ecosystem from one trophic level to the next level as energy flow from the primary producer through the various trophic level of consumer and decomposer .
the main reason for this loss be the second law of thermodynamic , which state that whenever energy be convert from one form to another , there be a tendency toward disorder ( entropy ) in the system .
in biologic system , this mean a great deal of energy be lose as metabolic heat when the organism from one trophic level consume the next level .
in the silver springs ecosystem example ( figure four  six  .  eight ) , - pron - see that the primary consumer produce one  one  zero  three kcal / m two  / yr from the seven  six  one  eight kcal / m two  / yr of energy available to - pron - from the primary producer .
the measurement of energy transfer efficiency between two successive trophic level be term the trophic level transfer efficiency ( tlte ) and be define by the formula  in silver springs , the tlte between the first two trophic level be approximately one  four  .  eight percent .
the low efficiency of energy transfer between trophic level be usually the major factor that limit the length of food chain observe in a food web .
the fact be , after four to six energy transfer , there be not enough energy leave to support another trophic level .
in the lake ontario example show in figure four  six  .  six , only three energy transfer occur between the primary producer , ( green algae ) , and the apex consumer ( chinook salmon ) .
ecologist have many different method of measure energy transfer within ecosystem .
some transfer be easy or more difficult to measure depend on the complexity of the ecosystem and how much access scientist have to observe the ecosystem .
in other word , some ecosystem be more difficult to study than other , and sometimes the quantification of energy transfer have to be estimate .
another main parameter that be important in characterize energy flow within an ecosystem be the net production efficiency .
net production efficiency ( npe ) allow ecologist to quantify how efficiently organism of a particular trophic level incorporate the energy - pron - receive into biomass  - pron - be calculate use the follow formula  net consumer productivity be the energy content available to the organism of the next trophic level .
assimilation be the biomass ( energy content generate per unit area ) of the present trophic level after account for the energy lose due to incomplete ingestion of food , energy use for respiration , and energy lose as waste .
incomplete ingestion refer to the fact that some consumer eat only a part of - pron - food .
for example , when a lion kill an antelope , - pron - will eat everything except the hide and bone .
the lion be miss the energy - rich bone marrow inside the bone , so the lion do not make use of all the calorie - pron - prey could provide .
thus , npe measure how efficiently each trophic level us and incorporate the energy from - pron - food into biomass to fuel the next trophic level .
in general , cold - blooded animal ( ectotherm ) , such as invertebrate , fish , amphibian , and reptile , use less of the energy - pron - obtain for respiration and heat than warm - blooded animal ( endotherm ) , such as bird and mammal .
the extra heat generate in endotherm , although an advantage in term of the activity of these organism in cold environment , be a major disadvantage in term of npe .
therefore , many endotherm have to eat more often than ectotherm to get the energy - pron - need for survival .
in general , npe for ectotherm be an order of magnitude ( one  zero x ) high than for endotherm .
for example , the npe for a caterpillar eat leaf have be measure at one  eight percent , whereas the npe for a squirrel eat acorn may be as low as one  .  six percent .
the inefficiency of energy use by warm - blooded animal have broad implication for the world ' s food supply .
- pron - be widely accept that the meat industry use large amount of crop to feed livestock , and because the npe be low , much of the energy from animal feed be lose .
for example , - pron - cost about one ¢ to produce one  zero  zero  zero dietary calorie ( kcal ) of corn or soybean , but approximately $ zero  .  one  nine to produce a similar number of calorie grow cattle for beef consumption .
the same energy content of milk from cattle be also costly , at approximately $ zero  .  one  six per one  zero  zero  zero kcal .
much of this difference be due to the low npe of cattle .
thus , there have be a grow movement worldwide to promote the consumption of non - meat and non - dairy food so that less energy be waste feed animal for the meat industry .
modeling ecosystems energy flow 
ecological pyramid
the structure of ecosystem can be visualize with ecological pyramid , which be first describe by the pioneering study of charles elton in the one  nine  two  zero s .
ecological pyramid show the relative amount of various parameter ( such as number of organism , energy , and biomass ) across trophic level .
pyramid of number can be either upright or invert , depend on the ecosystem .
as show in figure four  six  .  one  zero , typical grassland during the summer have a base of many plant and the number of organism decrease at each trophic level .
however , during the summer in a temperate forest , the base of the pyramid consist of few tree compare with the number of primary consumer , mostly insect .
because tree be large , - pron - have great photosynthetic capability , and dominate other plant in this ecosystem to obtain sunlight .
even in small number , primary producer in forest be still capable of support other trophic level .
another way to visualize ecosystem structure be with pyramid of biomass .
this pyramid measure the amount of energy convert into live tissue at the different trophic level .
use the silver springs ecosystem example , this data exhibit an upright biomass pyramid ( figure four  six  .  one  zero ) , whereas the pyramid from the english channel example be invert .
the plant ( primary producer ) of the silver springs ecosystem make up a large percentage of the biomass find there .
however , the phytoplankton in the english channel example make up less biomass than the primary consumer , the zooplankton .
as with inverted pyramid of number , this invert pyramid be not due to a lack of productivity from the primary producer , but result from the high turnover rate of the phytoplankton .
the phytoplankton be consume rapidly by the primary consumer , thus , minimize - pron - biomass at any particular point in time .
however , phytoplankton reproduce quickly , thus - pron - be able to support the rest of the ecosystem .
pyramid ecosystem modeling can also be use to show energy flow through the trophic level .
notice that these number be the same as those use in the energy flow compartment diagram in figure four  six  .  eight .
pyramid of energy be always upright , and an ecosystem without sufficient primary productivity can not be support .
all type of ecological pyramid be useful for characterize ecosystem structure .
however , in the study of energy flow through the ecosystem , pyramid of energy be the most consistent and representative model of ecosystem structure .
consequence of food webs  biological magnification one of the most important environmental consequence of ecosystem dynamic be biomagnification .
biomagnification be the increase concentration of persistent , toxic substance in organism at each trophic level , from the primary producer to the apex consumer .
many substance have be show to bioaccumulate , include classical study with the pesticide dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane ( ddt ) , which be publish in the one  nine  six  zero s bestseller , silent spring , by rachel carson .
ddt be a commonly use pesticide before - pron - danger become know .
in some aquatic ecosystem , organism from each trophic level consume many organism of the low level , which cause ddt to increase in bird ( apex consumer ) that eat fish .
thus , the bird accumulate sufficient amount of ddt to because fragility in - pron - eggshell .
this effect increase egg breakage during nesting and be show to have adverse effect on these bird population .
the use of ddt be ban in the united states in the one  nine  seven  zero .
other substance that biomagnify be polychlorinat biphenyls ( pcb ) , which be use in coolant liquid in the united states until - pron - use be ban in one  nine  seven  nine , and heavy metal , such as mercury , lead , and cadmium .
these substance be best study in aquatic ecosystem , where fish specie at different trophic level accumulate toxic substance bring through the ecosystem by the primary producer .
as illustrate in a study perform by the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) in the saginaw bay of lake huron ( figure four  six  .  one  one ) , pcb concentration increase from the ecosystem 's primary producer ( phytoplankton ) through the different trophic level of fish specie .
the apex consumer ( walleye ) have more than four time the amount of pcb compare to phytoplankton .
also , base on result from other study , bird that eat these fish may have pcb level at least one order of magnitude high than those find in the lake fish .
this chart show the pcb concentration find at the various trophic level in the saginaw bay ecosystem of lake huron .
number on the x - axis reflect enrichment with heavy isotope of nitrogen ( one  five n ) , which be a marker for increase trophic level .
notice that the fish in the high trophic level accumulate more pcb than those in low trophic level .
other concern have be raise by the accumulation of heavy metal , such as mercury and cadmium , in certain type of seafood .
the united states environmental protection agency ( epa ) recommend that pregnant woman and young child should not consume any swordfish , shark , king mackerel , or tilefish because of - pron - high mercury content .
these individual be advise to eat fish low in mercury  salmon , tilapia , shrimp , pollock , and catfish .
biomagnification be a good example of how ecosystem dynamic can affect - pron - everyday life , even influence the food - pron - eat .
biogeochemical cycles
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  discuss the biogeochemical cycle of water , carbon , nitrogen , phosphoru , and sulfur explain how human activity have impact these cycle and the potential consequence for earth energy flow directionally through ecosystem , enter as sunlight ( or inorganic molecule for chemoautotroph ) and leave as heat during the many transfer between trophic level .
however , the matter that make up live organism be conserve and recycle .
the six most common element associate with organic molecule — carbon , nitrogen , hydrogen , oxygen , phosphoru , and sulfur
— take a variety of chemical form and may exist for long period in the atmosphere , on land , in water , or beneath the earth 's surface .
geologic process , such as weathering , erosion , water drainage , and the subduction of the continental plate , all play a role in this recycling of material .
because geology and chemistry have major role in the study of this process , the recycling of inorganic matter between live organism and - pron - environment be call a biogeochemical cycle .
water contain hydrogen and oxygen , which be essential to all living process .
the hydrosphere be the area of the earth where water movement and storage occur  as liquid water on the surface and beneath the surface or frozen ( river , lake , ocean , groundwater , polar ice cap , and glacier ) , and as water vapor in the atmosphere .
carbon be find in all organic macromolecule and be an important constituent of fossil fuel .
nitrogen be a major component of - pron - nucleic acid and protein and be critical to human agriculture .
phosphorus , a major component of nucleic acid ( along with nitrogen ) , be one of the main ingredient in artificial fertilizer use in agriculture and - pron - associate environmental impact on - pron - surface water .
sulfur , critical to the three –d folding of protein ( as in disulfide bind ) , be release into the atmosphere by the burning of fossil fuel , such as coal .
the cycling of these element be interconnect .
for example , the movement of water be critical for the leaching of nitrogen and phosphate into river , lake , and ocean .
furthermore , the ocean - pron - be a major reservoir for carbon .
thus , mineral nutrient be cycle , either rapidly or slowly , through the entire biosphere , from one live organism to another , and between the biotic and abiotic world .
the water ( hydrologic ) cycle water be the basis of all living process .
the human body be more than one  /  two water and human cell be more than seven  zero percent water .
thus , most land animal need a supply of fresh water to survive .
however , when examine the store of water on earth , nine  seven  .  five percent of - pron - be non - potable salt water ( figure four  six  .  one  two ) .
of the remaining water , nine  nine percent be lock underground as water or as ice .
thus , less than one percent of fresh water be easily accessible from lake and river .
many live thing , such as plant , animal , and fungus , be dependent on the small amount of fresh surface water supply , a lack of which can have massive effect on ecosystem dynamic .
human , of course , have develop technology to increase water availability , such as dig well to harvest groundwater , store rainwater , and use desalination to obtain drinkable water from the ocean .
although this pursuit of drinkable water have be ongoing throughout human history , the supply of fresh water be still a major issue in modern time .
only two  .  five percent of water on earth be fresh water , and less than one percent of fresh water be easily accessible to live thing .
water cycling be extremely important to ecosystem dynamic .
water have a major influence on climate and , thus , on the environment of ecosystem , some locate on distant part of the earth .
most of the water on earth be store for long period in the ocean , underground , and as ice .
figure four  six  .  one  three illustrate the average time that an individual water molecule may spend in the earth 's major water reservoir .
residence time be a measure of the average time an individual water molecule stay in a particular reservoir .
a large amount of the earth 's water be lock in place in these reservoir as ice , beneath the ground , and in the ocean , and , thus , be unavailable for short - term cycling ( only surface water can evaporate ) .
this graph show the average residence time for water molecule in the earth 's water reservoir .
there be various process that occur during the cycling of water , show in figure four  six  .  one  four .
these process include the follow   evaporation / sublimation  condensation / precipitation  subsurface water flow  surface runoff / snowmelt  streamflow
the water cycle be drive by the sun 's energy as - pron - warm the ocean and other surface water .
this lead to the evaporation ( water to water vapor ) of liquid surface water and the sublimation ( ice to water vapor ) of frozen water , which deposit large amount of water vapor into the atmosphere .
over time , this water vapor condense into cloud as liquid or frozen droplet and be eventually follow by precipitation ( rain or snow ) , which return water to the earth 's surface .
rain eventually permeate into the ground , where - pron - may evaporate again if - pron - be near the surface , flow beneath the surface , or be store for long period .
more easily observe be surface runoff  the flow of fresh water either from rain or melt ice .
runoff can then make - pron - way through stream and lake to the ocean or flow directly to the ocean - pron - .
rain and surface runoff be major way in which mineral , include carbon , nitrogen , phosphoru , and sulfur , be cycle from land to water .
the environmental effect of runoff will be discuss later as these cycle be describe .
water from the land and ocean enter the atmosphere by evaporation or sublimation , where - pron - condense into cloud and fall as rain or snow .
precipitated water may enter freshwater body or infiltrate the soil .
the cycle be complete when surface or groundwater reenter the ocean .
the carbon cycle carbon be the second most abundant element in live organism .
carbon be present in all organic molecule , and - pron - role in the structure of macromolecule be of primary importance to live organism .
carbon compound contain especially high energy , particularly those derive from fossilize organism , mainly plant , which human use as fuel .
since the one  eight  zero  zero , the number of country use massive amount of fossil fuel have increase .
since the beginning of the industrial revolution , global demand for the earth 's limited fossil fuel supply have rise  therefore , the amount of carbon dioxide in - pron - atmosphere have increase .
this increase in carbon dioxide have be associate with climate change and other disturbance of the earth 's ecosystem and be a major environmental concern worldwide .
thus , the " carbon footprint " be base on how much carbon dioxide be produce and how much fossil fuel country consume .
the carbon cycle be most easily study as two interconnect sub - cycle  one deal with rapid carbon exchange among live organism and the other deal with the long - term cycling of carbon through geologic process .
the entire carbon cycle be show in figure four  six  .  one  five .
the carbon cycle carbon be the second most abundant element in live organism .
carbon be present in all organic molecule , and - pron - role in the structure of macromolecule be of primary importance to live organism .
carbon compound contain especially high energy , particularly those derive from fossilize organism , mainly plant , which human use as fuel .
since the one  eight  zero  zero , the number of country use massive amount of fossil fuel have increase .
since the beginning of the industrial revolution , global demand for the earth 's limited fossil fuel supply have rise  therefore , the amount of carbon dioxide in - pron - atmosphere have increase .
this increase in carbon dioxide have be associate with climate change and other disturbance of the earth 's ecosystem and be a major environmental concern worldwide .
thus , the " carbon footprint " be base on how much carbon dioxide be produce and how much fossil fuel country consume .
the carbon cycle be most easily study as two interconnect sub - cycle  one deal with rapid carbon exchange among live organism and the other deal with the long - term cycling of carbon through geologic process .
the entire carbon cycle be show in figure four  six  .  one  five .
the biological carbon cycle live organism be connect in many way , even between ecosystem .
a good example of this connection be the exchange of carbon between autotroph and heterotroph within and between ecosystem by way of atmospheric carbon dioxide .
carbon dioxide be the basic building block that most autotroph use to build multi - carbon , high energy compound , such as glucose .
the energy harness from the sun be use by these organism to form the covalent bond that link carbon atom together .
these chemical bond thereby store this energy for later use in the process of respiration .
most terrestrial autotroph obtain - pron - carbon dioxide directly from the atmosphere , while marine autotroph acquire - pron - in the dissolve form ( carbonic acid , h two co three − ) .
however carbon dioxide be acquire , a by - product of the process be oxygen .
the photosynthetic organism be responsible for deposit approximately two  one percent oxygen content of the atmosphere that - pron - observe today .
heterotroph and autotroph be partner in biological carbon exchange ( especially the primary consumer , largely herbivore ) .
heterotrophs acquire the high - energy carbon compound from the autotroph by consume - pron - , and break - pron - down by respiration to obtain cellular energy , such as atp .
the most efficient type of respiration , aerobic respiration , require oxygen obtain from the atmosphere or dissolve in water .
thus , there be a constant exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the autotroph ( which need the carbon ) and the heterotrophs ( which need the oxygen ) .
gas exchange through the atmosphere and water be one way that the carbon cycle connect all live organism on earth .
the biogeochemical carbon cycle
the movement of carbon through the land , water , and air be complex , and in many case , - pron - occur much more slowly geologically than as see between live organism .
carbon be store for long period in what be know as carbon reservoir , which include the atmosphere , body of liquid water ( mostly ocean ) , ocean sediment , soil , land sediment ( include fossil fuel ) , and the earth 's interior .
as state , the atmosphere be a major reservoir of carbon in the form of carbon dioxide and be essential to the process of photosynthesis .
the level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere be greatly influence by the reservoir of carbon in the ocean .
the exchange of carbon between the atmosphere and water reservoir influence how much carbon be find in each location , and each one affect the other reciprocally .
carbon dioxide ( co two ) from the atmosphere dissolve in water and combine with water molecule to form carbonic acid , and then - pron - ionize to carbonate and bicarbonate ion .
carbon dioxide react with water to form bicarbonate and carbonate ion .
the equilibrium coefficient be such that more than nine  zero percent of the carbon in the ocean be find as bicarbonate ion .
some of these ion combine with seawater calcium to form calcium carbonate ( caco three ) , a major component of marine organism shell .
these organism eventually form sediment on the ocean floor .
over geologic time , the calcium carbonate form limestone , which comprise the large carbon reservoir on earth .
on land , carbon be store in soil as a result of the decomposition of live organism ( by decomposer ) or from weather of terrestrial rock and mineral .
this carbon can be leach into the water reservoir by surface runoff .
deep underground , on land and at sea , be fossil fuel  the anaerobically decompose remain of plant that take million of year to form .
fossil fuel be consider a non - renewable resource because - pron - use far exceed - pron - rate of formation .
a non - renewable resource , such as fossil fuel , be either regenerate very slowly or not at all .
another way for carbon to enter the atmosphere be from land ( include land beneath the surface of the ocean ) by the eruption of volcano and other geothermal system .
carbon sediment from the ocean floor be take deep within the earth by the process of subduction  the movement of one tectonic plate beneath another .
carbon be release as carbon dioxide when a volcano erupt or from volcanic hydrothermal vent .
carbon dioxide be also add to the atmosphere by the animal husbandry practice of human .
the large number of land animal raise to feed the earth 's grow population result in increased carbon dioxide level in the atmosphere due to farming practice and the respiration and methane production .
this be another example of how human activity indirectly affect biogeochemical cycle in a significant way .
although much of the debate about the future effect of increase atmospheric carbon on climate change focus on fossil fuel , scientist take natural process , such as volcano and respiration , into account as - pron - model and predict the future impact of this increase .
the nitrogen cycle get nitrogen into the live world be difficult .
plant and phytoplankton be not equip to incorporate nitrogen from the atmosphere ( which exist as tightly bond , triple covalent n two ) even though this molecule comprise approximately seven  eight percent of the atmosphere .
nitrogen enter the live world via free - living and symbiotic bacteria , which incorporate nitrogen into - pron - macromolecule through nitrogen fixation ( conversion of n two ) .
cyanobacteria live in most aquatic ecosystem where sunlight be present  - pron - play a key role in nitrogen fixation .
cyanobacteria be able to use inorganic source of nitrogen to " fix " nitrogen .
rhizobium bacteria live symbiotically in the root nodule of legume ( such as pea , bean , and peanut ) and provide - pron - with the organic nitrogen - pron - need .
free - live bacteria , such as azotobacter , be also important nitrogen fixer .
organic nitrogen be especially important to the study of ecosystem dynamic since many ecosystem process , such as primary production and decomposition , be limit by the available supply of nitrogen .
as show in figure four  six  .  one  seven , the nitrogen that enter live system by nitrogen fixation be successively convert from organic nitrogen back into nitrogen gas by bacteria .
this process occur in three step in terrestrial system  ammonification , nitrification , and denitrification .
first , the ammonification process convert nitrogenous waste from live animal or from the remain of dead animal into ammonium ( nh four + ) by certain bacteria and fungus .
second , the ammonium be convert to nitrite ( no two − ) by nitrify bacteria , such as nitrosomonas , through nitrification .
subsequently , nitrite be convert to nitrate ( no three − ) by similar organism .
third , the process of denitrification occur , whereby bacteria , such as pseudomonas and clostridium , convert the nitrate into nitrogen gas , allow - pron - to re - enter the atmosphere .
human activity can release nitrogen into the environment by two primary mean  the combustion of fossil fuel , which release different nitrogen oxide , and by the use of artificial fertilizer in agriculture , which be then wash into lake , stream , and river by surface runoff .
atmospheric nitrogen be associate with several effect on earth 's ecosystem include the production of acid rain ( as nitric acid , hno three ) and greenhouse gas ( as nitrous oxide , n two o ) potentially cause climate change .
a major effect from fertilizer runoff be saltwater and freshwater eutrophication , a process whereby nutrient runoff cause the excess growth of microorganism , deplete dissolve oxygen level and kill ecosystem fauna .
a similar process occur in the marine nitrogen cycle , where the ammonification , nitrification , and denitrification process be perform by marine bacteria .
some of this nitrogen fall to the ocean floor as sediment , which can then be move to land in geologic time by uplift of the earth 's surface and thereby incorporate into terrestrial rock .
although the movement of nitrogen from rock directly into living system have be traditionally see as insignificant compare with nitrogen fix from the atmosphere , a recent study show that this process may indeed be significant and should be include in any study of the global nitrogen cycle .
the phosphorus cycle phosphorus be an essential nutrient for living process  - pron - be a major component of nucleic acid and phospholipid , and , as calcium phosphate , make up the supportive component of - pron - bone .
phosphorus be often the limit nutrient ( necessary for growth ) in aquatic ecosystem ( figure four  six  .  one  eight ) .
phosphorus occur in nature as the phosphate ion ( po four three − ) .
in addition to phosphate runoff as a result of human activity , natural surface runoff occur when - pron - be leach from phosphate - contain rock by weather , thus send phosphate into river , lake , and the ocean .
this rock have - pron - origin in the ocean .
phosphate - contain ocean sediment form primarily from the body of ocean organism and from - pron - excretion .
however , in remote region , volcanic ash , aerosol , and mineral dust may also be significant phosphate source .
this sediment then be move to land over geologic time by the uplifting of area of the earth 's surface .
phosphorus be also reciprocally exchange between phosphate dissolve in the ocean and marine ecosystem .
the movement of phosphate from the ocean to the land and through the soil be extremely slow , with the average phosphate ion have an oceanic residence time between two  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero and one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year .
in nature , phosphorus exist as the phosphate ion ( po four three − ) .
weather of rock and volcanic activity release phosphate into the soil , water , and air , where - pron - become available to terrestrial food webs .
phosphate enter the ocean via surface runoff , groundwater flow , and river flow .
phosphate dissolve in ocean water cycle into marine food webs .
some phosphate from the marine food webs fall to the ocean floor , where - pron - form sediment .
excess phosphoru and nitrogen that enter these ecosystem from fertilizer runoff and from sewage cause excessive growth of microorganism and deplete the dissolve oxygen , which lead to the death of many ecosystem fauna , such as shellfish and finfish .
this process be responsible for dead zone in lake and at the mouth of many major river .
dead zone occur when phosphoru and nitrogen from fertilizer because excessive growth of microorganism , which deplete oxygen and kill fauna .
worldwide , large dead zone be find in coastal area of high population density .
a dead zone be an area within a freshwater or marine ecosystem where large area be deplete of - pron - normal flora and fauna  these zone can be cause by eutrophication , oil spill , dump of toxic chemical , and other human activity .
the number of dead zone have be increase for several year , and more than four  zero  zero of these zone be present as of two  zero  zero  eight .
one of the bad dead zone be off the coast of the united states in the gulf of mexico , where fertilizer runoff from the mississippi river basin have create a dead zone of over eight  four  six  three square mile .
phosphate and nitrate runoff from fertilizer also negatively affect several lake and bay ecosystem include the chesapeake bay in the eastern united states .
the sulfur cycle sulfur be an essential element for the macromolecule of live thing .
as a part of the amino acid cysteine , - pron - be involve in the formation of disulfide bond within protein , which help to determine - pron - three  - d fold pattern , and hence - pron - function .
as show in figure four  six  .  two  zero , sulfur cycle between the ocean , land , and atmosphere .
atmospheric sulfur be find in the form of sulfur dioxide ( so two ) and enter the atmosphere in three way  from the decomposition of organic molecule , from volcanic activity and geothermal vent , and from the burning of fossil fuel by human .
sulfur dioxide from the atmosphere become available to terrestrial and marine ecosystem when - pron - be dissolve in precipitation as weak sulfuric acid or when - pron - fall directly to the earth as fallout .
weather of rock also make sulfate available to terrestrial ecosystem .
decomposition of live organism return sulfate to the ocean , soil and atmosphere .
on land , sulfur be deposit in four major way  precipitation , direct fallout from the atmosphere , rock weathering , and geothermal vent ( figure four  six  .  two  one ) .
atmospheric sulfur be find in the form of sulfur dioxide ( so two ) , and as rain fall through the atmosphere , sulfur be dissolve in the form of weak sulfuric acid ( h two so four ) .
sulfur can also fall directly from the atmosphere in a process call fallout .
also , the weathering of sulfur - contain rock release sulfur into the soil .
these rock originate from ocean sediment that be move to land by the geologic uplifting of ocean sediment .
terrestrial ecosystem can then make use of these soil sulfate ( so four − ) , and upon the death and decomposition of these organism , release the sulfur back into the atmosphere as hydrogen sulfide ( h two s ) gas .
at this sulfur vent in lassen volcanic national park in northeastern california , the yellowish sulfur deposit be visible near the mouth of the vent .
sulfur enter the ocean via runoff from land , from atmospheric fallout , and from underwater geothermal vent .
some ecosystem ( figure four  six  .  nine ) rely on chemoautotroph use sulfur as a biological energy source .
this sulfur then support marine ecosystem in the form of sulfate .
human activity have play a major role in alter the balance of the global sulfur cycle .
the burning of large quantity of fossil fuel , especially from coal , release large amount of hydrogen sulfide gas into the atmosphere .
as rain fall through this gas , - pron - create the phenomenon know as acid rain .
acid rain be corrosive rain cause by rainwater fall to the ground through sulfur dioxide gas , turn - pron - into weak sulfuric acid , which cause damage to aquatic ecosystem .
acid rain damage the natural environment by lower the ph of lake , which kill many of the resident fauna  - pron - also affect the man - make environment through the chemical degradation of building .
for example , many marble monument , such as the lincoln memorial in washington , dc , have suffer significant damage from acid rain over the year .
these example show the wide - range effect of human activity on - pron - environment and the challenge that remain for - pron - future .
lake victoria in africa , show in this satellite image , be the site of one of the most extraordinary evolutionary finding on the planet , as well as a casualty of devastate biodiversity loss .
in the one  nine  eight  zero , biologist work in lake victoria in africa discover one of the most extraordinary product of evolution on the planet .
locate in the great rift valley , lake victoria be a large lake about six  eight  ,  nine  zero  zero km two in area ( large than lake huron , the second large of north america 's great lakes ) .
biologist be study specie of a family of fish call cichlid .
- pron - find that as - pron - sample for fish in different location of the lake , - pron - never stop find new specie , and - pron - identify nearly five  zero  zero evolve type of cichlid .
but while study these variation , - pron - quickly discover that the invasive nile perch be destroy the lake 's cichlid population , bring hundred of cichlid specie to extinction with devastating rapidity .
the biodiversity crisis
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  define biodiversity describe biodiversity as the equilibrium of naturally fluctuate rate of extinction and speciation identify historical cause of high extinction rate in earth
's
history
traditionally , ecologist have measure biodiversity , a general term for the variety present in the biosphere , by take into account both the number of specie and - pron - commonness .
biodiversity can be estimate at a number of level of organization of live thing .
these estimation index , which come from information theory , be most useful as a first step in quantify biodiversity between and within ecosystem  - pron - be less useful when the main concern among conservation biologist be simply the loss of biodiversity .
however , biologist recognize that measure of biodiversity , in term of specie diversity , may help focus effort to preserve the biologically or technologically important element of biodiversity .
the lake victoria cichlid provide an example through which - pron - can begin to understand biodiversity .
the biologist study cichlid in the one  nine  eight  zero s discover hundred of cichlid specie represent a variety of specialization to particular habitat type and specific feeding strategy  eat plankton float in the water , scraping and then eat algae from rock , eat insect larvae from the bottom , and eat the egg of other specie of cichlid .
the cichlid of lake victoria be the product of an adaptive radiation .
an adaptive radiation be a rapid ( less than three million year in the case of the lake victoria cichlid ) branch through speciation of a phylogenetic tree into many closely related specie  typically , the specie " radiate " into different habitat and niche .
the galápagos finch be an example of a modest adaptive radiation with one  five specie .
the cichlid of lake victoria be an example of a spectacular adaptive radiation that include about five  zero  zero specie .
at the time biologist be make this discovery , some specie begin to quickly disappear .
a culprit in these decline be a species of large fish that be introduce to lake victoria by fishery to feed the people live around the lake .
the nile perch be introduce in one  nine  six  three , but lie low until the one  nine  eight  zero s when - pron - population begin to surge .
the nile perch population grow by consume cichlid , drive specie after specie to the point of extinction ( the disappearance of a species ) .
in fact , there be several factor that play a role in the extinction of perhaps two  zero  zero cichlid specie in lake victoria  the nile perch , decline lake water quality due to agriculture and land clearing on the shore of lake victoria , and increase fishing pressure .
scientist have not even catalogue all of the specie present
— so many be lose that be never name .
the diversity be now a shadow of what - pron - once be .
the cichlid of lake victoria be a thumbnail sketch of contemporary rapid specie loss that occur all over earth and be cause by human activity .
extinction be a natural process of macroevolution that occur at the rate of about one out of one million specie become extinct per year .
the fossil record reveal that there have be five period of mass extinction in history with much high rate of species loss , and the rate of species loss today be comparable to those period of mass extinction .
however , there be a major difference between the previous mass extinction and the current extinction - pron - be experience  human activity .
specifically , three human activity have a major impact  destruction of habitat , introduction of exotic specie , and over - harvesting .
prediction of species loss within the next century , a tiny amount of time on geological timescale , range from one  zero percent to five  zero percent .
extinction on this scale have only happen five other time in the history of the planet , and - pron - have be cause by cataclysmic event that change the course of the history of life in each instance .
earth be now in one of those time .
type of biodiversity scientists generally accept that the term biodiversity describe the number and kind of specie in a location or on the planet .
specie can be difficult to define , but most biologist still feel comfortable with the concept and be able to identify and count eukaryotic specie in most context .
biologist have also identify alternate measure of biodiversity , some of which be important for plan how to preserve biodiversity .
genetic diversity be one of those alternate concept .
genetic diversity or variation be the raw material for adaptation in a species .
a species' future potential for adaptation depend on the genetic diversity hold in the genome of the individual in population that make up the specie .
the same be true for high taxonomic category .
a genus with very different type of specie will have more genetic diversity than a genus with specie that look alike and have similar ecology .
if there be a choice between one of these genera of specie be preserve , the one with the great potential for subsequent evolution be the most genetically diverse one .
- pron - would be ideal not to have to make such choice , but increasingly this may be the norm .
many gene code for protein , which in turn carry out the metabolic process that keep organism alive and reproducing .
genetic diversity can be measure as chemical diversity in that different specie produce a variety of chemical in - pron - cell , both the protein as well as the product and byproduct of metabolism .
this chemical diversity have potential benefit for human as a source of pharmaceutical , so - pron - provide one way to measure diversity that be important to human health and welfare .
human have generate diversity in domestic animal , plant , and fungus .
this diversity be also suffer loss because of migration , market force , and increase globalism in agriculture , especially in heavily populated region such as china , india , and japan .
the human population directly depend on this diversity as a stable food source , and - pron - decline be trouble biologist and agricultural scientist .
- pron - be also useful to define ecosystem diversity , mean the number of different ecosystem on the planet or in a give geographic area ( figure four  seven  .  two ) .
whole ecosystem can disappear even if some of the specie may survive by adapt to other ecosystem .
the loss of an ecosystem mean the loss of interaction between specie , the loss of unique feature of coadaptation , and the loss of biological productivity that an ecosystem be able to create .
an example of a largely extinct ecosystem in north america be the prairie ecosystem .
prairie once span central north america from the boreal forest in northern canada down into mexico .
- pron - be now all but go , replace by crop field , pasture land , and suburban sprawl .
many of the specie survive , but the hugely productive ecosystem that be responsible for create the most productive agricultural soil be now go .
as a consequence , soil be disappear or must be maintain at great expense .
the variety of ecosystem on earth — from ( a ) coral reef to ( b ) prairie — enable a great diversity of specie to exist .
current species diversity
despite considerable effort , knowledge of the specie that inhabit the planet be limit .
a recent estimate suggest that the eukaryote specie for which science have name , about one  .  five million specie , account for less than two  zero percent of the total number of eukaryote specie present on the planet ( eight  .  seven million specie , by one estimate ) .
estimate of number of prokaryotic specie be largely guess , but biologist agree that science have only begin to catalog - pron - diversity .
even with what be know , there be no central repository of name or sample of the describe specie  therefore , there be no way to be sure that the one  .  five million description be an accurate number .
- pron - be a good guess base on the opinion of expert in different taxonomic group .
give that earth be lose specie at an accelerate pace , science be very much in the place - pron - be with the lake victoria cichlid  know little about what be be lose .
table four  seven  .  one present recent estimate of biodiversity in different group .
there be various initiative to catalog describe specie in accessible way , and the internet be facilitate that effort .
nevertheless , - pron - have be point out that at the current rate of species description , which accord to the state of observed species report be one  seven  ,  zero  zero  zero to two  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero new specie per year , - pron - will take close to five  zero  zero year to finish describe life on this planet .
[ four ] over time , the task become both increasingly impossible and increasingly easy as extinction remove specie from the planet .
name and counting specie may seem an unimportant pursuit give the other need of humanity , but - pron - be not simply an accounting .
describing specie be a complex process by which biologist determine an organism 's unique characteristic and whether or not that organism belong to any other describe specie .
- pron - allow biologist to find and recognize the specie after the initial discovery , and allow - pron - to follow up on question about - pron - biology .
in addition , the unique characteristic of each specie make - pron - potentially valuable to human or other specie on which human depend .
understand these characteristic be the value of find and naming specie .
pattern of biodiversity biodiversity be not evenly distribute on earth .
lake victoria contain almost five  zero  zero specie of cichlid alone , ignore the other fish family present in the lake .
all of these specie be find only in lake victoria  therefore , the five  zero  zero specie of cichlid be endemic .
endemic specie be find in only one location .
endemic with highly restrict distribution be particularly vulnerable to extinction .
high taxonomic level , such as genera and family , can also be endemic .
lake huron contain about seven  nine specie of fish , all of which be find in many other lake in north america .
what account for the difference in fish diversity in these two lake ?
lake victoria be a tropical lake , while lake huron be a temperate lake .
lake huron in - pron - present form be only about seven  ,  zero  zero  zero year old , while lake victoria in - pron - present form be about one  five  ,  zero  zero  zero year old .
biogeographer have suggest these two factor , latitude and age , be two of several hypothesis to explain biodiversity pattern on the planet .
one of the old observed pattern in ecology be that specie biodiversity in almost every taxonomic group increase as latitude decline .
in other word , biodiversity increase closer to the equator .
this map illustrate the number of amphibian specie across the globe and show the trend toward high biodiversity at low latitude .
a similar pattern be observe for most taxonomic group .
- pron - be not yet clear why biodiversity increase closer to the equator , but hypothesis include the great age of the ecosystem in the tropic versus temperate region that be largely devoid of life or drastically impoverished during the last glaciation .
the idea be that great age provide more time for speciation .
another possible explanation be the increase energy the tropic receive from the sun versus the decrease energy that temperate and polar region receive .
- pron - be not entirely clear how great energy input could translate into more specie .
the complexity of tropical ecosystem may promote speciation by increase the heterogeneity , or number of ecological niche , in the tropic relative to high latitude .
the great heterogeneity provide more opportunity for coevolution , specialization , and perhaps great selection pressure lead to population differentiation .
however , this hypothesis suffer from some circularity — ecosystem with more specie encourage speciation , but how do - pron - get more specie to begin with ?
the tropic have be perceive as be more stable than temperate region , which have a pronounce climate and day - length seasonality .
the tropic have - pron - own form of seasonality , such as rainfall , but - pron - be generally assume to be more stable environment and this stability may promote speciation .
regardless of the mechanism , - pron - be certainly true that all level of biodiversity be great in the tropic .
additionally , the rate of endemism be high , and there be more biodiversity hotspot .
however , this richness of diversity also mean that knowledge of species be low , and there be a high potential for biodiversity loss .
conservation of biodiversity
in one  nine  eight  eight , british environmentalist norman myers develop a conservation concept to identify area rich in specie and at significant risk for specie loss  biodiversity hotspot .
biodiversity hotspot be geographical area that contain high number of endemic specie .
the purpose of the concept be to identify important location on the planet for conservation effort , a kind of conservation triage .
by protect hotspot , government be able to protect a large number of specie .
the original criterion for a hotspot include the presence of one  five  zero  zero or more endemic plant specie and seven  zero percent of the area disturb by human activity .
there be now three  four biodiversity hotspot ( figure four  seven  .  four ) contain large number of endemic specie , which include half of earth 's endemic plant .
conservation international have identify three  four biodiversity hotspot , which cover only two  .  three percent of the earth 's surface but have endemic to - pron - four  two percent of the terrestrial vertebrate specie and five  zero percent of the world 's plant .
biodiversity change through geological time
the number of specie on the planet , or in any geographical area , be the result of an equilibrium of two evolutionary process that be ongoing  speciation and extinction .
both be natural " birth " and " death " process of macroevolution .
when speciation rate begin to outstrip extinction rate , the number of specie will increase  likewise , the number of specie will decrease when extinction rate begin to overtake speciation rate .
throughout earth 's history , these two process have fluctuate — sometimes lead to dramatic change in the number of specie on earth as reflect in the fossil record .
percent extinction occurrence as reflect in the fossil record have fluctuate throughout earth 's history .
sudden and dramatic loss of biodiversity , call mass extinction , have occur five time .
paleontologist have identify five stratum in the fossil record that appear to show sudden and dramatic ( great than half of all extant specie disappear from the fossil record ) loss in biodiversity .
these be call mass extinction .
there be many less , yet still dramatic , extinction event , but the five mass extinction have attract the most research .
an argument can be make that the five mass extinction be only the five most extreme event in a continuous series of large extinction event throughout the phanerozoic ( since five  four  two million year ago ) .
in most case , the hypothesize cause be still controversial  however , the most recent event seem clear .
the five mass extinctions
the fossil record of the mass extinction be the basis for define period of geological history , so - pron - typically occur at the transition point between geological period .
the transition in fossil from one period to another reflect the dramatic loss of specie and the gradual origin of new specie .
these transition can be see in the rock stratum .
table four  seven  .  two provide datum on the five mass extinction .
the ordovician - silurian extinction event be the first record mass extinction and the second large .
during this period , about eight  five percent of marine specie ( few specie live outside the ocean ) become extinct .
the main hypothesis for - pron - because be a period of glaciation and then warm .
the extinction event actually consist of two extinction event separate by about one million year .
the first event be cause by cool , and the second event be due to the subsequent warming .
the climate change affect temperature and sea level .
some researcher have suggest that a gamma - ray burst , cause by a nearby supernova , be a possible because of the ordovician - silurian extinction .
the gamma - ray burst would have strip away the earth 's ozone layer cause intense ultraviolet radiation from the sun and may account for climate change observe at the time .
the hypothesis be speculative , but extraterrestrial influence on earth 's history be an active line of research .
recovery of biodiversity after the mass extinction take from five to two  zero million year , depend on the location .
the late devonian extinction may have occur over a relatively long period of time .
- pron - appear to have affect marine specie and not the plant or animal inhabit terrestrial habitat .
the cause of this extinction be poorly understand .
the end - permian extinction be the large in the history of life .
indeed , an argument could be make that earth nearly become devoid of life during this extinction event .
the planet look very different before and after this event .
estimate be that nine  six percent of all marine specie and seven  zero percent of all terrestrial specie be lose .
- pron - be at this time , for example , that the trilobite , a group that survive the ordovician – silurian extinction , become extinct .
the cause for this mass extinction be not clear , but the leading suspect be extend and widespread volcanic activity that lead to a runaway global - warming event .
the ocean become largely anoxic , suffocate marine life .
terrestrial tetrapod diversity take three  zero million year to recover after the end - permian extinction .
the permian extinction dramatically alter earth 's biodiversity makeup and the course of evolution .
the cause of the triassic –
jurassic extinction event be not clear and hypothesis of climate change , asteroid impact , and volcanic eruption have be argue .
the extinction event occur just before the breakup of the supercontinent pangaea , although recent scholarship suggest that the extinction may have occur more gradually throughout the triassic .
the cause of the end - cretaceous extinction event be the one that be best understand .
- pron - be during this extinction event about six  five million year ago that the dinosaur , the dominant vertebrate group for million of year , disappear from the planet ( with the exception of a theropod clade that give rise to bird ) .
indeed , every land animal that weigh more then two  five kg become extinct .
the because of this extinction be now understand to be the result of a cataclysmic impact of a large meteorite , or asteroid , off the coast of what be now the yucatán peninsula .
this hypothesis , propose first in one  nine  eight  zero , be a radical explanation base on a sharp spike in the level of iridium ( which rain down from space in meteor at a fairly constant rate but be otherwise absent on earth 's surface ) at the rock stratum that mark the boundary between the cretaceous and paleogene period ( figure four  seven  .  six ) .
this boundary mark the disappearance of the dinosaur in fossil as well as many other taxa .
the researcher who discover the iridium spike interpret - pron - as a rapid influx of iridium from space to the atmosphere ( in the form of a large asteroid ) rather than a slowing in the deposition of sediment during that period .
- pron - be a radical explanation , but the report of an appropriately aged and sized impact crater in one  nine  nine  one make the hypothesis more believable .
now an abundance of geological evidence support the theory .
recovery time for biodiversity after the end - cretaceous extinction be short , in geological time , than for the end - permian extinction , on the order of one  zero million year .
the pleistocene extinction
the pleistocene extinction be one of the less extinction , and a recent one .
- pron - be well know that the north american , and to some degree eurasian , megafauna , or large animal , disappear toward the end of the last glaciation period .
the extinction appear to have happen in a relatively restricted time period of one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero – one  two  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago .
in north america , the loss be quite dramatic and include the woolly mammoth ( last date about four  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago in an isolated population ) , mastodon , giant beaver , giant ground sloth , saber - toothed cat , and the north american camel , just to name a few .
the possibility that the rapid extinction of these large animal be cause by over - hunting be first suggest in the one  nine  zero  zero s .
research into this hypothesis continue today .
- pron - seem likely that over - hunting cause many pre - write history extinction in many region of the world .
in general , the timing of the pleistocene extinction correlate with the arrival of human and not with climate - change event , which be the main compete hypothesis for these extinction .
the extinction begin in australia about four  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero to five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago , just after the arrival of human in the area  a marsupial lion , a giant one - ton wombat , and several giant kangaroo specie disappear .
in north america , the extinction of almost all of the large mammal occur one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero – one  two  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago .
all that be leave be the small mammal such as bear , elk , moose , and cougar .
finally , on many remote oceanic island , the extinction of many specie occur coincident with human arrival .
not all of the island have large animal , but when there be large animal , - pron - be lose .
madagascar be colonize about two  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago and the large mammal that live there become extinct .
eurasia and africa do not show this pattern , but - pron - also do not experience a recent arrival of human .
human arrive in eurasia hundred of thousand of year ago after the origin of the specie in africa .
this topic remain an area of active research and hypothesizing .
- pron - seem clear that even if climate play a role , in most case human hunting precipitate the extinction .
present - time extinctions
the sixth , or holocene , mass extinction appear to have begin earlier than previously believe and have mostly to do with the activity of homo sapiens .
since the beginning of the holocene period , there be numerous recent extinction of individual specie that be record in human writing .
most of these be coincident with the expansion of the european colony since the one  five  zero  zero s .
one of the early and popularly know example be the dodo bird .
the dodo bird live in the forest of mauritius , an island in the indian ocean .
the dodo bird become extinct around one  six  six  two .
- pron - be hunt for - pron - meat by sailor and be easy prey because the dodo , which do not evolve with human , would approach people without fear .
introduce pig , rat , and dog bring to the island by european ship also kill dodo young and egg .
steller ' s sea cow become extinct in one  seven  six  eight  - pron - be relate to the manatee and probably once live along the northwest coast of north america .
steller ' s sea cow be first discover by europeans in one  seven  four  one and be hunt for meat and oil .
the last sea cow be kill in one  seven  six  eight .
that amount to two  seven year between the sea cow 's first contact with europeans and extinction of the specie .
in one  nine  one  four , the last living passenger pigeon die in a zoo in cincinnati , ohio .
this specie have once darken the sky of north america during - pron - migration , but - pron - be hunt and suffer from habitat loss through the clearing of forest for farmland .
in one  nine  one  eight , the last live carolina parakeet die in captivity .
this species be once common in the eastern united states , but - pron - suffer from habitat loss .
the specie be also hunt because - pron - eat orchard fruit when - pron - native food be destroy to make way for farmland .
the japanese sea lion , which inhabit a broad area around japan and the coast of korea , become extinct in the one  nine  five  zero due to fisherman .
the caribbean monk seal be distribute throughout the caribbean sea but be drive to extinction via hunt by one  nine  five  two .
these be only a few of the record extinction in the past five  zero  zero year .
the international union for conservation of nature ( iucn ) keep a list of extinct and endanger specie call the red list .
the list be not complete , but - pron - describe three  eight  zero extinct specie of vertebrate after one  five  zero  zero ad , eight  six of which be drive extinct by overhunt or overfishing .
estimate of present - time extinction rates estimates of extinction rate be hamper by the fact that most extinction be probably happen without observation .
the extinction of a bird or mammal be likely to be notice by human , especially if - pron - have be hunt or use in some other way .
but there be many organism that be of less interest to human ( not necessarily of less value ) and many that be undescribed .
the background extinction rate be estimate to be about one per million specie per year ( e / msy ) .
for example , assume there be about ten million specie in existence , the expectation be that ten specie would become extinct each year ( each year represent ten million specie per year ) .
one contemporary extinction rate estimate use the extinction in the write record since the year one  five  zero  zero .
for bird alone this method yield an estimate of two  six e / msy .
however , this value may be underestimate for three reason .
first , many specie would not have be describe until much later in the time period , so - pron - loss would have go unnoticed .
second , the number of recently extinct specie be increase because extinct specie now be be describe from skeletal remain .
and third , some specie be probably already extinct even though conservationist be reluctant to name - pron - as such .
take these factor into account raise the estimate extinction rate closer to one  zero  zero e / msy .
the predict rate by the end of the century be one  five  zero  zero e / msy .
a second approach to estimate present - time extinction rate be to correlate specie loss with habitat loss by measure forest - area loss and understanding specie - area relationship .
the species - area relationship be the rate at which new specie be see when the area survey be increase .
study have show that the number of specie present increase as the size of the island increase .
this phenomenon have also be show to hold true in other habitat as well .
turn this relationship around , if the habitat area be reduce , the number of specie live there will also decline .
estimate of extinction rate base on habitat loss and species - area relationship have suggest that with about nine  zero percent habitat loss an expect five  zero percent of specie would become extinct .
specie - area estimate have lead to species extinction rate calculation of about one  zero  zero  zero e / msy and high .
in general , actual observation do not show this amount of loss and suggestion have be make that there be a delay in extinction .
recent work have also call into question the applicability of the species - area relationship when estimate the loss of specie .
this work argue that the species - area relationship lead to an overestimate of extinction rate .
a good relationship to use may be the endemic - area relationship .
use this method would bring estimate down to around five  zero  zero e / msy in the come century .
note that this value be still five  zero  zero time the background rate .
study have show that the number of specie present increase with the size of the habitat .
the importance of biodiversity to human life
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  identify chemical diversity benefit to human identify biodiversity component that support human agriculture describe ecosystem service
- pron - may not be clear why biologist be concerned about biodiversity loss .
when biodiversity loss be think of as the extinction of the passenger pigeon , the dodo bird , and even the woolly mammoth , the loss may appear to be an emotional one .
but be the loss practically important for the welfare of the human specie ?
from the perspective of evolution and ecology , the loss of a particular individual specie be unimportant ( however , the loss of a keystone specie can lead to ecological disaster ) .
extinction be a normal part of macroevolution .
but the accelerated extinction rate mean the loss of ten of thousand of specie within - pron - lifetime , and - pron - be likely to have dramatic effect on human welfare through the collapse of ecosystem and in add cost to maintain food production , clean air and water , and human health .
agriculture begin after early hunter - gather society first settle in one place and heavily modify - pron - immediate environment .
this cultural transition have make - pron - difficult for human to recognize - pron - dependence on undomesticated live thing on the planet .
biologist recognize the human specie be embed in ecosystem and be dependent on - pron - , just as every other specie on the planet be dependent .
technology smooth out the extreme of existence , but ultimately the human specie can not exist without - pron - ecosystem .
human health contemporary society that live close to the land often have a broad knowledge of the medicinal us of plant grow in - pron - area .
most plant produce secondary plant compound , which be toxin use to protect the plant from insect and other animal that eat - pron - , but some of which also work as medication .
for century in europe , old knowledge about the medical us of plant be compile in herbal — book that identify plant and - pron - us .
human be not the only specie to use plant for medicinal reason  the great ape , orangutan , chimpanzee , bonobo , and gorilla have all be observe self - medicate with plant .
modern pharmaceutical science also recognize the importance of these plant compound .
example of significant medicine derive from plant compound include aspirin , codeine , digoxin , atropine , and vincristine ( figure four  seven  .  eight ) .
many medicine be once derive from plant extract but be now synthesize .
- pron - be estimate that , at one time , two  five percent of modern drug contain at least one plant extract .
that number have probably decrease to about one  zero percent as natural plant ingredient be replace by synthetic version .
antibiotic , which be responsible for extraordinary improvement in health and lifespan in developed country , be compound largely derive from fungus and bacteria .
catharanthus roseus , the madagascar periwinkle , have various medicinal property .
among other us , - pron - be a source of vincristine , a drug use in the treatment of lymphoma .
in recent year , animal venom and poison have excite intense research for - pron - medicinal potential .
by two  zero  zero  seven , the fda have approve five drug base on animal toxin to treat disease such as hypertension , chronic pain , and diabete .
another five drug be undergo clinical trial , and at least six drug be be use in other country .
other toxin under investigation come from mammal , snake , lizard , various amphibian , fish , snail , octopus , and scorpion .
aside from represent billion of dollar in profit , these medicine improve people 's life .
pharmaceutical company be actively look for new compound synthesize by live organism that can function as medicine .
- pron - be estimate that one  /  three of pharmaceutical research and development be spend on natural compound and that about three  five percent of new drug bring to market between one  nine  eight  one and two  zero  zero  two be from natural compound .
the opportunity for new medication will be reduce in direct proportion to the disappearance of specie .
agricultural diversity
since the beginning of human agriculture more than one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago , human group have be breed and select crop variety .
this crop diversity match the cultural diversity of highly subdivide population of human .
for example , potato be domesticate begin around seven  ,  zero  zero  zero year ago in the central andes of peru and bolivia .
the potato grow in that region belong to seven specie and the number of variety likely be in the thousand .
each variety have be breed to thrive at particular elevation and soil and climate condition .
the diversity be drive by the diverse demand of the topography , the limited movement of people , and the demand create by crop rotation for different variety that will do well in different field .
potato be only one example of human - generate diversity .
every plant , animal , and fungus that have be cultivate by human have be breed from original wild ancestor specie into diverse variety arise from the demand for food value , adaptation to grow condition , and resistance to pest .
the potato demonstrate a well - know example of the risk of low crop diversity  the tragic irish potato famine when the single variety grow in ireland become susceptible to a potato blight , wipe out the crop .
the loss of the crop lead to famine , death , and mass emigration .
resistance to disease be a chief benefit to maintain crop biodiversity , and lack of diversity in contemporary crop specie carry similar risk .
seed company , which be the source of most crop variety in developed country , must continually breed new variety to keep up with evolve pest organism .
these same seed company , however , have participate in the decline of the number of variety available as - pron - focus on sell few variety in more area of the world .
the ability to create new crop variety rely on the diversity of variety available and the accessibility of wild form relate to the crop plant .
these wild form be often the source of new gene variant that can be breed with exist variety to create variety with new attribute .
loss of wild specie relate to a crop will mean the loss of potential in crop improvement .
maintain the genetic diversity of wild specie relate to domesticate specie ensure - pron - continued food supply .
since the one  nine  two  zero , government agriculture department have maintain seed bank of crop variety as a way to maintain crop diversity .
this system have flaw because , over time , seed bank be lose through accident , and there be no way to replace - pron - .
in two  zero  zero  eight , the svalbard global seed vault ( figure four  seven  .  nine ) begin store seed from around the world as a backup system to the regional seed bank .
if a regional seed bank store variety in svalbard , loss can be replace from svalbard .
the seed vault be locate deep into the rock of an arctic island .
condition within the vault be maintain at ideal temperature and humidity for seed survival , but the deep underground location of the vault in the arctic mean that failure of the vault 's system will not compromise the climatic condition inside the vault .
crop success s be largely dependent on the quality of the soil .
although some agricultural soil be render sterile use controversial cultivation and chemical treatment , most contain a huge diversity of organism that maintain nutrient cycle — break down organic matter into nutrient compound that crop need for growth .
these organism also maintain soil texture that affect water and oxygen dynamic in the soil that be necessary for plant growth .
if farmer have to maintain arable soil use alternate mean , the cost of food would be much high than - pron - be now .
these kind of process be call ecosystem service .
- pron - occur within ecosystem , such as soil ecosystem , as a result of the diverse metabolic activity of the organism live there , but - pron - provide benefit to human food production , drink water availability , and breathable air .
other key ecosystem service relate to food production be plant pollination and crop pest control .
over one  five  zero crop in the united states require pollination to produce .
one estimate of the benefit of honeybee pollination within the united states be $ one  .  six billion per year  other pollinator contribute up to $ six  .  seven billion more .
many honeybee population be manage by apiarist who rent out - pron - hives' service to farmer .
honeybee population in north america have be suffer large loss cause by a syndrome know as colony collapse disorder , whose because be unclear .
other pollinator include a diverse array of other bee specie and various insect and bird .
loss of these specie would make grow crop require pollination impossible , increase dependence on other crop .
finally , human compete for - pron - food with crop pest , most of which be insect .
pesticide control these competitor  however , pesticide be costly and lose - pron - effectiveness over time as pest population adapt .
- pron - also lead to collateral damage by kill non - pest specie and risk the health of consumer and agricultural worker .
ecologist believe that the bulk of the work in remove pest be actually do by predator and parasite of those pest , but the impact have not be well study .
a review find that in seven  four percent of study that look for an effect of landscape complexity on natural enemy of pest , the great the complexity , the great the effect of pest - suppress organism .
an experimental study find that introduce multiple enemy of pea aphid ( an important alfalfa pest ) increase the yield of alfalfa significantly .
this study show the importance of landscape diversity via the question of whether a diversity of pest be more effective at control than one single pest  the result show this to be the case .
loss of diversity in pest enemy will inevitably make - pron - more difficult and costly to grow food .
wild food sources
in addition to grow crop and raise animal for food , human obtain food resource from wild population , primarily fish population .
for approximately one billion people , aquatic resource provide the main source of animal protein .
but since one  nine  nine  zero , global fish production have decline .
despite considerable effort , few fishery on the planet be manage for sustainability .
fishery extinction rarely lead to complete extinction of the harvest specie , but rather to a radical restructuring of the marine ecosystem in which a dominant specie be so over - harvest that - pron - become a minor player , ecologically .
in addition to human lose the food source , these alteration affect many other specie in way that be difficult or impossible to predict .
the collapse of fishery have dramatic and long - last effect on local population that work in the fishery .
in addition , the loss of an inexpensive protein source to population that can not afford to replace - pron - will increase the cost of living and limit society in other way .
in general , the fish take from fishery have shift to small specie as large specie be fish to extinction .
the ultimate outcome could clearly be the loss of aquatic system as food source .
psychological and moral value
finally , - pron - have be argue that human benefit psychologically from live in a biodiverse world .
a chief proponent of this idea be entomologist e . o . wilson .
- pron - argue that human evolutionary history have adapt - pron - to live in a natural environment and that build environment generate stressor that affect human health and well - being .
there be considerable research into the psychological regenerative benefit of natural landscape that suggest the hypothesis may hold some truth .
in addition , there be a moral argument that human have a responsibility to inflict as little harm as possible on other specie .
threat to biodiversity
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  identify significant threat to biodiversity explain the effect of habitat loss , exotic specie , and hunt on biodiversity identify the early and predict effect of climate change on biodiversity the core threat to biodiversity on the planet , and therefore a threat to human welfare , be the combination of human population growth and resource exploitation .
the human population require resource to survive and grow , and those resource be be remove unsustainably from the environment .
the three great proximate threat to biodiversity be habitat loss , overharvesting , and introduction of exotic specie .
the first two of these be a direct result of human population growth and resource use .
the third result from increase mobility and trade .
a fourth major because of extinction , anthropogenic climate change , have not yet have a large impact , but - pron - be predict to become significant during this century .
global climate change be also a consequence of human population need for energy and the use of fossil fuel to meet those need ( figure four  seven  .  one  zero ) .
environmental issue , such as toxic pollution , have specific target effect on specie , but - pron - be not generally see as threat at the magnitude of the other .
atmospheric carbon dioxide level fluctuate in a cyclical manner .
however , the burning of fossil fuel in recent history have cause a dramatic increase in the level of carbon dioxide in the earth 's atmosphere , which have now reach level never before see in human history .
scientist predict that the addition of this " greenhouse gas " to the atmosphere be result in climate change that will significantly impact biodiversity in the come century .
habitat loss humans rely on technology to modify - pron - environment and replace certain function that be once perform by the natural ecosystem .
other specie can not do this .
elimination of - pron - ecosystem —
whether - pron - be a forest , a desert , a grassland , a freshwater estuarine , or a marine environment — will kill the individual in the specie .
remove the entire habitat within the range of a specie and , unless - pron - be one of the few specie that do well in human - build environment , the specie will become extinct .
human destruction of habitat accelerate in the latter half of the twentieth century .
consider the exceptional biodiversity of sumatra  - pron - be home to one specie of orangutan , a species of critically endanger elephant , and the sumatran tiger , but half of sumatra 's forest be now go .
the neighbor island of borneo , home to the other specie of orangutan , have lose a similar area of forest .
forest loss continue in protect area of borneo .
the orangutan in borneo be list as endanger by the international union for conservation of nature ( iucn ) , but - pron - be simply the most visible of thousand of specie that will not survive the disappearance of the forest of borneo .
the forest be remove for timber and to plant palm oil plantation ( figure four  seven  .  one  one ) .
palm oil be use in many product include food product , cosmetic , and biodiesel in europe .
a five - year estimate of global forest cover loss for the year two  zero  zero  zero – two  zero  zero  five be three  .  one percent .
in the humid tropic where forest loss be primarily from timber extraction , two  seven  two  ,  zero  zero  zero km two be lose out of a global total of one  one  ,  five  six  four  ,  zero  zero  zero km two ( or two  .  four percent ) .
in the tropic , these loss certainly also represent the extinction of specie because of high level of endemism .
( a ) one specie of orangutan , pongo pygmaeus , be find only in the rainforest of borneo , and the other specie of orangutan ( pongo abelii ) be find only in the rainforest of sumatra .
these animal be example of the exceptional biodiversity of ( c ) the island of sumatra and borneo .
other specie include the ( b ) sumatran tiger ( panthera tigris sumatrae ) and the ( d ) sumatran elephant ( elephas maximus sumatranus ) , both critically endanger specie .
rainforest habitat be be remove to make way for ( e ) oil palm plantation such as this one in borneo 's sabah province .
habitat destruction can affect ecosystem other than forest .
river and stream be important ecosystem and be frequently modify through land development and from dam or water removal .
damming of river affect the water flow and access to all part of a river .
differ flow regime can reduce or eliminate population that be adapt to these change in flow pattern .
for example , an estimate nine  one percent of river length in the united states have be develop  - pron - have modification like dam , to create energy or store water  levee , to prevent flooding  or dredge or rerout , to create land that be more suitable for human development .
many fish specie in the united states , especially rare specie or specie with restricted distribution , have see decline cause by river damming and habitat loss .
research have confirm that specie of amphibian that must carry out part of - pron - life cycle in both aquatic and terrestrial habitat have a great chance of suffer population decline and extinction because of the increase likelihood that one of - pron - habitat or access between - pron - will be lose .
overharvesting overharvesting be a serious threat to many specie , but particularly to aquatic specie .
there be many example of regulated commercial fishery monitor by fishery scientist that have nevertheless collapse .
the western atlantic cod fishery be the most spectacular recent collapse .
while - pron - be a hugely productive fishery for four  zero  zero year , the introduction of modern factory trawler in the one  nine  eight  zero and the pressure on the fishery lead to - pron - become unsustainable .
the cause of fishery collapse be both economic and political in nature .
most fishery be manage as a common ( share ) resource even when the fishing territory lie within a country 's territorial water .
common resource be subject to an economic pressure know as the tragedy of the common in which essentially no fisher have a motivation to exercise restraint in harvest a fishery when - pron - be not own by that fisher .
the natural outcome of harvest of resource hold in common be - pron - overexploitation .
while large fishery be regulate to attempt to avoid this pressure , - pron - still exist in the background .
this overexploitation be exacerbate when access to the fishery be open and unregulated and when technology give fisher the ability to overfish .
in a few fishery , the biological growth of the resource be less than the potential growth of the profit make from fish if that time and money be invest elsewhere .
in these case — whale be an example — economic force will always drive toward fish the population to extinction .
for the most part , fishery extinction be not equivalent to biological extinction — the last fish of a species be rarely fish out of the ocean .
at the same time , fishery extinction be still harmful to fish specie and - pron - ecosystem .
there be some instance in which true extinction be a possibility .
whale have slow - grow population and be at risk of complete extinction through hunting .
there be some specie of shark with restricted distribution that be at risk of extinction .
the grouper be another population of generally slow - grow fish that , in the caribbean , include a number of specie that be at risk of extinction from overfish .
coral reef be extremely diverse marine ecosystem that face peril from several process .
reef be home to one  /  three of the world 's marine fish specie — about four  ,  zero  zero  zero specie
— despite make up only one percent of marine habitat .
most home marine aquaria be stock with wild - catch organism , not culture organism .
although no species be know to have be drive extinct by the pet trade in marine specie , there be study show that population of some specie have decline in response to harvesting , indicate that the harvest be not sustainable at those level .
there be concern about the effect of the pet trade on some terrestrial specie such as turtle , amphibian , bird , plant , and even the orangutan .
bush meat be the generic term use for wild animal kill for food .
hunting be practice throughout the world , but hunting practice , particularly in equatorial africa and part of asia , be believe to threaten several specie with extinction .
traditionally , bush meat in africa be hunt to feed family directly  however , recent commercialization of the practice now have bush meat available in grocery store , which have increase harvest rate to the level of unsustainability .
additionally , human population growth have increase the need for protein food that be not be meet from agriculture .
specie threaten by the bush meat trade be mostly mammal include many primate live in the congo basin .
exotic species exotic specie be specie that have be intentionally or unintentionally introduce by human into an ecosystem in which - pron - do not evolve .
such introduction likely occur frequently as natural phenomenon .
for example , kudzu ( pueraria lobata ) , which be native to japan , be introduce in the united states in one  eight  seven  six .
- pron - be later plant for soil conservation .
problematically , - pron - grow too well in the southeastern united states — up to a foot a day .
- pron - be now a pest specie and cover over seven million acre in the southeastern united states .
if an introduce species be able to survive in - pron - new habitat , that introduction be now reflect in the observed range of the specie .
human transportation of people and good , include the intentional transport of organism for trade , have dramatically increase the introduction of specie into new ecosystem , sometimes at distance that be well beyond the capacity of the specie to ever travel - pron - and outside the range of the species' natural predator .
most exotic specie introduction probably fail because of the low number of individual introduce or poor adaptation to the ecosystem - pron - enter .
some specie , however , possess preadaptation that can make - pron - especially successful in a new ecosystem .
these exotic specie often undergo dramatic population increase in - pron - new habitat and reset the ecological condition in the new environment , threaten the specie that exist there .
for this reason , exotic specie be also call invasive specie .
exotic specie can threaten other specie through competition for resource , predation , or disease .
lake and island be particularly vulnerable to extinction threat from introduce specie .
in lake victoria , as mention earlier , the intentional introduction of the nile perch be largely responsible for the extinction of about two  zero  zero specie of cichlid .
the accidental introduction of the brown tree snake via aircraft ( figure four  seven  .  one  two ) from the solomon islands to guam in one  nine  five  zero have lead to the extinction of three specie of bird and three to five specie of reptile endemic to the island .
several other specie be still threaten .
the brown tree snake be adept at exploit human transportation as a means to migrate  one be even find on an aircraft arrive in corpus christi , texas .
constant vigilance on the part of airport , military , and commercial aircraft personnel be require to prevent the snake from move from guam to other island in the pacific , especially hawaii .
island do not make up a large area of land on the globe , but - pron - do contain a disproportionate number of endemic specie because of - pron - isolation from mainland ancestor .
the brown tree snake , boiga irregularis , be an exotic specie that have cause numerous extinction on the island of guam since - pron - accidental introduction in one  nine  five  zero .
the island of guam since - pron - accidental introduction in one  nine  five  zero .
( credit  nps )
- pron - now appear that the global decline in amphibian specie recognize in the one  nine  nine  zero be , in some part , cause by the fungus batrachochytrium dendrobatidis , which cause the disease chytridiomycosis ( figure four  seven  .  one  three ) .
there be evidence that the fungus be native to africa and may have be spread throughout the world by transport of a commonly use laboratory and pet specie  the african claw toad ( xenopus laevi ) .
- pron - may well be that biologist - pron - be responsible for spread this disease worldwide .
the north american bullfrog , rana catesbeiana , which have also be widely introduce as a food animal but which easily escape captivity , survive most infection of batrachochytrium dendrobatidis and can act as a reservoir for the disease .
this limosa harlequin frog ( atelopus limosus ) , an endanger species from panama , die from a fungal disease call chytridiomycosis .
the red lesion be symptomatic of the disease .
early evidence suggest that another fungal pathogen , geomyces destructan , introduce from europe be responsible for white - nose syndrome , which infect cave - hibernate bat in eastern north america and have spread from a point of origin in western new york state ( figure four  seven  .  one  four ) .
the disease have decimate bat population and threaten extinction of specie already list as endanger  the indiana bat , myotis sodali , and potentially the virginia big - eared bat , corynorhinus townsendii virginianus .
how the fungus be introduce be unclear , but one logical presumption would be that recreational caver unintentionally bring the fungus on clothe or equipment from europe .
this little brown bat in greeley mine , vermont , march two  six , two  zero  zero  nine , be find to have white - nose syndrome .
climate change climate change , and specifically the anthropogenic ( meaning , cause by human )
warm trend presently underway , be recognize as a major extinction threat , particularly when combine with other threat such as habitat loss .
scientist disagree about the likely magnitude of the effect , with extinction rate estimate range from one  five percent to four  zero percent of specie commit to extinction by two  zero  five  zero .
scientist do agree , however , that climate change will alter regional climate , include rainfall and snowfall pattern , make habitat less hospitable to the specie live in - pron - .
the warming trend will shift cold climate toward the north and south pole , force specie to move with - pron - adapt climate norm while face habitat gap along the way .
the shift range will impose new competitive regime on specie as - pron - find - pron - in contact with other specie not present in - pron - historic range .
one such unexpected specie contact be between polar bear and grizzly bear .
previously , these two specie have separate range .
now , - pron - range be overlap and there be document case of these two specie mat and produce viable offspring .
change climate also throw off species' delicate timing adaptation to seasonal food resource and breeding time .
many contemporary mismatch to shift in resource availability and timing have already be document .
since two  zero  zero  eight , grizzly bear ( ursus arctos horribili ) have be spot farther north than - pron - historic range , a possible consequence of climate change .
as a result , grizzly bear habitat now overlap polar bear ( ursus maritimus ) habitat .
the two kind of bear , which be capable of mat and produce viable offspring , be consider separate specie as historically - pron - live in different habitat and never meet .
however , in two  zero  zero  six a hunter shoot a wild grizzly - polar bear hybrid know as a grolar bear , the first wild hybrid ever find .
range shift be already be observe  for example , some european bird specie range have move nine  one km northward .
the same study suggest that the optimal shift base on warm trend be double that distance , suggest that the population be not move quickly enough .
range shift have also be observe in plant , butterfly , other insect , freshwater fish , reptile , and mammal .
climate gradient will also move up mountain , eventually crowd specie high in altitude and eliminate the habitat for those specie adapt to the high elevation .
some climate will completely disappear .
the rate of warming appear to be accelerate in the arctic , which be recognize as a serious threat to polar bear population that require sea ice to hunt seal during the winter month  seal be the only source of protein available to polar bear .
a trend to decrease sea ice coverage have occur since observation begin in the mid - twentieth century .
the rate of decline observe in recent year be far great than previously predict by climate model .
finally , global warming will raise ocean level due to melt water from glacier and the great volume of warm water .
shoreline will be inundate , reduce island size , which will have an effect on some specie , and a number of island will disappear entirely .
additionally , the gradual melting and subsequent refreezing of the pole , glacier , and high elevation mountain — a cycle that have provide freshwater to environment for century — will also be jeopardize .
this could result in an overabundance of salt water and a shortage of fresh water .
preserve biodiversity
by the end of this section , - pron - will be able to  identify new technology for describe biodiversity explain the legislative framework for conservation describe principle and challenge of conservation preserve design identify example of the effect of habitat restoration
discuss the role of zoo in biodiversity conservation
preserve biodiversity be an extraordinary challenge that must be meet by great understanding of biodiversity - pron - , change in human behavior and belief , and various preservation strategy .
measure biodiversity
the technology of molecular genetic and datum processing and storage be mature to the point where catalogue the planet 's specie in an accessible way be close to feasible .
dna barcoding be one molecular genetic method , which take advantage of rapid evolution in a mitochondrial gene present in eukaryote , except the plant , to identify specie use the sequence of portion of the gene .
plant may be barcod use a combination of chloroplast gene .
rapid mass sequencing machine make the molecular genetic portion of the work relatively inexpensive and quick .
computer resource store and make available the large volume of datum .
project be currently underway to use dna barcoding to catalog museum specimen , which have already be name and study , as well as test the method on less study group .
as of mid two  zero  one  two , close to one  five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero name specie have be barcod .
early study suggest there be significant number of undescribed specie that look too much like sibling specie to previously be recognize as different .
these now can be identify with dna barcoding .
numerous computer database now provide information about name specie and a framework for add new specie .
however , as already note , at the present rate of description of new specie , - pron - will take close to five  zero  zero year before the complete catalog of life be know .
many , perhaps most , speci on the planet do not have that much time .
there be also the problem of understanding which speci know to science be threaten and to what degree - pron - be threaten .
this task be carry out by the non - profit iucn which , as previously mention , maintain the red list — an online listing of endanger specie categorize by taxonomy , type of threat , and other criterion ( figure four  seven  .  one  six ) .
the red list be support by scientific research .
in two  zero  one  one , the list contain six  one  ,  zero  zero  zero specie , all with support documentation .
change human behavior legislation throughout the world have be enact to protect specie .
the legislation include international treaty as well as national and state law .
the convention on international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora ( cites ) treaty come into force in one  nine  seven  five .
the treaty , and the national legislation that support - pron - , provide a legal framework for prevent approximately three  three  ,  zero  zero  zero list specie from be transport across nations' border , thus protect - pron - from be catch or kill when international trade be involve .
the treaty be limit in - pron - reach because - pron - only deal with international movement of organism or - pron - part .
- pron - be also limit by various countries' ability or willingness to enforce the treaty and support legislation .
the illegal trade in organism and - pron - part be probably a market in the hundred of million of dollar .
illegal wildlife trade be monitor by another non - profit  trade records analysis of flora and fauna in commerce ( traffic ) .
within many country there be law that protect endanger specie and regulate hunting and fishing .
in the united states , the endangered species act ( esa ) be enact in one  nine  seven  three .
specie at risk be list by the act  the u . s . fish and wildlife service be require by law to develop management plan that protect the list specie and bring - pron - back to sustainable number .
the act , and other like - pron - in other country , be a useful tool , but - pron - suffer because - pron - be often difficult to get a species list , or to get an effective management plan in place once - pron - be list .
additionally , specie may be controversially take off the list without necessarily have have a change in - pron - situation .
more fundamentally , the approach to protect individual specie rather than entire ecosystem be both inefficient and focus effort on a few highly visible and often charismatic specie , perhaps at the expense of other specie that go unprotected .
at the same time , the act have a critical habitat provision outline in the recovery mechanism that may benefit specie other than the one target for management .
the migratory bird treaty act ( mbta ) be an agreement between the united states and canada that be sign into law in one  nine  one  eight in response to decline in north american bird specie cause by hunting .
the act now list over eight  zero  zero protect specie .
- pron - make - pron - illegal to disturb or kill the protect specie or distribute - pron - part ( much of the hunting of bird in the past be for - pron - feather ) .
the international response to global warming have be mix .
the kyoto protocol , an international agreement that come out of the united nations framework convention on climate change that commit country to reduce greenhouse gas emission by two  zero  one  two , be ratify by some country , but spurn by other .
two important country in term of - pron - potential impact that do not ratify the kyoto protocol be the united states and china .
the united states reject - pron - as a result of a powerful fossil fuel industry and china because of a concern - pron - would stifle the nation 's growth .
some goal for reduction in greenhouse gas be meet and exceed by individual country , but worldwide , the effort to limit greenhouse gas production be not succeed .
the intend replacement for the kyoto protocol have not materialize because government can not agree on timeline and benchmark .
meanwhile , climate scientist predict the result cost to human society and biodiversity will be high .
as already mention , the private non - profit sector play a large role in the conservation effort both in north america and around the world .
the approach range from species - specific organization to the broadly focus iucn and traffic .
the nature conservancy take a novel approach .
- pron - purchase land and protect - pron - in an attempt to set up preserve for ecosystem .
ultimately , human behavior will change when human value change .
at present , the grow urbanization of the human population be a force that pose challenge to the valuing of biodiversity .
conservation in preserves establishment of wildlife and ecosystem preserve be one of the key tool in conservation effort .
a preserve be an area of land set aside with vary degree of protection for the organism that exist within the boundary of the preserve .
preserve can be effective in the short term for protect both specie and ecosystem , but - pron - face challenge that scientist be still explore to strengthen - pron - viability as long - term solution .
how much area to preserve ?
due to the way protect land be allocate ( - pron - tend to contain less economically valuable resource rather than be set aside specifically for the specie or ecosystem at risk ) and the way biodiversity be distribute , determine a target percentage of land or marine habitat that should be protect to maintain biodiversity level be challenging .
the iucnworld parks congress estimate that one  one  .  five percent of earth 's land surface be cover by preserve of various kind in two  zero  zero  three .
this area be great than previous goal  however , - pron - only represent nine out of one  four recognize major biome .
research have show that one  two percent of all specie live only outside preserve  these percentage be much high when only threaten specie and high quality preserve be consider .
for example , high quality preserve include only about five  zero percent of threaten amphibian specie .
the conclusion must be that either the percentage of area protect must increase , or the percentage of high quality preserve must increase , or preserve must be target with great attention to biodiversity protection .
researcher argue that more attention to the latter solution be require .
preserve design
there have be extensive research into optimal preserve design for maintain biodiversity .
the fundamental principle behind much of the research have be the seminal theoretical work of robert h . macarthur and edward o . wilson publish in one  nine  six  seven on island biogeography .
[ five ] this work seek to understand the factor affect biodiversity on island .
the fundamental conclusion be that biodiversity on an island be a function of the origin of specie through migration , speciation , and extinction on that island .
island farther from a mainland be hard to get to , so migration be low and the equilibrium number of specie be low .
within island population , evidence suggest that the number of specie gradually increase to a level similar to the number on the mainland from which the species be suspect to have migrate .
in addition , small island be hard to find , so - pron - immigration rate for new specie be low .
small island be also less geographically diverse so there be few niche to promote speciation .
and finally , small island support small population , so the probability of extinction be high .
as island get large , the number of specie accelerate , although the effect of island area on specie number be not a direct correlation .
conservation preserve can be see as " island " of habitat within " an ocean " of non - habitat .
for a specie to persist in a preserve , the preserve must be large enough .
the critical size depend , in part , on the home range that be characteristic of the specie .
a preserve for wolf , which range hundred of kilometer , must be much large than a preserve for butterfly , which may range within ten kilometer during - pron - lifetime .
but large preserve have more core area of optimal habitat for individual specie , - pron - have more niche to support more specie , and - pron - attract more specie because - pron - can be find and reach more easily .
preserve perform good when there be buffer zone around - pron - of suboptimal habitat .
the buffer allow organism to exit the boundary of the preserve without immediate negative consequence from predation or lack of resource .
one large preserve be good than the same area of several small preserve because there be more core habitat unaffect by edge .
for this same reason , preserve in the shape of a square or circle will be good than a preserve with many thin " arm .
" if preserve must be small , then provide wildlife corridor between - pron - so that individual and - pron - gene can move between the preserve , for example along river and stream , will make the small preserve behave more like a large one .
all of these factor be take into consideration when plan the nature of a preserve before the land be set aside .
in addition to the physical , biological , and ecological specification of a preserve , there be a variety of policy , legislative , and enforcement specification relate to us of the preserve for function other than protection of specie .
these can include anything from timber extraction , mineral extraction , regulated hunting , human habitation , and nondestructive human recreation .
many of these policy decision be make base on political pressure rather than conservation consideration .
in some case , wildlife protection policy have be so strict that subsistence - live indigenous population have be force from ancestral land that fall within a preserve .
in other case , even if a preserve be design to protect wildlife , if the protection be not or can not be enforce , the preserve status will have little meaning in the face of illegal poaching and timber extraction .
this be a widespread problem with preserve in area of the tropic .
limitation on preserves
some of the limitation on preserve as conservation tool be evident from the discussion of preserve design .
political and economic pressure typically make preserve small , never large , so set aside area that be large enough be difficult .
if the area set aside be sufficiently large , there may not be sufficient area to create a buffer around the preserve .
in this case , an area on the outer edge of the preserve inevitably become a risky suboptimal habitat for the specie in the preserve .
enforcement of protection be also a significant issue in country without the resource or political will to prevent poaching and illegal resource extraction .
climate change will create inevitable problem with the location of preserve .
the specie within - pron - will migrate to high latitude as the habitat of the preserve become less favorable .
scientist be plan for the effect of global warming on future preserve and strive to predict the need for new preserve to accommodate anticipate change to habitat  however , the end effectiveness be tenuous since these effort be prediction base .
finally , an argument can be make that conservation preserve reinforce the cultural perception that human be separate from nature , can exist outside of - pron - , and can only operate in way that do damage to biodiversity .
create preserve reduce the pressure on human activity outside the preserve to be sustainable and non - damage to biodiversity .
ultimately , the political , economic , and human demographic pressure will degrade and reduce the size of conservation preserve if the activity outside - pron - be not alter to be less damaging to biodiversity .
habitat restoration habitat restoration hold considerable promise as a mechanism for restore and maintain biodiversity .
of course once a species have become extinct , - pron - restoration be impossible .
however , restoration can improve the biodiversity of degraded ecosystem .
reintroduce wolf , a top predator , to yellowstone national park in one  nine  nine  five lead to dramatic change in the ecosystem that increase biodiversity .
the wolf ( figure four  seven  .  one  seven ) function to suppress elk and coyote population and provide more abundant resource to the guild of carrion eater .
reduce elk population have allow revegetation of riparian area , which have increase the diversity of specie in that habitat .
decrease the coyote population have increase the population of specie that be previously suppress by this predator .
the number of specie of carrion eater have increase because of the predatory activity of the wolf .
in this habitat , the wolf be a keystone specie , mean a specie that be instrumental in maintain diversity in an ecosystem .
remove a keystone specie from an ecological community may because a collapse in diversity .
the result from the yellowstone experiment suggest that restore a keystone specie can have the effect of restore biodiversity in the community .
ecologist have argue for the identification of keystone specie where possible and for focus protection effort on those specie  likewise , - pron - also make sense to attempt to return - pron - to - pron - ecosystem if - pron - have be remove .
( a )
the gibbon wolf pack in yellowstone national park , march one , two  zero  zero  seven , represent a keystone specie .
the reintroduction of wolf into yellowstone national park in one  nine  nine  five lead to a change in the grazing behavior of ( b ) elk .
to avoid predation , the elk no longer graze expose stream and riverbed , such as ( c ) the lamar riverbed in yellowstone .
this allow willow and cottonwood seedling to grow .
the seedling decrease erosion and provide shade to the creek , which improve fish habitat .
a new colony of ( d ) beaver may also have benefit from the habitat change .
other large - scale restoration experiment underway involve dam removal .
in the united states , since the mid -  one  nine  eight  zero , many age dam be be consider for removal rather than replacement because of shift belief about the ecological value of free - flow river and because many dam no longer provide the benefit and function that - pron - do when - pron - be first build .
the measure benefit of dam removal include restoration of naturally fluctuate water level ( the purpose of dam be frequently to reduce variation in river flow ) , which lead to increase fish diversity and improved water quality .
in the pacific northwest , dam removal project be expect to increase population of salmon , which be consider a keystone specie because - pron - transport key nutrient to inland ecosystem during - pron - annual spawning migration .
in other region such as the atlantic coast , dam removal have allow the return of spawn anadromous fish specie ( specie that be bear in fresh water , live most of - pron - life in salt water , and return to fresh water to spawn ) .
some of the large dam removal project have yet to occur or have happen too recently for the consequence to be measure .
the large - scale ecological experiment that these removal project constitute will provide valuable datum for other dam project slat either for removal or construction .
the role of captive breeding zoos have seek to play a role in conservation effort both through captive breeding program and education .
the transformation of the mission of zoo from collection and exhibition facility to organization that be dedicate to conservation be ongoing .
in general , - pron - have be recognize that , except in some specific target case , captive breeding program for endanger specie be inefficient and often prone to failure when the specie be reintroduce to the wild .
zoo facility be far too limited to contemplate captive breeding program for the number of specie that be now at risk .
education be another potential positive impact of zoo on conservation effort , particularly give the global trend to urbanization and the consequent reduction in contact between people and wildlife .
a number of study have be perform to look at the effectiveness of zoo on people 's attitude and action regard conservation  at present , the result tend to be mixed .
