The electrical energy plant in Figure 7.1 converts energy from one form to another form that can be more easily used.This type of generating plant starts with underground thermal energy (heat) and transforms it into electrical energy thatwill be transported to homes and factories. Like a generating plant, plants and animals also must take in energy fromthe environment and convert it into a form that their cells can use. Energy enters an organism’s body in one form and isconverted into another form that can fuel the organism’s life functions. In the process of photosynthesis, plants and otherphotosynthetic producers take in energy in the form of light (solar energy) and convert it into chemical energy, glucose,which stores this energy in its chemical bonds. Then, a series of metabolic pathways, collectively called cellular respiration,extracts the energy from the bonds in glucose and converts it into a form that all living things can use—both producers,such as plants, and consumers, such as animals.
Energy production within a cell involves many coordinated chemical pathways. Most of these pathways are combinations ofoxidation and reduction reactions. Oxidation and reduction occur in tandem. An oxidation reaction strips an electron froman atom in a compound, and the addition of this electron to another compound is a reduction reaction. Because oxidationand reduction usually occur together, these pairs of reactions are called oxidation reduction reactions, or redox reactions.Electrons and EnergyThe removal of an electron from a molecule, oxidizing it, results in a decrease in potential energy in the oxidized compound.The electron (sometimes as part of a hydrogen atom), does not remain unbonded, however, in the cytoplasm of a cell.Rather, the electron is shifted to a second compound, reducing the second compound. The shift of an electron from onecompound to another removes some potential energy from the first compound (the oxidized compound) and increases thepotential energy of the second compound (the reduced compound). The transfer of electrons between molecules is importantbecause most of the energy stored in atoms and used to fuel cell functions is in the form of high-energy electrons. Thetransfer of energy in the form of electrons allows the cell to transfer and use energy in an incremental fashion—in smallpackages rather than in a single, destructive burst. This chapter focuses on the extraction of energy from food; you will seethat as you track the path of the transfers, you are tracking the path of electrons moving through metabolic pathways.Electron CarriersIn living systems, a small class of compounds functions as electron shuttles: They bind and carry high-energy electronsbetween compounds in pathways. The principal electron carriers we will consider are derived from the B vitamin groupand are derivatives of nucleotides. These compounds can be easily reduced (that is, they accept electrons) or oxidized (theylose electrons). Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) (Figure 7.2) is derived from vitamin B3, niacin. NAD+ is theoxidized form of the molecule; NADH is the reduced form of the molecule after it has accepted two electrons and a proton(which together are the equivalent of a hydrogen atom with an extra electron).NAD+ can accept electrons from an organic molecule according to the general equation:RHReducingagent+NAD+Oxidizingagent→ NADHReduced + ROxidizedWhen electrons are added to a compound, they are reduced. A compound that reduces another is called a reducing agent. Inthe above equation, RH is a reducing agent, and NAD+ is reduced to NADH. When electrons are removed from compound,it oxidized. A compound that oxidizes another is called an oxidizing agent. In the above equation, NAD+ is an oxidizingagent, and RH is oxidized to R.
Similarly, flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD+) is derived from vitamin B2, also called riboflavin. Its reduced form is FADH2.A second variation of NAD, NADP, contains an extra phosphate group. Both NAD+ and FAD+ are extensively used inenergy extraction from sugars, and NADP plays an important role in anabolic reactions and photosynthesis.
The oxidized form of the electron carrier (NAD+) is shown on the left and the reduced form (NADH) is shownon the right. The nitrogenous base in NADH has one more hydrogen ion and two more electrons than in NAD+.ATP in Living SystemsA living cell cannot store significant amounts of free energy. Excess free energy would result in an increase of heat in thecell, which would result in excessive thermal motion that could damage and then destroy the cell. Rather, a cell must be ableto handle that energy in a way that enables the cell to store energy safely and release it for use only as needed. Living cellsaccomplish this by using the compound adenosine triphosphate (ATP). ATP is often called the “energy currency” of the cell,and, like currency, this versatile compound can be used to fill any energy need of the cell. How? It functions similarly to arechargeable battery.When ATP is broken down, usually by the removal of its terminal phosphate group, energy is released. The energy isused to do work by the cell, usually by the released phosphate binding to another molecule, activating it. For example, inthe mechanical work of muscle contraction, ATP supplies the energy to move the contractile muscle proteins. Recall theactive transport work of the sodium-potassium pump in cell membranes. ATP alters the structure of the integral protein thatfunctions as the pump, changing its affinity for sodium and potassium. In this way, the cell performs work, pumping ionsagainst their electrochemical gradients.ATP Structure and FunctionAt the heart of ATP is a molecule of adenosine monophosphate (AMP), which is composed of an adenine molecule bondedto a ribose molecule and to a single phosphate group (Figure 7.3). Ribose is a five-carbon sugar found in RNA, and AMPis one of the nucleotides in RNA. The addition of a second phosphate group to this core molecule results in the formationof adenosine diphosphate (ADP); the addition of a third phosphate group forms adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
ATP (adenosine triphosphate) has three phosphate groups that can be removed by hydrolysis to form ADP(adenosine diphosphate) or AMP (adenosine monophosphate).The negative charges on the phosphate group naturallyrepel each other, requiring energy to bond them together and releasing energy when these bonds are broken.The addition of a phosphate group to a molecule requires energy. Phosphate groups are negatively charged and thus repelone another when they are arranged in series, as they are in ADP and ATP. This repulsion makes the ADP and ATPmolecules inherently unstable. The release of one or two phosphate groups from ATP, a process called dephosphorylation,releases energy.Energy from ATPHydrolysis is the process of breaking complex macromolecules apart. During hydrolysis, water is split, or lysed, and theresulting hydrogen atom (H+) and a hydroxyl group (OH-) are added to the larger molecule. The hydrolysis of ATP producesADP, together with an inorganic phosphate ion (Pi), and the release of free energy. To carry out life processes, ATP iscontinuously broken down into ADP, and like a rechargeable battery, ADP is continuously regenerated into ATP by thereattachment of a third phosphate group. Water, which was broken down into its hydrogen atom and hydroxyl group duringATP hydrolysis, is regenerated when a third phosphate is added to the ADP molecule, reforming ATP.Obviously, energy must be infused into the system to regenerate ATP. Where does this energy come from? In nearly everyliving thing on earth, the energy comes from the metabolism of glucose. In this way, ATP is a direct link between the limitedset of exergonic pathways of glucose catabolism and the multitude of endergonic pathways that power living cells.PhosphorylationRecall that, in some chemical reactions, enzymes may bind to several substrates that react with each other on the enzyme,forming an intermediate complex. An intermediate complex is a temporary structure, and it allows one of the substrates(such as ATP) and reactants to more readily react with each other; in reactions involving ATP, ATP is one of the substratesand ADP is a product. During an endergonic chemical reaction, ATP forms an intermediate complex with the substrate andenzyme in the reaction. This intermediate complex allows the ATP to transfer its third phosphate group, with its energy,to the substrate, a process called phosphorylation. Phosphorylation refers to the addition of the phosphate (~P). This isillustrated by the following generic reaction:A + enzyme + ATP → ⎡⎣A − enzyme − ∼ P⎤⎦→ B + enzyme + ADP + phosphate ionWhen the intermediate complex breaks apart, the energy is used to modify the substrate and convert it into a product of thereaction. The ADP molecule and a free phosphate ion are released into the medium and are available for recycling throughcell metabolism.Substrate PhosphorylationATP is generated through two mechanisms during the breakdown of glucose. A few ATP molecules are generated (thatis, regenerated from ADP) as a direct result of the chemical reactions that occur in the catabolic pathways. A phosphategroup is removed from an intermediate reactant in the pathway, and the free energy of the reaction is used to add the thirdphosphate to an available ADP molecule, producing ATP (Figure 7.4). This very direct method of phosphorylation is calledsubstrate-level phosphorylation.
In phosphorylation reactions, the gamma phosphate of ATP is attached to a protein.Oxidative PhosphorylationMost of the ATP generated during glucose catabolism, however, is derived from a much more complex process,chemiosmosis, which takes place in mitochondria (Figure 7.5) within a eukaryotic cell or the plasma membrane of aprokaryotic cell. Chemiosmosis, a process of ATP production in cellular metabolism, is used to generate 90 percent of theATP made during glucose catabolism and is also the method used in the light reactions of photosynthesis to harness theenergy of sunlight. The production of ATP using the process of chemiosmosis is called oxidative phosphorylation becauseof the involvement of oxygen in the process.
In eukaryotes, oxidative phosphorylation takes place in mitochondria. In prokaryotes, this process takesplace in the plasma membrane.
You have read that nearly all of the energy used by living cells comes to them in the bonds of the sugar, glucose. Glycolysisis the first step in the breakdown of glucose to extract energy for cellular metabolism. Nearly all living organisms carryout glycolysis as part of their metabolism. The process does not use oxygen and is therefore anaerobic. Glycolysis takesplace in the cytoplasm of both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Glucose enters heterotrophic cells in two ways. One methodis through secondary active transport in which the transport takes place against the glucose concentration gradient. Theother mechanism uses a group of integral proteins called GLUT proteins, also known as glucose transporter proteins. Thesetransporters assist in the facilitated diffusion of glucose.Glycolysis begins with the six carbon ring-shaped structure of a single glucose molecule and ends with two molecules ofa three-carbon sugar called pyruvate. Glycolysis consists of two distinct phases. The first part of the glycolysis pathwaytraps the glucose molecule in the cell and uses energy to modify it so that the six-carbon sugar molecule can be split evenlyinto the two three-carbon molecules. The second part of glycolysis extracts energy from the molecules and stores it in theform of ATP and NADH, the reduced form of NAD.First Half of Glycolysis (Energy-Requiring Steps)Step 1. The first step in glycolysis (Figure 7.6) is catalyzed by hexokinase, an enzyme with broad specificity that catalyzesthe phosphorylation of six-carbon sugars. Hexokinase phosphorylates glucose using ATP as the source of the phosphate,producing glucose-6-phosphate, a more reactive form of glucose. This reaction prevents the phosphorylated glucosemolecule from continuing to interact with the GLUT proteins, and it can no longer leave the cell because the negativelycharged phosphate will not allow it to cross the hydrophobic interior of the plasma membrane.Step 2. In the second step of glycolysis, an isomerase converts glucose-6-phosphate into one of its isomers,fructose-6-phosphate. An isomerase is an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of a molecule into one of its isomers. (Thischange from phosphoglucose to phosphofructose allows the eventual split of the sugar into two three-carbon molecules.).Step 3. The third step is the phosphorylation of fructose-6-phosphate, catalyzed by the enzyme phosphofructokinase. Asecond ATP molecule donates a high-energy phosphate to fructose-6-phosphate, producing fructose-1,6-bisphosphate. Inthis pathway, phosphofructokinase is a rate-limiting enzyme. It is active when the concentration of ADP is high; it is lessactive when ADP levels are low and the concentration of ATP is high. Thus, if there is “sufficient” ATP in the system, thepathway slows down. This is a type of end product inhibition, since ATP is the end product of glucose catabolism.Step 4. The newly added high-energy phosphates further destabilize fructose-1,6-bisphosphate. The fourth step in glycolysisemploys an enzyme, aldolase, to cleave 1,6-bisphosphate into two three-carbon isomers: dihydroxyacetone-phosphate andglyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.Step 5. In the fifth step, an isomerase transforms the dihydroxyacetone-phosphate into its isomer,glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. Thus, the pathway will continue with two molecules of a single isomer. At this point in thepathway, there is a net investment of energy from two ATP molecules in the breakdown of one glucose molecule.
The first half of glycolysis uses two ATP molecules in the phosphorylation of glucose, which is then splitinto two three-carbon molecules.
Second Half of Glycolysis (Energy-Releasing Steps)So far, glycolysis has cost the cell two ATP molecules and produced two small, three-carbon sugar molecules. Both of thesemolecules will proceed through the second half of the pathway, and sufficient energy will be extracted to pay back the twoATP molecules used as an initial investment and produce a profit for the cell of two additional ATP molecules and two evenhigher-energy NADH molecules.Step 6. The sixth step in glycolysis (Figure 7.7) oxidizes the sugar (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate), extracting high-energyelectrons, which are picked up by the electron carrier NAD+, producing NADH. The sugar is then phosphorylated by theaddition of a second phosphate group, producing 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. Note that the second phosphate group does notrequire another ATP molecule.
The second half of glycolysis involves phosphorylation without ATP investment (step 6) and produces twoNADH and four ATP molecules per glucose.Here again is a potential limiting factor for this pathway. The continuation of the reaction depends upon the availability ofthe oxidized form of the electron carrier, NAD+. Thus, NADH must be continuously oxidized back into NAD+ in order tokeep this step going. If NAD+ is not available, the second half of glycolysis slows down or stops. If oxygen is available inthe system, the NADH will be oxidized readily, though indirectly, and the high-energy electrons from the hydrogen releasedin this process will be used to produce ATP. In an environment without oxygen, an alternate pathway (fermentation) canprovide the oxidation of NADH to NAD+.Step 7. In the seventh step, catalyzed by phosphoglycerate kinase (an enzyme named for the reverse reaction),1,3-bisphosphoglycerate donates a high-energy phosphate to ADP, forming one molecule of ATP. (This is an example ofsubstrate-level phosphorylation.) A carbonyl group on the 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate is oxidized to a carboxyl group, and3-phosphoglycerate is formed.Step 8. In the eighth step, the remaining phosphate group in 3-phosphoglycerate moves from the third carbon to the secondcarbon, producing 2-phosphoglycerate (an isomer of 3-phosphoglycerate). The enzyme catalyzing this step is a mutase(isomerase).Step 9. Enolase catalyzes the ninth step. This enzyme causes 2-phosphoglycerate to lose water from its structure; this isa dehydration reaction, resulting in the formation of a double bond that increases the potential energy in the remainingphosphate bond and produces phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP).Step 10. The last step in glycolysis is catalyzed by the enzyme pyruvate kinase (the enzyme in this case is named for thereverse reaction of pyruvate’s conversion into PEP) and results in the production of a second ATP molecule by substratelevelphosphorylation and the compound pyruvic acid (or its salt form, pyruvate). Many enzymes in enzymatic pathwaysare named for the reverse reactions, since the enzyme can catalyze both forward and reverse reactions (these may have beendescribed initially by the reverse reaction that takes place in vitro, under non-physiological conditions).
Outcomes of GlycolysisGlycolysis starts with glucose and ends with two pyruvate molecules, a total of four ATP molecules and two molecules ofNADH. Two ATP molecules were used in the first half of the pathway to prepare the six-carbon ring for cleavage, so the cellhas a net gain of two ATP molecules and 2 NADH molecules for its use. If the cell cannot catabolize the pyruvate moleculesfurther, it will harvest only two ATP molecules from one molecule of glucose. Mature mammalian red blood cells are notcapable of aerobic respiration—the process in which organisms convert energy in the presence of oxygen—and glycolysisis their sole source of ATP. If glycolysis is interrupted, these cells lose their ability to maintain their sodium-potassiumpumps, and eventually, they die.The last step in glycolysis will not occur if pyruvate kinase, the enzyme that catalyzes the formation of pyruvate, is notavailable in sufficient quantities. In this situation, the entire glycolysis pathway will proceed, but only two ATP moleculeswill be made in the second half. Thus, pyruvate kinase is a rate-limiting enzyme for glycolysis.
If oxygen is available, aerobic respiration will go forward. In eukaryotic cells, the pyruvate molecules produced at the end ofglycolysis are transported into mitochondria, which are the sites of cellular respiration. There, pyruvate will be transformedinto an acetyl group that will be picked up and activated by a carrier compound called coenzyme A (CoA). The resultingcompound is called acetyl CoA. CoA is made from vitamin B5, pantothenic acid. Acetyl CoA can be used in a variety ofways by the cell, but its major function is to deliver the acetyl group derived from pyruvate to the next stage of the pathwayin glucose catabolism.Breakdown of PyruvateIn order for pyruvate, the product of glycolysis, to enter the next pathway, it must undergo several changes. The conversionis a three-step process (Figure 7.8).Step 1. A carboxyl group is removed from pyruvate, releasing a molecule of carbon dioxide into the surrounding medium.The result of this step is a two-carbon hydroxyethyl group bound to the enzyme (pyruvate dehydrogenase). This is the firstof the six carbons from the original glucose molecule to be removed. This step proceeds twice (remember: there are twopyruvate molecules produced at the end of glycolsis) for every molecule of glucose metabolized; thus, two of the six carbonswill have been removed at the end of both steps.Step 2. The hydroxyethyl group is oxidized to an acetyl group, and the electrons are picked up by NAD+, forming NADH.The high-energy electrons from NADH will be used later to generate ATP.Step 3. The enzyme-bound acetyl group is transferred to CoA, producing a molecule of acetyl CoA.
Upon entering the mitochondrial matrix, a multi-enzyme complex converts pyruvate into acetyl CoA. In theprocess, carbon dioxide is released and one molecule of NADH is formed.Note that during the second stage of glucose metabolism, whenever a carbon atom is removed, it is bound to two oxygenatoms, producing carbon dioxide, one of the major end products of cellular respiration.Acetyl CoA to CO2In the presence of oxygen, acetyl CoA delivers its acetyl group to a four-carbon molecule, oxaloacetate, to form citrate,a six-carbon molecule with three carboxyl groups; this pathway will harvest the remainder of the extractable energy fromwhat began as a glucose molecule. This single pathway is called by different names: the citric acid cycle (for the firstintermediate formed—citric acid, or citrate—when acetate joins to the oxaloacetate), the TCA cycle (since citric acid orcitrate and isocitrate are tricarboxylic acids), and the Krebs cycle, after Hans Krebs, who first identified the steps in thepathway in the 1930s in pigeon flight muscles.Citric Acid CycleLike the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl CoA, the citric acid cycle takes place in the matrix of mitochondria. Almostall of the enzymes of the citric acid cycle are soluble, with the single exception of the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase,which is embedded in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion. Unlike glycolysis, the citric acid cycle is a closed loop:The last part of the pathway regenerates the compound used in the first step. The eight steps of the cycle are a series ofredox, dehydration, hydration, and decarboxylation reactions that produce two carbon dioxide molecules, one GTP/ATP,and reduced forms of NADH and FADH2 (Figure 7.9). This is considered an aerobic pathway because the NADH andFADH2 produced must transfer their electrons to the next pathway in the system, which will use oxygen. If this transferdoes not occur, the oxidation steps of the citric acid cycle also do not occur. Note that the citric acid cycle produces verylittle ATP directly and does not directly consume oxygen.
In the citric acid cycle, the acetyl group from acetyl CoA is attached to a four-carbon oxaloacetate moleculeto form a six-carbon citrate molecule. Through a series of steps, citrate is oxidized, releasing two carbon dioxidemolecules for each acetyl group fed into the cycle. In the process, three NAD+ molecules are reduced to NADH, oneFAD molecule is reduced to FADH2, and one ATP or GTP (depending on the cell type) is produced (by substrate-levelphosphorylation). Because the final product of the citric acid cycle is also the first reactant, the cycle runs continuouslyin the presence of sufficient reactants. (credit: modification of work by “Yikrazuul”/Wikimedia Commons)Steps in the Citric Acid CycleStep 1. Prior to the start of the first step, a transitional phase occurs during which pyruvic acid is converted to acetyl CoA.Then, the first step of the cycle begins: This is a condensation step, combining the two-carbon acetyl group with a fourcarbonoxaloacetate molecule to form a six-carbon molecule of citrate. CoA is bound to a sulfhydryl group (-SH) anddiffuses away to eventually combine with another acetyl group. This step is irreversible because it is highly exergonic. Therate of this reaction is controlled by negative feedback and the amount of ATP available. If ATP levels increase, the rate ofthis reaction decreases. If ATP is in short supply, the rate increases.Step 2. In step two, citrate loses one water molecule and gains another as citrate is converted into its isomer, isocitrate.Step 3. In step three, isocitrate is oxidized, producing a five-carbon molecule, α-ketoglutarate, together with a molecule ofCO2 and two electrons, which reduce NAD+ to NADH. This step is also regulated by negative feedback from ATP andNADH, and a positive effect of ADP.Steps 3 and 4. Steps three and four are both oxidation and decarboxylation steps, which release electrons that reduce NAD+to NADH and release carboxyl groups that form CO2 molecules. α-Ketoglutarate is the product of step three, and a succinyl group is the product of step four. CoA binds the succinyl group to form succinyl CoA. The enzyme that catalyzes step fouris regulated by feedback inhibition of ATP, succinyl CoA, and NADH.Step 5. In step five, a phosphate group is substituted for coenzyme A, and a high-energy bond is formed. This energy isused in substrate-level phosphorylation (during the conversion of the succinyl group to succinate) to form either guaninetriphosphate (GTP) or ATP. There are two forms of the enzyme, called isoenzymes, for this step, depending upon the typeof animal tissue in which they are found. One form is found in tissues that use large amounts of ATP, such as heart andskeletal muscle. This form produces ATP. The second form of the enzyme is found in tissues that have a high number ofanabolic pathways, such as liver. This form produces GTP. GTP is energetically equivalent to ATP; however, its use is morerestricted. In particular, protein synthesis primarily uses GTP.Step 6. Step six is a dehydration process that converts succinate into fumarate. Two hydrogen atoms are transferred toFAD, producing FADH2. The energy contained in the electrons of these atoms is insufficient to reduce NAD+ but adequateto reduce FAD. Unlike NADH, this carrier remains attached to the enzyme and transfers the electrons to the electrontransport chain directly. This process is made possible by the localization of the enzyme catalyzing this step inside the innermembrane of the mitochondrion.Step 7. Water is added to fumarate during step seven, and malate is produced. The last step in the citric acid cycleregenerates oxaloacetate by oxidizing malate. Another molecule of NADH is produced in the process.
Products of the Citric Acid CycleTwo carbon atoms come into the citric acid cycle from each acetyl group, representing four out of the six carbons of oneglucose molecule. Two carbon dioxide molecules are released on each turn of the cycle; however, these do not necessarilycontain the most recently added carbon atoms. The two acetyl carbon atoms will eventually be released on later turns of thecycle; thus, all six carbon atoms from the original glucose molecule are eventually incorporated into carbon dioxide. Eachturn of the cycle forms three NADH molecules and one FADH2 molecule. These carriers will connect with the last portionof aerobic respiration to produce ATP molecules. One GTP or ATP is also made in each cycle. Several of the intermediatecompounds in the citric acid cycle can be used in synthesizing non-essential amino acids; therefore, the cycle is amphibolic(both catabolic and anabolic).
You have just read about two pathways in glucose catabolism—glycolysis and the citric acid cycle—that generate ATP.Most of the ATP generated during the aerobic catabolism of glucose, however, is not generated directly from thesepathways. Rather, it is derived from a process that begins with moving electrons through a series of electron transportersthat undergo redox reactions. This causes hydrogen ions to accumulate within the matrix space. Therefore, a concentrationgradient forms in which hydrogen ions diffuse out of the matrix space by passing through ATP synthase. The current ofhydrogen ions powers the catalytic action of ATP synthase, which phosphorylates ADP, producing ATP.
Electron Transport ChainThe electron transport chain (Figure 7.10) is the last component of aerobic respiration and is the only part of glucosemetabolism that uses atmospheric oxygen. Oxygen continuously diffuses into plants; in animals, it enters the body throughthe respiratory system. Electron transport is a series of redox reactions that resemble a relay race or bucket brigade inthat electrons are passed rapidly from one component to the next, to the endpoint of the chain where the electrons reducemolecular oxygen, producing water. There are four complexes composed of proteins, labeled I through IV in Figure 7.10,and the aggregation of these four complexes, together with associated mobile, accessory electron carriers, is called theelectron transport chain. The electron transport chain is present in multiple copies in the inner mitochondrial membrane ofeukaryotes and the plasma membrane of prokaryotes.
The electron transport chain is a series of electron transporters embedded in the inner mitochondrialmembrane that shuttles electrons from NADH and FADH2 to molecular oxygen. In the process, protons are pumpedfrom the mitochondrial matrix to the intermembrane space, and oxygen is reduced to form water.Complex ITo start, two electrons are carried to the first complex aboard NADH. This complex, labeled I, is composed of flavinmononucleotide (FMN) and an iron-sulfur (Fe-S)-containing protein. FMN, which is derived from vitamin B2, also calledriboflavin, is one of several prosthetic groups or co-factors in the electron transport chain. A prosthetic group is a nonproteinmolecule required for the activity of a protein. Prosthetic groups are organic or inorganic, non-peptide moleculesbound to a protein that facilitate its function; prosthetic groups include co-enzymes, which are the prosthetic groups ofenzymes. The enzyme in complex I is NADH dehydrogenase and is a very large protein, containing 45 amino acid chains.Complex I can pump four hydrogen ions across the membrane from the matrix into the intermembrane space, and it is inthis way that the hydrogen ion gradient is established and maintained between the two compartments separated by the innermitochondrial membrane.Q and Complex IIComplex II directly receives FADH2, which does not pass through complex I. The compound connecting the first andsecond complexes to the third is ubiquinone (Q). The Q molecule is lipid soluble and freely moves through the hydrophobiccore of the membrane. Once it is reduced, (QH2), ubiquinone delivers its electrons to the next complex in the electrontransport chain. Q receives the electrons derived from NADH from complex I and the electrons derived from FADH2 fromcomplex II, including succinate dehydrogenase. This enzyme and FADH2 form a small complex that delivers electronsdirectly to the electron transport chain, bypassing the first complex. Since these electrons bypass and thus do not energizethe proton pump in the first complex, fewer ATP molecules are made from the FADH2 electrons. The number of ATPmolecules ultimately obtained is directly proportional to the number of protons pumped across the inner mitochondrialmembrane.Complex IIIThe third complex is composed of cytochrome b, another Fe-S protein, Rieske center (2Fe-2S center), and cytochrome cproteins; this complex is also called cytochrome oxidoreductase. Cytochrome proteins have a prosthetic group of heme.The heme molecule is similar to the heme in hemoglobin, but it carries electrons, not oxygen. As a result, the iron ion at its core is reduced and oxidized as it passes the electrons, fluctuating between different oxidation states: Fe++ (reduced)and Fe+++ (oxidized). The heme molecules in the cytochromes have slightly different characteristics due to the effects ofthe different proteins binding them, giving slightly different characteristics to each complex. Complex III pumps protonsthrough the membrane and passes its electrons to cytochrome c for transport to the fourth complex of proteins and enzymes(cytochrome c is the acceptor of electrons from Q; however, whereas Q carries pairs of electrons, cytochrome c can acceptonly one at a time).Complex IVThe fourth complex is composed of cytochrome proteins c, a, and a3. This complex contains two heme groups (one in eachof the two cytochromes, a, and a3) and three copper ions (a pair of CuA and one CuB in cytochrome a3). The cytochromeshold an oxygen molecule very tightly between the iron and copper ions until the oxygen is completely reduced. The reducedoxygen then picks up two hydrogen ions from the surrounding medium to make water (H2O). The removal of the hydrogenions from the system contributes to the ion gradient used in the process of chemiosmosis.ChemiosmosisIn chemiosmosis, the free energy from the series of redox reactions just described is used to pump hydrogen ions (protons)across the membrane. The uneven distribution of H+ ions across the membrane establishes both concentration and electricalgradients (thus, an electrochemical gradient), owing to the hydrogen ions’ positive charge and their aggregation on one sideof the membrane.If the membrane were open to diffusion by the hydrogen ions, the ions would tend to diffuse back across into the matrix,driven by their electrochemical gradient. Recall that many ions cannot diffuse through the nonpolar regions of phospholipidmembranes without the aid of ion channels. Similarly, hydrogen ions in the matrix space can only pass through the innermitochondrial membrane through an integral membrane protein called ATP synthase (Figure 7.11). This complex proteinacts as a tiny generator, turned by the force of the hydrogen ions diffusing through it, down their electrochemical gradient.The turning of parts of this molecular machine facilitates the addition of a phosphate to ADP, forming ATP, using thepotential energy of the hydrogen ion gradient.
Chemiosmosis (Figure 7.12) is used to generate 90 percent of the ATP made during aerobic glucose catabolism; itis also the method used in the light reactions of photosynthesis to harness the energy of sunlight in the process ofphotophosphorylation. Recall that the production of ATP using the process of chemiosmosis in mitochondria is calledoxidative phosphorylation. The overall result of these reactions is the production of ATP from the energy of the electronsremoved from hydrogen atoms. These atoms were originally part of a glucose molecule. At the end of the pathway, theelectrons are used to reduce an oxygen molecule to oxygen ions. The extra electrons on the oxygen attract hydrogen ions(protons) from the surrounding medium, and water is formed.
ATP YieldThe number of ATP molecules generated from the catabolism of glucose varies. For example, the number of hydrogenions that the electron transport chain complexes can pump through the membrane varies between species. Another sourceof variance stems from the shuttle of electrons across the membranes of the mitochondria. (The NADH generated fromglycolysis cannot easily enter mitochondria.) Thus, electrons are picked up on the inside of mitochondria by either NAD+or FAD+. As you have learned earlier, these FAD+ molecules can transport fewer ions; consequently, fewer ATP moleculesare generated when FAD+ acts as a carrier. NAD+ is used as the electron transporter in the liver and FAD+ acts in the brain.Another factor that affects the yield of ATP molecules generated from glucose is the fact that intermediate compounds inthese pathways are used for other purposes. Glucose catabolism connects with the pathways that build or break down allother biochemical compounds in cells, and the result is somewhat messier than the ideal situations described thus far. Forexample, sugars other than glucose are fed into the glycolytic pathway for energy extraction. Moreover, the five-carbonsugars that form nucleic acids are made from intermediates in glycolysis. Certain nonessential amino acids can be madefrom intermediates of both glycolysis and the citric acid cycle. Lipids, such as cholesterol and triglycerides, are also madefrom intermediates in these pathways, and both amino acids and triglycerides are broken down for energy through thesepathways. Overall, in living systems, these pathways of glucose catabolism extract about 34 percent of the energy containedin glucose.
In aerobic respiration, the final electron acceptor is an oxygen molecule, O2. If aerobic respiration occurs, then ATP will beproduced using the energy of high-energy electrons carried by NADH or FADH2 to the electron transport chain. If aerobicrespiration does not occur, NADH must be reoxidized to NAD+ for reuse as an electron carrier for the glycolytic pathway tocontinue. How is this done? Some living systems use an organic molecule as the final electron acceptor. Processes that usean organic molecule to regenerate NAD+ from NADH are collectively referred to as fermentation. In contrast, some livingsystems use an inorganic molecule as a final electron acceptor. Both methods are called anaerobic cellular respiration inwhich organisms convert energy for their use in the absence of oxygen.Anaerobic Cellular RespirationCertain prokaryotes, including some species of bacteria and Archaea, use anaerobic respiration. For example, the group ofArchaea called methanogens reduces carbon dioxide to methane to oxidize NADH. These microorganisms are found in soiland in the digestive tracts of ruminants, such as cows and sheep. Similarly, sulfate-reducing bacteria and Archaea, most ofwhich are anaerobic ( Figure 7.13), reduce sulfate to hydrogen sulfide to regenerate NAD+ from NADH.
The green color seen in these coastal waters is from an eruption of hydrogen sulfide-producing bacteria.These anaerobic, sulfate-reducing bacteria release hydrogen sulfide gas as they decompose algae in the water.
The enzyme used in this reaction is lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). The reaction can proceed in either direction, but thereaction from left to right is inhibited by acidic conditions. Such lactic acid accumulation was once believed to causemuscle stiffness, fatigue, and soreness, although more recent research disputes this hypothesis. Once the lactic acid has beenremoved from the muscle and circulated to the liver, it can be reconverted into pyruvic acid and further catabolized forenergy.
Alcohol FermentationAnother familiar fermentation process is alcohol fermentation ( Figure 7.15) that produces ethanol, an alcohol. The firstchemical reaction of alcohol fermentation is the following (CO2 does not participate in the second reaction):Pyruvic acid → CO2 + acetaldehyde + NADH → ethanol + NAD+The first reaction is catalyzed by pyruvate decarboxylase, a cytoplasmic enzyme, with a coenzyme of thiaminepyrophosphate (TPP, derived from vitamin B1 and also called thiamine). A carboxyl group is removed from pyruvicacid, releasing carbon dioxide as a gas. The loss of carbon dioxide reduces the size of the molecule by one carbon,making acetaldehyde. The second reaction is catalyzed by alcohol dehydrogenase to oxidize NADH to NAD+ and reduceacetaldehyde to ethanol. The fermentation of pyruvic acid by yeast produces the ethanol found in alcoholic beverages.Ethanol tolerance of yeast is variable, ranging from about 5 percent to 21 percent, depending on the yeast strain andenvironmental conditions.
Fermentation of grape juice into wine produces CO2 as a byproduct. Fermentation tanks have valves sothat the pressure inside the tanks created by the carbon dioxide produced can be released.Other Types of FermentationOther fermentation methods occur in bacteria. Many prokaryotes are facultatively anaerobic. This means that they canswitch between aerobic respiration and fermentation, depending on the availability of oxygen. Certain prokaryotes, likeClostridia, are obligate anaerobes. Obligate anaerobes live and grow in the absence of molecular oxygen. Oxygen is apoison to these microorganisms and kills them on exposure. It should be noted that all forms of fermentation, except lacticacid fermentation, produce gas. The production of particular types of gas is used as an indicator of the fermentation ofspecific carbohydrates, which plays a role in the laboratory identification of the bacteria. Various methods of fermentationare used by assorted organisms to ensure an adequate supply of NAD+ for the sixth step in glycolysis. Without thesepathways, that step would not occur and no ATP would be harvested from the breakdown of glucose.
You have learned about the catabolism of glucose, which provides energy to living cells. But living things consume morethan glucose for food. How does a turkey sandwich end up as ATP in your cells? This happens because all of the catabolicpathways for carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids eventually connect into glycolysis and the citric acid cycle pathways (seeFigure 7.17). Metabolic pathways should be thought of as porous—that is, substances enter from other pathways, andintermediates leave for other pathways. These pathways are not closed systems. Many of the substrates, intermediates, andproducts in a particular pathway are reactants in other pathways.Connections of Other Sugars to Glucose MetabolismGlycogen, a polymer of glucose, is an energy storage molecule in animals. When there is adequate ATP present, excessglucose is shunted into glycogen for storage. Glycogen is made and stored in both liver and muscle. The glycogen will behydrolyzed into glucose monomers (G-1-P) if blood sugar levels drop. The presence of glycogen as a source of glucoseallows ATP to be produced for a longer period of time during exercise. Glycogen is broken down into G-1-P and convertedinto G-6-P in both muscle and liver cells, and this product enters the glycolytic pathway.
Sucrose is a disaccharide with a molecule of glucose and a molecule of fructose bonded together with a glycosidic linkage.Fructose is one of the three dietary monosaccharides, along with glucose and galactose (which is part of the milk sugar, thedisaccharide lactose), which are absorbed directly into the bloodstream during digestion. The catabolism of both fructoseand galactose produces the same number of ATP molecules as glucose.Connections of Proteins to Glucose MetabolismProteins are hydrolyzed by a variety of enzymes in cells. Most of the time, the amino acids are recycled into the synthesisof new proteins. If there are excess amino acids, however, or if the body is in a state of starvation, some amino acids will beshunted into the pathways of glucose catabolism (Figure 7.16). Each amino acid must have its amino group removed priorto entry into these pathways. The amino group is converted into ammonia. In mammals, the liver synthesizes urea from twoammonia molecules and a carbon dioxide molecule. Thus, urea is the principal waste product in mammals produced fromthe nitrogen originating in amino acids, and it leaves the body in urine.
The carbon skeletons of certain amino acids (indicated in boxes) derived from proteins can feed into thecitric acid cycle.
Connections of Lipid and Glucose MetabolismsThe lipids that are connected to the glucose pathways are cholesterol and triglycerides. Cholesterol is a lipid that contributesto cell membrane flexibility and is a precursor of steroid hormones. The synthesis of cholesterol starts with acetyl groupsand proceeds in only one direction. The process cannot be reversed.Triglycerides are a form of long-term energy storage in animals. Triglycerides are made of glycerol and three fatty acids.Animals can make most of the fatty acids they need. Triglycerides can be both made and broken down through parts of theglucose catabolism pathways. Glycerol can be phosphorylated to glycerol-3-phosphate, which continues through glycolysis.Fatty acids are catabolized in a process called beta-oxidation that takes place in the matrix of the mitochondria and convertstheir fatty acid chains into two carbon units of acetyl groups. The acetyl groups are picked up by CoA to form acetyl CoAthat proceeds into the citric acid cycle.
Glycogen from the liver and muscles, hydrolyzed into glucose-1-phosphate, together with fats andproteins, can feed into the catabolic pathways for carbohydrates.
Cellular respiration must be regulated in order to provide balanced amounts of energy in the form of ATP. The cell also mustgenerate a number of intermediate compounds that are used in the anabolism and catabolism of macromolecules. Without controls, metabolic reactions would quickly come to a stand still as the forward and backward reactions reached a state ofequilibrium. Resources would be used inappropriately. A cell does not need the maximum amount of ATP that it can makeall the time: At times, the cell needs to shunt some of the intermediates to pathways for amino acid, protein, glycogen, lipid,and nucleic acid production. In short, the cell needs to control its metabolism.Regulatory MechanismsA variety of mechanisms is used to control cellular respiration. Some type of control exists at each stage of glucosemetabolism. Access of glucose to the cell can be regulated using the GLUT proteins that transport glucose (Figure 7.18).Different forms of the GLUT protein control passage of glucose into the cells of specific tissues.
GLUT4 is a glucose transporter that is stored in vesicles. A cascade of events that occurs upon insulinbinding to a receptor in the plasma membrane causes GLUT4-containing vesicles to fuse with the plasma membraneso that glucose may be transported into the cell.Some reactions are controlled by having two different enzymes—one each for the two directions of a reversible reaction.Reactions that are catalyzed by only one enzyme can go to equilibrium, stalling the reaction. In contrast, if two differentenzymes (each specific for a given direction) are necessary for a reversible reaction, the opportunity to control the rate ofthe reaction increases, and equilibrium is not reached.A number of enzymes involved in each of the pathways—in particular, the enzyme catalyzing the first committed reactionof the pathway—are controlled by attachment of a molecule to an allosteric site on the protein. The molecules mostcommonly used in this capacity are the nucleotides ATP, ADP, AMP, NAD+, and NADH. These regulators, allostericeffectors, may increase or decrease enzyme activity, depending on the prevailing conditions. The allosteric effector altersthe steric structure of the enzyme, usually affecting the configuration of the active site. This alteration of the protein’s (theenzyme’s) structure either increases or decreases its affinity for its substrate, with the effect of increasing or decreasing therate of the reaction. The attachment signals to the enzyme. This binding can increase or decrease the enzyme’s activity,providing feedback. This feedback type of control is effective as long as the chemical affecting it is attached to the enzyme.Once the overall concentration of the chemical decreases, it will diffuse away from the protein, and the control is relaxed.Control of Catabolic PathwaysEnzymes, proteins, electron carriers, and pumps that play roles in glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and the electron transportchain tend to catalyze non-reversible reactions. In other words, if the initial reaction takes place, the pathway is committedto proceeding with the remaining reactions. Whether a particular enzyme activity is released depends upon the energy needsof the cell (as reflected by the levels of ATP, ADP, and AMP).GlycolysisThe control of glycolysis begins with the first enzyme in the pathway, hexokinase (Figure 7.19). This enzyme catalyzesthe phosphorylation of glucose, which helps to prepare the compound for cleavage in a later step. The presence of thenegatively charged phosphate in the molecule also prevents the sugar from leaving the cell. When hexokinase is inhibited,glucose diffuses out of the cell and does not become a substrate for the respiration pathways in that tissue. The product ofthe hexokinase reaction is glucose-6-phosphate, which accumulates when a later enzyme, phosphofructokinase, is inhibited.
The glycolysis pathway is primarily regulated at the three key enzymatic steps (1, 2, and 7) as indicated.Note that the first two steps that are regulated occur early in the pathway and involve hydrolysis of ATP.Phosphofructokinase is the main enzyme controlled in glycolysis. High levels of ATP, citrate, or a lower, more acidic pHdecrease the enzyme’s activity. An increase in citrate concentration can occur because of a blockage in the citric acid cycle.Fermentation, with its production of organic acids like lactic acid, frequently accounts for the increased acidity in a cell;however, the products of fermentation do not typically accumulate in cells.The last step in glycolysis is catalyzed by pyruvate kinase. The pyruvate produced can proceed to be catabolized orconverted into the amino acid alanine. If no more energy is needed and alanine is in adequate supply, the enzymeis inhibited. The enzyme’s activity is increased when fructose-1,6-bisphosphate levels increase. (Recall thatfructose-1,6-bisphosphate is an intermediate in the first half of glycolysis.) The regulation of pyruvate kinase involvesphosphorylation by a kinase (pyruvate kinase kinase), resulting in a less-active enzyme. Dephosphorylation by aphosphatase reactivates it. Pyruvate kinase is also regulated by ATP (a negative allosteric effect).If more energy is needed, more pyruvate will be converted into acetyl CoA through the action of pyruvate dehydrogenase. Ifeither acetyl groups or NADH accumulate, there is less need for the reaction and the rate decreases. Pyruvate dehydrogenaseis also regulated by phosphorylation: A kinase phosphorylates it to form an inactive enzyme, and a phosphatase reactivatesit. The kinase and the phosphatase are also regulated.Citric Acid CycleThe citric acid cycle is controlled through the enzymes that catalyze the reactions that make the first two molecules ofNADH (Figure 7.9). These enzymes are isocitrate dehydrogenase and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. When adequate ATPand NADH levels are available, the rates of these reactions decrease. When more ATP is needed, as reflected in rising ADPlevels, the rate increases. α-Ketoglutarate dehydrogenase will also be affected by the levels of succinyl CoA—a subsequentintermediate in the cycle—causing a decrease in activity. A decrease in the rate of operation of the pathway at this point isnot necessarily negative, as the increased levels of the α-ketoglutarate not used by the citric acid cycle can be used by thecell for amino acid (glutamate) synthesis.Electron Transport ChainSpecific enzymes of the electron transport chain are unaffected by feedback inhibition, but the rate of electron transportthrough the pathway is affected by the levels of ADP and ATP. Greater ATP consumption by a cell is indicated by a buildupof ADP. As ATP usage decreases, the concentration of ADP decreases, and now, ATP begins to build up in the cell. Thischange is the relative concentration of ADP to ATP triggers the cell to slow down the electron transport chain.