Seed plants dominate the landscape and play an integral role in human societies. (a) Palm trees growalong the shoreline; (b) wheat is a crop grown in most of the world; (c) the flower of the cotton plant produces fibersthat are woven into fabric; (d) the potent alkaloids of the beautiful opium poppy have influenced human life both asa medicinal remedy and as a dangerously addictive drug.
The lush palms on tropical shorelines do not depend on water for the dispersal of their pollen, fertilization, or the survivalof the zygote—unlike mosses, liverworts, and ferns of the terrain. Seed plants, such as palms, have broken free from theneed to rely on water for their reproductive needs. They play an integral role in all aspects of life on the planet, shaping thephysical terrain, influencing the climate, and maintaining life as we know it. For millennia, human societies have dependedon seed plants for nutrition and medicinal compounds: and more recently, for industrial by-products, such as timber andpaper, dyes, and textiles. Palms provide materials including rattans, oils, and dates. Wheat is grown to feed both human andanimal populations. The fruit of the cotton boll flower is harvested as a boll, with its fibers transformed into clothing or pulpfor paper. The showy opium poppy is valued both as an ornamental flower and as a source of potent opiate compounds.
The first plants to colonize land were most likely closely related to modern day mosses (bryophytes) and are thought tohave appeared about 500 million years ago. They were followed by liverworts (also bryophytes) and primitive vascul
plants—the pterophytes—from which modern ferns are derived. The lifecycle of bryophytes and pterophytes ischaracterized by the alternation of generations, like gymnosperms and angiosperms; what sets bryophytes and pterophytesapart from gymnosperms and angiosperms is their reproductive requirement for water. The completion of the bryophyte andpterophyte life cycle requires water because the male gametophyte releases sperm, which must swim—propelled by theirflagella—to reach and fertilize the female gamete or egg. After fertilization, the zygote matures and grows into a sporophyte,which in turn will form sporangia or "spore vessels." In the sporangia, mother cells undergo meiosis and produce the haploidspores. Release of spores in a suitable environment will lead to germination and a new generation of gametophytes.In seed plants, the evolutionary trend led to a dominant sporophyte generation, and at the same time, a systematic reductionin the size of the gametophyte: from a conspicuous structure to a microscopic cluster of cells enclosed in the tissues of thesporophyte. Whereas lower vascular plants, such as club mosses and ferns, are mostly homosporous (produce only one typeof spore), all seed plants, or spermatophytes, are heterosporous. They form two types of spores: megaspores (female) andmicrospores (male). Megaspores develop into female gametophytes that produce eggs, and microspores mature into malegametophytes that generate sperm. Because the gametophytes mature within the spores, they are not free-living, as are thegametophytes of other seedless vascular plants. Heterosporous seedless plants are seen as the evolutionary forerunners ofseed plants.Seeds and pollen—two critical adaptations to drought, and to reproduction that doesn’t require water—distinguish seedplants from other (seedless) vascular plants. Both adaptations were required for the colonization of land begun by thebryophytes and their ancestors. Fossils place the earliest distinct seed plants at about 350 million years ago. The firstreliable record of gymnosperms dates their appearance to the Pennsylvanian period, about 319 million years ago (Figure26.2). Gymnosperms were preceded by progymnosperms, the first naked seed plants, which arose about 380 million yearsago. Progymnosperms were a transitional group of plants that superficially resembled conifers (cone bearers) because theyproduced wood from the secondary growth of the vascular tissues; however, they still reproduced like ferns, releasing sporesinto the environment. Gymnosperms dominated the landscape in the early (Triassic) and middle (Jurassic) Mesozoic era.Angiosperms surpassed gymnosperms by the middle of the Cretaceous (about 100 million years ago) in the late Mesozoicera, and today are the most abundant plant group in most terrestrial biomes.
Various plant species evolved in different eras.
Pollen and seed were innovative structures that allowed seed plants to break their dependence on water for reproductionand development of the embryo, and to conquer dry land. The pollen grains are the male gametophytes, which containthe sperm (gametes) of the plant. The small haploid (1n) cells are encased in a protective coat that prevents desiccation(drying out) and mechanical damage. Pollen grains can travel far from their original sporophyte, spreading the plant’s genes.The seed offers the embryo protection, nourishment, and a mechanism to maintain dormancy for tens or even thousands ofyears, ensuring germination can occur when growth conditions are optimal. Seeds therefore allow plants to disperse the nextgeneration through both space and time. With such evolutionary advantages, seed plants have become the most successfuland familiar group of plants, in part because of their size and striking appearance.
Evolution of GymnospermsThe fossil plant Elkinsia polymorpha, a "seed fern" from the Devonian period—about 400 million years ago—is consideredthe earliest seed plant known to date. Seed ferns (Figure 26.3) produced their seeds along their branches without specializedstructures. What makes them the first true seed plants is that they developed structures called cupules to enclose and protectthe ovule—the female gametophyte and associated tissues—which develops into a seed upon fertilization. Seed plantsresembling modern tree ferns became more numerous and diverse in the coal swamps of the Carboniferous period.
This fossilized leaf is from Glossopteris, a seed fern that thrived during the Permian age (290–240 millionyears ago).
Fossil records indicate the first gymnosperms (progymnosperms) most likely originated in the Paleozoic era, during themiddle Devonian period: about 390 million years ago. Following the wet Mississippian and Pennsylvanian periods, whichwere dominated by giant fern trees, the Permian period was dry. This gave a reproductive edge to seed plants, which arebetter adapted to survive dry spells. The Ginkgoales, a group of gymnosperms with only one surviving species—the Gingkobiloba—were the first gymnosperms to appear during the lower Jurassic. Gymnosperms expanded in the Mesozoic era(about 240 million years ago), supplanting ferns in the landscape, and reaching their greatest diversity during this time. TheJurassic period was as much the age of the cycads (palm-tree-like gymnosperms) as the age of the dinosaurs. Gingkoalesand the more familiar conifers also dotted the landscape. Although angiosperms (flowering plants) are the major form ofplant life in most biomes, gymnosperms still dominate some ecosystems, such as the taiga (boreal forests) and the alpineforests at higher mountain elevations (Figure 26.4) because of their adaptation to cold and dry growth conditions.
This boreal forest (taiga) has low-lying plants and conifer trees.
Seeds and Pollen as an Evolutionary Adaptation to Dry LandUnlike bryophyte and fern spores (which are haploid cells dependent on moisture for rapid development of gametophytes),seeds contain a diploid embryo that will germinate into a sporophyte. Storage tissue to sustain growth and a protectivecoat give seeds their superior evolutionary advantage. Several layers of hardened tissue prevent desiccation, and freereproduction from the need for a constant supply of water. Furthermore, seeds remain in a state of dormancy—inducedby desiccation and the hormone abscisic acid—until conditions for growth become favorable. Whether blown by the wind, floating on water, or carried away by animals, seeds are scattered in an expanding geographic range, thus avoidingcompetition with the parent plant.Pollen grains (Figure 26.5) are male gametophytes and are carried by wind, water, or a pollinator. The whole structureis protected from desiccation and can reach the female organs without dependence on water. Male gametes reach femalegametophyte and the egg cell gamete though a pollen tube: an extension of a cell within the pollen grain. The sperm ofmodern gymnosperms lack flagella, but in cycads and the Gingko, the sperm still possess flagella that allow them to swimdown the pollen tube to the female gamete; however, they are enclosed in a pollen grain.This fossilized pollen is from a Buckbean fen core found in Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming. Thepollen is magnified 1,054 times.
Evolution of AngiospermsUndisputed fossil records place the massive appearance and diversification of angiosperms in the middle to late Mesozoicera. Angiosperms (“seed in a vessel”) produce a flower containing male and/or female reproductive structures. Fossilevidence (Figure 26.6) indicates that flowering plants first appeared in the Lower Cretaceous, about 125 million yearsago, and were rapidly diversifying by the Middle Cretaceous, about 100 million years ago. Earlier traces of angiospermsare scarce. Fossilized pollen recovered from Jurassic geological material has been attributed to angiosperms. A few earlyCretaceous rocks show clear imprints of leaves resembling angiosperm leaves. By the mid-Cretaceous, a staggering numberof diverse flowering plants crowd the fossil record. The same geological period is also marked by the appearance of manymodern groups of insects, including pollinating insects that played a key role in ecology and the evolution of floweringplants.Although several hypotheses have been offered to explain this sudden profusion and variety of flowering plants, nonehave garnered the consensus of paleobotanists (scientists who study ancient plants). New data in comparative genomicsand paleobotany have, however, shed some light on the evolution of angiosperms. Rather than being derived fromgymnosperms, angiosperms form a sister clade (a species and its descendents) that developed in parallel with thegymnosperms. The two innovative structures of flowers and fruit represent an improved reproductive strategy that served toprotect the embryo, while increasing genetic variability and range. Paleobotanists debate whether angiosperms evolved fromsmall woody bushes, or were basal angiosperms related to tropical grasses. Both views draw support from cladistics studies,and the so-called woody magnoliid hypothesis—which proposes that the early ancestors of angiosperms were shrubs—alsooffers molecular biological evidence.
The most primitive living angiosperm is considered to be Amborella trichopoda, a small plant native to the rainforest ofNew Caledonia, an island in the South Pacific. Analysis of the genome of A. trichopoda has shown that it is related to allexisting flowering plants and belongs to the oldest confirmed branch of the angiosperm family tree. A few other angiospermgroups called basal angiosperms, are viewed as primitive because they branched off early from the phylogenetic tree. Mostmodern angiosperms are classified as either monocots or eudicots, based on the structure of their leaves and embryos.Basal angiosperms, such as water lilies, are considered more primitive because they share morphological traits with bothmonocots and eudicots.
This leaf imprint shows a Ficus speciosissima, an angiosperm that flourished during the Cretaceousperiod.
Flowers and Fruits as an Evolutionary AdaptationAngiosperms produce their gametes in separate organs, which are usually housed in a flower. Both fertilization and embryodevelopment take place inside an anatomical structure that provides a stable system of sexual reproduction largely shelteredfrom environmental fluctuations. Flowering plants are the most diverse phylum on Earth after insects; flowers come in abewildering array of sizes, shapes, colors, smells, and arrangements. Most flowers have a mutualistic pollinator, with thedistinctive features of flowers reflecting the nature of the pollination agent. The relationship between pollinator and flowercharacteristics is one of the great examples of coevolution.Following fertilization of the egg, the ovule grows into a seed. The surrounding tissues of the ovary thicken, developinginto a fruit that will protect the seed and often ensure its dispersal over a wide geographic range. Not all fruits developfrom an ovary; such structures are “false fruits.” Like flowers, fruit can vary tremendously in appearance, size, smell, andtaste. Tomatoes, walnut shells and avocados are all examples of fruit. As with pollen and seeds, fruits also act as agents ofdispersal. Some may be carried away by the wind. Many attract animals that will eat the fruit and pass the seeds throughtheir digestive systems, then deposit the seeds in another location. Cockleburs are covered with stiff, hooked spines that canhook into fur (or clothing) and hitch a ride on an animal for long distances. The cockleburs that clung to the velvet trousersof an enterprising Swiss hiker, George de Mestral, inspired his invention of the loop and hook fastener he named Velcro.
Gymnosperms, meaning “naked seeds,” are a diverse group of seed plants and are paraphyletic. Paraphyletic groups arethose in which not all members are descendants of a single common ancestor. Their characteristics include naked seeds,separate female and male gametes, pollination by wind, and tracheids (which transport water and solutes in the vascularsystem).Gymnosperm seeds are not enclosed in an ovary; rather, they are exposed on cones or modified leaves. Sporophylls arespecialized leaves that produce sporangia. The term strobilus (plural = strobili) describes a tight arrangement of sporophyllsaround a central stalk, as seen in cones. Some seeds are enveloped by sporophyte tissues upon maturation. The layer ofsporophyte tissue that surrounds the megasporangium, and later, the embryo, is called the integument.Gymnosperms were the dominant phylum in Mesozoic era. They are adapted to live where fresh water is scarce during partof the year, or in the nitrogen-poor soil of a bog. Therefore, they are still the prominent phylum in the coniferous biomeor taiga, where the evergreen conifers have a selective advantage in cold and dry weather. Evergreen conifers continue lowlevels of photosynthesis during the cold months, and are ready to take advantage of the first sunny days of spring. Onedisadvantage is that conifers are more susceptible than deciduous trees to infestations because conifers do not lose theirleaves all at once. They cannot, therefore, shed parasites and restart with a fresh supply of leaves in spring.The life cycle of a gymnosperm involves alternation of generations, with a dominant sporophyte in which the femalegametophyte resides, and reduced gametophytes. All gymnosperms are heterosporous. The male and female reproductiveorgans can form in cones or strobili. Male and female sporangia are produced either on the same plant, described asmonoecious (“one home” or bisexual), or on separate plants, referred to as dioecious (“two homes” or unisexual) plants.The life cycle of a conifer will serve as our example of reproduction in gymnosperms.Life Cycle of a ConiferPine trees are conifers (cone bearing) and carry both male and female sporophylls on the same mature sporophyte.Therefore, they are monoecious plants. Like all gymnosperms, pines are heterosporous and generate two different typesof spores: male microspores and female megaspores. In the male cones, or staminate cones, the microsporocytes giverise to pollen grains by meiosis. In the spring, large amounts of yellow pollen are released and carried by the wind. Somegametophytes will land on a female cone. Pollination is defined as the initiation of pollen tube growth. The pollen tubedevelops slowly, and the generative cell in the pollen grain divides into two haploid sperm cells by mitosis. At fertilization,one of the sperm cells will finally unite its haploid nucleus with the haploid nucleus of a haploid egg cell.Female cones, or ovulate cones, contain two ovules per scale. One megaspore mother cell, or megasporocyte, undergoesmeiosis in each ovule. Three of the four cells break down; only a single surviving cell will develop into a femalemulticellular gametophyte, which encloses archegonia (an archegonium is a reproductive organ that contains a single largeegg). Upon fertilization, the diploid egg will give rise to the embryo, which is enclosed in a seed coat of tissue from theparent plant. Fertilization and seed development is a long process in pine trees: it may take up to two years after pollination.The seed that is formed contains three generations of tissues: the seed coat that originates from the sporophyte tissue, thegametophyte that will provide nutrients, and the embryo itself.
Figure 26.8 illustrates the life cycle of a conifer. The sporophyte (2n) phase is the longest phase in the life of a gymnosperm.The gametophytes (1n)—microspores and megaspores—are reduced in size. It may take more than year between pollinationand fertilization while the pollen tube grows towards the megasporocyte (2n), which undergoes meiosis into megaspores.The megaspores will mature into eggs (1n).
Diversity of GymnospermsModern gymnosperms are classified into four phyla. Coniferophyta, Cycadophyta, and Ginkgophyta are similar in theirproduction of secondary cambium (cells that generate the vascular system of the trunk or stem and are partially specializedfor water transportation) and their pattern of seed development. However, the three phyla are not closely relatedphylogenetically to each other. Gnetophyta are considered the closest group to angiosperms because they produce truexylem tissue.Conifers (Coniferophyta)Conifers are the dominant phylum of gymnosperms, with the most variety of species (Figure 26.9). Most are typically talltrees that usually bear scale-like or needle-like leaves. Water evaporation from leaves is reduced by their thin shape andthe thick cuticle. Snow slides easily off needle-shaped leaves, keeping the load light and decreasing breaking of branches.Adaptations to cold and dry weather explain the predominance of conifers at high altitudes and in cold climates. Conifersinclude familiar evergreen trees such as pines, spruces, firs, cedars, sequoias, and yews. A few species are deciduousand lose their leaves in fall. The European larch and the tamarack are examples of deciduous conifers (Figure 26.9c).Many coniferous trees are harvested for paper pulp and timber. The wood of conifers is more primitive than the wood ofangiosperms; it contains tracheids, but no vessel elements, and is therefore referred to as “soft wood.”
Conifers are the dominant form of vegetation in cold or arid environments and at high altitudes. Shownhere are the (a) evergreen spruce Picea sp., (b) juniper Juniperus sp., (c) sequoia Sequoia Semervirens, which isa deciduous gymnosperm, and (d) the tamarack Larix larcinia. Notice the yellow leaves of the tamarack.
CycadsCycads thrive in mild climates, and are often mistaken for palms because of the shape of their large, compound leaves.Cycads bear large cones (Figure 26.10), and may be pollinated by beetles rather than wind: unusual for a gymnosperm.They dominated the landscape during the age of dinosaurs in the Mesozoic, but only a hundred or so species persisted tomodern times. They face possible extinction, and several species are protected through international conventions. Becauseof their attractive shape, they are often used as ornamental plants in gardens in the tropics and subtropics.
This Encephalartos ferox cycad has large cones and broad, fern-like leaves.
GingkophytesThe single surviving species of the gingkophytes group is the Gingko biloba (Figure 26.11). Its fan-shaped leaves—uniqueamong seed plants because they feature a dichotomous venation pattern—turn yellow in autumn and fall from the tree.For centuries, G. biloba was cultivated by Chinese Buddhist monks in monasteries, which ensured its preservation. It isplanted in public spaces because it is unusually resistant to pollution. Male and female organs are produced on separateplants. Typically, gardeners plant only male trees because the seeds produced by the female plant have an off-putting smellof rancid butter.
This plate from the 1870 book Flora Japonica, Sectio Prima (Tafelband) depicts the leaves and fruit ofGingko biloba, as drawn by Philipp Franz von Siebold and Joseph Gerhard Zuccarini.GnetophytesGnetophytes are the closest relative to modern angiosperms, and include three dissimilar genera of plants: Ephedra,Gnetum, and Welwitschia (Figure 26.12). Like angiosperms, they have broad leaves. In tropical and subtropical zones,gnetophytes are vines or small shrubs. Ephedra occurs in dry areas of the West Coast of the United States and Mexico.Ephedra’s small, scale-like leaves are the source of the compound ephedrine, which is used in medicine as a potent decongestant. Because ephedrine is similar to amphetamines, both in chemical structure and neurological effects, its use isrestricted to prescription drugs. Like angiosperms, but unlike other gymnosperms, all gnetophytes possess vessel elementsin their xylem.
Ephedra viridis, known by the common name Mormon tea, grows on the West Coast of the UnitedStates and Mexico. (b) Gnetum gnemon grows in Malaysia. (c) The large Welwitschia mirabilis can be found in theNamibian desert.
From their humble and still obscure beginning during the early Jurassic period, the angiosperms—or flowering plants—haveevolved to dominate most terrestrial ecosystems (Figure 26.13). With more than 250,000 species, the angiosperm phylum(Anthophyta) is second only to insects in terms of diversification.
These flowers grow in a botanical garden border in Bellevue, WA. Flowering plants dominate terrestriallandscapes. The vivid colors of flowers are an adaptation to pollination by animals such as insects and birds.
The success of angiosperms is due to two novel reproductive structures: flowers and fruit. The function of the flower is toensure pollination. Flowers also provide protection for the ovule and developing embryo inside a receptacle. The functionof the fruit is seed dispersal. They also protect the developing seed. Different fruit structures or tissues on fruit—such assweet flesh, wings, parachutes, or spines that grab—reflect the dispersal strategies that help spread seeds.FlowersFlowers are modified leaves, or sporophylls, organized around a central stalk. Although they vary greatly in appearance, allflowers contain the same structures: sepals, petals, carpels, and stamens. The peduncle attaches the flower to the plant. Awhorl of sepals (collectively called the calyx) is located at the base of the peduncle and encloses the unopened floral bud.Sepals are usually photosynthetic organs, although there are some exceptions. For example, the corolla in lilies and tulipsconsists of three sepals and three petals that look virtually identical. Petals, collectively the corolla, are located inside thewhorl of sepals and often display vivid colors to attract pollinators. Flowers pollinated by wind are usually small, feathery,and visually inconspicuous. Sepals and petals together form the perianth. The sexual organs (carpels and stamens) arelocated at the center of the flower.As illustrated in Figure 26.14, styles, stigmas, and ovules constitute the female organ: the gynoecium or carpel. Flowerstructure is very diverse, and carpels may be singular, multiple, or fused. Multiple fused carpels comprise a pistil. Themegaspores and the female gametophytes are produced and protected by the thick tissues of the carpel. A long, thin structurecalled a style leads from the sticky stigma, where pollen is deposited, to the ovary, enclosed in the carpel. The ovary housesone or more ovules, each of which will develop into a seed upon fertilization. The male reproductive organs, the stamens(collectively called the androecium), surround the central carpel. Stamens are composed of a thin stalk called a filamentand a sac-like structure called the anther. The filament supports the anther, where the microspores are produced by meiosisand develop into pollen grains.
This image depicts the structure of a perfect flower. Perfect flowers produce both male and female floralorgans. The flower shown has only one carpel, but some flowers have a cluster of carpels. Together, all the carpelsmake up the gynoecium.
FruitAs the seed develops, the walls of the ovary thicken and form the fruit. The seed forms in an ovary, which also enlarges asthe seeds grow. In botany, a fertilized and fully grown, ripened ovary is a fruit. Many foods commonly called vegetables areactually fruit. Eggplants, zucchini, string beans, and bell peppers are all technically fruit because they contain seeds and arederived from the thick ovary tissue. Acorns are nuts, and winged maple whirligigs (whose botanical name is samara) arealso fruit. Botanists classify fruit into more than two dozen different categories, only a few of which are actually fleshy andsweet.Mature fruit can be fleshy or dry. Fleshy fruit include the familiar berries, peaches, apples, grapes, and tomatoes. Rice,wheat, and nuts are examples of dry fruit. Another distinction is that not all fruits are derived from the ovary. For instance,strawberries are derived from the receptacle and apples from the pericarp, or hypanthium. Some fruits are derived fromseparate ovaries in a single flower, such as the raspberry. Other fruits, such as the pineapple, form from clusters of flowers.Additionally, some fruits, like watermelon and orange, have rinds. Regardless of how they are formed, fruits are an agentof seed dispersal. The variety of shapes and characteristics reflect the mode of dispersal. Wind carries the light dry fruit oftrees and dandelions. Water transports floating coconuts. Some fruits attract herbivores with color or perfume, or as food.Once eaten, tough, undigested seeds are dispersed through the herbivore’s feces. Other fruits have burs and hooks to clingto fur and hitch rides on animals.The Life Cycle of an AngiospermThe adult, or sporophyte, phase is the main phase of an angiosperm’s life cycle (Figure 26.15). Like gymnosperms,angiosperms are heterosporous. Therefore, they generate microspores, which will generate pollen grains as the malegametophytes, and megaspores, which will form an ovule that contains female gametophytes. Inside the anthers’microsporangia, male gametophytes divide by meiosis to generate haploid microspores, which, in turn, undergo mitosis andgive rise to pollen grains. Each pollen grain contains two cells: one generative cell that will divide into two sperm and asecond cell that will become the pollen tube cell.
The ovule, sheltered within the ovary of the carpel, contains the megasporangium protected by two layers of integumentsand the ovary wall. Within each megasporangium, a megasporocyte undergoes meiosis, generating four megaspores—threesmall and one large. Only the large megaspore survives; it produces the female gametophyte, referred to as the embryosac. The megaspore divides three times to form an eight-cell stage. Four of these cells migrate to each pole of the embryosac; two come to the equator, and will eventually fuse to form a 2n polar nucleus; the three cells away from the egg formantipodals, and the two cells closest to the egg become the synergids.The mature embryo sac contains one egg cell, two synergids or “helper” cells, three antipodal cells, and two polar nucleiin a central cell. When a pollen grain reaches the stigma, a pollen tube extends from the grain, grows down the style, andenters through the micropyle: an opening in the integuments of the ovule. The two sperm cells are deposited in the embryosac.A double fertilization event then occurs. One sperm and the egg combine, forming a diploid zygote—the future embryo.The other sperm fuses with the 2n polar nuclei, forming a triploid cell that will develop into the endosperm, which is tissuethat serves as a food reserve. The zygote develops into an embryo with a radicle, or small root, and one (monocot) or two(dicot) leaf-like organs called cotyledons. This difference in the number of embryonic leaves is the basis for the two major groups of angiosperms: the monocots and the eudicots. Seed food reserves are stored outside the embryo, in the form ofcomplex carbohydrates, lipids or proteins. The cotyledons serve as conduits to transmit the broken-down food reserves fromtheir storage site inside the seed to the developing embryo. The seed consists of a toughened layer of integuments formingthe coat, the endosperm with food reserves, and at the center, the well-protected embryo.Most flowers are monoecious or bisexual, which means that they carry both stamens and carpels; only a few species selfpollinate.Monoecious flowers are also known as “perfect” flowers because they contain both types of sex organs (Figure26.14). Both anatomical and environmental barriers promote cross-pollination mediated by a physical agent (wind or water),or an animal, such as an insect or bird. Cross-pollination increases genetic diversity in a species.Diversity of AngiospermsAngiosperms are classified in a single phylum: the Anthophyta. Modern angiosperms appear to be a monophyletic group,which means that they originate from a single ancestor. Flowering plants are divided into two major groups, according tothe structure of the cotyledons, pollen grains, and other structures. Monocots include grasses and lilies, and eudicots ordicots form a polyphyletic group. Basal angiosperms are a group of plants that are believed to have branched off beforethe separation into monocots and eudicots because they exhibit traits from both groups. They are categorized separatelyin many classification schemes. The Magnoliidae (magnolia trees, laurels, and water lilies) and the Piperaceae (peppers)belong to the basal angiosperm group.Basal AngiospermsThe Magnoliidae are represented by the magnolias: tall trees bearing large, fragrant flowers that have many parts and areconsidered archaic (Figure 26.16d). Laurel trees produce fragrant leaves and small, inconspicuous flowers. The Lauralesgrow mostly in warmer climates and are small trees and shrubs. Familiar plants in this group include the bay laurel,cinnamon, spice bush (Figure 26.16a), and avocado tree. The Nymphaeales are comprised of the water lilies, lotus (Figure26.16c), and similar plants; all species thrive in freshwater biomes, and have leaves that float on the water surface or growunderwater. Water lilies are particularly prized by gardeners, and have graced ponds and pools for thousands of years. ThePiperales are a group of herbs, shrubs, and small trees that grow in the tropical climates. They have small flowers withoutpetals that are tightly arranged in long spikes. Many species are the source of prized fragrance or spices, for example theberries of Piper nigrum (Figure 26.16b) are the familiar black peppercorns that are used to flavor many dishes.
The (a) common spicebush belongs to the Laurales, the same family as cinnamon and bay laurel. Thefruit of (b) the Piper nigrum plant is black pepper, the main product that was traded along spice routes. Notice thesmall, unobtrusive, clustered flowers. (c) Lotus flowers, Nelumbo nucifera, have been cultivated since ancient timesfor their ornamental value; the root of the lotus flower is eaten as a vegetable. The red seeds of (d) a magnolia tree,characteristic of the final stage, are just starting to appear.
MonocotsPlants in the monocot group are primarily identified as such by the presence of a single cotyledon in the seedling. Otheranatomical features shared by monocots include veins that run parallel to the length of the leaves, and flower parts thatare arranged in a three- or six-fold symmetry. True woody tissue is rarely found in monocots. In palm trees, vascular andparenchyma tissues produced by the primary and secondary thickening meristems form the trunk. The pollen from thefirst angiosperms was monosulcate, containing a single furrow or pore through the outer layer. This feature is still seenin the modern monocots. Vascular tissue of the stem is not arranged in any particular pattern. The root system is mostlyadventitious and unusually positioned, with no major tap root. The monocots include familiar plants such as the true lilies(which are at the origin of their alternate name of Liliopsida), orchids, grasses, and palms. Many important crops aremonocots, such as rice and other cereals, corn, sugar cane, and tropical fruits like bananas and pineapples.
The world’s major crops are flowering plants. (a) Rice, (b) wheat, and (c) bananas are monocots, while(d) cabbage, (e) beans, and (f) peaches are dicots.
EudicotsEudicots, or true dicots, are characterized by the presence of two cotyledons in the developing shoot. Veins form a networkin leaves, and flower parts come in four, five, or many whorls. Vascular tissue forms a ring in the stem; in monocots,vascular tissue is scattered in the stem. Eudicots can be herbaceous (like grasses), or produce woody tissues. Most eudicotsproduce pollen that is trisulcate or triporate, with three furrows or pores. The root system is usually anchored by one mainroot developed from the embryonic radicle. Eudicots comprise two-thirds of all flowering plants. The major differencesbetween monocots and eudicots are summarized in Table 26.1. Many species exhibit characteristics that belong to eithergroup; as such, the classification of a plant as a monocot or a eudicot is not always clearly evident.
Without seed plants, life as we know it would not be possible. Plants play a key role in the maintenance of terrestrialecosystems through stabilization of soils, cycling of carbon, and climate moderation. Large tropical forests release oxygenand act as carbon dioxide sinks. Seed plants provide shelter to many life forms, as well as food for herbivores, therebyindirectly feeding carnivores. Plant secondary metabolites are used for medicinal purposes and industrial production.Animals and Plants: HerbivoryCoevolution of flowering plants and insects is a hypothesis that has received much attention and support, especially becauseboth angiosperms and insects diversified at about the same time in the middle Mesozoic. Many authors have attributed thediversity of plants and insects to pollination and herbivory, or consumption of plants by insects and other animals. Thisis believed to have been as much a driving force as pollination. Coevolution of herbivores and plant defenses is observedin nature. Unlike animals, most plants cannot outrun predators or use mimicry to hide from hungry animals. A sort ofarms race exists between plants and herbivores. To “combat” herbivores, some plant seeds—such as acorn and unripenedpersimmon—are high in alkaloids and therefore unsavory to some animals. Other plants are protected by bark, althoughsome animals developed specialized mouth pieces to tear and chew vegetal material. Spines and thorns (Figure 26.18) determost animals, except for mammals with thick fur, and some birds have specialized beaks to get past such defenses.
Spines and (b) thorns are examples of plant defenses.
Herbivory has been used by seed plants for their own benefit in a display of mutualistic relationships. The dispersal of fruitby animals is the most striking example. The plant offers to the herbivore a nutritious source of food in return for spreadingthe plant’s genetic material to a wider area.An extreme example of collaboration between an animal and a plant is the case of acacia trees and ants. The trees supportthe insects with shelter and food. In return, ants discourage herbivores, both invertebrates and vertebrates, by stinging andattacking leaf-eating insects.Animals and Plants: PollinationGrasses are a successful group of flowering plants that are wind pollinated. They produce large amounts of powdery pollencarried over large distances by the wind. The flowers are small and wisp-like. Large trees such as oaks, maples, and birchesare also wind pollinated.
More than 80 percent of angiosperms depend on animals for pollination: the transfer of pollen from the anther to the stigma.Consequently, plants have developed many adaptations to attract pollinators. The specificity of specialized plant structuresthat target animals can be very surprising. It is possible, for example, to determine the type of pollinator favored by a plantjust from the flower’s characteristics. Many bird or insect-pollinated flowers secrete nectar, which is a sugary liquid. Theyalso produce both fertile pollen, for reproduction, and sterile pollen rich in nutrients for birds and insects. Butterflies andbees can detect ultraviolet light. Flowers that attract these pollinators usually display a pattern of low ultraviolet reflectancethat helps them quickly locate the flower's center and collect nectar while being dusted with pollen (Figure 26.19). Large,red flowers with little smell and a long funnel shape are preferred by hummingbirds, who have good color perception, apoor sense of smell, and need a strong perch. White flowers opened at night attract moths. Other animals—such as bats,lemurs, and lizards—can also act as pollinating agents. Any disruption to these interactions, such as the disappearance ofbees as a consequence of colony collapse disorders, can lead to disaster for agricultural industries that depend heavily onpollinated crops.
As a bee collects nectar from a flower, it is dusted by pollen, which it then disperses to other flowers.
The Importance of Seed Plants in Human LifeSeed plants are the foundation of human diets across the world (Figure 26.20). Many societies eat almost exclusivelyvegetarian fare and depend solely on seed plants for their nutritional needs. A few crops (rice, wheat, and potatoes)dominate the agricultural landscape. Many crops were developed during the agricultural revolution, when human societiesmade the transition from nomadic hunter–gatherers to horticulture and agriculture. Cereals, rich in carbohydrates, providethe staple of many human diets. Beans and nuts supply proteins. Fats are derived from crushed seeds, as is the case forpeanut and rapeseed (canola) oils, or fruits such as olives. Animal husbandry also consumes large amounts of crops.Staple crops are not the only food derived from seed plants. Fruits and vegetables provide nutrients, vitamins, and fiber.Sugar, to sweeten dishes, is produced from the monocot sugarcane and the eudicot sugar beet. Drinks are made frominfusions of tea leaves, chamomile flowers, crushed coffee beans, or powdered cocoa beans. Spices come from manydifferent plant parts: saffron and cloves are stamens and buds, black pepper and vanilla are seeds, the bark of a bush in theLaurales family supplies cinnamon, and the herbs that flavor many dishes come from dried leaves and fruit, such as thepungent red chili pepper. The volatile oils of flowers and bark provide the scent of perfumes. Additionally, no discussionof seed plant contribution to human diet would be complete without the mention of alcohol. Fermentation of plant-derivedsugars and starches is used to produce alcoholic beverages in all societies. In some cases, the beverages are derived from thefermentation of sugars from fruit, as with wines and, in other cases, from the fermentation of carbohydrates derived fromseeds, as with beers.Seed plants have many other uses, including providing wood as a source of timber for construction, fuel, and material tobuild furniture. Most paper is derived from the pulp of coniferous trees. Fibers of seed plants such as cotton, flax, and hempare woven into cloth. Textile dyes, such as indigo, were mostly of plant origin until the advent of synthetic chemical dyes.Lastly, it is more difficult to quantify the benefits of ornamental seed plants. These grace private and public spaces, addingbeauty and serenity to human lives and inspiring painters and poets alike.
Humans rely on plants for a variety of reasons. (a) Cacao beans were introduced in Europe from the NewWorld, where they were used by Mesoamerican civilizations. Combined with sugar, another plant product, chocolate isa popular food. (b) Flowers like the tulip are cultivated for their beauty. (c) Quinine, extracted from cinchona trees, isused to treat malaria, to reduce fever, and to alleviate pain. (d) This violin is made of wood.
The medicinal properties of plants have been known to human societies since ancient times. There are references to theuse of plants’ curative properties in Egyptian, Babylonian, and Chinese writings from 5,000 years ago. Many modernsynthetic therapeutic drugs are derived or synthesized de novo from plant secondary metabolites. It is important to notethat the same plant extract can be a therapeutic remedy at low concentrations, become an addictive drug at higher doses,and can potentially kill at high concentrations. Table 26.3 presents a few drugs, their plants of origin, and their medicinalapplications.
Biodiversity of PlantsBiodiversity ensures a resource for new food crops and medicines. Plant life balances ecosystems, protects watersheds,mitigates erosion, moderates climate and provides shelter for many animal species. Threats to plant diversity, however,come from many angles. The explosion of the human population, especially in tropical countries where birth rates arehighest and economic development is in full swing, is leading to human encroachment into forested areas. To feed the largerpopulation, humans need to obtain arable land, so there is massive clearing of trees. The need for more energy to power larger cities and economic growth therein leads to the construction of dams, the consequent flooding of ecosystems, andincreased emissions of pollutants. Other threats to tropical forests come from poachers, who log trees for their preciouswood. Ebony and Brazilian rosewood, both on the endangered list, are examples of tree species driven almost to extinctionby indiscriminate logging.The number of plant species becoming extinct is increasing at an alarming rate. Because ecosystems are in a delicatebalance, and seed plants maintain close symbiotic relationships with animals—whether predators or pollinators—thedisappearance of a single plant can lead to the extinction of connected animal species. A real and pressing issue is thatmany plant species have not yet been catalogued, and so their place in the ecosystem is unknown. These unknown speciesare threatened by logging, habitat destruction, and loss of pollinators. They may become extinct before we have the chanceto begin to understand the possible impacts from their disappearance. Efforts to preserve biodiversity take several linesof action, from preserving heirloom seeds to barcoding species. Heirloom seeds come from plants that were traditionallygrown in human populations, as opposed to the seeds used for large-scale agricultural production. Barcoding is a techniquein which one or more short gene sequences, taken from a well-characterized portion of the genome, are used to identify aspecies through DNA analysis.
