Many species of fungus produce the familiar mushroom (a) which is a reproductive structure. This (b)coral fungus displays brightly colored fruiting bodies. This electron micrograph shows (c) the spore-bearing structuresof Aspergillus, a type of toxic fungi found mostly in soil and plants.The word fungus comes from the Latin word for mushrooms. Indeed, the familiar mushroom is a reproductive structure usedby many types of fungi. However, there are also many fungi species that don't produce mushrooms at all. Being eukaryotes,a typical fungal cell contains a true nucleus and many membrane-bound organelles. The kingdom Fungi includes anenormous variety of living organisms collectively referred to as Eucomycota, or true Fungi. While scientists have identifiedabout 100,000 species of fungi, this is only a fraction of the 1.5 million species of fungus likely present on Earth. Ediblemushrooms, yeasts, black mold, and the producer of the antibiotic penicillin, Penicillium notatum, are all members of thekingdom Fungi, which belongs to the domain Eukarya.Fungi, once considered plant-like organisms, are more closely related to animals than plants. Fungi are not capable ofphotosynthesis: they are heterotrophic because they use complex organic compounds as sources of energy and carbon.Some fungal organisms multiply only asexually, whereas others undergo both asexual reproduction and sexual reproductionwith alternation of generations. Most fungi produce a large number of spores, which are haploid cells that can undergomitosis to form multicellular, haploid individuals. Like bacteria, fungi play an essential role in ecosystems because they aredecomposers and participate in the cycling of nutrients by breaking down organic materials to simple molecules.Fungi often interact with other organisms, forming beneficial or mutualistic associations. For example most terrestrial plantsform symbiotic relationships with fungi. The roots of the plant connect with the underground parts of the fungus formingmycorrhizae. Through mycorrhizae, the fungus and plant exchange nutrients and water, greatly aiding the survival ofboth species Alternatively, lichens are an association between a fungus and its photosynthetic partner (usually an alga).Fungi also cause serious infections in plants and animals. For example, Dutch elm disease, which is caused by the fungusOphiostoma ulmi, is a particularly devastating type of fungal infestation that destroys many native species of elm (Ulmussp.) by infecting the tree’s vascular system. The elm bark beetle acts as a vector, transmitting the disease from tree to tree.
Accidentally introduced in the 1900s, the fungus decimated elm trees across the continent. Many European and Asiatic elmsare less susceptible to Dutch elm disease than American elms.In humans, fungal infections are generally considered challenging to treat. Unlike bacteria, fungi do not respond totraditional antibiotic therapy, since they are eukaryotes. Fungal infections may prove deadly for individuals withcompromised immune systems.Fungi have many commercial applications. The food industry uses yeasts in baking, brewing, and cheese and wine making.Many industrial compounds are byproducts of fungal fermentation. Fungi are the source of many commercial enzymes andantibiotics.
Although humans have used yeasts and mushrooms since prehistoric times, until recently, the biology of fungi was poorlyunderstood. Up until the mid-20th century, many scientists classified fungi as plants. Fungi, like plants, arose mostly sessileand seemingly rooted in place. They possess a stem-like structure similar to plants, as well as having a root-like fungalmycelium in the soil. In addition, their mode of nutrition was poorly understood. Progress in the field of fungal biologywas the result of mycology: the scientific study of fungi. Based on fossil evidence, fungi appeared in the pre-Cambrian era,about 450 million years ago. Molecular biology analysis of the fungal genome demonstrates that fungi are more closelyrelated to animals than plants. They are a polyphyletic group of organisms that share characteristics, rather than sharing asingle common ancestor.
Cell Structure and FunctionFungi are eukaryotes, and as such, have a complex cellular organization. As eukaryotes, fungal cells contain a membraneboundnucleus. The DNA in the nucleus is wrapped around histone proteins, as is observed in other eukaryotic cells. Afew types of fungi have structures comparable to bacterial plasmids (loops of DNA); however, the horizontal transfer ofgenetic information from one mature bacterium to another rarely occurs in fungi. Fungal cells also contain mitochondriaand a complex system of internal membranes, including the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus.Unlike plant cells, fungal cells do not have chloroplasts or chlorophyll. Many fungi display bright colors arising from othercellular pigments, ranging from red to green to black. The poisonous Amanita muscaria (fly agaric) is recognizable by itsbright red cap with white patches (Figure 24.2). Pigments in fungi are associated with the cell wall and play a protectiverole against ultraviolet radiation. Some fungal pigments are toxic.
The poisonous Amanita muscaria is native to temperate and boreal regions of North America.
Like plant cells, fungal cells have a thick cell wall. The rigid layers of fungal cell walls contain complex polysaccharidescalled chitin and glucans. Chitin, also found in the exoskeleton of insects, gives structural strength to the cell walls of fungi.The wall protects the cell from desiccation and predators. Fungi have plasma membranes similar to other eukaryotes, exceptthat the structure is stabilized by ergosterol: a steroid molecule that replaces the cholesterol found in animal cell membranes.Most members of the kingdom Fungi are nonmotile. Flagella are produced only by the gametes in the primitive PhylumChytridiomycota.GrowthThe vegetative body of a fungus is a unicellular or multicellular thallus. Dimorphic fungi can change from the unicellularto multicellular state depending on environmental conditions. Unicellular fungi are generally referred to as yeasts.Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker’s yeast) and Candida species (the agents of thrush, a common fungal infection) areexamples of unicellular fungi.
Candida albicans is a yeast cell and the agent of candidiasis and thrush. This organism has a similarmorphology to coccus bacteria; however, yeast is a eukaryotic organism (note the nucleus).
Most fungi are multicellular organisms. They display two distinct morphological stages: the vegetative and reproductive.The vegetative stage consists of a tangle of slender thread-like structures called hyphae (singular, hypha), whereas thereproductive stage can be more conspicuous. The mass of hyphae is a mycelium (Figure 24.4). It can grow on a surface,in soil or decaying material, in a liquid, or even on living tissue. Although individual hyphae must be observed under amicroscope, the mycelium of a fungus can be very large, with some species truly being “the fungus humongous.” The giantArmillaria solidipes (honey mushroom) is considered the largest organism on Earth, spreading across more than 2,000 acresof underground soil in eastern Oregon; it is estimated to be at least 2,400 years old.
The mycelium of the fungus Neotestudina rosati can be pathogenic to humans. The fungus enters througha cut or scrape and develops a mycetoma, a chronic subcutaneous infection.
Most fungal hyphae are divided into separate cells by endwalls called septa (singular, septum) (Figure 24.5a, c). In mostphyla of fungi, tiny holes in the septa allow for the rapid flow of nutrients and small molecules from cell to cell alongthe hypha. They are described as perforated septa. The hyphae in bread molds (which belong to the Phylum Zygomycota)are not separated by septa. Instead, they are formed by large cells containing many nuclei, an arrangement described ascoenocytic hyphae.
Fungal hyphae may be (a) septated or (b) coenocytic (coeno- = "common"; -cytic = "cell") with many nucleipresent in a single hypha. A bright field light micrograph of (c) Phialophora richardsiae shows septa that divide thehyphae.
Fungi thrive in environments that are moist and slightly acidic, and can grow with or without light. They vary intheir oxygen requirement. Most fungi are obligate aerobes, requiring oxygen to survive. Other species, such as theChytridiomycota that reside in the rumen of cattle, are are obligate anaerobes, in that they only use anaerobic respirationbecause oxygen will disrupt their metabolism or kill them. Yeasts are intermediate, being faculative anaerobes. This meansthat they grow best in the presence of oxygen using aerobic respiration, but can survive using anaerobic respiration whenoxygen is not available. The alcohol produced from yeast fermentation is used in wine and beer production.NutritionLike animals, fungi are heterotrophs; they use complex organic compounds as a source of carbon, rather than fix carbondioxide from the atmosphere as do some bacteria and most plants. In addition, fungi do not fix nitrogen from theatmosphere. Like animals, they must obtain it from their diet. However, unlike most animals, which ingest food and thendigest it internally in specialized organs, fungi perform these steps in the reverse order; digestion precedes ingestion. First,exoenzymes are transported out of the hyphae, where they process nutrients in the environment. Then, the smaller moleculesproduced by this external digestion are absorbed through the large surface area of the mycelium. As with animal cells, thepolysaccharide of storage is glycogen, rather than starch, as found in plants.Fungi are mostly saprobes (saprophyte is an equivalent term): organisms that derive nutrients from decaying organicmatter. They obtain their nutrients from dead or decomposing organic matter: mainly plant material. Fungal exoenzymesare able to break down insoluble polysaccharides, such as the cellulose and lignin of dead wood, into readily absorbableglucose molecules. The carbon, nitrogen, and other elements are thus released into the environment. Because of theirvaried metabolic pathways, fungi fulfill an important ecological role and are being investigated as potential tools inbioremediation. For example, some species of fungi can be used to break down diesel oil and polycyclic aromatichydrocarbons (PAHs). Other species take up heavy metals, such as cadmium and lead.Some fungi are parasitic, infecting either plants or animals. Smut and Dutch elm disease affect plants, whereas athlete’sfoot and candidiasis (thrush) are medically important fungal infections in humans. In environments poor in nitrogen, somefungi resort to predation of nematodes (small non-segmented roundworms). Species of Arthrobotrys fungi have a numberof mechanisms to trap nematodes. One mechanism involves constricting rings within the network of hyphae. The ringsswell when they touch the nematode, gripping it in a tight hold. The fungus penetrates the tissue of the worm by extendingspecialized hyphae called haustoria. Many parasitic fungi possess haustoria, as these structures penetrate the tissues of thehost, release digestive enzymes within the host's body, and absorb the digested nutrients.
ReproductionFungi reproduce sexually and/or asexually. Perfect fungi reproduce both sexually and asexually, while the so-calledimperfect fungi reproduce only asexually (by mitosis).In both sexual and asexual reproduction, fungi produce spores that disperse from the parent organism by either floatingon the wind or hitching a ride on an animal. Fungal spores are smaller and lighter than plant seeds. The giant puffballmushroom bursts open and releases trillions of spores. The huge number of spores released increases the likelihood oflanding in an environment that will support growth.
The (a) giant puff ball mushroom releases (b) a cloud of spores when it reaches maturity.
The dark cells in this bright field light micrograph are the pathogenic yeast Histoplasma capsulatum, seenagainst a backdrop of light blue tissue. Histoplasma primarily infects lungs but can spread to other tissues, causinghistoplasmosis, a potentially fatal disease.
The most common mode of asexual reproduction is through the formation of asexual spores, which are produced by oneparent only (through mitosis) and are genetically identical to that parent (Figure 24.8). Spores allow fungi to expand theirdistribution and colonize new environments. They may be released from the parent thallus either outside or within a specialreproductive sac called a sporangium.
Fungi may have both asexual and sexual stages of reproduction.
There are many types of asexual spores. Conidiospores are unicellular or multicellular spores that are released directly fromthe tip or side of the hypha. Other asexual spores originate in the fragmentation of a hypha to form single cells that arereleased as spores; some of these have a thick wall surrounding the fragment. Yet others bud off the vegetative parent cell.Sporangiospores are produced in a sporangium.
This bright field light micrograph shows the release of spores from a sporangium at the end of a hyphacalled a sporangiophore. The organism is a Mucor sp. fungus, a mold often found indoors.
Sexual ReproductionSexual reproduction introduces genetic variation into a population of fungi. In fungi, sexual reproduction often occurs inresponse to adverse environmental conditions. During sexual reproduction, two mating types are produced. When bothmating types are present in the same mycelium, it is called homothallic, or self-fertile. Heterothallic mycelia require twodifferent, but compatible, mycelia to reproduce sexually.
Although there are many variations in fungal sexual reproduction, all include the following three stages (Figure 24.8).First, during plasmogamy (literally, “marriage or union of cytoplasm”), two haploid cells fuse, leading to a dikaryotic stagewhere two haploid nuclei coexist in a single cell. During karyogamy (“nuclear marriage”), the haploid nuclei fuse to forma diploid zygote nucleus. Finally, meiosis takes place in the gametangia (singular, gametangium) organs, in which gametesof different mating types are generated. At this stage, spores are disseminated into the environment.
The kingdom Fungi contains five major phyla that were established according to their mode of sexual reproduction or usingmolecular data. Polyphyletic, unrelated fungi that reproduce without a sexual cycle, are placed for convenience in a sixthgroup called a “form phylum”. Not all mycologists agree with this scheme. Rapid advances in molecular biology and thesequencing of 18S rRNA (a part of RNA) continue to show new and different relationships between the various categoriesof fungi.The five true phyla of fungi are the Chytridiomycota (Chytrids), the Zygomycota (conjugated fungi), the Ascomycota (sacfungi), the Basidiomycota (club fungi) and the recently described Phylum Glomeromycota. An older classification schemegrouped fungi that strictly use asexual reproduction into Deuteromycota, a group that is no longer in use.Note: “-mycota” is used to designate a phylum while “-mycetes” formally denotes a class or is used informally to refer toall members of the phylum.Chytridiomycota: The ChytridsThe only class in the Phylum Chytridiomycota is the Chytridiomycetes. The chytrids are the simplest and most primitiveEumycota, or true fungi. The evolutionary record shows that the first recognizable chytrids appeared during the late pre-Cambrian period, more than 500 million years ago. Like all fungi, chytrids have chitin in their cell walls, but one group ofchytrids has both cellulose and chitin in the cell wall. Most chytrids are unicellular; a few form multicellular organisms andhyphae, which have no septa between cells (coenocytic). They produce gametes and diploid zoospores that swim with thehelp of a single flagellum.The ecological habitat and cell structure of chytrids have much in common with protists. Chytrids usually live in aquaticenvironments, although some species live on land. Some species thrive as parasites on plants, insects, or amphibians (Figure24.10), while others are saprobes. The chytrid species Allomyces is well characterized as an experimental organism. Itsreproductive cycle includes both asexual and sexual phases. Allomyces produces diploid or haploid flagellated zoospores ina sporangium.
The chytrid Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis is seen in these light micrographs as transparent spheresgrowing on (a) a freshwater arthropod and (b) algae. This chytrid causes skin diseases in many species of amphibians,resulting in species decline and extinction.
Zygomycota: The Conjugated FungiThe zygomycetes are a relatively small group of fungi belonging to the Phylum Zygomycota. They include the familiarbread mold, Rhizopus stolonifer, which rapidly propagates on the surfaces of breads, fruits, and vegetables. Most species aresaprobes, living off decaying organic material; a few are parasites, particularly of insects. Zygomycetes play a considerablecommercial role. The metabolic products of other species of Rhizopus are intermediates in the synthesis of semi-syntheticsteroid hormones.Zygomycetes have a thallus of coenocytic hyphae in which the nuclei are haploid when the organism is in the vegetativestage. The fungi usually reproduce asexually by producing sporangiospores (Figure 24.11). The black tips of bread mold arethe swollen sporangia packed with black spores (Figure 24.12). When spores land on a suitable substrate, they germinateand produce a new mycelium. Sexual reproduction starts when conditions become unfavorable. Two opposing matingstrains (type + and type –) must be in close proximity for gametangia from the hyphae to be produced and fuse, leadingto karyogamy. The developing diploid zygospores have thick coats that protect them from desiccation and other hazards.They may remain dormant until environmental conditions are favorable. When the zygospore germinates, it undergoesmeiosis and produces haploid spores, which will, in turn, grow into a new organism. This form of sexual reproduction infungi is called conjugation (although it differs markedly from conjugation in bacteria and protists), giving rise to the name“conjugated fungi”.
Zygomycetes have asexual and asexual life cycles. In the sexual life cycle, plus and minus mating typesconjugate to form a zygosporangium.
Sporangia grow at the end of stalks, which appear as (a) white fuzz seen on this bread mold,Rhizopus stolonifer. The (b) tips of bread mold are the spore-containing sporangia.
Ascomycota: The Sac FungiThe majority of known fungi belong to the Phylum Ascomycota, which is characterized by the formation of an ascus(plural, asci), a sac-like structure that contains haploid ascospores. Many ascomycetes are of commercial importance.Some play a beneficial role, such as the yeasts used in baking, brewing, and wine fermentation, plus truffles and morels,which are held as gourmet delicacies. Aspergillus oryzae is used in the fermentation of rice to produce sake. Otherascomycetes parasitize plants and animals, including humans. For example, fungal pneumonia poses a significant threatto AIDS patients who have a compromised immune system. Ascomycetes not only infest and destroy crops directly; theyalso produce poisonous secondary metabolites that make crops unfit for consumption. Filamentous ascomycetes produce hyphae divided by perforated septa, allowing streaming of cytoplasm from one cell to the other. Conidia and asci, whichare used respectively for asexual and sexual reproductions, are usually separated from the vegetative hyphae by blocked(non-perforated) septa.Asexual reproduction is frequent and involves the production of conidiophores that release haploid conidiospores (Figure24.13). Sexual reproduction starts with the development of special hyphae from either one of two types of matingstrains (Figure 24.13). The “male” strain produces an antheridium and the “female” strain develops an ascogonium. Atfertilization, the antheridium and the ascogonium combine in plasmogamy without nuclear fusion. Special ascogenoushyphae arise, in which pairs of nuclei migrate: one from the “male” strain and one from the “female” strain. In each ascus,two or more haploid ascospores fuse their nuclei in karyogamy. During sexual reproduction, thousands of asci fill a fruitingbody called the ascocarp. The diploid nucleus gives rise to haploid nuclei by meiosis. The ascospores are then released,germinate, and form hyphae that are disseminated in the environment and start new mycelia.
The bright field light micrograph shows ascospores being released from asci in the fungus Talaromycesflavus var. flavus.
Basidiomycota: The Club FungiThe fungi in the Phylum Basidiomycota are easily recognizable under a light microscope by their club-shaped fruitingbodies called basidia (singular, basidium), which are the swollen terminal cell of a hypha. The basidia, which are thereproductive organs of these fungi, are often contained within the familiar mushroom, commonly seen in fields after rain,on the supermarket shelves, and growing on your lawn (Figure 24.15). These mushroom-producing basidiomyces aresometimes referred to as “gill fungi” because of the presence of gill-like structures on the underside of the cap. The “gills”are actually compacted hyphae on which the basidia are borne. This group also includes shelf fungus, which cling to the barkof trees like small shelves. In addition, the basidiomycota includes smuts and rusts, which are important plant pathogens;toadstools, and shelf fungi stacked on tree trunks. Most edible fungi belong to the Phylum Basidiomycota; however, somebasidiomycetes produce deadly toxins. For example, Cryptococcus neoformans causes severe respiratory illness.
The fruiting bodies of a basidiomycete form a ring in a meadow, commonly called “fairy ring.” Thebest-known fairy ring fungus has the scientific name Marasmius oreades. The body of this fungus, its mycelium, isunderground and grows outward in a circle. As it grows, the mycelium depletes the soil of nitrogen, causing the myceliato grow away from the center and leading to the “fairy ring” of fruiting bodies where there is adequate soil nitrogen.
The lifecycle of basidiomycetes includes alternation of generations (Figure 24.16). Spores are generally produced throughsexual reproduction, rather than asexual reproduction. The club-shaped basidium carries spores called basidiospores. Inthe basidium, nuclei of two different mating strains fuse (karyogamy), giving rise to a diploid zygote that then undergoesmeiosis. The haploid nuclei migrate into basidiospores, which germinate and generate monokaryotic hyphae. The myceliumthat results is called a primary mycelium. Mycelia of different mating strains can combine and produce a secondarymycelium that contains haploid nuclei of two different mating strains. This is the dikaryotic stage of the basidiomyceslifecyle and and it is the dominant stage. Eventually, the secondary mycelium generates a basidiocarp, which is a fruitingbody that protrudes from the ground—this is what we think of as a mushroom. The basidiocarp bears the developing basidiaon the gills under its cap.
Asexual Ascomycota and BasidiomycotaImperfect fungi—those that do not display a sexual phase—use to be classified in the form phylum Deuteromycota, , aclassification group no longer used in the present, ever-developing classification of organisms. While Deuteromycota useto be a classification group, recent moleclular analysis has shown that the members classified in this group belong to theAscomycota or the Basidiomycota classifications. Since they do not possess the sexual structures that are used to classifyother fungi, they are less well described in comparison to other members. Most members live on land, with a few aquaticexceptions. They form visible mycelia with a fuzzy appearance and are commonly known as mold.Reproduction of the fungi in this group is strictly asexual and occurs mostly by production of asexual conidiospores (Figure24.17). Some hyphae may recombine and form heterokaryotic hyphae. Genetic recombination is known to take placebetween the different nuclei.
Aspergillus niger is an asexually reproducing fungus (phylum Ascomycota) commonly found as a foodcontaminant. The spherical structure in this light micrograph is a conidiophore.
The fungi in this group have a large impact on everyday human life. The food industry relies on them for ripening somecheeses. The blue veins in Roquefort cheese and the white crust on Camembert are the result of fungal growth. Theantibiotic penicillin was originally discovered on an overgrown Petri plate, on which a colony of Penicillium fungi killed thebacterial growth surrounding it. Other fungi in this group cause serious diseases, either directly as parasites (which infectboth plants and humans), or as producers of potent toxic compounds, as seen in the aflatoxins released by fungi of the genusAspergillus.GlomeromycotaThe Glomeromycota is a newly established phylum which comprises about 230 species that all live in close associationwith the roots of trees. Fossil records indicate that trees and their root symbionts share a long evolutionary history. It appearsthat all members of this family form arbuscular mycorrhizae: the hyphae interact with the root cells forming a mutuallybeneficial association where the plants supply the carbon source and energy in the form of carbohydrates to the fungus, andthe fungus supplies essential minerals from the soil to the plant.The glomeromycetes do not reproduce sexually and do not survive without the presence of plant roots. Although theyhave coenocytic hyphae like the zygomycetes, they do not form zygospores. DNA analysis shows that all glomeromycetesprobably descended from a common ancestor, making them a monophyletic lineage.
Fungi play a crucial role in the balance of ecosystems. They colonize most habitats on Earth, preferring dark, moistconditions. They can thrive in seemingly hostile environments, such as the tundra, thanks to a most successful symbiosiswith photosynthetic organisms like algae to produce lichens. Fungi are not obvious in the way large animals or tall treesappear. Yet, like bacteria, they are the major decomposers of nature. With their versatile metabolism, fungi break downorganic matter, which would not otherwise be recycled.HabitatsAlthough fungi are primarily associated with humid and cool environments that provide a supply of organic matter, theycolonize a surprising diversity of habitats, from seawater to human skin and mucous membranes. Chytrids are foundprimarily in aquatic environments. Other fungi, such as Coccidioides immitis, which causes pneumonia when its spores areinhaled, thrive in the dry and sandy soil of the southwestern United States. Fungi that parasitize coral reefs live in the ocean.However, most members of the Kingdom Fungi grow on the forest floor, where the dark and damp environment is rich in decaying debris from plants and animals. In these environments, fungi play a major role as decomposers and recyclers,making it possible for members of the other kingdoms to be supplied with nutrients and live.Decomposers and RecyclersThe food web would be incomplete without organisms that decompose organic matter (Figure 24.18). Someelements—such as nitrogen and phosphorus—are required in large quantities by biological systems, and yet are notabundant in the environment. The action of fungi releases these elements from decaying matter, making them available toother living organisms. Trace elements present in low amounts in many habitats are essential for growth, and would remaintied up in rotting organic matter if fungi and bacteria did not return them to the environment via their metabolic activity.
Fungi are an important part of ecosystem nutrient cycles. These bracket fungi growing on the side of atree are the fruiting structures of a basidiomycete. They receive their nutrients through their hyphae, which invade anddecay the tree trunk.
The ability of fungi to degrade many large and insoluble molecules is due to their mode of nutrition. As seen earlier,digestion precedes ingestion. Fungi produce a variety of exoenzymes to digest nutrients. The enzymes are either releasedinto the substrate or remain bound to the outside of the fungal cell wall. Large molecules are broken down into smallmolecules, which are transported into the cell by a system of protein carriers embedded in the cell membrane. Because themovement of small molecules and enzymes is dependent on the presence of water, active growth depends on a relativelyhigh percentage of moisture in the environment.As saprobes, fungi help maintain a sustainable ecosystem for the animals and plants that share the same habitat. In additionto replenishing the environment with nutrients, fungi interact directly with other organisms in beneficial, and sometimesdamaging, ways.
Shelf fungi, so called because they grow on trees in a stack, attack and digest the trunk or branches of atree. While some shelf fungi are found only on dead trees, others can parasitize living trees and cause eventual death,so they are considered serious tree pathogens.
Mutualistic RelationshipsSymbiosis is the ecological interaction between two organisms that live together. The definition does not describe the qualityof the interaction. When both members of the association benefit, the symbiotic relationship is called mutualistic. Fungiform mutualistic associations with many types of organisms, including cyanobacteria, algae, plants, and animals.Fungus/Plant MutualismOne of the most remarkable associations between fungi and plants is the establishment of mycorrhizae. Mycorrhiza, whichcomes from the Greek words myco meaning fungus and rhizo meaning root, refers to the association between vascular plantroots and their symbiotic fungi. Somewhere between 80 and 90 percent of all plant species have mycorrhizal partners. In amycorrhizal association, the fungal mycelia use their extensive network of hyphae and large surface area in contact with thesoil to channel water and minerals from the soil into the plant. In exchange, the plant supplies the products of photosynthesisto fuel the metabolism of the fungus.There are a number of types of mycorrhizae. Ectomycorrhizae (“outside” mycorrhiza) depend on fungi enveloping theroots in a sheath (called a mantle) and a Hartig net of hyphae that extends into the roots between cells (Figure 24.20).The fungal partner can belong to the Ascomycota, Basidiomycota or Zygomycota. In a second type, the Glomeromycetefungi form vesicular–arbuscular interactions with arbuscular mycorrhiza (sometimes called endomycorrhizae). In thesemycorrhiza, the fungi form arbuscules that penetrate root cells and are the site of the metabolic exchanges betweenthe fungus and the host plant (Figure 24.20 and Figure 24.21). The arbuscules (from the Latin for little trees) have ashrub-like appearance. Orchids rely on a third type of mycorrhiza. Orchids are epiphytes that form small seeds withoutmuch storage to sustain germination and growth. Their seeds will not germinate without a mycorrhizal partner (usually aBasidiomycete). After nutrients in the seed are depleted, fungal symbionts support the growth of the orchid by providingnecessary carbohydrates and minerals. Some orchids continue to be mycorrhizal throughout their lifecycle.
The (a) infection of Pinus radiata (Monterey pine) roots by the hyphae of Amanita muscaria (fly amanita)causes the pine tree to produce many small, branched rootlets. The Amanita hyphae cover these small roots with awhite mantle. (b) Spores (round bodies) and hyphae (thread-like structures) are evident in this light micrograph of anarbuscular mycorrhiza between a fungus and the root of a corn plant.
LichensLichens display a range of colors and textures (Figure 24.22) and can survive in the most unusual and hostile habitats.They cover rocks, gravestones, tree bark, and the ground in the tundra where plant roots cannot penetrate. Lichens cansurvive extended periods of drought, when they become completely desiccated, and then rapidly become active once wateris available again.
Lichens have many forms. They may be (a) crust-like, (b) hair-like, or (c) leaf-like.
Lichens are not a single organism, but rather an example of a mutualism, in which a fungus (usually a member ofthe Ascomycota or Basidiomycota phyla) lives in close contact with a photosynthetic organism (a eukaryotic alga or aprokaryotic cyanobacterium) (Figure 24.23). Generally, neither the fungus nor the photosynthetic organism can survivealone outside of the symbiotic relationship. The body of a lichen, referred to as a thallus, is formed of hyphae wrappedaround the photosynthetic partner. The photosynthetic organism provides carbon and energy in the form of carbohydrates.Some cyanobacteria fix nitrogen from the atmosphere, contributing nitrogenous compounds to the association. In return, thefungus supplies minerals and protection from dryness and excessive light by encasing the algae in its mycelium. The fungusalso attaches the symbiotic organism to the substrate.
This cross-section of a lichen thallus shows the (a) upper cortex of fungal hyphae, which providesprotection; the (b) algal zone where photosynthesis occurs, the (c) medulla of fungal hyphae, and the (d) lower cortex,which also provides protection and may have (e) rhizines to anchor the thallus to the substrate.
The thallus of lichens grows very slowly, expanding its diameter a few millimeters per year. Both the fungus and the algaparticipate in the formation of dispersal units for reproduction. Lichens produce soredia, clusters of algal cells surroundedby mycelia. Soredia are dispersed by wind and water and form new lichens.Lichens are extremely sensitive to air pollution, especially to abnormal levels of nitrogen and sulfur. The U.S. ForestService and National Park Service can monitor air quality by measuring the relative abundance and health of the lichenpopulation in an area. Lichens fulfill many ecological roles. Caribou and reindeer eat lichens, and they provide cover forsmall invertebrates that hide in the mycelium. In the production of textiles, weavers used lichens to dye wool for manycenturies until the advent of synthetic dyes.
Fungus/Animal MutualismFungi have evolved mutualisms with numerous insects in Phylum Arthropoda: jointed, legged invertebrates. Arthropodsdepend on the fungus for protection from predators and pathogens, while the fungus obtains nutrients and a way todisseminate spores into new environments. The association between species of Basidiomycota and scale insects is oneexample. The fungal mycelium covers and protects the insect colonies. The scale insects foster a flow of nutrients fromthe parasitized plant to the fungus. In a second example, leaf-cutting ants of Central and South America literally farmfungi. They cut disks of leaves from plants and pile them up in gardens (Figure 24.24). Fungi are cultivated in these diskgardens, digesting the cellulose in the leaves that the ants cannot break down. Once smaller sugar molecules are produced and consumed by the fungi, the fungi in turn become a meal for the ants. The insects also patrol their garden, preyingon competing fungi. Both ants and fungi benefit from the association. The fungus receives a steady supply of leaves andfreedom from competition, while the ants feed on the fungi they cultivate.
A leaf cutting ant transports a leaf that will feed a farmed fungus.
FungivoresAnimal dispersal is important for some fungi because an animal may carry spores considerable distances from the source.Fungal spores are rarely completely degraded in the gastrointestinal tract of an animal, and many are able to germinatewhen they are passed in the feces. Some dung fungi actually require passage through the digestive system of herbivores tocomplete their lifecycle. The black truffle—a prized gourmet delicacy—is the fruiting body of an underground mushroom.Almost all truffles are ectomycorrhizal, and are usually found in close association with trees. Animals eat truffles anddisperse the spores. In Italy and France, truffle hunters use female pigs to sniff out truffles. Female pigs are attracted totruffles because the fungus releases a volatile compound closely related to a pheromone produced by male pigs.
Parasitism describes a symbiotic relationship in which one member of the association benefits at the expense of the other.Both parasites and pathogens harm the host; however, the pathogen causes a disease, whereas the parasite usually does not.Commensalism occurs when one member benefits without affecting the other.Plant Parasites and PathogensThe production of sufficient good-quality crops is essential to human existence. Plant diseases have ruined crops, bringingwidespread famine. Many plant pathogens are fungi that cause tissue decay and eventual death of the host (Figure 24.25).In addition to destroying plant tissue directly, some plant pathogens spoil crops by producing potent toxins. Fungi are alsoresponsible for food spoilage and the rotting of stored crops. For example, the fungus Claviceps purpurea causes ergot, adisease of cereal crops (especially of rye). Although the fungus reduces the yield of cereals, the effects of the ergot's alkaloidtoxins on humans and animals are of much greater significance. In animals, the disease is referred to as ergotism. The mostcommon signs and symptoms are convulsions, hallucination, gangrene, and loss of milk in cattle. The active ingredient ofergot is lysergic acid, which is a precursor of the drug LSD. Smuts, rusts, and powdery or downy mildew are other examplesof common fungal pathogens that affect crops.
Some fungal pathogens include (a) green mold on grapefruit, (b) powdery mildew on a zinnia, (c) stemrust on a sheaf of barley, and (d) grey rot on grapes. In wet conditions Botrytis cinerea, the fungus that causes greyrot, can destroy a grape crop. However, controlled infection of grapes by Botrytis results in noble rot, a condition thatproduces strong and much-prized dessert wines.
Aflatoxins are toxic, carcinogenic compounds released by fungi of the genus Aspergillus. Periodically, harvests of nutsand grains are tainted by aflatoxins, leading to massive recall of produce. This sometimes ruins producers and causes foodshortages in developing countries.Animal and Human Parasites and PathogensFungi can affect animals, including humans, in several ways. A mycosis is a fungal disease that results from infectionand direct damage. Fungi attack animals directly by colonizing and destroying tissues. Mycotoxicosis is the poisoning ofhumans (and other animals) by foods contaminated by fungal toxins (mycotoxins). Mycetismus describes the ingestionof preformed toxins in poisonous mushrooms. In addition, individuals who display hypersensitivity to molds and sporesdevelop strong and dangerous allergic reactions. Fungal infections are generally very difficult to treat because, unlikebacteria, fungi are eukaryotes. Antibiotics only target prokaryotic cells, whereas compounds that kill fungi also harm theeukaryotic animal host.Many fungal infections are superficial; that is, they occur on the animal’s skin. Termed cutaneous (“skin”) mycoses, theycan have devastating effects. For example, the decline of the world’s frog population in recent years may be caused bythe chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, which infects the skin of frogs and presumably interferes with gaseousexchange. Similarly, more than a million bats in the United States have been killed by white-nose syndrome, which appearsas a white ring around the mouth of the bat. It is caused by the cold-loving fungus Pseudogymnoascus destructans, whichdisseminates its deadly spores in caves where bats hibernate. Mycologists are researching the transmission, mechanism, andcontrol of P. destructans to stop its spread.Fungi that cause the superficial mycoses of the epidermis, hair, and nails rarely spread to the underlying tissue (Figure24.26). These fungi are often misnamed “dermatophytes”, from the Greek words dermis meaning skin and phyte meaningplant, although they are not plants. Dermatophytes are also called “ringworms” because of the red ring they cause on skin.They secrete extracellular enzymes that break down keratin (a protein found in hair, skin, and nails), causing conditions such as athlete’s foot and jock itch. These conditions are usually treated with over-the-counter topical creams and powders,and are easily cleared. More persistent superficial mycoses may require prescription oral medications.
Ringworm presents as a red ring on skin; (b) Trichophyton violaceum, shown in this bright fieldlight micrograph, causes superficial mycoses on the scalp; (c) Histoplasma capsulatum is an ascomycete that infectsairways and causes symptoms similar to influenza.
Systemic mycoses spread to internal organs, most commonly entering the body through the respiratory system. For example,coccidioidomycosis (valley fever) is commonly found in the southwestern United States, where the fungus resides in thedust. Once inhaled, the spores develop in the lungs and cause symptoms similar to those of tuberculosis. Histoplasmosis iscaused by the dimorphic fungus Histoplasma capsulatum. It also causes pulmonary infections, and in rarer cases, swellingof the membranes of the brain and spinal cord. Treatment of these and many other fungal diseases requires the use ofantifungal medications that have serious side effects.Opportunistic mycoses are fungal infections that are either common in all environments, or part of the normal biota.They mainly affect individuals who have a compromised immune system. Patients in the late stages of AIDS suffer fromopportunistic mycoses that can be life threatening. The yeast Candida sp., a common member of the natural biota, can growunchecked and infect the vagina or mouth (oral thrush) if the pH of the surrounding environment, the person’s immunedefenses, or the normal population of bacteria are altered.Mycetismus can occur when poisonous mushrooms are eaten. It causes a number of human fatalities during mushroompickingseason. Many edible fruiting bodies of fungi resemble highly poisonous relatives, and amateur mushroom huntersare cautioned to carefully inspect their harvest and avoid eating mushrooms of doubtful origin. The adage “there are boldmushroom pickers and old mushroom pickers, but are there no old, bold mushroom pickers” is unfortunately true.
Although we often think of fungi as organisms that cause disease and rot food, fungi are important to human life on manylevels. As we have seen, they influence the well-being of human populations on a large scale because they are part ofthe nutrient cycle in ecosystems. They have other ecosystem roles as well. As animal pathogens, fungi help to control thepopulation of damaging pests. These fungi are very specific to the insects they attack, and do not infect animals or plants.Fungi are currently under investigation as potential microbial insecticides, with several already on the market. For example,the fungus Beauveria bassiana is a pesticide being tested as a possible biological control agent for the recent spread ofemerald ash borer. It has been released in Michigan, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, West Virginia and Maryland.
The emerald ash borer is an insect that attacks ash trees. It is in turn parasitized by a pathogenic fungusthat holds promise as a biological insecticide. The parasitic fungus appears as white fuzz on the body of the insect.
The mycorrhizal relationship between fungi and plant roots is essential for the productivity of farm land.Without the fungalpartner in root systems, 80–90 percent of trees and grasses would not survive. Mycorrhizal fungal inoculants are availableas soil amendments from gardening supply stores and are promoted by supporters of organic agriculture.We also eat some types of fungi. Mushrooms figure prominently in the human diet. Morels, shiitake mushrooms,chanterelles, and truffles are considered delicacies (Figure 24.28). The humble meadow mushroom, Agaricus campestris,appears in many dishes. Molds of the genus Penicillium ripen many cheeses. They originate in the natural environment suchas the caves of Roquefort, France, where wheels of sheep milk cheese are stacked in order to capture the molds responsiblefor the blue veins and pungent taste of the cheese.
The morel mushroom is an ascomycete much appreciated for its delicate taste.
Fermentation—of grains to produce beer, and of fruits to produce wine—is an ancient art that humans in most cultureshave practiced for millennia. Wild yeasts are acquired from the environment and used to ferment sugars into CO2 and ethylalcohol under anaerobic conditions. It is now possible to purchase isolated strains of wild yeasts from different wine-makingregions. Louis Pasteur was instrumental in developing a reliable strain of brewer’s yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, for theFrench brewing industry in the late 1850s. This was one of the first examples of biotechnology patenting.Many secondary metabolites of fungi are of great commercial importance. Antibiotics are naturally produced by fungito kill or inhibit the growth of bacteria, limiting their competition in the natural environment. Important antibiotics,such as penicillin and the cephalosporins, are isolated from fungi. Valuable drugs isolated from fungi include theimmunosuppressant drug cyclosporine (which reduces the risk of rejection after organ transplant), the precursors ofsteroid hormones, and ergot alkaloids used to stop bleeding. Psilocybin is a compound found in fungi such as Psilocybesemilanceata and Gymnopilus junonius, which have been used for their hallucinogenic properties by various cultures forthousands of years.As simple eukaryotic organisms, fungi are important model research organisms. Many advances in modern genetics wereachieved by the use of the red bread mold Neurospora crassa. Additionally, many important genes originally discoveredin S. cerevisiae served as a starting point in discovering analogous human genes. As a eukaryotic organism, the yeast cellproduces and modifies proteins in a manner similar to human cells, as opposed to the bacterium Escherichia coli, whichlacks the internal membrane structures and enzymes to tag proteins for export. This makes yeast a much better organism foruse in recombinant DNA technology experiments. Like bacteria, yeasts grow easily in culture, have a short generation time,and are amenable to genetic modification.