Examples of critically endangered vertebrate species include (a) the Siberian tiger (Panthera tigris), (b)the mountain gorilla (Gorilla beringei), and (c) the Philippine eagle (Pithecophega jefferyi).
Vertebrates are among the most recognizable organisms of the animal kingdom. More than 62,000 vertebrate species havebeen identified. The vertebrate species now living represent only a small portion of the vertebrates that have existed. Thebest-known extinct vertebrates are the dinosaurs, a unique group of reptiles, which reached sizes not seen before or after interrestrial animals. They were the dominant terrestrial animals for 150 million years, until they died out in a mass extinctionnear the end of the Cretaceous period. Although it is not known with certainty what caused their extinction, a great deal isknown about the anatomy of the dinosaurs, given the preservation of skeletal elements in the fossil record.Currently, a number of vertebrate species face extinction primarily due to habitat loss and pollution. According to theInternational Union for the Conservation of Nature, more than 6,000 vertebrate species are classified as threatened.Amphibians and mammals are the classes with the greatest percentage of threatened species, with 29 percent of allamphibians and 21 percent of all mammals classified as threatened. Attempts are being made around the world to preventthe extinction of threatened species. For example, the Biodiversity Action Plan is an international program, ratified by 188countries, which is designed to protect species and habitats.
Vertebrates are members of the kingdom Animalia and the phylum Chordata (Figure 29.2). Recall that animals thatpossess bilateral symmetry can be divided into two groups—protostomes and deuterostomes—based on their patterns ofembryonic development. The deuterostomes, whose name translates as “second mouth,” consist of two phyla: Chordata andEchinodermata. Echinoderms are invertebrate marine animals that have pentaradial symmetry and a spiny body covering, agroup that includes sea stars, sea urchins, and sea cucumbers. The most conspicuous and familiar members of Chordata arevertebrates, but this phylum also includes two groups of invertebrate chordates.
Characteristics of ChordataAnimals in the phylum Chordata share four key features that appear at some stage during their development: a notochord,a dorsal hollow nerve cord, pharyngeal slits, and a post-anal tail (Figure 29.3). In some groups, some of these are presentonly during embryonic development.The chordates are named for the notochord, which is a flexible, rod-shaped structure that is found in the embryonic stage ofall chordates and in the adult stage of some chordate species. It is located between the digestive tube and the nerve cord, andprovides skeletal support through the length of the body. In some chordates, the notochord acts as the primary axial supportof the body throughout the animal’s lifetime. In vertebrates, the notochord is present during embryonic development, atwhich time it induces the development of the neural tube and serves as a support for the developing embryonic body. Thenotochord, however, is not found in the postnatal stage of vertebrates; at this point, it has been replaced by the vertebralcolumn (that is, the spine).
The dorsal hollow nerve cord derives from ectoderm that rolls into a hollow tube during development. In chordates, itis located dorsal to the notochord. In contrast, other animal phyla are characterized by solid nerve cords that are locatedeither ventrally or laterally. The nerve cord found in most chordate embryos develops into the brain and spinal cord, whichcompose the central nervous system.Pharyngeal slits are openings in the pharynx (the region just posterior to the mouth) that extend to the outside environment.In organisms that live in aquatic environments, pharyngeal slits allow for the exit of water that enters the mouth duringfeeding. Some invertebrate chordates use the pharyngeal slits to filter food out of the water that enters the mouth. Invertebrate fishes, the pharyngeal slits are modified into gill supports, and in jawed fishes, into jaw supports. In tetrapods,the slits are modified into components of the ear and tonsils. Tetrapod literally means “four-footed,” which refers to thephylogenetic history of various groups that evolved accordingly, even though some now possess fewer than two pairs ofwalking appendages. Tetrapods include amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals.The post-anal tail is a posterior elongation of the body, extending beyond the anus. The tail contains skeletal elements andmuscles, which provide a source of locomotion in aquatic species, such as fishes. In some terrestrial vertebrates, the tail alsohelps with balance, courting, and signaling when danger is near. In humans, the post-anal tail is vestigial, that is, reduced insize and nonfunctional.
Chordates and the Evolution of VertebratesChordata also contains two clades of invertebrates: Urochordata and Cephalochordata. Members of these groups alsopossess the four distinctive features of chordates at some point during their development.
UrochordataMembers of Urochordata are also known as tunicates (Figure 29.4). The name tunicate derives from the cellulose-likecarbohydrate material, called the tunic, which covers the outer body of tunicates. Although adult tunicates are classified aschordates, they do not have a notochord, a dorsal hollow nerve cord, or a post-anal tail, although they do have pharyngealslits. The larval form, however, possesses all four structures. Most tunicates are hermaphrodites. Tunicate larvae hatch fromeggs inside the adult tunicate’s body. After hatching, a tunicate larva swims for a few days until it finds a suitable surfaceon which it can attach, usually in a dark or shaded location. It then attaches via the head to the surface and undergoesmetamorphosis into the adult form, at which point the notochord, nerve cord, and tail disappear.
This photograph shows a colony of the tunicate Botrylloides violaceus. (b) The larval stage of thetunicate possesses all of the features characteristic of chordates: a notochord, a dorsal hollow nerve cord, pharyngealslits, and a post-anal tail. (c) In the adult stage, the notochord, nerve cord, and tail disappear.
Most tunicates live a sessile existence on the ocean floor and are suspension feeders. The primary foods of tunicates areplankton and detritus. Seawater enters the tunicate’s body through its incurrent siphon. Suspended material is filtered out ofthis water by a mucous net (pharyngeal slits) and is passed into the intestine via the action of cilia. The anus empties intothe excurrent siphon, which expels wastes and water. Tunicates are found in shallow ocean waters around the world.CephalochordataMembers of Cephalochordata possess a notochord, dorsal hollow nerve cord, pharyngeal slits, and a post-anal tail in theadult stage (Figure 29.5). The notochord extends into the head, which gives the subphylum its name. Extinct members ofthis subphylum include Pikaia, which is the oldest known cephalochordate. Pikaia fossils were recovered from the Burgessshales of Canada and dated to the middle of the Cambrian age, making them more than 500 million years old.Extant members of Cephalochordata are the lancelets, named for their blade-like shape. Lancelets are only a fewcentimeters long and are usually found buried in sand at the bottom of warm temperate and tropical seas. Like tunicates,they are suspension feeders.
The lancelet, like all cephalochordates, has a head. Adult lancelets retain the four key features ofchordates: a notochord, a dorsal hollow nerve cord, pharyngeal slits, and a post-anal tail. Water from the mouth entersthe pharyngeal slits, which filter out food particles. The filtered water then collects in the atrium and exits through theatriopore.
Craniata and VertebrataA cranium is a bony, cartilaginous, or fibrous structure surrounding the brain, jaw, and facial bones (Figure 29.6). Mostbilaterally symmetrical animals have a head; of these, those that have a cranium compose the clade Craniata. Craniataincludes the hagfishes (Myxini), which have a cranium but lack a backbone, and all of the organisms called “vertebrates.”
Craniata, including this fish (Dunkleosteus sp.), are characterized by the presence of a cranium, mandible,and other facial bones.
Vertebrates are members of the clade Vertebrata. Vertebrates display the four characteristic features of the chordates;however, members of this group also share derived characteristics that distinguish them from invertebrate chordates.Vertebrata is named for the vertebral column, composed of vertebrae, a series of separate bones joined together as abackbone (Figure 29.7). In adult vertebrates, the vertebral column replaces the notochord, which is only seen in theembryonic stage.
Vertebrata are characterized by the presence of a backbone, such as the one that runs through the middleof this fish. All vertebrates are in the Craniata clade and have a cranium.
Based on molecular analysis, vertebrates appear to be more closely related to lancelets (cephalochordates) than to tunicates(urochordates) among the invertebrate chordates. This evidence suggests that the cephalochordates diverged fromUrochordata and the vertebrates subsequently diverged from the cephalochordates. This hypothesis is further supported bythe discovery of a fossil in China from the genus Haikouella. This organism seems to be an intermediate form betweencephalochordates and vertebrates. The Haikouella fossils are about 530 million years old and appear similar to modernlancelets. These organisms had a brain and eyes, as do vertebrates, but lack the skull found in craniates.[1]This evidencesuggests that vertebrates arose during the Cambrian explosion. Recall that the “Cambrian explosion” is the name given to arelatively brief span of time during the Cambrian period during which many animal groups appeared and rapidly diversified.Most modern animal phyla originated during the Cambrian explosion.Vertebrates are the largest group of chordates, with more than 62,000 living species. Vertebrates are grouped based onanatomical and physiological traits. More than one classification and naming scheme is used for these animals. Here we willconsider the traditional groups Agnatha, Chondrichthyes, Osteichthyes, Amphibia, Reptilia, Aves, and Mammalia, whichconstitute classes in the subphylum Vertebrata. Many modern authors classify birds within Reptilia, which correctly reflectstheir evolutionary heritage. We consider them separately only for convenience. Further, we will consider hagfishes andlampreys together as jawless fishes, the agnathans, although emerging classification schemes separate them into chordatejawless fishes (the hagfishes) and vertebrate jawless fishes (the lampreys).Animals that possess jaws are known as gnathostomes, which means “jawed mouth.” Gnathostomes include fishes andtetrapods—amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Tetrapods can be further divided into two groups: amphibians andamniotes. Amniotes are animals whose eggs are adapted for terrestrial living, and this group includes mammals, reptiles,and birds. Amniotic embryos, developing in either an externally shed egg or an egg carried by the female, are provided witha water-retaining environment and are protected by amniotic membranes.
Modern fishes include an estimated 31,000 species. Fishes were the earliest vertebrates, with jawless species being theearliest and jawed species evolving later. They are active feeders, rather than sessile, suspension feeders. Jawless fishes—thehagfishes and lampreys—have a distinct cranium and complex sense organs including eyes, distinguishing them from theinvertebrate chordates.Jawless FishesJawless fishes are craniates that represent an ancient vertebrate lineage that arose over one half-billion years ago. In thepast, the hagfishes and lampreys were classified together as agnathans. Today, hagfishes and lampreys are recognized as separate clades, primarily because lampreys are true vertebrates, whereas hagfishes are not. A defining feature is the lackof paired lateral appendages (fins). Some of the earliest jawless fishes were the ostracoderms (which translates to “shellskin”).Ostracoderms were vertebrate fishes encased in bony armor, unlike present-day jawless fishes, which lack bone intheir scales.Myxini: HagfishesThe clade Myxini includes at least 20 species of hagfishes. Hagfishes are eel-like scavengers that live on the ocean floor andfeed on dead invertebrates, other fishes, and marine mammals (Figure 29.8). Hagfishes are entirely marine and are foundin oceans around the world, except for the polar regions. A unique feature of these animals is the slime glands beneath theskin that release mucus through surface pores. This mucus allows the hagfish to escape from the grip of predators. Hagfishcan also twist their bodies in a knot to feed and sometimes eat carcasses from the inside out.
Pacific hagfish are scavengers that live on the ocean floor.
The skeleton of a hagfish is composed of cartilage, which includes a cartilaginous notochord that runs the length of the body.This notochord provides support to the hagfish’s body. Hagfishes do not replace the notochord with a vertebral columnduring development, as do true vertebrates.Petromyzontidae: LampreysThe clade Petromyzontidae includes approximately 35–40 or more species of lampreys. Lampreys are similar to hagfishesin size and shape; however, lampreys possess some vertebral elements. Lampreys lack paired appendages and bone, as dothe hagfishes. As adults, lampreys are characterized by a toothed, funnel-like sucking mouth. Many species have a parasiticstage of their life cycle during which they are ectoparasites of fishes.
These parasitic sea lampreys attach to their lake trout host by suction and use their rough tongues to raspaway flesh in order to feed on the trout’s blood.
Lampreys live primarily in coastal and fresh waters, and have a worldwide distribution, except for in the tropics andpolar regions. Some species are marine, but all species spawn in fresh water. Eggs are fertilized externally, and the larvae distinctly differ from the adult form, spending 3 to 15 years as suspension feeders. Once they attain sexual maturity, theadults reproduce and die within days.Lampreys possess a notochord as adults; however, this notochord is surrounded by a cartilaginous structure called anarcualia, which may resemble an evolutionarily early form of the vertebral column.Gnathostomes: Jawed FishesGnathostomes or “jaw-mouths” are vertebrates that possess jaws. One of the most significant developments in earlyvertebrate evolution was the development of the jaw, which is a hinged structure attached to the cranium that allows ananimal to grasp and tear its food. The evolution of jaws allowed early gnathostomes to exploit food resources that wereunavailable to jawless fishes.Early gnathostomes also possessed two sets of paired fins, allowing the fishes to maneuver accurately. Pectoral fins aretypically located on the anterior body, and pelvic fins on the posterior. Evolution of the jaw and paired fins permittedgnathostomes to expand from the sedentary suspension feeding of jawless fishes to become mobile predators. The ability ofgnathostomes to exploit new nutrient sources likely is one reason that they replaced most jawless fishes during the Devonianperiod. Two early groups of gnathostomes were the acanthodians and placoderms (Figure 29.10), which arose in the lateSilurian period and are now extinct. Most modern fishes are gnathostomes that belong to the clades Chondrichthyes andOsteichthyes.
Dunkleosteous was an enormous placoderm from the Devonian period, 380–360 million years ago. Itmeasured up to 10 meters in length and weighed up to 3.6 tons.
Chondrichthyes: Cartilaginous FishesThe clade Chondrichthyes is diverse, consisting of sharks (Figure 29.11), rays, and skates, together with sawfishes and afew dozen species of fishes called chimaeras, or “ghost” sharks.” Chondrichthyes are jawed fishes that possess paired finsand a skeleton made of cartilage. This clade arose approximately 370 million years ago in the early or middle Devonian.They are thought to be descended from the placoderms, which had skeletons made of bone; thus, the cartilaginous skeletonof Chondrichthyes is a later development. Parts of shark skeleton are strengthened by granules of calcium carbonate, butthis is not the same as bone.Most cartilaginous fishes live in marine habitats, with a few species living in fresh water for a part or all of their lives. Mostsharks are carnivores that feed on live prey, either swallowing it whole or using their jaws and teeth to tear it into smallerpieces. Shark teeth likely evolved from the jagged scales that cover their skin, called placoid scales. Some species of sharksand rays are suspension feeders that feed on plankton.
Hammerhead sharks tend to school during the day and hunt prey at night.
Sharks have well-developed sense organs that aid them in locating prey, including a keen sense of smell andelectroreception, with the latter perhaps the most sensitive of any animal. Organs called ampullae of Lorenzini allowsharks to detect the electromagnetic fields that are produced by all living things, including their prey. Electroreception hasonly been observed in aquatic or amphibious animals. Sharks, together with most fishes and aquatic and larval amphibians,also have a sense organ called the lateral line, which is used to detect movement and vibration in the surrounding water,and is often considered homologous to “hearing” in terrestrial vertebrates. The lateral line is visible as a darker stripe thatruns along the length of a fish’s body.Sharks reproduce sexually, and eggs are fertilized internally. Most species are ovoviviparous: The fertilized egg is retainedin the oviduct of the mother’s body and the embryo is nourished by the egg yolk. The eggs hatch in the uterus, and young areborn alive and fully functional. Some species of sharks are oviparous: They lay eggs that hatch outside of the mother’s body.Embryos are protected by a shark egg case or “mermaid’s purse” (Figure 29.12) that has the consistency of leather. Theshark egg case has tentacles that snag in seaweed and give the newborn shark cover. A few species of sharks are viviparous:The young develop within the mother’s body and she gives live birth.
Shark embryos are clearly visible through these transparent egg cases. The round structure is the yolkthat nourishes the growing embryo.
Rays and skates comprise more than 500 species and are closely related to sharks. They can be distinguished from sharksby their flattened bodies, pectoral fins that are enlarged and fused to the head, and gill slits on their ventral surface (Figure29.13). Like sharks, rays and skates have a cartilaginous skeleton. Most species are marine and live on the sea floor, withnearly a worldwide distribution.
This stingray blends into the sandy bottom of the ocean floor.
Osteichthyes: Bony FishesMembers of the clade Osteichthyes, also called bony fishes, are characterized by a bony skeleton. The vast majority ofpresent-day fishes belong to this group, which consists of approximately 30,000 species, making it the largest class ofvertebrates in existence today.Nearly all bony fishes have an ossified skeleton with specialized bone cells (osteocytes) that produce and maintain a calciumphosphate matrix. This characteristic has only reversed in a few groups of Osteichthyes, such as sturgeons and paddlefish,which have primarily cartilaginous skeletons. The skin of bony fishes is often covered by overlapping scales, and glands inthe skin secrete mucus that reduces drag when swimming and aids the fish in osmoregulation. Like sharks, bony fishes havea lateral line system that detects vibrations in water.All bony fishes use gills to breathe. Water is drawn over gills that are located in chambers covered and ventilated by aprotective, muscular flap called the operculum. Many bony fishes also have a swim bladder, a gas-filled organ that helps tocontrol the buoyancy of the fish. Bony fishes are further divided into two extant clades: Actinopterygii (ray-finned fishes)and Sarcopterygii (lobe-finned fishes).Actinopterygii, the ray-finned fishes, include many familiar fishes—tuna, bass, trout, and salmon (Figure 29.14a), amongothers. Ray-finned fishes are named for their fins that are webs of skin supported by bony spines called rays. In contrast,the fins of Sarcopterygii are fleshy and lobed, supported by bone (Figure 29.14b). Living members of this clade include theless-familiar lungfishes and coelacanths.
The (a) sockeye salmon and (b) coelacanth are both bony fishes of the Osteichthyes clade. Thecoelacanth, sometimes called a lobe-finned fish, was thought to have gone extinct in the Late Cretaceous period, 100million years ago, until one was discovered in 1938 near the Comoros Islands between Africa and Madagascar.
Amphibians are vertebrate tetrapods. Amphibia includes frogs, salamanders, and caecilians. The term amphibian looselytranslates from the Greek as “dual life,” which is a reference to the metamorphosis that many frogs and salamanders undergoand their mixture of aquatic and terrestrial environments in their life cycle. Amphibians evolved during the Devonian periodand were the earliest terrestrial tetrapods.
Characteristics of AmphibiansAs tetrapods, most amphibians are characterized by four well-developed limbs. Some species of salamanders and allcaecilians are functionally limbless; their limbs are vestigial. An important characteristic of extant amphibians is a moist,permeable skin that is achieved via mucus glands that keep the skin moist; thus, exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxidewith the environment can take place through it ( cutaneous respiration). Additional characteristics of amphibians includepedicellate teeth—teeth in which the root and crown are calcified, separated by a zone of noncalcified tissue—and a papillaamphibiorum and papilla basilaris, structures of the inner ear that are sensitive to frequencies below and above 10,00 hertz,respectively. Amphibians also have an auricular operculum, which is an extra bone in the ear that transmits sounds to theinner ear. All extant adult amphibians are carnivorous, and some terrestrial amphibians have a sticky tongue that is used tocapture prey.Evolution of AmphibiansThe fossil record provides evidence of the first tetrapods: now-extinct amphibian species dating to nearly 400 million yearsago. Evolution of tetrapods from fishes represented a significant change in body plan from one suited to organisms thatrespired and swam in water, to organisms that breathed air and moved onto land; these changes occurred over a spanof 50 million years during the Devonian period. One of the earliest known tetrapods is from the genus Acanthostega.Acanthostega was aquatic; fossils show that it had gills similar to fishes. However, it also had four limbs, with the skeletalstructure of limbs found in present-day tetrapods, including amphibians. Therefore, it is thought that Acanthostega lived inshallow waters and was an intermediate form between lobe-finned fishes and early, fully terrestrial tetrapods. What precededAcanthostega?In 2006, researchers published news of their discovery of a fossil of a “tetrapod-like fish,” Tiktaalik roseae, which seemsto be an intermediate form between fishes having fins and tetrapods having limbs (Figure 29.15). Tiktaalik likely lived in ashallow water environment about 375 million years ago.
The recent fossil discovery of Tiktaalik roseae suggests evidence for an animal intermediate to finnedfish and legged tetrapods.
The early tetrapods that moved onto land had access to new nutrient sources and relatively few predators. This led tothe widespread distribution of tetrapods during the early Carboniferous period, a period sometimes called the “age of theamphibians.”Modern AmphibiansAmphibia comprises an estimated 6,770 extant species that inhabit tropical and temperate regions around the world.Amphibians can be divided into three clades: Urodela (“tailed-ones”), the salamanders; Anura (“tail-less ones”), the frogs;and Apoda (“legless ones”), the caecilians.Urodela: SalamandersSalamanders are amphibians that belong to the order Urodela. Living salamanders (Figure 29.16) include approximately620 species, some of which are aquatic, other terrestrial, and some that live on land only as adults. Adult salamandersusually have a generalized tetrapod body plan with four limbs and a tail. They move by bending their bodies from sideto side, called lateral undulation, in a fish-like manner while “walking” their arms and legs fore and aft. It is thought thattheir gait is similar to that used by early tetrapods. Respiration differs among different species. The majority of salamandersare lungless, and respiration occurs through the skin or through external gills. Some terrestrial salamanders have primitivelungs; a few species have both gills and lungs.Unlike frogs, virtually all salamanders rely on internal fertilization of the eggs. The only male amphibians that possesscopulatory structures are the caecilians, so fertilization among salamanders typically involves an elaborate and oftenprolonged courtship. Such a courtship allows the successful transfer of sperm from male to female via a spermatophore.Development in many of the most highly evolved salamanders, which are fully terrestrial, occurs during a prolonged eggstage, with the eggs guarded by the mother. During this time, the gilled larval stage is found only within the egg capsule,with the gills being resorbed, and metamorphosis being completed, before hatching. Hatchlings thus resemble tiny adults.
Anura: FrogsFrogs are amphibians that belong to the order Anura (Figure 29.17). Anurans are among the most diverse groups ofvertebrates, with approximately 5,965 species that occur on all of the continents except Antarctica. Anurans have a bodyplan that is more specialized for movement. Adult frogs use their hind limbs to jump on land. Frogs have a numberof modifications that allow them to avoid predators, including skin that acts as camouflage. Many species of frogs andsalamanders also release defensive chemicals from glands in the skin that are poisonous to predators.
The Australian green tree frog is a nocturnal predator that lives in the canopies of trees near a watersource.Frog eggs are fertilized externally, and like other amphibians, frogs generally lay their eggs in moist environments. A moistenvironment is required as eggs lack a shell and thus dehydrate quickly in dry environments. Frogs demonstrate a greatdiversity of parental behaviors, with some species laying many eggs and exhibiting little parental care, to species that carryeggs and tadpoles on their hind legs or backs. The life cycle of frogs, as other amphibians, consists of two distinct stages:the larval stage followed by metamorphosis to an adult stage. The larval stage of a frog, the tadpole, is often a filter-feedingherbivore. Tadpoles usually have gills, a lateral line system, long-finned tails, and lack limbs. At the end of the tadpolestage, frogs undergo metamorphosis into the adult form (Figure 29.18). During this stage, the gills, tail, and lateral linesystem disappear, and four limbs develop. The jaws become larger and are suited for carnivorous feeding, and the digestivesystem transforms into the typical short gut of a predator. An eardrum and air-breathing lungs also develop. These changesduring metamorphosis allow the larvae to move onto land in the adult stage.
A juvenile frog metamorphoses into a frog. Here, the frog has started to develop limbs, but its tadpole tailis still evident.Apoda: CaeciliansAn estimated 185 species comprise caecilians, a group of amphibians that belong to the order Apoda. Although they arevertebrates, a complete lack of limbs leads to their resemblance to earthworms in appearance. They are adapted for a soilburrowingor aquatic lifestyle, and they are nearly blind. These animals are found in the tropics of South America, Africa,and Southern Asia. They have vestigial limbs, evidence that they evolved from a legged ancestor.
The amniotes —reptiles, birds, and mammals—are distinguished from amphibians by their terrestrially adapted egg, whichis protected by amniotic membranes. The evolution of amniotic membranes meant that the embryos of amniotes wereprovided with their own aquatic environment, which led to less dependence on water for development and thus allowedthe amniotes to branch out into drier environments. This was a significant development that distinguished them fromamphibians, which were restricted to moist environments due their shell-less eggs. Although the shells of various amnioticspecies vary significantly, they all allow retention of water. The shells of bird eggs are composed of calcium carbonate andare hard, but fragile. The shells of reptile eggs are leathery and require a moist environment. Most mammals do not lay eggs(except for monotremes). Instead, the embryo grows within the mother’s body; however, even with this internal gestation,amniotic membranes are still present.Characteristics of AmniotesThe amniotic egg is the key characteristic of amniotes. In amniotes that lay eggs, the shell of the egg provides protectionfor the developing embryo while being permeable enough to allow for the exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen. Thealbumin, or egg white, provides the embryo with water and protein, whereas the fattier egg yolk is the energy supplyfor the embryo, as is the case with the eggs of many other animals, such as amphibians. However, the eggs of amniotescontain three additional extra-embryonic membranes: the chorion, amnion, and allantois (Figure 29.20). Extra-embryonicmembranes are membranes present in amniotic eggs that are not a part of the body of the developing embryo. Whilethe inner amniotic membrane surrounds the embryo itself, the chorion surrounds the embryo and yolk sac. The chorionfacilitates exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the embryo and the egg’s external environment. The amnionprotects the embryo from mechanical shock and supports hydration. The allantois stores nitrogenous wastes producedby the embryo and also facilitates respiration. In mammals, membranes that are homologous to the extra-embryonicmembranes in eggs are present in the placenta.Additional derived characteristics of amniotes include waterproof skin, due to the presence of lipids, and costal (rib)ventilation of the lungs.Evolution of AmniotesThe first amniotes evolved from amphibian ancestors approximately 340 million years ago during the Carboniferous period.The early amniotes diverged into two main lines soon after the first amniotes arose. The initial split was into synapsidsand sauropsids. Synapsids include all mammals, including extinct mammalian species. Synapsids also include therapsids,which were mammal-like reptiles from which mammals evolved. Sauropsids include reptiles and birds, and can be furtherdivided into anapsids and diapsids. The key differences between the synapsids, anapsids, and diapsids are the structuresof the skull and the number of temporal fenestrae behind each eye (Figure 29.21). Temporal fenestrae are post-orbitalopenings in the skull that allow muscles to expand and lengthen. Anapsids have no temporal fenestrae, synapsids have one,and diapsids have two. Anapsids include extinct organisms and may, based on anatomy, include turtles. However, this isstill controversial, and turtles are sometimes classified as diapsids based on molecular evidence. The diapsids include birdsand all other living and extinct reptiles.
Compare the skulls and temporal fenestrae of anapsids, synapsids, and diapsids. Anapsids have noopenings, synapsids have one opening, and diapsids have two openings.The diapsids diverged into two groups, the Archosauromorpha (“ancient lizard form”) and the Lepidosauromorpha (“scalylizard form”) during the Mesozoic period (Figure 29.22). The lepidosaurs include modern lizards, snakes, and tuataras. Thearchosaurs include modern crocodiles and alligators, and the extinct pterosaurs (“winged lizard”) and dinosaurs (“terriblelizard”). Clade Dinosauria includes birds, which evolved from a branch of dinosaurs.
In the past, the most common division of amniotes has been into the classes Mammalia, Reptilia, and Aves. Birds aredescended, however, from dinosaurs, so this classical scheme results in groups that are not true clades. We will considerbirds as a group distinct from reptiles for the purpose of this discussion with the understanding that this does not completelyreflect phylogenetic history and relationships.Characteristics of ReptilesReptiles are tetrapods. Limbless reptiles—snakes and other squamates—have vestigial limbs and, like caecilians, areclassified as tetrapods because they are descended from four-limbed ancestors. Reptiles lay eggs enclosed in shells onland. Even aquatic reptiles return to the land to lay eggs. They usually reproduce sexually with internal fertilization. Somespecies display ovoviviparity, with the eggs remaining in the mother’s body until they are ready to hatch. Other species areviviparous, with the offspring born alive.One of the key adaptations that permitted reptiles to live on land was the development of their scaly skin, containing theprotein keratin and waxy lipids, which reduced water loss from the skin. This occlusive skin means that reptiles cannot usetheir skin for respiration, like amphibians, and thus all breathe with lungs.Reptiles are ectotherms, animals whose main source of body heat comes from the environment. This is in contrast toendotherms, which use heat produced by metabolism to regulate body temperature. In addition to being ectothermic,reptiles are categorized as poikilotherms, or animals whose body temperatures vary rather than remain stable. Reptiles havebehavioral adaptations to help regulate body temperature, such as basking in sunny places to warm up and finding shadyspots or going underground to cool down. The advantage of ectothermy is that metabolic energy from food is not requiredto heat the body; therefore, reptiles can survive on about 10 percent of the calories required by a similarly sized endotherm.In cold weather, some reptiles such as the garter snake brumate. Brumation is similar to hibernation in that the animalbecomes less active and can go for long periods without eating, but differs from hibernation in that brumating reptiles arenot asleep or living off fat reserves. Rather, their metabolism is slowed in response to cold temperatures, and the animal isvery sluggish.
Evolution of ReptilesReptiles originated approximately 300 million years ago during the Carboniferous period. One of the oldest knownamniotes is Casineria, which had both amphibian and reptilian characteristics. One of the earliest undisputed reptileswas Hylonomus. Soon after the first amniotes appeared, they diverged into three groups—synapsids, anapsids, anddiapsids—during the Permian period. The Permian period also saw a second major divergence of diapsid reptiles intoarchosaurs (predecessors of crocodilians and dinosaurs) and lepidosaurs (predecessors of snakes and lizards). These groupsremained inconspicuous until the Triassic period, when the archosaurs became the dominant terrestrial group due to theextinction of large-bodied anapsids and synapsids during the Permian-Triassic extinction. About 250 million years ago,archosaurs radiated into the dinosaurs and the pterosaurs.Although they are sometimes mistakenly called dinosaurs, the pterosaurs were distinct from true dinosaurs (Figure 29.23).Pterosaurs had a number of adaptations that allowed for flight, including hollow bones (birds also exhibit hollow bones, acase of convergent evolution). Their wings were formed by membranes of skin that attached to the long, fourth finger ofeach arm and extended along the body to the legs.
Pterosaurs, which existed from the late Triassic to the Cretaceous period (210 to 65.5 million years ago),possessed wings but are not believed to have been capable of powered flight. Instead, they may have been able tosoar after launching from cliffs.
The dinosaurs were a diverse group of terrestrial reptiles with more than 1,000 species identified to date. Paleontologistscontinue to discover new species of dinosaurs. Some dinosaurs were quadrupeds (Figure 29.24); others were bipeds. Somewere carnivorous, whereas others were herbivorous. Dinosaurs laid eggs, and a number of nests containing fossilized eggshave been found. It is not known whether dinosaurs were endotherms or ectotherms. However, given that modern birds areendothermic, the dinosaurs that served as ancestors to birds likely were endothermic as well. Some fossil evidence existsfor dinosaurian parental care, and comparative biology supports this hypothesis since the archosaur birds and crocodiliansdisplay parental care.
Edmontonia was an armored dinosaur that lived in the late Cretaceous period, 145.5 to 65.6 million yearsago.
Dinosaurs dominated the Mesozoic Era, which was known as the “age of reptiles.” The dominance of dinosaurs lasted untilthe end of the Cretaceous, the last period of the Mesozoic Era. The Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction resulted in the loss ofmost of the large-bodied animals of the Mesozoic Era. Birds are the only living descendants of one of the major clades ofdinosaurs.
Modern ReptilesClass Reptilia includes many diverse species that are classified into four living clades. These are the 25 species ofCrocodilia, 2 species of Sphenodontia, approximately 9,200 Squamata species, and the Testudines, with about 325 species.CrocodiliaCrocodilia (“small lizard”) arose with a distinct lineage by the middle Triassic; extant species include alligators, crocodiles,and caimans. Crocodilians (Figure 29.25) live throughout the tropics and subtropics of Africa, South America, SouthernFlorida, Asia, and Australia. They are found in freshwater, saltwater, and brackish habitats, such as rivers and lakes, andspend most of their time in water. Some species are able to move on land due to their semi-erect posture.
Crocodilians, such as this Siamese crocodile (Crocodylus siamensis), provide parental care for theiroffspring.
SphenodontiaSphenodontia (“wedge tooth”) arose in the Mesozoic era and includes only one living genus, Tuatara, comprising twospecies that are found in New Zealand (Figure 29.26). Tuataras measure up to 80 centimeters and weigh about 1 kilogram.Although quite lizard-like in gross appearance, several unique features of the skull and jaws clearly define them anddistinguish the group from the squamates.
This tuatara from New Zealand may resemble a lizard but belongs to a distinct lineage, theSphenodontidae family.
SquamataSquamata (“scaly”) arose in the late Permian, and extant species include lizards and snakes. Both are found on allcontinents except Antarctica. Lizards and snakes are most closely related to tuataras, both groups having evolved from alepidosaurian ancestor. Squamata is the largest extant clade of reptiles (Figure 29.27). Most lizards differ from snakes byhaving four limbs, although these have been variously lost or significantly reduced in at least 60 lineages. Snakes lackeyelids and external ears, which are present in lizards. Lizard species range in size from chameleons and geckos, which area few centimeters in length, to the Komodo dragon, which is about 3 meters in length. Most lizards are carnivorous, butsome large species, such as iguanas, are herbivores.
This Jackson’s chameleon (Trioceros jacksonii) blends in with its surroundings.Snakes are thought to have descended from either burrowing lizards or aquatic lizards over 100 million years ago (Figure29.28). Snakes comprise about 3,000 species and are found on every continent except Antarctica. They range in sizefrom 10 centimeter-long thread snakes to 10 meter-long pythons and anacondas. All snakes are carnivorous and eat smallanimals, birds, eggs, fish, and insects. The snake body form is so specialized that, in its general morphology, a “snakeis a snake.” Their specializations all point to snakes having evolved to feed on relatively large prey (even though somecurrent species have reversed this trend). Although variations exist, most snakes have a skull that is very flexible, involvingeight rotational joints. They also differ from other squamates by having mandibles (lower jaws) without either bony orligamentous attachment anteriorly. Having this connection via skin and muscle allows for great expansion of the gape andindependent motion of the two sides—both advantages in swallowing big items.
The garter snake belongs to the genus Thamnophis, the most widely distributed reptile genus in NorthAmerica.
TestudinesTurtles are members of the clade Testudines (“having a shell”) (Figure 29.29). Turtles are characterized by a bony orcartilaginous shell. The shell consists of the ventral surface called the plastron and the dorsal surface called the carapace,which develops from the ribs. The plastron is made of scutes or plates; the scutes can be used to differentiate species ofturtles. The two clades of turtles are most easily recognized by how they retract their necks. The dominant group, whichincludes all North American species, retracts its neck in a vertical S-curve. Turtles in the less speciose clade retract the neckwith a horizontal curve.Turtles arose approximately 200 million years ago, predating crocodiles, lizards, and snakes. Similar to other reptiles, turtlesare ectotherms. They lay eggs on land, although many species live in or near water. None exhibit parental care. Turtles rangein size from the speckled padloper tortoise at 8 centimeters (3.1 inches) to the leatherback sea turtle at 200 centimeters (over6 feet). The term “turtle” is sometimes used to describe only those species of Testudines that live in the sea, with the terms“tortoise” and “terrapin” used to refer to species that live on land and in fresh water, respectively.
The African spurred tortoise (Geochelone sulcata) lives at the southern edge of the Sahara Desert. It isthe third largest tortoise in the world.
The most obvious characteristic that sets birds apart from other modern vertebrates is the presence of feathers, whichare modified scales. While vertebrates like bats fly without feathers, birds rely on feathers and wings, along with othermodifications of body structure and physiology, for flight.Characteristics of BirdsBirds are endothermic, and because they fly, they require large amounts of energy, necessitating a high metabolic rate. Likemammals, which are also endothermic, birds have an insulating covering that keeps heat in the body: feathers. Specializedfeathers called down feathers are especially insulating, trapping air in spaces between each feather to decrease the rate ofheat loss. Certain parts of a bird’s body are covered in down feathers, and the base of other feathers have a downy portion,whereas newly hatched birds are covered in down.Feathers not only act as insulation but also allow for flight, enabling the lift and thrust necessary to become airborne. Thefeathers on a wing are flexible, so the collective feathers move and separate as air moves through them, reducing the drag onthe wing. Flight feathers are asymmetrical, which affects airflow over them and provides some of the lifting and thrustingforce required for flight (Figure 29.30). Two types of flight feathers are found on the wings, primary feathers and secondaryfeathers. Primary feathers are located at the tip of the wing and provide thrust. Secondary feathers are located closer tothe body, attach to the forearm portion of the wing and provide lift. Contour feathers are the feathers found on the body,and they help reduce drag produced by wind resistance during flight. They create a smooth, aerodynamic surface so that airmoves smoothly over the bird’s body, allowing for efficient flight.
Primary feathers are located at the wing tip and provide thrust; secondary feathers are located close tothe body and provide lift.Flapping of the entire wing occurs primarily through the actions of the chest muscles, the pectoralis and thesupracoracoideus. These muscles are highly developed in birds and account for a higher percentage of body mass than inmost mammals. These attach to a blade-shaped keel, like that of a boat, located on the sternum. The sternum of birds is larger than that of other vertebrates, which accommodates the large muscles required to generate enough upward force togenerate lift with the flapping of the wings. Another skeletal modification found in most birds is the fusion of the twoclavicles (collarbones), forming the furcula or wishbone. The furcula is flexible enough to bend and provide support to theshoulder girdle during flapping.An important requirement of flight is a low body weight. As body weight increases, the muscle output required for flyingincreases. The largest living bird is the ostrich, and while it is much smaller than the largest mammals, it is flightless.For birds that do fly, reduction in body weight makes flight easier. Several modifications are found in birds to reducebody weight, including pneumatization of bones. Pneumatic bones are bones that are hollow, rather than filled with tissue(Figure 29.31). They contain air spaces that are sometimes connected to air sacs, and they have struts of bone to providestructural reinforcement. Pneumatic bones are not found in all birds, and they are more extensive in large birds than in smallbirds. Not all bones of the skeleton are pneumatic, although the skulls of almost all birds are.
Many birds have hollow, pneumatic bones, which make flight easier.Other modifications that reduce weight include the lack of a urinary bladder. Birds possess a cloaca, a structure that allowswater to be reabsorbed from waste back into the bloodstream. Uric acid is not expelled as a liquid but is concentrated intourate salts, which are expelled along with fecal matter. In this way, water is not held in the urinary bladder, which wouldincrease body weight. Most bird species only possess one ovary rather than two, further reducing body mass.The air sacs that extend into bones to form pneumatic bones also join with the lungs and function in respiration. Unlikemammalian lungs in which air flows in two directions, as it is breathed in and out, airflow through bird lungs travels inone direction (Figure 29.32). Air sacs allow for this unidirectional airflow, which also creates a cross-current exchangesystem with the blood. In a cross-current or counter-current system, the air flows in one direction and the blood flows in theopposite direction, creating a very efficient means of gas exchange.
Avian respiration is an efficient system of gas exchange with air flowing unidirectionally. During inhalation,air passes from the trachea into posterior air sacs, then through the lungs to anterior air sacs. The air sacs areconnected to the hollow interior of bones. During exhalation, air from air sacs passes into the lungs and out the trachea.
Evolution of BirdsThe evolutionary history of birds is still somewhat unclear. Due to the fragility of bird bones, they do not fossilize as wellas other vertebrates. Birds are diapsids, meaning they have two fenestrations or openings in their skulls. Birds belong to agroup of diapsids called the archosaurs, which also includes crocodiles and dinosaurs. It is commonly accepted that birdsevolved from dinosaurs.Dinosaurs (including birds) are further subdivided into two groups, the Saurischia (“lizard like”) and the Ornithischia (“birdlike”). Despite the names of these groups, it was not the bird-like dinosaurs that gave rise to modern birds. Rather, Saurischiadiverged into two groups: One included the long-necked herbivorous dinosaurs, such as Apatosaurus. The second group,bipedal predators called theropods, includes birds. This course of evolution is suggested by similarities between theropod fossils and birds, specifically in the structure of the hip and wrist bones, as well as the presence of the wishbone, formed bythe fusing of the clavicles.One important fossil of an animal intermediate to dinosaurs and birds is Archaeopteryx, which is from the Jurassic period(Figure 29.33). Archaeopteryx is important in establishing the relationship between birds and dinosaurs, because it is anintermediate fossil, meaning it has characteristics of both dinosaurs and birds. Some scientists propose classifying it as abird, but others prefer to classify it as a dinosaur. The fossilized skeleton of Archaeopteryx looks like that of a dinosaur,and it had teeth whereas birds do not, but it also had feathers modified for flight, a trait associated only with birds amongmodern animals. Fossils of older feathered dinosaurs exist, but the feathers do not have the characteristics of flight feathers.
(a) Archaeopteryx lived in the late Jurassic Period around 150 million years ago. It had teeth like adinosaur, but had (b) flight feathers like modern birds, which can be seen in this fossil.It is still unclear exactly how flight evolved in birds. Two main theories exist, the arboreal (“tree”) hypothesis and theterrestrial (“land”) hypothesis. The arboreal hypothesis posits that tree-dwelling precursors to modern birds jumped frombranch to branch using their feathers for gliding before becoming fully capable of flapping flight. In contrast to this, theterrestrial hypothesis holds that running was the stimulus for flight, as wings could be used to improve running and thenbecame used for flapping flight. Like the question of how flight evolved, the question of how endothermy evolved inbirds still is unanswered. Feathers provide insulation, but this is only beneficial if body heat is being produced internally.Similarly, internal heat production is only viable if insulation is present to retain that heat. It has been suggested that one orthe other—feathers or endothermy—evolved in response to some other selective pressure.During the Cretaceous period, a group known as the Enantiornithes was the dominant bird type (Figure 29.34).Enantiornithes means “opposite birds,” which refers to the fact that certain bones of the feet are joined differently than theway the bones are joined in modern birds. These birds formed an evolutionary line separate from modern birds, and they didnot survive past the Cretaceous. Along with the Enantiornithes, Ornithurae birds (the evolutionary line that includes modernbirds) were also present in the Cretaceous. After the extinction of Enantiornithes, modern birds became the dominant bird,with a large radiation occurring during the Cenozoic Era. Referred to as Neornithes (“new birds”), modern birds are nowclassified into two groups, the Paleognathae (“old jaw”) or ratites, a group of flightless birds including ostriches, emus,rheas, and kiwis, and the Neognathae (“new jaw”), which includes all other birds.
Shanweiniao cooperorum was a species of Enantiornithes that did not survive past the Cretaceousperiod.
Mammals are vertebrates that possess hair and mammary glands. Several other characteristics are distinctive to mammals,including certain features of the jaw, skeleton, integument, and internal anatomy. Modern mammals belong to three clades:monotremes, marsupials, and eutherians (or placental mammals).
Characteristics of MammalsThe presence of hair is one of the most obvious signs of a mammal. Although it is not very extensive on certain species,such as whales, hair has many important functions for mammals. Mammals are endothermic, and hair provides insulationto retain heat generated by metabolic work. Hair traps a layer of air close to the body, retaining heat. Along with insulation,hair can serve as a sensory mechanism via specialized hairs called vibrissae, better known as whiskers. These attach tonerves that transmit information about sensation, which is particularly useful to nocturnal or burrowing mammals. Hair canalso provide protective coloration or be part of social signaling, such as when an animal’s hair stands “on end.”Mammalian integument, or skin, includes secretory glands with various functions. Sebaceous glands produce a lipidmixture called sebum that is secreted onto the hair and skin for water resistance and lubrication. Sebaceous glands arelocated over most of the body. Eccrine glands produce sweat, or perspiration, which is mainly composed of water. In mostmammals, eccrine glands are limited to certain areas of the body, and some mammals do not possess them at all. However,in primates, especially humans, sweat figures prominently in thermoregulation, regulating the body through evaporativecooling. Sweat glands are located over most of the body surface in primates. Apocrine glands, or scent glands, secretesubstances that are used for chemical communication, such as in skunks. Mammary glands produce milk that is usedto feed newborns. While male monotremes and eutherians possess mammary glands, male marsupials do not. Mammaryglands likely are modified sebaceous or eccrine glands, but their evolutionary origin is not entirely clear.The skeletal system of mammals possesses many unique features. The lower jaw of mammals consists of only one bone, thedentary. The jaws of other vertebrates are composed of more than one bone. In mammals, the dentary bone joins the skull atthe squamosal bone, while in other vertebrates, the quadrate bone of the jaw joins with the articular bone of the skull. Thesebones are present in mammals, but they have been modified to function in hearing and form bones in the middle ear (Figure29.35). Other vertebrates possess only one middle ear bone, the stapes. Mammals have three: the malleus, incus, and stapes.The malleus originated from the articular bone, whereas the incus originated from the quadrate bone. This arrangement ofjaw and ear bones aids in distinguishing fossil mammals from fossils of other synapsids.
Bones of the mammalian inner ear are modified from bones of the jaw and skull.
The adductor muscle that closes the jaw is composed of two muscles in mammals: the temporalis and the masseter. Theseallow side-to-side movement of the jaw, making chewing possible, which is unique to mammals. Most mammals haveheterodont teeth, meaning that they have different types and shapes of teeth rather than just one type and shape of tooth.Most mammals are diphyodonts, meaning that they have two sets of teeth in their lifetime: deciduous or “baby” teeth, andpermanent teeth. Other vertebrates are polyphyodonts, that is, their teeth are replaced throughout their entire life.Mammals, like birds, possess a four-chambered heart. Mammals also have a specialized group of cardiac fibers located inthe walls of their right atrium called the sinoatrial node, or pacemaker, which determines the rate at which the heart beats.Mammalian erythrocytes (red blood cells) do not have nuclei, whereas the erythrocytes of other vertebrates are nucleated.The kidneys of mammals have a portion of the nephron called the loop of Henle or nephritic loop, which allows mammalsto produce urine with a high concentration of solutes, higher than that of the blood. Mammals lack a renal portal system,which is a system of veins that moves blood from the hind or lower limbs and region of the tail to the kidneys. Renal portalsystems are present in all other vertebrates except jawless fishes. A urinary bladder is present in all mammals.Mammalian brains have certain characteristics that differ from other vertebrates. In some, but not all mammals, the cerebralcortex, the outermost part of the cerebrum, is highly folded, allowing for a greater surface area than is possible with asmooth cortex. The optic lobes, located in the midbrain, are divided into two parts in mammals, whereas other vertebrates possess a single, undivided lobe. Eutherian mammals also possess a specialized structure that links the two cerebralhemispheres, called the corpus callosum.Evolution of MammalsMammals are synapsids, meaning they have a single opening in the skull. They are the only living synapsids, as earlierforms became extinct by the Jurassic period. The early non-mammalian synapsids can be divided into two groups, thepelycosaurs and the therapsids. Within the therapsids, a group called the cynodonts are thought to be the ancestors ofmammals.
Cynodonts, which first appeared in the Late Permian period 260 million years ago, are thought to be theancestors of modern mammals.
A key characteristic of synapsids is endothermy, rather than the ectothermy seen in most other vertebrates. The increasedmetabolic rate required to internally modify body temperature went hand in hand with changes to certain skeletal structures.The later synapsids, which had more evolved characteristics unique to mammals, possess cheeks for holding food andheterodont teeth, which are specialized for chewing, mechanically breaking down food to speed digestion and releasing theenergy needed to produce heat. Chewing also requires the ability to chew and breathe at the same time, which is facilitatedby the presence of a secondary palate. A secondary palate separates the area of the mouth where chewing occurs from thearea above where respiration occurs, allowing breathing to proceed uninterrupted during chewing. A secondary palate is notfound in pelycosaurs but is present in cynodonts and mammals. The jawbone also shows changes from early synapsids tolater ones. The zygomatic arch, or cheekbone, is present in mammals and advanced therapsids such as cynodonts, but is notpresent in pelycosaurs. The presence of the zygomatic arch suggests the presence of the masseter muscle, which closes thejaw and functions in chewing.In the appendicular skeleton, the shoulder girdle of therian mammals is modified from that of other vertebrates in that itdoes not possess a procoracoid bone or an interclavicle, and the scapula is the dominant bone.Mammals evolved from therapsids in the late Triassic period, as the earliest known mammal fossils are from the earlyJurassic period, some 205 million years ago. Early mammals were small, about the size of a small rodent. Mammals firstbegan to diversify in the Mesozoic Era, from the Jurassic to the Cretaceous periods, although most of these mammals wereextinct by the end of the Mesozoic. During the Cretaceous period, another radiation of mammals began and continuedthrough the Cenozoic Era, about 65 million years ago.Living MammalsThe eutherians, or placental mammals, and the marsupials together comprise the clade of therian mammals. Monotremes,or metatherians, form their sister clade.There are three living species of monotremes: the platypus and two species of echidnas, or spiny anteaters. The leatherybeakedplatypus belongs to the family Ornithorhynchidae (“bird beak”), whereas echidnas belong to the familyTachyglossidae (“sticky tongue”) (Figure 29.37). The platypus and one species of echidna are found in Australia, and theother species of echidna is found in New Guinea. Monotremes are unique among mammals as they lay eggs, rather thangiving birth to live young. The shells of their eggs are not like the hard shells of birds, but are a leathery shell, similar to theshells of reptile eggs. Monotremes have no teeth.
(a) The platypus, a monotreme, possesses a leathery beak and lays eggs rather than giving birth to liveyoung. (b) The echidna is another monotreme.
Marsupials are found primarily in Australia, though the opossum is found in North America. Australian marsupials includethe kangaroo, koala, bandicoot, Tasmanian devil (Figure 29.38), and several other species. Most species of marsupialspossess a pouch in which the very premature young reside after birth, receiving milk and continuing to develop. Marsupialsdiffer from eutherians in that there is a less complex placental connection: The young are born at an extremely early ageand latch onto the nipple within the pouch.
The Tasmanian devil is one of several marsupials native to Australia.
Eutherians are the most widespread of the mammals, occurring throughout the world. There are 18 to 20 orders of placentalmammals. Some examples are Insectivora, the insect eaters; Edentata, the toothless anteaters; Rodentia, the rodents;Cetacea, the aquatic mammals including whales; Carnivora, carnivorous mammals including dogs, cats, and bears; andPrimates, which includes humans. Eutherian mammals are sometimes called placental mammals because all speciespossess a complex placenta that connects a fetus to the mother, allowing for gas, fluid, and nutrient exchange. While othermammals possess a less complex placenta or briefly have a placenta, all eutherians possess a complex placenta duringgestation.
Order Primates of class Mammalia includes lemurs, tarsiers, monkeys, apes, and humans. Non-human primates liveprimarily in the tropical or subtropical regions of South America, Africa, and Asia. They range in size from the mouse lemurat 30 grams (1 ounce) to the mountain gorilla at 200 kilograms (441 pounds). The characteristics and evolution of primatesis of particular interest to us as it allows us to understand the evolution of our own species.
Characteristics of PrimatesAll primate species possess adaptations for climbing trees, as they all descended from tree-dwellers. This arboreal heritageof primates has resulted in hands and feet that are adapted for brachiation, or climbing and swinging through trees. Theseadaptations include, but are not limited to: 1) a rotating shoulder joint, 2) a big toe that is widely separated from theother toes and thumbs, which are widely separated from fingers (except humans), which allow for gripping branches, 3)stereoscopic vision, two overlapping fields of vision from the eyes, which allows for the perception of depth and gaugingdistance. Other characteristics of primates are brains that are larger than those of most other mammals, claws that have beenmodified into flattened nails, typically only one offspring per pregnancy, and a trend toward holding the body upright.Order Primates is divided into two groups: prosimians and anthropoids. Prosimians include the bush babies of Africa, thelemurs of Madagascar, and the lorises, pottos, and tarsiers of Southeast Asia. Anthropoids include monkeys, apes, andhumans. In general, prosimians tend to be nocturnal (in contrast to diurnal anthropoids) and exhibit a smaller size andsmaller brain than anthropoids.Evolution of PrimatesThe first primate-like mammals are referred to as proto-primates. They were roughly similar to squirrels and tree shrewsin size and appearance. The existing fossil evidence (mostly from North Africa) is very fragmented. These proto-primatesremain largely mysterious creatures until more fossil evidence becomes available. The oldest known primate-like mammalswith a relatively robust fossil record is Plesiadapis (although some researchers do not agree that Plesiadapis was a protoprimate).Fossils of this primate have been dated to approximately 55 million years ago. Plesiadapiforms were protoprimatesthat had some features of the teeth and skeleton in common with true primates. They were found in North Americaand Europe in the Cenozoic and went extinct by the end of the Eocene.The first true primates were found in North America, Europe, Asia, and Africa in the Eocene Epoch. These early primatesresembled present-day prosimians such as lemurs. Evolutionary changes continued in these early primates, with largerbrains and eyes, and smaller muzzles being the trend. By the end of the Eocene Epoch, many of the early prosimian specieswent extinct due either to cooler temperatures or competition from the first monkeys.Anthropoid monkeys evolved from prosimians during the Oligocene Epoch. By 40 million years ago, evidence indicatesthat monkeys were present in the New World (South America) and the Old World (Africa and Asia). New World monkeysare also called Platyrrhini—a reference to their broad noses (Figure 29.39). Old World monkeys are called Catarrhini—areference to their narrow noses. There is still quite a bit of uncertainty about the origins of the New World monkeys. Atthe time the platyrrhines arose, the continents of South American and Africa had drifted apart. Therefore, it is thought thatmonkeys arose in the Old World and reached the New World either by drifting on log rafts or by crossing land bridges. Dueto this reproductive isolation, New World monkeys and Old World monkeys underwent separate adaptive radiations overmillions of years. The New World monkeys are all arboreal, whereas Old World monkeys include arboreal and grounddwellingspecies.
The howler monkey is native to Central and South America. It makes a call that sounds like a lion roaring.
Apes evolved from the catarrhines in Africa midway through the Cenozoic, approximately 25 million years ago. Apesare generally larger than monkeys and they do not possess a tail. All apes are capable of moving through trees, althoughmany species spend most their time on the ground. Apes are more intelligent than monkeys, and they have relatively larger brains proportionate to body size. The apes are divided into two groups. The lesser apes comprise the family Hylobatidae,including gibbons and siamangs. The great apes include the genera Pan (chimpanzees and bonobos) (Figure 29.40a),Gorilla (gorillas), Pongo (orangutans), and Homo (humans) (Figure 29.40b). The very arboreal gibbons are smaller thanthe great apes; they have low sexual dimorphism (that is, the genders are not markedly different in size); and they haverelatively longer arms used for swinging through trees.
The (a) chimpanzee is one of the great apes. It possesses a relatively large brain and has no tail. (b) Allgreat apes have a similar skeletal structure.
Human EvolutionThe family Hominidae of order Primates includes the hominoids: the great apes (Figure 29.41). Evidence from thefossil record and from a comparison of human and chimpanzee DNA suggests that humans and chimpanzees divergedfrom a common hominoid ancestor approximately 6 million years ago. Several species evolved from the evolutionarybranch that includes humans, although our species is the only surviving member. The term hominin is used to refer tothose species that evolved after this split of the primate line, thereby designating species that are more closely relatedto humans than to chimpanzees. Hominins were predominantly bipedal and include those groups that likely gave riseto our species—including Australopithecus, Homo habilis, and Homo erectus—and those non-ancestral groups that canbe considered “cousins” of modern humans, such as Neanderthals. Determining the true lines of descent in hominins isdifficult. In years past, when relatively few hominin fossils had been recovered, some scientists believed that consideringthem in order, from oldest to youngest, would demonstrate the course of evolution from early hominins to modern humans.In the past several years, however, many new fossils have been found, and it is clear that there was often more than onespecies alive at any one time and that many of the fossils found (and species named) represent hominin species that died outand are not ancestral to modern humans.
This chart shows the evolution of modern humans.Very Early HomininsThree species of very early hominids have made news in the past few years. The oldest of these, Sahelanthropus tchadensis,has been dated to nearly 7 million years ago. There is a single specimen of this genus, a skull that was a surface find inChad. The fossil, informally called “Toumai,” is a mosaic of primitive and evolved characteristics, and it is unclear how thisfossil fits with the picture given by molecular data, namely that the line leading to modern humans and modern chimpanzeesapparently bifurcated about 6 million years ago. It is not thought at this time that this species was an ancestor of modernhumans.A second, younger species, Orrorin tugenensis, is also a relatively recent discovery, found in 2000. There are severalspecimens of Orrorin. It is not known whether Orrorin was a human ancestor, but this possibility has not been ruled out.Some features of Orrorin are more similar to those of modern humans than are the australopiths, although Orrorin is mucholder.A third genus, Ardipithecus, was discovered in the 1990s, and the scientists who discovered the first fossil found that someother scientists did not believe the organism to be a biped (thus, it would not be considered a hominid). In the interveningyears, several more specimens of Ardipithecus, classified as two different species, demonstrated that the organism wasbipedal. Again, the status of this genus as a human ancestor is uncertain.Early Hominins: Genus AustralopithecusAustralopithecus (“southern ape”) is a genus of hominin that evolved in eastern Africa approximately 4 million yearsago and went extinct about 2 million years ago. This genus is of particular interest to us as it is thought that our genus,genus Homo, evolved from Australopithecus about 2 million years ago (after likely passing through some transitionalstates). Australopithecus had a number of characteristics that were more similar to the great apes than to modern humans.For example, sexual dimorphism was more exaggerated than in modern humans. Males were up to 50 percent largerthan females, a ratio that is similar to that seen in modern gorillas and orangutans. In contrast, modern human males areapproximately 15 to 20 percent larger than females. The brain size of Australopithecus relative to its body mass was alsosmaller than modern humans and more similar to that seen in the great apes. A key feature that Australopithecus had incommon with modern humans was bipedalism, although it is likely that Australopithecus also spent time in trees. Hominin footprints, similar to those of modern humans, were found in Laetoli, Tanzania and dated to 3.6 million years ago. Theyshowed that hominins at the time of Australopithecus were walking upright.There were a number of Australopithecus species, which are often referred to as australopiths. Australopithecus anamensislived about 4.2 million years ago. More is known about another early species, Australopithecus afarensis, which livedbetween 3.9 and 2.9 million years ago. This species demonstrates a trend in human evolution: the reduction of the dentitionand jaw in size. A. afarensis (Figure 29.42) had smaller canines and molars compared to apes, but these were larger thanthose of modern humans. Its brain size was 380–450 cubic centimeters, approximately the size of a modern chimpanzeebrain. It also had prognathic jaws, which is a relatively longer jaw than that of modern humans. In the mid-1970s, the fossilof an adult female A. afarensis was found in the Afar region of Ethiopia and dated to 3.24 million years ago (Figure 29.43).The fossil, which is informally called “Lucy,” is significant because it was the most complete australopith fossil found, with40 percent of the skeleton recovered.
The skull of (a) Australopithecus afarensis, an early hominid that lived between two and three millionyears ago, resembled that of (b) modern humans but was smaller with a sloped forehead and prominent jaw.
This adult female Australopithecus afarensis skeleton, nicknamed Lucy, was discovered in the mid1970s.
Australopithecus africanus lived between 2 and 3 million years ago. It had a slender build and was bipedal, but had robustarm bones and, like other early hominids, may have spent significant time in trees. Its brain was larger than that of A.afarensis at 500 cubic centimeters, which is slightly less than one-third the size of modern human brains. Two other species,Australopithecus bahrelghazali and Australopithecus garhi, have been added to the roster of australopiths in recent years.A Dead End: Genus ParanthropusThe australopiths had a relatively slender build and teeth that were suited for soft food. In the past several years, fossils ofhominids of a different body type have been found and dated to approximately 2.5 million years ago. These hominids, of thegenus Paranthropus, were relatively large and had large grinding teeth. Their molars showed heavy wear, suggesting thatthey had a coarse and fibrous vegetarian diet as opposed to the partially carnivorous diet of the australopiths. Paranthropusincludes Paranthropus robustus of South Africa, and Paranthropus aethiopicus and Paranthropus boisei of East Africa. Thehominids in this genus went extinct more than 1 million years ago and are not thought to be ancestral to modern humans,but rather members of an evolutionary branch on the hominin tree that left no descendants.Early Hominins: Genus HomoThe human genus, Homo, first appeared between 2.5 and 3 million years ago. For many years, fossils of a species called H.habilis were the oldest examples in the genus Homo, but in 2010, a new species called Homo gautengensis was discoveredand may be older. Compared to A. africanus, H. habilis had a number of features more similar to modern humans. H. habilishad a jaw that was less prognathic than the australopiths and a larger brain, at 600–750 cubic centimeters. However, H.habilis retained some features of older hominin species, such as long arms. The name H. habilis means “handy man,” whichis a reference to the stone tools that have been found with its remains.
H. erectus appeared approximately 1.8 million years ago (Figure 29.44). It is believed to have originated in East Africaand was the first hominin species to migrate out of Africa. Fossils of H. erectus have been found in India, China, Java, andEurope, and were known in the past as “Java Man” or “Peking Man.” H. erectus had a number of features that were moresimilar to modern humans than those of H. habilis. H. erectus was larger in size than earlier hominins, reaching heightsup to 1.85 meters and weighing up to 65 kilograms, which are sizes similar to those of modern humans. Its degree ofsexual dimorphism was less than earlier species, with males being 20 to 30 percent larger than females, which is close tothe size difference seen in our species. H. erectus had a larger brain than earlier species at 775–1,100 cubic centimeters,which compares to the 1,130–1,260 cubic centimeters seen in modern human brains. H. erectus also had a nose withdownward-facing nostrils similar to modern humans, rather than the forward facing nostrils found in other primates. Longer,downward-facing nostrils allow for the warming of cold air before it enters the lungs and may have been an adaptation tocolder climates. Artifacts found with fossils of H. erectus suggest that it was the first hominin to use fire, hunt, and have ahome base. H. erectus is generally thought to have lived until about 50,000 years ago.
Homo erectus had a prominent brow and a nose that pointed downward rather than forward.Humans: Homo sapiensA number of species, sometimes called archaic Homo sapiens, apparently evolved from H. erectus starting about 500,000years ago. These species include Homo heidelbergensis, Homo rhodesiensis, and Homo neanderthalensis. These archaic H.sapiens had a brain size similar to that of modern humans, averaging 1,200–1,400 cubic centimeters. They differed frommodern humans by having a thick skull, a prominent brow ridge, and a receding chin. Some of these species survived until30,000–10,000 years ago, overlapping with modern humans.
The Homo neanderthalensis used tools and may have worn clothing.There is considerable debate about the origins of anatomically modern humans or Homo sapiens sapiens. As discussedearlier, H. erectus migrated out of Africa and into Asia and Europe in the first major wave of migration about 1.5 millionyears ago. It is thought that modern humans arose in Africa from H. erectus and migrated out of Africa about 100,000 yearsago in a second major migration wave. Then, modern humans replaced H. erectus species that had migrated into Asia andEurope in the first wave.This evolutionary timeline is supported by molecular evidence. One approach to studying the origins of modern humansis to examine mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) from populations around the world. Because a fetus develops from an eggcontaining its mother’s mitochondria (which have their own, non-nuclear DNA), mtDNA is passed entirely through thematernal line. Mutations in mtDNA can now be used to estimate the timeline of genetic divergence. The resulting evidencesuggests that all modern humans have mtDNA inherited from a common ancestor that lived in Africa about 160,000 yearsago. Another approach to the molecular understanding of human evolution is to examine the Y chromosome, which ispassed from father to son. This evidence suggests that all men today inherited a Y chromosome from a male that lived inAfrica about 140,000 years ago.