Asian carp jump out of the water in response to electrofishing. The Asian carp in the inset photograph wereharvested from the Little Calumet River in Illinois in May, 2010, using rotenone, a toxin often used as an insecticide, inan effort to learn more about the population of the species.
Imagine sailing down a river in a small motorboat on a weekend afternoon; the water is smooth and you are enjoying thewarm sunshine and cool breeze when suddenly you are hit in the head by a 20-pound silver carp. This is a risk now on manyrivers and canal systems in Illinois and Missouri because of the presence of Asian carp.This fish-actually a group of species including the silver, black, grass, and big head carp-has been farmed and eatenin China for over 1000 years. It is one of the most important aquaculture food resources worldwide. In the United States,however, Asian carp is considered a dangerous invasive species that disrupts community structure and composition to thepoint of threatening native species.
Population DemographyBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Describe how ecologists measure population size and densityDescribe three different patterns of population distributionUse life tables to calculate mortality ratesDescribe the three types of survivorship curves and relate them to specific populationsPopulations are dynamic entities. Populations consist all of the species living within a specific area, and populationsfluctuate based on a number of factors: seasonal and yearly changes in the environment, natural disasters such as forestfires and volcanic eruptions, and competition for resources between and within species. The statistical study of populationdynamics, demography, uses a series of mathematical tools to investigate how populations respond to changes in theirbiotic and abiotic environments. Many of these tools were originally designed to study human populations. For example,life tables, which detail the life expectancy of individuals within a population, were initially developed by life insurancecompanies to set insurance rates. In fact, while the term “demographics” is commonly used when discussing humans, allliving populations can be studied using this approach.Population Size and DensityThe study of any population usually begins by determining how many individuals of a particular species exist, and howclosely associated they are with each other. Within a particular habitat, a population can be characterized by its populationsize (N), the total number of individuals, and its population density, the number of individuals within a specific area orvolume. Population size and density are the two main characteristics used to describe and understand populations. Forexample, populations with more individuals may be more stable than smaller populations based on their genetic variability,and thus their potential to adapt to the environment. Alternatively, a member of a population with low population density(more spread out in the habitat), might have more difficulty finding a mate to reproduce compared to a population of higherdensity. As is shown in Figure 45.2, smaller organisms tend to be more densely distributed than larger organisms.
Population Research MethodsThe most accurate way to determine population size is to simply count all of the individuals within the habitat. However, thismethod is often not logistically or economically feasible, especially when studying large habitats. Thus, scientists usuallystudy populations by sampling a representative portion of each habitat and using this data to make inferences about thehabitat as a whole. A variety of methods can be used to sample populations to determine their size and density. For immobileorganisms such as plants, or for very small and slow-moving organisms, a quadrat may be used (Figure 45.3). A quadratis a way of marking off square areas within a habitat, either by staking out an area with sticks and string, or by the useof a wood, plastic, or metal square placed on the ground. After setting the quadrats, researchers then count the numberof individuals that lie within their boundaries. Multiple quadrat samples are performed throughout the habitat at severalrandom locations. All of this data can then be used to estimate the population size and population density within the entirehabitat. The number and size of quadrat samples depends on the type of organisms under study and other factors, includingthe density of the organism. For example, if sampling daffodils, a 1 m2 quadrat might be used whereas with giant redwoods,which are larger and live much further apart from each other, a larger quadrat of 100 m2 might be employed. This ensuresthat enough individuals of the species are counted to get an accurate sample that correlates with the habitat, including areasnot sampled.
A scientist uses a quadrat to measure population size and density.
For mobile organisms, such as mammals, birds, or fish, a technique called mark and recapture is often used. This methodinvolves marking a sample of captured animals in some way (such as tags, bands, paint, or other body markings), andthen releasing them back into the environment to allow them to mix with the rest of the population; later, a new sample iscollected, including some individuals that are marked (recaptures) and some individuals that are unmarked.
Mark and recapture is used to measure the population size of mobile animals such as (a) bighorn sheep,(b) the California condor, and (c) salmon.
Using the ratio of marked and unmarked individuals, scientists determine how many individuals are in the sample. Fromthis, calculations are used to estimate the total population size. This method assumes that the larger the population, the lowerthe percentage of tagged organisms that will be recaptured since they will have mixed with more untagged individuals. Forexample, if 80 deer are captured, tagged, and released into the forest, and later 100 deer are captured and 20 of them arealready marked, we can determine the population size (N) using the following equation:
Therefore, there are an estimated 400 total individuals in the original population.There are some limitations to the mark and recapture method. Some animals from the first catch may learn to avoid capturein the second round, thus inflating population estimates. Alternatively, animals may preferentially be retrapped (especiallyif a food reward is offered), resulting in an underestimate of population size. Also, some species may be harmed by themarking technique, reducing their survival. A variety of other techniques have been developed, including the electronictracking of animals tagged with radio transmitters and the use of data from commercial fishing and trapping operations toestimate the size and health of populations and communities.Species DistributionIn addition to measuring simple density, further information about a population can be obtained by looking at thedistribution of the individuals. Species dispersion patterns (or distribution patterns) show the spatial relationship betweenmembers of a population within a habitat at a particular point in time. In other words, they show whether members of thespecies live close together or far apart, and what patterns are evident when they are spaced apart.Individuals in a population can be more or less equally spaced apart, dispersed randomly with no predictable pattern, orclustered in groups. These are known as uniform, random, and clumped dispersion patterns, respectively (Figure 45.5).Uniform dispersion is observed in plants that secrete substances inhibiting the growth of nearby individuals (such as therelease of toxic chemicals by the sage plant Salvia leucophylla, a phenomenon called allelopathy) and in animals like thepenguin that maintain a defined territory. An example of random dispersion occurs with dandelion and other plants thathave wind-dispersed seeds that germinate wherever they happen to fall in a favorable environment. A clumped dispersionmay be seen in plants that drop their seeds straight to the ground, such as oak trees, or animals that live in groups (schoolsof fish or herds of elephants). Clumped dispersions may also be a function of habitat heterogeneity. Thus, the dispersionof the individuals within a population provides more information about how they interact with each other than does asimple density measurement. Just as lower density species might have more difficulty finding a mate, solitary species witha random distribution might have a similar difficulty when compared to social species clumped together in groups.
Species may have uniform, random, or clumped distribution. Territorial birds such as penguins tendto have uniform distribution. Plants such as dandelions with wind-dispersed seeds tend to be randomly distributed.Animals such as elephants that travel in groups exhibit clumped distribution.
DemographyWhile population size and density describe a population at one particular point in time, scientists must use demography tostudy the dynamics of a population. Demography is the statistical study of population changes over time: birth rates, deathrates, and life expectancies. Each of these measures, especially birth rates, may be affected by the population characteristicsdescribed above. For example, a large population size results in a higher birth rate because more potentially reproductiveindividuals are present. In contrast, a large population size can also result in a higher death rate because of competition,disease, and the accumulation of waste. Similarly, a higher population density or a clumped dispersion pattern results inmore potential reproductive encounters between individuals, which can increase birth rate. Lastly, a female-biased sex ratio (the ratio of males to females) or age structure (the proportion of population members at specific age ranges) composed ofmany individuals of reproductive age can increase birth rates.In addition, the demographic characteristics of a population can influence how the population grows or declines over time.If birth and death rates are equal, the population remains stable. However, the population size will increase if birth ratesexceed death rates; the population will decrease if birth rates are less than death rates. Life expectancy is another importantfactor; the length of time individuals remain in the population impacts local resources, reproduction, and the overall healthof the population. These demographic characteristics are often displayed in the form of a life table.Life TablesLife tables provide important information about the life history of an organism. Life tables divide the population into agegroups and often sexes, and show how long a member of that group is likely to live. They are modeled after actuarial tablesused by the insurance industry for estimating human life expectancy. Life tables may include the probability of individualsdying before their next birthday (i.e., their mortality rate), the percentage of surviving individuals dying at a particular ageinterval, and their life expectancy at each interval. An example of a life table is shown in Table 45.1 from a study of Dallmountain sheep, a species native to northwestern North America. Notice that the population is divided into age intervals(column A). The mortality rate (per 1000), shown in column D, is based on the number of individuals dying during the ageinterval (column B) divided by the number of individuals surviving at the beginning of the interval (Column C), multipliedby 1000.
For example, between ages three and four, 12 individuals die out of the 776 that were remaining from the original 1000sheep. This number is then multiplied by 1000 to get the mortality rate per thousand.
As can be seen from the mortality rate data (column D), a high death rate occurred when the sheep were between 6 and 12months old, and then increased even more from 8 to 12 years old, after which there were few survivors. The data indicatethat if a sheep in this population were to survive to age one, it could be expected to live another 7.7 years on average, asshown by the life expectancy numbers in column E.
Survivorship CurvesAnother tool used by population ecologists is a survivorship curve, which is a graph of the number of individuals survivingat each age interval plotted versus time (usually with data compiled from a life table). These curves allow us to compare thelife histories of different populations (Figure 45.6). Humans and most primates exhibit a Type I survivorship curve becausea high percentage of offspring survive their early and middle years-death occurs predominantly in older individuals. Thesetypes of species usually have small numbers of offspring at one time, and they give a high amount of parental care to themto ensure their survival. Birds are an example of an intermediate or Type II survivorship curve because birds die more orless equally at each age interval. These organisms also may have relatively few offspring and provide significant parentalcare. Trees, marine invertebrates, and most fishes exhibit a Type III survivorship curve because very few of these organismssurvive their younger years; however, those that make it to an old age are more likely to survive for a relatively long periodof time. Organisms in this category usually have a very large number of offspring, but once they are born, little parentalcare is provided. Thus these offspring are “on their own” and vulnerable to predation, but their sheer numbers assure thesurvival of enough individuals to perpetuate the species.
Survivorship curves show the distribution of individuals in a population according to age. Humans andmost mammals have a Type I survivorship curve because death primarily occurs in the older years. Birds have a TypeII survivorship curve, as death at any age is equally probable. Trees have a Type III survivorship curve because veryfew survive the younger years, but after a certain age, individuals are much more likely to survive.
45.2 | Life Histories and Natural SelectionBy the end of this section, you will be able to:• Describe how life history patterns are influenced by natural selection• Explain different life history patterns and how different reproductive strategies affect species’ survivalA species’ life history describes the series of events over its lifetime, such as how resources are allocated for growth,maintenance, and reproduction. Life history traits affect the life table of an organism. A species’ life history is geneticallydetermined and shaped by the environment and natural selection.Life History Patterns and Energy BudgetsEnergy is required by all living organisms for their growth, maintenance, and reproduction; at the same time, energy isoften a major limiting factor in determining an organism’s survival. Plants, for example, acquire energy from the sun viaphotosynthesis, but must expend this energy to grow, maintain health, and produce energy-rich seeds to produce the nextgeneration. Animals have the additional burden of using some of their energy reserves to acquire food. Furthermore, someanimals must expend energy caring for their offspring. Thus, all species have an energy budget: they must balance energyintake with their use of energy for metabolism, reproduction, parental care, and energy storage (such as bears building upbody fat for winter hibernation).Parental Care and FecundityFecundity is the potential reproductive capacity of an individual within a population. In other words, fecundity describeshow many offspring could ideally be produced if an individual has as many offspring as possible, repeating the reproductivecycle as soon as possible after the birth of the offspring. In animals, fecundity is inversely related to the amount of parentalcare given to an individual offspring. Species, such as many marine invertebrates, that produce many offspring usuallyprovide little if any care for the offspring (they would not have the energy or the ability to do so anyway). Most of theirenergy budget is used to produce many tiny offspring. Animals with this strategy are often self-sufficient at a very earlyage. This is because of the energy tradeoff these organisms have made to maximize their evolutionary fitness. Because theirenergy is used for producing offspring instead of parental care, it makes sense that these offspring have some ability to beable to move within their environment and find food and perhaps shelter. Even with these abilities, their small size makesthem extremely vulnerable to predation, so the production of many offspring allows enough of them to survive to maintainthe species.Animal species that have few offspring during a reproductive event usually give extensive parental care, devoting much oftheir energy budget to these activities, sometimes at the expense of their own health. This is the case with many mammals,such as humans, kangaroos, and pandas. The offspring of these species are relatively helpless at birth and need to developbefore they achieve self-sufficiency.Plants with low fecundity produce few energy-rich seeds (such as coconuts and chestnuts) with each having a good chanceto germinate into a new organism; plants with high fecundity usually have many small, energy-poor seeds (like orchids)that have a relatively poor chance of surviving. Although it may seem that coconuts and chestnuts have a better chanceof surviving, the energy tradeoff of the orchid is also very effective. It is a matter of where the energy is used, for largenumbers of seeds or for fewer seeds with more energy.Early versus Late ReproductionThe timing of reproduction in a life history also affects species survival. Organisms that reproduce at an early age havea greater chance of producing offspring, but this is usually at the expense of their growth and the maintenance of theirhealth. Conversely, organisms that start reproducing later in life often have greater fecundity or are better able to provideparental care, but they risk that they will not survive to reproductive age. Examples of this can be seen in fishes. Smallfish like guppies use their energy to reproduce rapidly, but never attain the size that would give them defense against somepredators. Larger fish, like the bluegill or shark, use their energy to attain a large size, but do so with the risk that theywill die before they can reproduce or at least reproduce to their maximum. These different energy strategies and tradeoffsare key to understanding the evolution of each species as it maximizes its fitness and fills its niche. In terms of energybudgeting, some species “blow it all” and use up most of their energy reserves to reproduce early before they die. Otherspecies delay having reproduction to become stronger, more experienced individuals and to make sure that they are strongenough to provide parental care if necessary.
Single versus Multiple Reproductive EventsSome life history traits, such as fecundity, timing of reproduction, and parental care, can be grouped together into generalstrategies that are used by multiple species. Semelparity occurs when a species reproduces only once during its lifetimeand then dies. Such species use most of their resource budget during a single reproductive event, sacrificing their healthto the point that they do not survive. Examples of semelparity are bamboo, which flowers once and then dies, and theChinook salmon (Figure 45.7a), which uses most of its energy reserves to migrate from the ocean to its freshwater nestingarea, where it reproduces and then dies. Scientists have posited alternate explanations for the evolutionary advantage ofthe Chinook’s post-reproduction death: a programmed suicide caused by a massive release of corticosteroid hormones,presumably so the parents can become food for the offspring, or simple exhaustion caused by the energy demands ofreproduction; these are still being debated.Iteroparity describes species that reproduce repeatedly during their lives. Some animals are able to mate only once peryear, but survive multiple mating seasons. The pronghorn antelope is an example of an animal that goes into a seasonalestrus cycle (“heat”): a hormonally induced physiological condition preparing the body for successful mating (Figure45.7b). Females of these species mate only during the estrus phase of the cycle. A different pattern is observed in primates,including humans and chimpanzees, which may attempt reproduction at any time during their reproductive years, eventhough their menstrual cycles make pregnancy likely only a few days per month during ovulation.
The (a) Chinook salmon mates once and dies. The (b) pronghorn antelope mates during specific timesof the year during its reproductive life. Primates, such as humans and (c) chimpanzees, may mate on any day,independent of ovulation.
45.3 | Environmental Limits to Population GrowthBy the end of this section, you will be able to:• Explain the characteristics of and differences between exponential and logistic growth patterns• Give examples of exponential and logistic growth in natural populations• Describe how natural selection and environmental adaptation led to the evolution of particular life history patternsAlthough life histories describe the way many characteristics of a population (such as their age structure) change over timein a general way, population ecologists make use of a variety of methods to model population dynamics mathematically.These more precise models can then be used to accurately describe changes occurring in a population and better predictfuture changes. Certain models that have been accepted for decades are now being modified or even abandoned due to theirlack of predictive ability, and scholars strive to create effective new models.Exponential GrowthCharles Darwin, in his theory of natural selection, was greatly influenced by the English clergyman Thomas Malthus.Malthus published a book in 1798 stating that populations with unlimited natural resources grow very rapidly, and thenpopulation growth decreases as resources become depleted. This accelerating pattern of increasing population size is calledexponential growth.The best example of exponential growth is seen in bacteria. Bacteria are prokaryotes that reproduce by prokaryotic fission.This division takes about an hour for many bacterial species. If 1000 bacteria are placed in a large flask with an unlimitedsupply of nutrients (so the nutrients will not become depleted), after an hour, there is one round of division and eachorganism divides, resulting in 2000 organisms-an increase of 1000. In another hour, each of the 2000 organisms willdouble, producing 4000, an increase of 2000 organisms. After the third hour, there should be 8000 bacteria in the flask, anincrease of 4000 organisms. The important concept of exponential growth is that the population growth rate-the numberof organisms added in each reproductive generation-is accelerating; that is, it is increasing at a greater and greater rate.After 1 day and 24 of these cycles, the population would have increased from 1000 to more than 16 billion. When thepopulation size, N, is plotted over time, a J-shaped growth curve is produced (Figure 45.9).The bacteria example is not representative of the real world where resources are limited. Furthermore, some bacteria willdie during the experiment and thus not reproduce, lowering the growth rate. Therefore, when calculating the growth rate ofa population, the death rate (D) (number organisms that die during a particular time interval) is subtracted from the birthrate (B) (number organisms that are born during that interval). This is shown in the following formula:
The birth rate is usually expressed on a per capita (for each individual) basis. Thus, B (birth rate) = bN (the per capita birthrate “b” multiplied by the number of individuals “N”) and D (death rate) =dN (the per capita death rate “d” multiplied bythe number of individuals “N”). Additionally, ecologists are interested in the population at a particular point in time, aninfinitely small time interval. For this reason, the terminology of differential calculus is used to obtain the “instantaneous”growth rate, replacing the change in number and time with an instant-specific measurement of number and time.
Notice that the “d” associated with the first term refers to the derivative (as the term is used in calculus) and is differentfrom the death rate, also called “d.” The difference between birth and death rates is further simplified by substituting theterm “r” (intrinsic rate of increase) for the relationship between birth and death rates:
The value “r” can be positive, meaning the population is increasing in size; or negative, meaning the population isdecreasing in size; or zero, where the population’s size is unchanging, a condition known as zero population growth. Afurther refinement of the formula recognizes that different species have inherent differences in their intrinsic rate of increase(often thought of as the potential for reproduction), even under ideal conditions. Obviously, a bacterium can reproduce more rapidly and have a higher intrinsic rate of growth than a human. The maximal growth rate for a species is its bioticpotential, or rmax, thus changing the equation to:
When resources are unlimited, populations exhibit exponential growth, resulting in a J-shaped curve.When resources are limited, populations exhibit logistic growth. In logistic growth, population expansion decreases asresources become scarce, and it levels off when the carrying capacity of the environment is reached, resulting in anS-shaped curve.Logistic GrowthExponential growth is possible only when infinite natural resources are available; this is not the case in the real world.Charles Darwin recognized this fact in his description of the “struggle for existence,” which states that individuals willcompete (with members of their own or other species) for limited resources. The successful ones will survive to pass ontheir own characteristics and traits (which we know now are transferred by genes) to the next generation at a greater rate(natural selection). To model the reality of limited resources, population ecologists developed the logistic growth model.Carrying Capacity and the Logistic ModelIn the real world, with its limited resources, exponential growth cannot continue indefinitely. Exponential growth may occurin environments where there are few individuals and plentiful resources, but when the number of individuals gets largeenough, resources will be depleted, slowing the growth rate. Eventually, the growth rate will plateau or level off (Figure45.9). This population size, which represents the maximum population size that a particular environment can support, iscalled the carrying capacity, or K.The formula we use to calculate logistic growth adds the carrying capacity as a moderating force in the growth rate. Theexpression “K – N” is indicative of how many individuals may be added to a population at a given stage, and “K – N”divided by “K” is the fraction of the carrying capacity available for further growth. Thus, the exponential growth model isrestricted by this factor to generate the logistic growth equation:
Notice that when N is very small, (K-N)/K becomes close to K/K or 1, and the right side of the equation reduces to rmaxN,which means the population is growing exponentially and is not influenced by carrying capacity. On the other hand, whenN is large, (K-N)/K come close to zero, which means that population growth will be slowed greatly or even stopped.Thus, population growth is greatly slowed in large populations by the carrying capacity K. This model also allows for thepopulation of a negative population growth, or a population decline. This occurs when the number of individuals in thepopulation exceeds the carrying capacity (because the value of (K-N)/K is negative).A graph of this equation yields an S-shaped curve (Figure 45.9), and it is a more realistic model of population growth thanexponential growth. There are three different sections to an S-shaped curve. Initially, growth is exponential because thereare few individuals and ample resources available. Then, as resources begin to become limited, the growth rate decreases.Finally, growth levels off at the carrying capacity of the environment, with little change in population size over time.
Role of Intraspecific CompetitionThe logistic model assumes that every individual within a population will have equal access to resources and, thus, an equalchance for survival. For plants, the amount of water, sunlight, nutrients, and the space to grow are the important resources,whereas in animals, important resources include food, water, shelter, nesting space, and mates.In the real world, phenotypic variation among individuals within a population means that some individuals will be betteradapted to their environment than others. The resulting competition between population members of the same speciesfor resources is termed intraspecific competition (intra- = “within”; -specific = “species”). Intraspecific competition forresources may not affect populations that are well below their carrying capacity-resources are plentiful and all individualscan obtain what they need. However, as population size increases, this competition intensifies. In addition, the accumulationof waste products can reduce an environment’s carrying capacity.Examples of Logistic GrowthYeast, a microscopic fungus used to make bread and alcoholic beverages, exhibits the classical S-shaped curve when grownin a test tube (Figure 45.10a). Its growth levels off as the population depletes the nutrients that are necessary for its growth.In the real world, however, there are variations to this idealized curve. Examples in wild populations include sheep andharbor seals (Figure 45.10b). In both examples, the population size exceeds the carrying capacity for short periods oftime and then falls below the carrying capacity afterwards. This fluctuation in population size continues to occur as thepopulation oscillates around its carrying capacity. Still, even with this oscillation, the logistic model is confirmed.
Population Dynamics and RegulationBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Give examples of how the carrying capacity of a habitat may changeCompare and contrast density-dependent growth regulation and density-independent growth regulation, givingexamplesGive examples of exponential and logistic growth in wild animal populationsDescribe how natural selection and environmental adaptation leads to the evolution of particular life-historypatternsThe logistic model of population growth, while valid in many natural populations and a useful model, is a simplificationof real-world population dynamics. Implicit in the model is that the carrying capacity of the environment does not change,which is not the case. The carrying capacity varies annually: for example, some summers are hot and dry whereas othersare cold and wet. In many areas, the carrying capacity during the winter is much lower than it is during the summer.Also, natural events such as earthquakes, volcanoes, and fires can alter an environment and hence its carrying capacity.Additionally, populations do not usually exist in isolation. They engage in interspecific competition: that is, they sharethe environment with other species, competing with them for the same resources. These factors are also important tounderstanding how a specific population will grow.Nature regulates population growth in a variety of ways. These are grouped into density-dependent factors, in whichthe density of the population at a given time affects growth rate and mortality, and density-independent factors, whichinfluence mortality in a population regardless of population density. Note that in the former, the effect of the factor on thepopulation depends on the density of the population at onset. Conservation biologists want to understand both types becausethis helps them manage populations and prevent extinction or overpopulation.Density-dependent RegulationMost density-dependent factors are biological in nature (biotic), and include predation, inter- and intraspecific competition,accumulation of waste, and diseases such as those caused by parasites. Usually, the denser a population is, the greater itsmortality rate. For example, during intra- and interspecific competition, the reproductive rates of the individuals will usuallybe lower, reducing their population’s rate of growth. In addition, low prey density increases the mortality of its predatorbecause it has more difficulty locating its food source.An example of density-dependent regulation is shown in Figure 45.11 with results from a study focusing on the giantintestinal roundworm (Ascaris lumbricoides), a parasite of humans and other mammals.[4]Denser populations of the parasiteexhibited lower fecundity: they contained fewer eggs. One possible explanation for this is that females would be smallerin more dense populations (due to limited resources) and that smaller females would have fewer eggs. This hypothesis wastested and disproved in a 2009 study which showed that female weight had no influence.[5]The actual cause of the densitydependenceof fecundity in this organism is still unclear and awaiting further investigation.
In this population of roundworms, fecundity (number of eggs) decreases with population density.[6]Density-independent Regulation and Interaction with DensitydependentFactorsMany factors, typically physical or chemical in nature (abiotic), influence the mortality of a population regardless of itsdensity, including weather, natural disasters, and pollution. An individual deer may be killed in a forest fire regardless ofhow many deer happen to be in that area. Its chances of survival are the same whether the population density is high or low.The same holds true for cold winter weather.In real-life situations, population regulation is very complicated and density-dependent and independent factors can interact.A dense population that is reduced in a density-independent manner by some environmental factor(s) will be able to recoverdifferently than a sparse population. For example, a population of deer affected by a harsh winter will recover faster if thereare more deer remaining to reproduce.
Life Histories of K-selected and r-selected SpeciesWhile reproductive strategies play a key role in life histories, they do not account for important factors like limited resourcesand competition. The regulation of population growth by these factors can be used to introduce a classical concept inpopulation biology, that of K-selected versus r-selected species.Early Theories about Life History: K-selected and r-selected SpeciesBy the second half of the twentieth century, the concept of K- and r-selected species was used extensively and successfullyto study populations. The concept relates not only reproductive strategies, but also to a species’ habitat and behavior,especially in the way that they obtain resources and care for their young. It includes length of life and survivorship factorsas well. For this analysis, population biologists have grouped species into the two large categories-K-selected and rselected-although they are really two ends of a continuum.
K-selected species are species selected by stable, predictable environments. Populations of K-selected species tend to existclose to their carrying capacity (hence the term K-selected) where intraspecific competition is high. These species have few,large offspring, a long gestation period, and often give long-term care to their offspring (Table B45_04_01). While largerin size when born, the offspring are relatively helpless and immature at birth. By the time they reach adulthood, they mustdevelop skills to compete for natural resources. In plants, scientists think of parental care more broadly: how long fruit takesto develop or how long it remains on the plant are determining factors in the time to the next reproductive event. Examplesof K-selected species are primates including humans), elephants, and plants such as oak trees (Figure 45.13a).Oak trees grow very slowly and take, on average, 20 years to produce their first seeds, known as acorns. As many as 50,000acorns can be produced by an individual tree, but the germination rate is low as many of these rot or are eaten by animalssuch as squirrels. In some years, oaks may produce an exceptionally large number of acorns, and these years may be on atwo- or three-year cycle depending on the species of oak (r-selection).As oak trees grow to a large size and for many years before they begin to produce acorns, they devote a large percentageof their energy budget to growth and maintenance. The tree’s height and size allow it to dominate other plants in thecompetition for sunlight, the oak’s primary energy resource. Furthermore, when it does reproduce, the oak produces large,energy-rich seeds that use their energy reserve to become quickly established (K-selection).In contrast, r-selected species have a large number of small offspring (hence their r designation (Table 45.2). Thisstrategy is often employed in unpredictable or changing environments. Animals that are r-selected do not give long-termparental care and the offspring are relatively mature and self-sufficient at birth. Examples of r-selected species are marineinvertebrates, such as jellyfish, and plants, such as the dandelion (Figure 45.13b). Dandelions have small seeds that arewind dispersed long distances. Many seeds are produced simultaneously to ensure that at least some of them reach ahospitable environment. Seeds that land in inhospitable environments have little chance for survival since their seeds arelow in energy content. Note that survival is not necessarily a function of energy stored in the seed itself.
(a) Elephants are considered K-selected species as they live long, mature late, and provide long-termparental care to few offspring. Oak trees produce many offspring that do not receive parental care, but are consideredK-selected species based on longevity and late maturation. (b) Dandelions and jellyfish are both considered r-selectedspecies as they mature early, have short lifespans, and produce many offspring that receive no parental care.Modern Theories of Life HistoryThe r- and K-selection theory, although accepted for decades and used for much groundbreaking research, has now beenreconsidered, and many population biologists have abandoned or modified it. Over the years, several studies attempted toconfirm the theory, but these attempts have largely failed. Many species were identified that did not follow the theory’spredictions. Furthermore, the theory ignored the age-specific mortality of the populations which scientists now know isvery important. New demographic-based models of life history evolution have been developed which incorporate manyecological concepts included in r- and K-selection theory as well as population age structure and mortality factors.Human Population GrowthBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Discuss how human population growth can be exponentialExplain how humans have expanded the carrying capacity of their habitatRelate population growth and age structure to the level of economic development in different countriesDiscuss the long-term implications of unchecked human population growthConcepts of animal population dynamics can be applied to human population growth. Humans are not unique in their abilityto alter their environment. For example, beaver dams alter the stream environment where they are built. Humans, however,have the ability to alter their environment to increase its carrying capacity sometimes to the detriment of other species (e.g.,via artificial selection for crops that have a higher yield). Earth’s human population is growing rapidly, to the extent thatsome worry about the ability of the earth’s environment to sustain this population, as long-term exponential growth carriesthe potential risks of famine, disease, and large-scale death.
Although humans have increased the carrying capacity of their environment, the technologies used to achieve thistransformation have caused unprecedented changes to Earth’s environment, altering ecosystems to the point where somemay be in danger of collapse. The depletion of the ozone layer, erosion due to acid rain, and damage from global climatechange are caused by human activities. The ultimate effect of these changes on our carrying capacity is unknown. As somepoint out, it is likely that the negative effects of increasing carrying capacity will outweigh the positive ones-the carryingcapacity of the world for human beings might actually decrease.The world’s human population is currently experiencing exponential growth even though human reproduction is far belowits biotic potential (Figure 45.14). To reach its biotic potential, all females would have to become pregnant every ninemonths or so during their reproductive years. Also, resources would have to be such that the environment would supportsuch growth. Neither of these two conditions exists. In spite of this fact, human population is still growing exponentially.
Human population growth since 1000 AD is exponential (dark blue line). Notice that while the populationin Asia (yellow line), which has many economically underdeveloped countries, is increasing exponentially, thepopulation in Europe (light blue line), where most of the countries are economically developed, is growing much moreslowly.A consequence of exponential human population growth is the time that it takes to add a particular number of humans to theEarth is becoming shorter. Figure 45.15 shows that 123 years were necessary to add 1 billion humans in 1930, but it onlytook 24 years to add two billion people between 1975 and 1999. As already discussed, at some point it would appear thatour ability to increase our carrying capacity indefinitely on a finite world is uncertain. Without new technological advances,the human growth rate has been predicted to slow in the coming decades. However, the population will still be increasingand the threat of overpopulation remains.
The time between the addition of each billion human beings to Earth decreases over time.
Overcoming Density-Dependent RegulationHumans are unique in their ability to alter their environment with the conscious purpose of increasing its carrying capacity.This ability is a major factor responsible for human population growth and a way of overcoming density-dependent growthregulation. Much of this ability is related to human intelligence, society, and communication. Humans can construct shelterto protect them from the elements and have developed agriculture and domesticated animals to increase their food supplies.In addition, humans use language to communicate this technology to new generations, allowing them to improve uponprevious accomplishments.Other factors in human population growth are migration and public health. Humans originated in Africa, but have sincemigrated to nearly all inhabitable land on the Earth. Public health, sanitation, and the use of antibiotics and vaccines havedecreased the ability of infectious disease to limit human population growth. In the past, diseases such as the bubonic plaqueof the fourteenth century killed between 30 and 60 percent of Europe’s population and reduced the overall world populationby as many as 100 million people. Today, the threat of infectious disease, while not gone, is certainly less severe. Accordingto the World Health Organization, global death from infectious disease declined from 16.4 million in 1993 to 14.7 millionin 1992. To compare to some of the epidemics of the past, the percentage of the world's population killed between 1993 and2002 decreased from 0.30 percent of the world's population to 0.24 percent. Thus, it appears that the influence of infectiousdisease on human population growth is becoming less significant.Age Structure, Population Growth, and Economic DevelopmentThe age structure of a population is an important factor in population dynamics. Age structure is the proportion of apopulation at different age ranges. Age structure allows better prediction of population growth, plus the ability to associatethis growth with the level of economic development in the region. Countries with rapid growth have a pyramidal shape intheir age structure diagrams, showing a preponderance of younger individuals, many of whom are of reproductive age orwill be soon (Figure 45.16). This pattern is most often observed in underdeveloped countries where individuals do not live to old age because of less-than-optimal living conditions. Age structures of areas with slow growth, including developedcountries such as the United States, still have a pyramidal structure, but with many fewer young and reproductive-agedindividuals and a greater proportion of older individuals. Other developed countries, such as Italy, have zero populationgrowth. The age structure of these populations is more conical, with an even greater percentage of middle-aged and olderindividuals. The actual growth rates in different countries are shown in Figure 45.17, with the highest rates tending to be inthe less economically developed countries of Africa and Asia.
The percent growth rate of population in different countries is shown. Notice that the highest growth isoccurring in less economically developed countries in Africa and Asia.Long-Term Consequences of Exponential Human Population GrowthMany dire predictions have been made about the world’s population leading to a major crisis called the “populationexplosion.” In the 1968 book The Population Bomb, biologist Dr. Paul R. Ehrlich wrote, “The battle to feed all of humanityis over. In the 1970s hundreds of millions of people will starve to death in spite of any crash programs embarked upon now.At this late date nothing can prevent a substantial increase in the world death rate.”[9]While many critics view this statementas an exaggeration, the laws of exponential population growth are still in effect, and unchecked human population growthcannot continue indefinitely.
Efforts to control population growth led to the one-child policy in China, which used to include more severe consequences,but now imposes fines on urban couples who have more than one child. Due to the fact that some couples wish to havea male heir, many Chinese couples continue to have more than one child. The policy itself, its social impacts, and theeffectiveness of limiting overall population growth are controversial. In spite of population control policies, the humanpopulation continues to grow. At some point the food supply may run out because of the subsequent need to produce moreand more food to feed our population. The United Nations estimates that future world population growth may vary from 6billion (a decrease) to 16 billion people by the year 2100. There is no way to know whether human population growth willmoderate to the point where the crisis described by Dr. Ehrlich will be averted.Another result of population growth is the endangerment of the natural environment. Many countries have attempted toreduce the human impact on climate change by reducing their emission of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide. However,these treaties have not been ratified by every country, and many underdeveloped countries trying to improve their economiccondition may be less likely to agree with such provisions if it means slower economic development. Furthermore, therole of human activity in causing climate change has become a hotly debated socio-political issue in some developedcountries, including the United States. Thus, we enter the future with considerable uncertainty about our ability to curbhuman population growth and protect our environment.
Community EcologyBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Discuss the predator-prey cycleGive examples of defenses against predation and herbivoryDescribe the competitive exclusion principleGive examples of symbiotic relationships between speciesDescribe community structure and successionPopulations rarely, if ever, live in isolation from populations of other species. In most cases, numerous species share ahabitat. The interactions between these populations play a major role in regulating population growth and abundance. Allpopulations occupying the same habitat form a community: populations inhabiting a specific area at the same time. Thenumber of species occupying the same habitat and their relative abundance is known as species diversity. Areas with lowdiversity, such as the glaciers of Antarctica, still contain a wide variety of living things, whereas the diversity of tropicalrainforests is so great that it cannot be counted. Ecology is studied at the community level to understand how species interactwith each other and compete for the same resources.Predation and HerbivoryPerhaps the classical example of species interaction is predation: the hunting of prey by its predator. Nature shows ontelevision highlight the drama of one living organism killing another. Populations of predators and prey in a communityare not constant over time: in most cases, they vary in cycles that appear to be related. The most often cited example ofpredator-prey dynamics is seen in the cycling of the lynx (predator) and the snowshoe hare (prey), using nearly 200 year-oldtrapping data from North American forests (Figure 45.18). This cycle of predator and prey lasts approximately 10 years,with the predator population lagging 1–2 years behind that of the prey population. As the hare numbers increase, there ismore food available for the lynx, allowing the lynx population to increase as well. When the lynx population grows to a threshold level, however, they kill so many hares that hare population begins to decline, followed by a decline in the lynxpopulation because of scarcity of food. When the lynx population is low, the hare population size begins to increase due, atleast in part, to low predation pressure, starting the cycle anew.
The cycling of lynx and snowshoe hare populations in Northern Ontario is an example of predator-preydynamics.The idea that the population cycling of the two species is entirely controlled by predation models has come under question.More recent studies have pointed to undefined density-dependent factors as being important in the cycling, in addition topredation. One possibility is that the cycling is inherent in the hare population due to density-dependent effects such aslower fecundity (maternal stress) caused by crowding when the hare population gets too dense. The hare cycling wouldthen induce the cycling of the lynx because it is the lynxes’ major food source. The more we study communities, the morecomplexities we find, allowing ecologists to derive more accurate and sophisticated models of population dynamics.Herbivory describes the consumption of plants by insects and other animals, and it is another interspecific relationship thataffects populations. Unlike animals, most plants cannot outrun predators or use mimicry to hide from hungry animals. Someplants have developed mechanisms to defend against herbivory. Other species have developed mutualistic relationships; forexample, herbivory provides a mechanism of seed distribution that aids in plant reproduction.Defense Mechanisms against Predation and HerbivoryThe study of communities must consider evolutionary forces that act on the members of the various populations containedwithin it. Species are not static, but slowly changing and adapting to their environment by natural selection and otherevolutionary forces. Species have evolved numerous mechanisms to escape predation and herbivory. These defenses maybe mechanical, chemical, physical, or behavioral.Mechanical defenses, such as the presence of thorns on plants or the hard shell on turtles, discourage animal predation andherbivory by causing physical pain to the predator or by physically preventing the predator from being able to eat the prey.Chemical defenses are produced by many animals as well as plants, such as the foxglove which is extremely toxic wheneaten. Figure 45.19 shows some organisms’ defenses against predation and herbivory.
The (a) honey locust tree (Gleditsia triacanthos) uses thorns, a mechanical defense, against herbivores,while the (b) Florida red-bellied turtle (Pseudemys nelsoni) uses its shell as a mechanical defense against predators.(c) Foxglove (Digitalis sp.) uses a chemical defense: toxins produced by the plant can cause nausea, vomiting,hallucinations, convulsions, or death when consumed. (d) The North American millipede (Narceus americanus) usesboth mechanical and chemical defenses: when threatened, the millipede curls into a defensive ball and produces anoxious substance that irritates eyes and skin.
Many species use their body shape and coloration to avoid being detected by predators. The tropical walking stick is aninsect with the coloration and body shape of a twig which makes it very hard to see when stationary against a backgroundof real twigs (Figure 45.20a). In another example, the chameleon can change its color to match its surroundings (Figure45.20b). Both of these are examples of camouflage, or avoiding detection by blending in with the background.
(a) The tropical walking stick and (b) the chameleon use body shape and/or coloration to preventdetection by predators.
Some species use coloration as a way of warning predators that they are not good to eat. For example, the cinnabar mothcaterpillar, the fire-bellied toad, and many species of beetle have bright colors that warn of a foul taste, the presence oftoxic chemical, and/or the ability to sting or bite, respectively. Predators that ignore this coloration and eat the organisms will experience their unpleasant taste or presence of toxic chemicals and learn not to eat them in the future. This type ofdefensive mechanism is called aposematic coloration, or warning coloration.
(a) The strawberry poison dart frog (Oophaga pumilio) uses aposematic coloration to warn predatorsthat it is toxic, while the (b) striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis) uses aposematic coloration to warn predators of theunpleasant odor it produces.
While some predators learn to avoid eating certain potential prey because of their coloration, other species have evolvedmechanisms to mimic this coloration to avoid being eaten, even though they themselves may not be unpleasant to eator contain toxic chemicals. In Batesian mimicry, a harmless species imitates the warning coloration of a harmful one.Assuming they share the same predators, this coloration then protects the harmless ones, even though they do not have thesame level of physical or chemical defenses against predation as the organism they mimic. Many insect species mimic thecoloration of wasps or bees, which are stinging, venomous insects, thereby discouraging predation.
Batesian mimicry occurs when a harmless species mimics the coloration of a harmful species, as is seenwith the (a) bumblebee and (b) bee-like robber fly.
In Müllerian mimicry, multiple species share the same warning coloration, but all of them actually have defenses. Figure45.23 shows a variety of foul-tasting butterflies with similar coloration. In Emsleyan/Mertensian mimicry, a deadly preymimics a less dangerous one, such as the venomous coral snake mimicking the non-venomous milk snake. This type ofmimicry is extremely rare and more difficult to understand than the previous two types. For this type of mimicry to work,it is essential that eating the milk snake has unpleasant but not fatal consequences. Then, these predators learn not to eatsnakes with this coloration, protecting the coral snake as well. If the snake were fatal to the predator, there would be noopportunity for the predator to learn not to eat it, and the benefit for the less toxic species would disappear.
Several unpleasant-tasting Heliconius butterfly species share a similar color pattern with better-tastingvarieties, an example of Müllerian mimicry.
Competitive Exclusion PrincipleResources are often limited within a habitat and multiple species may compete to obtain them. All species have anecological niche in the ecosystem, which describes how they acquire the resources they need and how they interact withother species in the community. The competitive exclusion principle states that two species cannot occupy the same nichein a habitat. In other words, different species cannot coexist in a community if they are competing for all the same resources.An example of this principle is shown in Figure 45.24, with two protozoan species, Paramecium aurelia and Parameciumcaudatum. When grown individually in the laboratory, they both thrive. But when they are placed together in the same testtube (habitat), P. aurelia outcompetes P. caudatum for food, leading to the latter’s eventual extinction.
Paramecium aurelia and Paramecium caudatum grow well individually, but when they compete for thesame resources, the P. aurelia outcompetes the P. caudatum.This exclusion may be avoided if a population evolves to make use of a different resource, a different area of the habitat,or feeds during a different time of day, called resource partitioning. The two organisms are then said to occupy differentmicroniches. These organisms coexist by minimizing direct competition.SymbiosisSymbiotic relationships, or symbioses (plural), are close interactions between individuals of different species over anextended period of time which impact the abundance and distribution of the associating populations. Most scientists acceptthis definition, but some restrict the term to only those species that are mutualistic, where both individuals benefit from theinteraction. In this discussion, the broader definition will be used.CommensalismA commensal relationship occurs when one species benefits from the close, prolonged interaction, while the other neitherbenefits nor is harmed. Birds nesting in trees provide an example of a commensal relationship (Figure 45.25). The tree isnot harmed by the presence of the nest among its branches. The nests are light and produce little strain on the structuralintegrity of the branch, and most of the leaves, which the tree uses to get energy by photosynthesis, are above the nest sothey are unaffected. The bird, on the other hand, benefits greatly. If the bird had to nest in the open, its eggs and youngwould be vulnerable to predators. Another example of a commensal relationship is the clown fish and the sea anemone.The sea anemone is not harmed by the fish, and the fish benefits with protection from predators who would be stung uponnearing the sea anemone.
The southern masked-weaver bird is starting to make a nest in a tree in Zambezi Valley, Zambia. Thisis an example of a commensal relationship, in which one species (the bird) benefits, while the other (the tree) neitherbenefits nor is harmed.
MutualismA second type of symbiotic relationship is called mutualism, where two species benefit from their interaction. Somescientists believe that these are the only true examples of symbiosis. For example, termites have a mutualistic relationshipwith protozoa that live in the insect’s gut (Figure 45.26a). The termite benefits from the ability of bacterial symbiontswithin the protozoa to digest cellulose. The termite itself cannot do this, and without the protozoa, it would not be able toobtain energy from its food (cellulose from the wood it chews and eats). The protozoa and the bacterial symbionts benefitby having a protective environment and a constant supply of food from the wood chewing actions of the termite. Lichenshave a mutualistic relationship between fungus and photosynthetic algae or bacteria (Figure 45.26b). As these symbiontsgrow together, the glucose produced by the algae provides nourishment for both organisms, whereas the physical structureof the lichen protects the algae from the elements and makes certain nutrients in the atmosphere more available to the algae.
(a) Termites form a mutualistic relationship with symbiotic protozoa in their guts, which allow bothorganisms to obtain energy from the cellulose the termite consumes. (b) Lichen is a fungus that has symbioticphotosynthetic algae living inside its cells.
ParasitismA parasite is an organism that lives in or on another living organism and derives nutrients from it. In this relationship,the parasite benefits, but the organism being fed upon, the host is harmed. The host is usually weakened by the parasiteas it siphons resources the host would normally use to maintain itself. The parasite, however, is unlikely to kill the host,especially not quickly, because this would allow no time for the organism to complete its reproductive cycle by spreadingto another host.The reproductive cycles of parasites are often very complex, sometimes requiring more than one host species. A tapewormis a parasite that causes disease in humans when contaminated, undercooked meat such as pork, fish, or beef is consumed(Figure 45.27). The tapeworm can live inside the intestine of the host for several years, benefiting from the food the host is bringing into its gut by eating, and may grow to be over 50 ft long by adding segments. The parasite moves from speciesto species in a cycle, making two hosts necessary to complete its life cycle. Another common parasite is Plasmodiumfalciparum, the protozoan cause of malaria, a significant disease in many parts of the world. Living in human liver andred blood cells, the organism reproduces asexually in the gut of blood-feeding mosquitoes to complete its life cycle. Thusmalaria is spread from human to human by mosquitoes, one of many arthropod-borne infectious diseases.
This diagram shows the life cycle of a pork tapeworm (Taenia solium), a human worm parasite.
Characteristics of CommunitiesCommunities are complex entities that can be characterized by their structure (the types and numbers of species present)and dynamics (how communities change over time). Understanding community structure and dynamics enables communityecologists to manage ecosystems more effectively.Foundation SpeciesFoundation species are considered the “base” or “bedrock” of a community, having the greatest influence on its overallstructure. They are usually the primary producers: organisms that bring most of the energy into the community. Kelp, brownalgae, is a foundation species, forming the basis of the kelp forests off the coast of California.Foundation species may physically modify the environment to produce and maintain habitats that benefit the otherorganisms that use them. An example is the photosynthetic corals of the coral reef (Figure 45.28). Corals themselvesare not photosynthetic, but harbor symbionts within their body tissues (dinoflagellates called zooxanthellae) that performphotosynthesis; this is another example of a mutualism. The exoskeletons of living and dead coral make up most of the reefstructure, which protects many other species from waves and ocean currents.
Coral is the foundation species of coral reef ecosystems.
Biodiversity, Species Richness, and Relative Species AbundanceBiodiversity describes a community’s biological complexity: it is measured by the number of different species (speciesrichness) in a particular area and their relative abundance (species evenness). The area in question could be a habitat, abiome, or the entire biosphere. Species richness is the term that is used to describe the number of species living in a habitator biome. Species richness varies across the globe (Figure 45.29). One factor in determining species richness is latitude,with the greatest species richness occurring in ecosystems near the equator, which often have warmer temperatures, largeamounts of rainfall, and low seasonality. The lowest species richness occurs near the poles, which are much colder, drier,and thus less conducive to life in Geologic time (time since glaciations). The predictability of climate or productivity isalso an important factor. Other factors influence species richness as well. For example, the study of island biogeographyattempts to explain the relatively high species richness found in certain isolated island chains, including the GalápagosIslands that inspired the young Darwin. Relative species abundance is the number of individuals in a species relative to thetotal number of individuals in all species within a habitat, ecosystem, or biome. Foundation species often have the highestrelative abundance of species.
The greatest species richness for mammals in North and South America is associated with the equatoriallatitudes.
Keystone SpeciesA keystone species is one whose presence is key to maintaining biodiversity within an ecosystem and to upholding anecological community’s structure. The intertidal sea star, Pisaster ochraceus, of the northwestern United States is a keystonespecies (Figure 45.30). Studies have shown that when this organism is removed from communities, populations of theirnatural prey (mussels) increase, completely altering the species composition and reducing biodiversity. Another keystonespecies is the banded tetra, a fish in tropical streams, which supplies nearly all of the phosphorus, a necessary inorganicnutrient, to the rest of the community. If these fish were to become extinct, the community would be greatly affected.
The Pisaster ochraceus sea star is a keystone species.
Community DynamicsCommunity dynamics are the changes in community structure and composition over time. Sometimes these changes areinduced by environmental disturbances such as volcanoes, earthquakes, storms, fires, and climate change. Communitieswith a stable structure are said to be at equilibrium. Following a disturbance, the community may or may not return to theequilibrium state.Succession describes the sequential appearance and disappearance of species in a community over time. In primarysuccession, newly exposed or newly formed land is colonized by living things; in secondary succession, part of anecosystem is disturbed and remnants of the previous community remain.Primary Succession and Pioneer SpeciesPrimary succession occurs when new land is formed or rock is exposed: for example, following the eruption of volcanoes,such as those on the Big Island of Hawaii. As lava flows into the ocean, new land is continually being formed. On theBig Island, approximately 32 acres of land is added each year. First, weathering and other natural forces break down thesubstrate enough for the establishment of certain hearty plants and lichens with few soil requirements, known as pioneerspecies (Figure 45.32). These species help to further break down the mineral rich lava into soil where other, less hardyspecies will grow and eventually replace the pioneer species. In addition, as these early species grow and die, they add toan ever-growing layer of decomposing organic material and contribute to soil formation. Over time the area will reach anequilibrium state, with a set of organisms quite different from the pioneer species.
During primary succession in lava on Maui, Hawaii, succulent plants are the pioneer species.
Secondary successionA classic example of secondary succession occurs in oak and hickory forests cleared by wildfire (Figure 45.33). Wildfireswill burn most vegetation and kill those animals unable to flee the area. Their nutrients, however, are returned to the groundin the form of ash. Thus, even when areas are devoid of life due to severe fires, the area will soon be ready for new life totake hold.Before the fire, the vegetation was dominated by tall trees with access to the major plant energy resource: sunlight. Theirheight gave them access to sunlight while also shading the ground and other low-lying species. After the fire, though, thesetrees are no longer dominant. Thus, the first plants to grow back are usually annual plants followed within a few years by quickly growing and spreading grasses and other pioneer species. Due to, at least in part, changes in the environmentbrought on by the growth of the grasses and other species, over many years, shrubs will emerge along with small pine,oak, and hickory trees. These organisms are called intermediate species. Eventually, over 150 years, the forest will reachits equilibrium point where species composition is no longer changing and resembles the community before the fire. Thisequilibrium state is referred to as the climax community, which will remain stable until the next disturbance.
Secondary succession is shown in an oak and hickory forest after a forest fire.45.7 | Behavioral Biology: Proximate and UltimateCauses of BehaviorBy the end of this section, you will be able to:• Compare innate and learned behavior• Discuss how movement and migration behaviors are a result of natural selection• Discuss the different ways members of a population communicate with each other• Give examples of how species use energy for mating displays and other courtship behaviors• Differentiate between various mating systems• Describe different ways that species learnBehavior is the change in activity of an organism in response to a stimulus. Behavioral biology is the study of thebiological and evolutionary bases for such changes. The idea that behaviors evolved as a result of the pressures ofnatural selection is not new. Animal behavior has been studied for decades, by biologists in the science of ethology, bypsychologists in the science of comparative psychology, and by scientists of many disciplines in the study of neurobiology.Although there is overlap between these disciplines, scientists in these behavioral fields take different approaches.Comparative psychology is an extension of work done in human and behavioral psychology. Ethology is an extensionof genetics, evolution, anatomy, physiology, and other biological disciplines. Still, one cannot study behavioral biologywithout touching on both comparative psychology and ethology.One goal of behavioral biology is to dissect out the innate behaviors, which have a strong genetic component andare largely independent of environmental influences, from the learned behaviors, which result from environmentalconditioning. Innate behavior, or instinct, is important because there is no risk of an incorrect behavior being learned. Theyare “hard wired” into the system. On the other hand, learned behaviors, although riskier, are flexible, dynamic, and can bealtered according to changes in the environment.Innate Behaviors: Movement and MigrationInnate or instinctual behaviors rely on response to stimuli. The simplest example of this is a reflex action, an involuntaryand rapid response to stimulus. To test the “knee-jerk” reflex, a doctor taps the patellar tendon below the kneecap with arubber hammer. The stimulation of the nerves there leads to the reflex of extending the leg at the knee. This is similar tothe reaction of someone who touches a hot stove and instinctually pulls his or her hand away. Even humans, with our greatcapacity to learn, still exhibit a variety of innate behaviors.
Kinesis and TaxisAnother activity or movement of innate behavior is kinesis, or the undirected movement in response to a stimulus.Orthokinesis is the increased or decreased speed of movement of an organism in response to a stimulus. Woodlice, forexample, increase their speed of movement when exposed to high or low temperatures. This movement, although random,increases the probability that the insect spends less time in the unfavorable environment. Another example is klinokinesis,an increase in turning behaviors. It is exhibited by bacteria such as E. coli which, in association with orthokinesis, helps theorganisms randomly find a more hospitable environment.A similar, but more directed version of kinesis is taxis: the directed movement towards or away from a stimulus. Thismovement can be in response to light (phototaxis), chemical signals (chemotaxis), or gravity (geotaxis) and can be directedtoward (positive) or away (negative) from the source of the stimulus. An example of a positive chemotaxis is exhibited bythe unicellular protozoan Tetrahymena thermophila. This organism swims using its cilia, at times moving in a straight line,and at other times making turns. The attracting chemotactic agent alters the frequency of turning as the organism movesdirectly toward the source, following the increasing concentration gradient.Fixed Action PatternsA fixed action pattern is a series of movements elicited by a stimulus such that even when the stimulus is removed, thepattern goes on to completion. An example of such a behavior occurs in the three-spined stickleback, a small freshwaterfish (Figure 45.34). Males of this species develop a red belly during breeding season and show instinctual aggressivenessto other males during this time. In laboratory experiments, researchers exposed such fish to objects that in no way resemblea fish in their shape, but which were painted red on their lower halves. The male sticklebacks responded aggressively to theobjects just as if they were real male sticklebacks.
Male three-spined stickleback fish exhibit a fixed action pattern. During mating season, the males, whichdevelop a bright red belly, react strongly to red-bottomed objects that in no way resemble fish.MigrationMigration is the long-range seasonal movement of animals. It is an evolved, adapted response to variation in resourceavailability, and it is a common phenomenon found in all major groups of animals. Birds fly south for the winter to get towarmer climates with sufficient food, and salmon migrate to their spawning grounds. The popular 2005 documentary Marchof the Penguins followed the 62-mile migration of emperor penguins through Antarctica to bring food back to their breedingsite and to their young. Wildebeests (Figure 45.35) migrate over 1800 miles each year in search of new grasslands.
Wildebeests migrate in a clockwise fashion over 1800 miles each year in search of rain-ripened grass.
Although migration is thought of as innate behavior, only some migrating species always migrate (obligate migration).Animals that exhibit facultative migration can choose to migrate or not. Additionally, in some animals, only a portion ofthe population migrates, whereas the rest does not migrate (incomplete migration). For example, owls that live in the tundramay migrate in years when their food source, small rodents, is relatively scarce, but not migrate during the years whenrodents are plentiful.ForagingForaging is the act of searching for and exploiting food resources. Feeding behaviors that maximize energy gain andminimize energy expenditure are called optimal foraging behaviors, and these are favored by natural section. The paintedstork, for example, uses its long beak to search the bottom of a freshwater marshland for crabs and other food.
The painted stork uses its long beak to forage.
Innate Behaviors: Living in GroupsNot all animals live in groups, but even those that live relatively solitary lives, with the exception of those that canreproduce asexually, must mate. Mating usually involves one animal signaling another so as to communicate the desire tomate. There are several types of energy-intensive behaviors or displays associated with mating, called mating rituals. Otherbehaviors found in populations that live in groups are described in terms of which animal benefits from the behavior. Inselfish behavior, only the animal in question benefits; in altruistic behavior, one animal’s actions benefit another animal;cooperative behavior describes when both animals benefit. All of these behaviors involve some sort of communicationbetween population members.Communication within a SpeciesAnimals communicate with each other using stimuli known as signals. An example of this is seen in the three-spinedstickleback, where the visual signal of a red region in the lower half of a fish signals males to become aggressive and signalsfemales to mate. Other signals are chemical (pheromones), aural (sound), visual (courtship and aggressive displays), ortactile (touch). These types of communication may be instinctual or learned or a combination of both. These are not thesame as the communication we associate with language, which has been observed only in humans and perhaps in somespecies of primates and cetaceans.A pheromone is a secreted chemical signal used to obtain a response from another individual of the same species. Thepurpose of pheromones is to elicit a specific behavior from the receiving individual. Pheromones are especially commonamong social insects, but they are used by many species to attract the opposite sex, to sound alarms, to mark food trails,and to elicit other, more complex behaviors. Even humans are thought to respond to certain pheromones called axillarysteroids. These chemicals influence human perception of other people, and in one study were responsible for a group ofwomen synchronizing their menstrual cycles. The role of pheromones in human-to-human communication is still somewhatcontroversial and continues to be researched.Songs are an example of an aural signal, one that needs to be heard by the recipient. Perhaps the best known of these aresongs of birds, which identify the species and are used to attract mates. Other well-known songs are those of whales, whichare of such low frequency that they can travel long distances underwater. Dolphins communicate with each other using awide variety of vocalizations. Male crickets make chirping sounds using a specialized organ to attract a mate, repel othermales, and to announce a successful mating.Courtship displays are a series of ritualized visual behaviors (signals) designed to attract and convince a member of theopposite sex to mate. These displays are ubiquitous in the animal kingdom. Often these displays involve a series of steps,including an initial display by one member followed by a response from the other. If at any point, the display is performed incorrectly or a proper response is not given, the mating ritual is abandoned and the mating attempt will be unsuccessful.The mating display of the common stork is shown in Figure 45.37.Aggressive displays are also common in the animal kingdom. An example is when a dog bares its teeth when it wantsanother dog to back down. Presumably, these displays communicate not only the willingness of the animal to fight, but alsoits fighting ability. Although these displays do signal aggression on the part of the sender, it is thought that these displaysare actually a mechanism to reduce the amount of actual fighting that occurs between members of the same species: theyallow individuals to assess the fighting ability of their opponent and thus decide whether it is “worth the fight.” The testingof certain hypotheses using game theory has led to the conclusion that some of these displays may overstate an animal’sactual fighting ability and are used to “bluff” the opponent. This type of interaction, even if “dishonest,” would be favoredby natural selection if it is successful more times than not.
This stork’s courtship display is designed to attract potential mates.
Distraction displays are seen in birds and some fish. They are designed to attract a predator away from the nest thatcontains their young. This is an example of an altruistic behavior: it benefits the young more than the individual performingthe display, which is putting itself at risk by doing so.Many animals, especially primates, communicate with other members in the group through touch. Activities such asgrooming, touching the shoulder or root of the tail, embracing, lip contact, and greeting ceremonies have all been observedin the Indian langur, an Old World monkey. Similar behaviors are found in other primates, especially in the great apes.
Altruistic BehaviorsBehaviors that lower the fitness of the individual but increase the fitness of another individual are termed altruistic.Examples of such behaviors are seen widely across the animal kingdom. Social insects such as worker bees have no abilityto reproduce, yet they maintain the queen so she can populate the hive with her offspring. Meerkats keep a sentry standingguard to warn the rest of the colony about intruders, even though the sentry is putting itself at risk. Wolves and wild dogsbring meat to pack members not present during a hunt. Lemurs take care of infants unrelated to them. Although on thesurface, these behaviors appear to be altruistic, it may not be so simple.There has been much discussion over why altruistic behaviors exist. Do these behaviors lead to overall evolutionaryadvantages for their species? Do they help the altruistic individual pass on its own genes? And what about such activitiesbetween unrelated individuals? One explanation for altruistic-type behaviors is found in the genetics of natural selection. Inthe 1976 book, The Selfish Gene, scientist Richard Dawkins attempted to explain many seemingly altruistic behaviors fromthe viewpoint of the gene itself. Although a gene obviously cannot be selfish in the human sense, it may appear that way ifthe sacrifice of an individual benefits related individuals that share genes that are identical by descent (present in relatives because of common lineage). Mammal parents make this sacrifice to take care of their offspring. Emperor penguins migratemiles in harsh conditions to bring food back for their young. Selfish gene theory has been controversial over the years andis still discussed among scientists in related fields.Even less-related individuals, those with less genetic identity than that shared by parent and offspring, benefit fromseemingly altruistic behavior. The activities of social insects such as bees, wasps, ants, and termites are good examples.Sterile workers in these societies take care of the queen because they are closely related to it, and as the queen has offspring,she is passing on genes from the workers indirectly. Thus, it is of fitness benefit for the worker to maintain the queenwithout having any direct chance of passing on its genes due to its sterility. The lowering of individual fitness to enhancethe reproductive fitness of a relative and thus one’s inclusive fitness evolves through kin selection. This phenomenoncan explain many superficially altruistic behaviors seen in animals. However, these behaviors may not be truly defined asaltruism in these cases because the actor is actually increasing its own fitness either directly (through its own offspring) orindirectly (through the inclusive fitness it gains through relatives that share genes with it).Unrelated individuals may also act altruistically to each other, and this seems to defy the “selfish gene” explanation. Anexample of this observed in many monkey species where a monkey will present its back to an unrelated monkey to have thatindividual pick the parasites from its fur. After a certain amount of time, the roles are reversed and the first monkey nowgrooms the second monkey. Thus, there is reciprocity in the behavior. Both benefit from the interaction and their fitnessis raised more than if neither cooperated nor if one cooperated and the other did not cooperate. This behavior is still notnecessarily altruism, as the “giving” behavior of the actor is based on the expectation that it will be the “receiver” of thebehavior in the future, termed reciprocal altruism. Reciprocal altruism requires that individuals repeatedly encounter eachother, often the result of living in the same social group, and that cheaters (those that never “give back”) are punished.Evolutionary game theory, a modification of classical game theory in mathematics, has shown that many of these so-called“altruistic behaviors” are not altruistic at all. The definition of “pure” altruism, based on human behavior, is an action thatbenefits another without any direct benefit to oneself. Most of the behaviors previously described do not seem to satisfy thisdefinition, and game theorists are good at finding “selfish” components in them. Others have argued that the terms “selfish”and “altruistic” should be dropped completely when discussing animal behavior, as they describe human behavior and maynot be directly applicable to instinctual animal activity. What is clear, though, is that heritable behaviors that improve thechances of passing on one’s genes or a portion of one’s genes are favored by natural selection and will be retained in futuregenerations as long as those behaviors convey a fitness advantage. These instinctual behaviors may then be applied, inspecial circumstances, to other species, as long as it doesn’t lower the animal’s fitness.Finding Sex PartnersNot all animals reproduce sexually, but many that do have the same challenge: they need to find a suitable mate and oftenhave to compete with other individuals to obtain one. Significant energy is spent in the process of locating, attracting, andmating with the sex partner. Two types of selection occur during this process and can lead to traits that are important toreproduction called secondary sexual characteristics: intersexual selection, the choosing of a mate where individuals ofone sex choose mates of the other sex, and intrasexual selection, the competition for mates between species members ofthe same sex. Intersexual selection is often complex because choosing a mate may be based on a variety of visual, aural,tactile, and chemical cues. An example of intersexual selection is when female peacocks choose to mate with the malewith the brightest plumage. This type of selection often leads to traits in the chosen sex that do not enhance survival, butare those traits most attractive to the opposite sex (often at the expense of survival). Intrasexual selection involves matingdisplays and aggressive mating rituals such as rams butting heads-the winner of these battles is the one that is able tomate. Many of these rituals use up considerable energy but result in the selection of the healthiest, strongest, and/or mostdominant individuals for mating. Three general mating systems, all involving innate as opposed to learned behaviors, areseen in animal populations: monogamous, polygynous, and polyandrous.
In monogamous systems, one male and one female are paired for at least one breeding season. In some animals, such as thegray wolf, these associations can last much longer, even a lifetime. Several explanations have been proposed for this type of mating system. The “mate-guarding hypothesis” states that males stay with the female to prevent other males from matingwith her. This behavior is advantageous in such situations where mates are scarce and difficult to find. Another explanationis the “male-assistance hypothesis,” where males that remain with a female to help guard and rear their young will havemore and healthier offspring. Monogamy is observed in many bird populations where, in addition to the parental carefrom the female, the male is also a major provider of parental care for the chicks. A third explanation for the evolutionaryadvantages of monogamy is the “female-enforcement hypothesis.” In this scenario, the female ensures that the male doesnot have other offspring that might compete with her own, so she actively interferes with the male’s signaling to attractother mates.Polygynous mating refers to one male mating with multiple females. In these situations, the female must be responsiblefor most of the parental care as the single male is not capable of providing care to that many offspring. In resourced-basedpolygyny, males compete for territories with the best resources, and then mate with females that enter the territory, drawnto its resource richness. The female benefits by mating with a dominant, genetically fit male; however, it is at the cost ofhaving no male help in caring for the offspring. An example is seen in the yellow-rumped honeyguide, a bird whose malesdefend beehives because the females feed on their wax. As the females approach, the male defending the nest will mate withthem. Harem mating structures are a type of polygynous system where certain males dominate mating while controllinga territory with resources. Elephant seals, where the alpha male dominates the mating within the group are an example.A third type of polygyny is a lek system. Here there is a communal courting area where several males perform elaboratedisplays for females, and the females choose their mate from this group. This behavior is observed in several bird speciesincluding the sage grouse and the prairie chicken.In polyandrous mating systems, one female mates with many males. These types of systems are much rarer thanmonogamous and polygynous mating systems. In pipefishes and seahorses, males receive the eggs from the female, fertilizethem, protect them within a pouch, and give birth to the offspring (Figure 45.38). Therefore, the female is able to provideeggs to several males without the burden of carrying the fertilized eggs.
Polyandrous mating, in which one female mates with many males, occurs in the (a) seahorse and the (b)pipefish.
Simple Learned BehaviorsThe majority of the behaviors previously discussed were innate or at least have an innate component (variations onthe innate behaviors may be learned). They are inherited and the behaviors do not change in response to signals fromthe environment. Conversely, learned behaviors, even though they may have instinctive components, allow an organismto adapt to changes in the environment and are modified by previous experiences. Simple learned behaviors includehabituation and imprinting-both are important to the maturation process of young animals.HabituationHabituation is a simple form of learning in which an animal stops responding to a stimulus after a period of repeatedexposure. This is a form of non-associative learning, as the stimulus is not associated with any punishment or reward.Prairie dogs typically sound an alarm call when threatened by a predator, but they become habituated to the sound of humanfootsteps when no harm is associated with this sound, therefore, they no longer respond to them with an alarm call. In thisexample, habituation is specific to the sound of human footsteps, as the animals still respond to the sounds of potentialpredators.ImprintingImprinting is a type of learning that occurs at a particular age or a life stage that is rapid and independent of the speciesinvolved. Hatchling ducks recognize the first adult they see, their mother, and make a bond with her. A familiar sight isducklings walking or swimming after their mothers (Figure 45.39). This is another type of non-associative learning, but is very important in the maturation process of these animals as it encourages them to stay near their mother so they willbe protected, greatly increasing their chances of survival. However, if newborn ducks see a human before they see theirmother, they will imprint on the human and follow it in just the same manner as they would follow their real mother.
The attachment of ducklings to their mother is an example of imprinting.
Conditioned BehaviorConditioned behaviors are types of associative learning, where a stimulus becomes associated with a consequence. Duringoperant conditioning, the behavioral response is modified by its consequences, with regards to its form, strength, orfrequency.Classical ConditioningIn classical conditioning, a response called the conditioned response is associated with a stimulus that it had previouslynot been associated with, the conditioned stimulus. The response to the original, unconditioned stimulus is called theunconditioned response. The most cited example of classical conditioning is Ivan Pavlov’s experiments with dogs (Figure45.40). In Pavlov’s experiments, the unconditioned response was the salivation of dogs in response to the unconditionedstimulus of seeing or smelling their food. The conditioning stimulus that researchers associated with the unconditionedresponse was the ringing of a bell. During conditioning, every time the animal was given food, the bell was rung. This wasrepeated during several trials. After some time, the dog learned to associate the ringing of the bell with food and to respondby salivating. After the conditioning period was finished, the dog would respond by salivating when the bell was rung,even when the unconditioned stimulus, the food, was absent. Thus, the ringing of the bell became the conditioned stimulusand the salivation became the conditioned response. Although it is thought by some scientists that the unconditionedand conditioned responses are identical, even Pavlov discovered that the saliva in the conditioned dogs had characteristicdifferences when compared to the unconditioned dog.
In the classic Pavlovian response, the dog becomes conditioned to associate the ringing of the bell withfood.It had been thought by some scientists that this type of conditioning required multiple exposures to the paired stimulusand response, but it is now known that this is not necessary in all cases, and that some conditioning can be learned in asingle pairing experiment. Classical conditioning is a major tenet of behaviorism, a branch of psychological philosophy thatproposes that all actions, thoughts, and emotions of living things are behaviors that can be treated by behavior modificationand changes in the environment.Operant ConditioningIn operant conditioning, the conditioned behavior is gradually modified by its consequences as the animal responds to thestimulus. A major proponent of such conditioning was psychologist B.F. Skinner, the inventor of the Skinner box. Skinnerput rats in his boxes that contained a lever that would dispense food to the rat when depressed. While initially the rat wouldpush the lever a few times by accident, it eventually associated pushing the lever with getting the food. This type of learningis an example of operant conditioning. Operant learning is the basis of most animal training. The conditioned behavioris continually modified by positive or negative reinforcement, often a reward such as food or some type of punishment,respectively. In this way, the animal is conditioned to associate a type of behavior with the punishment or reward, and, overtime, can be induced to perform behaviors that they would not have done in the wild, such as the “tricks” dolphins performat marine amusement park shows.
The training of dolphins by rewarding them with food is an example of positive reinforcement operantconditioning.
Cognitive LearningClassical and operant conditioning are inefficient ways for humans and other intelligent animals to learn. Some primates,including humans, are able to learn by imitating the behavior of others and by taking instructions. The development ofcomplex language by humans has made cognitive learning, the manipulation of information using the mind, the mostprominent method of human learning. In fact, that is how students are learning right now by reading this book. As studentsread, they can make mental images of objects or organisms and imagine changes to them, or behaviors by them, andanticipate the consequences. In addition to visual processing, cognitive learning is also enhanced by remembering pastexperiences, touching physical objects, hearing sounds, tasting food, and a variety of other sensory-based inputs. Cognitivelearning is so powerful that it can be used to understand conditioning in detail. In the reverse scenario, conditioning cannothelp someone learn about cognition.
Classic work on cognitive learning was done by Wolfgang Köhler with chimpanzees. He demonstrated that these animalswere capable of abstract thought by showing that they could learn how to solve a puzzle. When a banana was hung in theircage too high for them to reach, and several boxes were placed randomly on the floor, some of the chimps were able to stackthe boxes one on top of the other, climb on top of them, and get the banana. This implies that they could visualize the resultof stacking the boxes even before they had performed the action. This type of learning is much more powerful and versatilethan conditioning.Cognitive learning is not limited to primates, although they are the most efficient in using it. Maze running experimentsdone with rats by H.C. Blodgett in the 1920s were the first to show cognitive skills in a simple mammal. The motivation forthe animals to work their way through the maze was a piece of food at its end. In these studies, the animals in Group I wererun in one trial per day and had food available to them each day on completion of the run (Figure 45.42). Group II rats werenot fed in the maze for the first six days and then subsequent runs were done with food for several days after. Group III ratshad food available on the third day and every day thereafter. The results were that the control rats, Group I, learned quickly,and figured out how to run the maze in seven days. Group III did not learn much during the three days without food, butrapidly caught up to the control group when given the food reward. Group II learned very slowly for the six days with noreward to motivate them, and they did not begin to catch up to the control group until the day food was given, and then ittook two days longer to learn the maze.
Group I (the green solid line) found food at the end of each trial, group II (the blue dashed line) did notfind food for the first 6 days, and group III (the red dotted line) did not find food during runs on the first three days.Notice that rats given food earlier learned faster and eventually caught up to the control group. The orange dots on thegroup II and III lines show the days when food rewards were added to the mazes.It may not be immediately obvious that this type of learning is different than conditioning. Although one might be temptedto believe that the rats simply learned how to find their way through a conditioned series of right and left turns, E.C. Tolmanproved a decade later that the rats were making a representation of the maze in their minds, which he called a “cognitivemap.” This was an early demonstration of the power of cognitive learning and how these abilities were not just limited tohumans.SociobiologySociobiology is an interdisciplinary science originally popularized by social insect researcher E.O. Wilson in the 1970s.Wilson defined the science as “the extension of population biology and evolutionary theory to social organization.”[10]Themain thrust of sociobiology is that animal and human behavior, including aggressiveness and other social interactions, canbe explained almost solely in terms of genetics and natural selection. This science is controversial; noted scientist such as thelate Stephen Jay Gould criticized the approach for ignoring the environmental effects on behavior. This is another exampleof the “nature versus nurture” debate of the role of genetics versus the role of environment in determining an organism’scharacteristics.
Sociobiology also links genes with behaviors and has been associated with “biological determinism,” the belief that allbehaviors are hardwired into our genes. No one disputes that certain behaviors can be inherited and that natural selectionplays a role retaining them. It is the application of such principles to human behavior that sparks this controversy, whichremains active today.
