EVOLUTION AND THEORIGIN OF SPECIES
All organisms are products of evolution adapted to their environment. (a) Saguaro (Carnegiea gigantea)can soak up 750 liters of water in a single rain storm, enabling these cacti to survive the dry conditions of the Sonoradesert in Mexico and the Southwestern United States. (b) The Andean semiaquatic lizard (Potamites montanicola)discovered in Peru in 2010 lives between 1,570 to 2,100 meters in elevation, and, unlike most lizards, is nocturnaland swims. Scientists still do no know how these cold-blood animals are able to move in the cold (10 to 15°C)temperatures of the Andean night.
IntroductionAll species of living organisms, from bacteria to baboons to blueberries, evolved at some point from a different species.Although it may seem that living things today stay much the same, that is not the case—evolution is an ongoing process.The theory of evolution is the unifying theory of biology, meaning it is the framework within which biologists askquestions about the living world. Its power is that it provides direction for predictions about living things that are borneout in experiment after experiment. The Ukrainian-born American geneticist Theodosius Dobzhansky famously wrote that“nothing makes sense in biology except in the light of evolution.”[1]He meant that the tenet that all life has evolved anddiversified from a common ancestor is the foundation from which we approach all questions in biology.
Understanding Evolution
Evolution by natural selection describes a mechanism for how species change over time. That species change had beensuggested and debated well before Darwin began to explore this idea. The view that species were static and unchanging wasgrounded in the writings of Plato, yet there were also ancient Greeks who expressed evolutionary ideas. In the eighteenthcentury, ideas about the evolution of animals were reintroduced by the naturalist Georges-Louis Leclerc Comte de Buffonwho observed that various geographic regions have different plant and animal populations, even when the environments aresimilar. It was also accepted that there were extinct species.During this time, James Hutton, a Scottish naturalist, proposed that geological change occurred gradually by theaccumulation of small changes from processes operating like they are today over long periods of time. This contrastedwith the predominant view that the geology of the planet was a consequence of catastrophic events occurring during arelatively brief past. Hutton’s view was popularized in the nineteenth century by the geologist Charles Lyell who becamea friend to Darwin. Lyell’s ideas were influential on Darwin’s thinking: Lyell’s notion of the greater age of Earth gavemore time for gradual change in species, and the process of change provided an analogy for gradual change in species. Inthe early nineteenth century, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck published a book that detailed a mechanism for evolutionary change.This mechanism is now referred to as an inheritance of acquired characteristics by which modifications in an individual arecaused by its environment, or the use or disuse of a structure during its lifetime, could be inherited by its offspring and thusbring about change in a species. While this mechanism for evolutionary change was discredited, Lamarck’s ideas were animportant influence on evolutionary thought.Charles Darwin and Natural SelectionIn the mid-nineteenth century, the actual mechanism for evolution was independently conceived of and described by twonaturalists: Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace. Importantly, each naturalist spent time exploring the natural worldon expeditions to the tropics. From 1831 to 1836, Darwin traveled around the world on H.M.S. Beagle, including stopsin South America, Australia, and the southern tip of Africa. Wallace traveled to Brazil to collect insects in the Amazonrainforest from 1848 to 1852 and to the Malay Archipelago from 1854 to 1862. Darwin’s journey, like Wallace’s laterjourneys to the Malay Archipelago, included stops at several island chains, the last being the Galápagos Islands west ofEcuador. On these islands, Darwin observed species of organisms on different islands that were clearly similar, yet haddistinct differences. For example, the ground finches inhabiting the Galápagos Islands comprised several species witha unique beak shape (Figure 18.2). The species on the islands had a graded series of beak sizes and shapes with verysmall differences between the most similar. He observed that these finches closely resembled another finch species on themainland of South America. Darwin imagined that the island species might be species modified from one of the originalmainland species. Upon further study, he realized that the varied beaks of each finch helped the birds acquire a specifictype of food. For example, seed-eating finches had stronger, thicker beaks for breaking seeds, and insect-eating finches hadspear-like beaks for stabbing their prey.
Darwin observed that beak shape varies among finch species. He postulated that the beak of an ancestralspecies had adapted over time to equip the finches to acquire different food sources.Wallace and Darwin both observed similar patterns in other organisms and they independently developed the sameexplanation for how and why such changes could take place. Darwin called this mechanism natural selection. Naturalselection, also known as “survival of the fittest,” is the more prolific reproduction of individuals with favorable traits thatsurvive environmental change because of those traits; this leads to evolutionary change.For example, a population of giant tortoises found in the Galapagos Archipelago was observed by Darwin to have longernecks than those that lived on other islands with dry lowlands. These tortoises were “selected” because they could reachmore leaves and access more food than those with short necks. In times of drought when fewer leaves would be available,those that could reach more leaves had a better chance to eat and survive than those that couldn’t reach the food source.Consequently, long-necked tortoises would be more likely to be reproductively successful and pass the long-necked trait totheir offspring. Over time, only long-necked tortoises would be present in the population.Natural selection, Darwin argued, was an inevitable outcome of three principles that operated in nature. First, mostcharacteristics of organisms are inherited, or passed from parent to offspring. Although no one, including Darwin andWallace, knew how this happened at the time, it was a common understanding. Second, more offspring are produced thanare able to survive, so resources for survival and reproduction are limited. The capacity for reproduction in all organismsoutstrips the availability of resources to support their numbers. Thus, there is competition for those resources in eachgeneration. Both Darwin and Wallace’s understanding of this principle came from reading an essay by the economistThomas Malthus who discussed this principle in relation to human populations. Third, offspring vary among each other inregard to their characteristics and those variations are inherited. Darwin and Wallace reasoned that offspring with inheritedcharacteristics which allow them to best compete for limited resources will survive and have more offspring than thoseindividuals with variations that are less able to compete. Because characteristics are inherited, these traits will be betterrepresented in the next generation. This will lead to change in populations over generations in a process that Darwincalled descent with modification. Ultimately, natural selection leads to greater adaptation of the population to its localenvironment; it is the only mechanism known for adaptive evolution.Papers by Darwin and Wallace (Figure 18.3) presenting the idea of natural selection were read together in 1858 before theLinnean Society in London. The following year Darwin’s book, On the Origin of Species, was published. His book outlinedin considerable detail his arguments for evolution by natural selection.
Both (a) Charles Darwin and (b) Alfred Wallace wrote scientific papers on natural selection that werepresented together before the Linnean Society in 1858.Demonstrations of evolution by natural selection are time consuming and difficult to obtain. One of the best examples hasbeen demonstrated in the very birds that helped to inspire Darwin’s theory: the Galápagos finches. Peter and RosemaryGrant and their colleagues have studied Galápagos finch populations every year since 1976 and have provided importantdemonstrations of natural selection. The Grants found changes from one generation to the next in the distribution of beakshapes with the medium ground finch on the Galápagos island of Daphne Major. The birds have inherited variation in thebill shape with some birds having wide deep bills and others having thinner bills. During a period in which rainfall washigher than normal because of an El Niño, the large hard seeds that large-billed birds ate were reduced in number; however,there was an abundance of the small soft seeds which the small-billed birds ate. Therefore, survival and reproduction weremuch better in the following years for the small-billed birds. In the years following this El Niño, the Grants measured beaksizes in the population and found that the average bill size was smaller. Since bill size is an inherited trait, parents withsmaller bills had more offspring and the size of bills had evolved to be smaller. As conditions improved in 1987 and largerseeds became more available, the trend toward smaller average bill size ceased.
Field BiologistMany people hike, explore caves, scuba dive, or climb mountains for recreation. People often participatein these activities hoping to see wildlife. Experiencing the outdoors can be incredibly enjoyable andinvigorating. What if your job was to be outside in the wilderness? Field biologists by definition work outdoorsin the “field.” The term field in this case refers to any location outdoors, even under water. A field biologisttypically focuses research on a certain species, group of organisms, or a single habitat (Figure 18.4).
A field biologist tranquilizes a polar bear for study. (credit: Karen Rhode)One objective of many field biologists includes discovering new species that have never been recorded.Not only do such findings expand our understanding of the natural world, but they also lead to importantinnovations in fields such as medicine and agriculture. Plant and microbial species, in particular, can revealnew medicinal and nutritive knowledge. Other organisms can play key roles in ecosystems or be consideredrare and in need of protection. When discovered, these important species can be used as evidence forenvironmental regulations and laws.
Processes and Patterns of EvolutionNatural selection can only take place if there is variation, or differences, among individuals in a population. Importantly,these differences must have some genetic basis; otherwise, the selection will not lead to change in the next generation.This is critical because variation among individuals can be caused by non-genetic reasons such as an individual being tallerbecause of better nutrition rather than different genes.Genetic diversity in a population comes from two main mechanisms: mutation and sexual reproduction. Mutation, a changein DNA, is the ultimate source of new alleles, or new genetic variation in any population. The genetic changes caused bymutation can have one of three outcomes on the phenotype. A mutation affects the phenotype of the organism in a waythat gives it reduced fitness—lower likelihood of survival or fewer offspring. A mutation may produce a phenotype with abeneficial effect on fitness. And, many mutations will also have no effect on the fitness of the phenotype; these are calledneutral mutations. Mutations may also have a whole range of effect sizes on the fitness of the organism that expressesthem in their phenotype, from a small effect to a great effect. Sexual reproduction also leads to genetic diversity: when twoparents reproduce, unique combinations of alleles assemble to produce the unique genotypes and thus phenotypes in eachof the offspring.A heritable trait that helps the survival and reproduction of an organism in its present environment is called an adaptation.Scientists describe groups of organisms becoming adapted to their environment when a change in the range of geneticvariation occurs over time that increases or maintains the “fit” of the population to its environment. The webbed feetof platypuses are an adaptation for swimming. The snow leopards’ thick fur is an adaptation for living in the cold. Thecheetahs’ fast speed is an adaptation for catching prey.
Whether or not a trait is favorable depends on the environmental conditions at the time. The same traits are not alwaysselected because environmental conditions can change. For example, consider a species of plant that grew in a moist climateand did not need to conserve water. Large leaves were selected because they allowed the plant to obtain more energy fromthe sun. Large leaves require more water to maintain than small leaves, and the moist environment provided favorableconditions to support large leaves. After thousands of years, the climate changed, and the area no longer had excess water.The direction of natural selection shifted so that plants with small leaves were selected because those populations were ableto conserve water to survive the new environmental conditions.The evolution of species has resulted in enormous variation in form and function. Sometimes, evolution gives rise to groupsof organisms that become tremendously different from each other. When two species evolve in diverse directions from acommon point, it is called divergent evolution. Such divergent evolution can be seen in the forms of the reproductiveorgans of flowering plants which share the same basic anatomies; however, they can look very different as a result ofselection in different physical environments and adaptation to different kinds of pollinators (Figure 18.5).
Flowering plants evolved from a common ancestor. Notice that the (a) dense blazing star (Liatrus spicata)and the (b) purple coneflower (Echinacea purpurea) vary in appearance, yet both share a similar basic morphology.(credit a: modification of work by Drew Avery; credit b: modification of work by Cory Zanker)In other cases, similar phenotypes evolve independently in distantly related species. For example, flight has evolved in bothbats and insects, and they both have structures we refer to as wings, which are adaptations to flight. However, the wingsof bats and insects have evolved from very different original structures. This phenomenon is called convergent evolution ,where similar traits evolve independently in species that do not share a common ancestry. The two species came to the samefunction, flying, but did so separately from each other.These physical changes occur over enormous spans of time and help explain how evolution occurs. Natural selection acts onindividual organisms, which in turn can shape an entire species. Although natural selection may work in a single generationon an individual, it can take thousands or even millions of years for the genotype of an entire species to evolve. It is overthese large time spans that life on earth has changed and continues to change.Evidence of EvolutionThe evidence for evolution is compelling and extensive. Looking at every level of organization in living systems, biologistssee the signature of past and present evolution. Darwin dedicated a large portion of his book, On the Origin of Species, toidentifying patterns in nature that were consistent with evolution, and since Darwin, our understanding has become clearerand broader.FossilsFossils provide solid evidence that organisms from the past are not the same as those found today, and fossils show aprogression of evolution. Scientists determine the age of fossils and categorize them from all over the world to determinewhen the organisms lived relative to each other. The resulting fossil record tells the story of the past and shows the evolutionof form over millions of years (Figure 18.6). For example, scientists have recovered highly detailed records showing theevolution of humans and horses (Figure 18.6). The whale flipper shares a similar morphology to appendages of birds andmammals (Figure 18.7) indicating that these species share a common ancestor.
In this (a) display, fossil hominids are arranged from oldest (bottom) to newest (top). As hominids evolved,the shape of the skull changed. An artist’s rendition of (b) extinct species of the genus Equus reveals that these ancientspecies resembled the modern horse (Equus ferus) but varied in size.Anatomy and EmbryologyAnother type of evidence for evolution is the presence of structures in organisms that share the same basic form. Forexample, the bones in the appendages of a human, dog, bird, and whale all share the same overall construction (Figure 18.7)resulting from their origin in the appendages of a common ancestor. Over time, evolution led to changes in the shapes andsizes of these bones in different species, but they have maintained the same overall layout. Scientists call these synonymousparts homologous structures.
The similar construction of these appendages indicates that these organisms share a common ancestor.Some structures exist in organisms that have no apparent function at all, and appear to be residual parts from a past commonancestor. These unused structures without function are called vestigial structures. Other examples of vestigial structuresare wings on flightless birds, leaves on some cacti, and hind leg bones in whales.
Another evidence of evolution is the convergence of form in organisms that share similar environments. For example,species of unrelated animals, such as the arctic fox and ptarmigan, living in the arctic region have been selected for seasonal
white phenotypes during winter to blend with the snow and ice (Figure 18.8ab). These similarities occur not because ofcommon ancestry, but because of similar selection pressures—the benefits of not being seen by predators.
The white winter coat of the (a) arctic fox and the (b) ptarmigan’s plumage are adaptations to theirenvironments. (credit a: modification of work by Keith Morehouse)Embryology, the study of the development of the anatomy of an organism to its adult form, also provides evidenceof relatedness between now widely divergent groups of organisms. Mutational tweaking in the embryo can have suchmagnified consequences in the adult that embryo formation tends to be conserved. As a result, structures that are absentin some groups often appear in their embryonic forms and disappear by the time the adult or juvenile form is reached. Forexample, all vertebrate embryos, including humans, exhibit gill slits and tails at some point in their early development.These disappear in the adults of terrestrial groups but are maintained in adult forms of aquatic groups such as fish and someamphibians. Great ape embryos, including humans, have a tail structure during their development that is lost by the time ofbirth.BiogeographyThe geographic distribution of organisms on the planet follows patterns that are best explained by evolution in conjunctionwith the movement of tectonic plates over geological time. Broad groups that evolved before the breakup of thesupercontinent Pangaea (about 200 million years ago) are distributed worldwide. Groups that evolved since the breakupappear uniquely in regions of the planet, such as the unique flora and fauna of northern continents that formed from thesupercontinent Laurasia and of the southern continents that formed from the supercontinent Gondwana. The presence ofmembers of the plant family Proteaceae in Australia, southern Africa, and South America is best by their presence prior tothe southern supercontinent Gondwana breaking up.The great diversification of marsupials in Australia and the absence of other mammals reflect Australia’s long isolation.Australia has an abundance of endemic species—species found nowhere else—which is typical of islands whose isolationby expanses of water prevents species to migrate. Over time, these species diverge evolutionarily into new species thatlook very different from their ancestors that may exist on the mainland. The marsupials of Australia, the finches on theGalápagos, and many species on the Hawaiian Islands are all unique to their one point of origin, yet they display distantrelationships to ancestral species on mainlands.Molecular BiologyLike anatomical structures, the structures of the molecules of life reflect descent with modification. Evidence of a commonancestor for all of life is reflected in the universality of DNA as the genetic material and in the near universality ofthe genetic code and the machinery of DNA replication and expression. Fundamental divisions in life between the threedomains are reflected in major structural differences in otherwise conservative structures such as the components ofribosomes and the structures of membranes. In general, the relatedness of groups of organisms is reflected in the similarityof their DNA sequences—exactly the pattern that would be expected from descent and diversification from a commonancestor.DNA sequences have also shed light on some of the mechanisms of evolution. For example, it is clear that the evolution ofnew functions for proteins commonly occurs after gene duplication events that allow the free modification of one copy bymutation, selection, or drift (changes in a population’s gene pool resulting from chance), while the second copy continuesto produce a functional protein.
Misconceptions of EvolutionAlthough the theory of evolution generated some controversy when it was first proposed, it was almost universally acceptedby biologists, particularly younger biologists, within 20 years after publication of On the Origin of Species. Nevertheless,the theory of evolution is a difficult concept and misconceptions about how it works abound.
Evolution Is Just a TheoryCritics of the theory of evolution dismiss its importance by purposefully confounding the everyday usage of the word“theory” with the way scientists use the word. In science, a “theory” is understood to be a body of thoroughly tested andverified explanations for a set of observations of the natural world. Scientists have a theory of the atom, a theory of gravity,and the theory of relativity, each of which describes understood facts about the world. In the same way, the theory ofevolution describes facts about the living world. As such, a theory in science has survived significant efforts to discreditit by scientists. In contrast, a “theory” in common vernacular is a word meaning a guess or suggested explanation; thismeaning is more akin to the scientific concept of “hypothesis.” When critics of evolution say evolution is “just a theory,”they are implying that there is little evidence supporting it and that it is still in the process of being rigorously tested. Thisis a mischaracterization.Individuals EvolveEvolution is the change in genetic composition of a population over time, specifically over generations, resulting fromdifferential reproduction of individuals with certain alleles. Individuals do change over their lifetime, obviously, but this iscalled development and involves changes programmed by the set of genes the individual acquired at birth in coordinationwith the individual’s environment. When thinking about the evolution of a characteristic, it is probably best to think aboutthe change of the average value of the characteristic in the population over time. For example, when natural selection leadsto bill-size change in medium-ground finches in the Galápagos, this does not mean that individual bills on the finches arechanging. If one measures the average bill size among all individuals in the population at one time and then measures theaverage bill size in the population several years later, this average value will be different as a result of evolution. Althoughsome individuals may survive from the first time to the second, they will still have the same bill size; however, there will bemany new individuals that contribute to the shift in average bill size.Evolution Explains the Origin of LifeIt is a common misunderstanding that evolution includes an explanation of life’s origins. Conversely, some of the theory’scritics believe that it cannot explain the origin of life. The theory does not try to explain the origin of life. The theory ofevolution explains how populations change over time and how life diversifies the origin of species. It does not shed light onthe beginnings of life including the origins of the first cells, which is how life is defined. The mechanisms of the origin oflife on Earth are a particularly difficult problem because it occurred a very long time ago, and presumably it just occurredonce. Importantly, biologists believe that the presence of life on Earth precludes the possibility that the events that led tolife on Earth can be repeated because the intermediate stages would immediately become food for existing living things.However, once a mechanism of inheritance was in place in the form of a molecule like DNA either within a cell or pre-cell,these entities would be subject to the principle of natural selection. More effective reproducers would increase in frequencyat the expense of inefficient reproducers. So while evolution does not explain the origin of life, it may have something tosay about some of the processes operating once pre-living entities acquired certain properties.Organisms Evolve on PurposeStatements such as “organisms evolve in response to a change in an environment” are quite common, but such statementscan lead to two types of misunderstandings. First, the statement must not be understood to mean that individual organismsevolve. The statement is shorthand for “a population evolves in response to a changing environment.” However, a
second misunderstanding may arise by interpreting the statement to mean that the evolution is somehow intentional.A changed environment results in some individuals in the population, those with particular phenotypes, benefiting andtherefore producing proportionately more offspring than other phenotypes. This results in change in the population if thecharacteristics are genetically determined.It is also important to understand that the variation that natural selection works on is already in a population and does notarise in response to an environmental change. For example, applying antibiotics to a population of bacteria will, over time,select a population of bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics. The resistance, which is caused by a gene, did not arise bymutation because of the application of the antibiotic. The gene for resistance was already present in the gene pool of thebacteria, likely at a low frequency. The antibiotic, which kills the bacterial cells without the resistance gene, strongly selectsindividuals that are resistant, since these would be the only ones that survived and divided. Experiments have demonstratedthat mutations for antibiotic resistance do not arise as a result of antibiotic.In a larger sense, evolution is not goal directed. Species do not become “better” over time; they simply track their changingenvironment with adaptations that maximize their reproduction in a particular environment at a particular time. Evolutionhas no goal of making faster, bigger, more complex, or even smarter species, despite the commonness of this kind oflanguage in popular discourse. What characteristics evolve in a species are a function of the variation present and theenvironment, both of which are constantly changing in a non-directional way. What trait is fit in one environment at onetime may well be fatal at some point in the future. This holds equally well for a species of insect as it does the humanspecies.
Formation of New Species
reproduction and have offspring that can then successfully reproduce. Scientists call such organisms members of the samebiological species.Species and the Ability to ReproduceA species is a group of individual organisms that interbreed and produce fertile, viable offspring. According to thisdefinition, one species is distinguished from another when, in nature, it is not possible for matings between individuals fromeach species to produce fertile offspring.Members of the same species share both external and internal characteristics, which develop from their DNA. The closerrelationship two organisms share, the more DNA they have in common, just like people and their families. People’s DNAis likely to be more like their father or mother’s DNA than their cousin or grandparent’s DNA. Organisms of the samespecies have the highest level of DNA alignment and therefore share characteristics and behaviors that lead to successfulreproduction.Species’ appearance can be misleading in suggesting an ability or inability to mate. For example, even though domesticdogs (Canis lupus familiaris) display phenotypic differences, such as size, build, and coat, most dogs can interbreed andproduce viable puppies that can mature and sexually reproduce (Figure 18.9).
The (a) poodle and (b) cocker spaniel can reproduce to produce a breed known as (c) the cockapoo.(credit a: modification of work by Sally Eller, Tom Reese; credit b: modification of work by Jeremy McWilliams; credit c:modification of work by Kathleen Conklin)In other cases, individuals may appear similar although they are not members of the same species. For example, even thoughbald eagles (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) and African fish eagles (Haliaeetus vocifer) are both birds and eagles, each belongsto a separate species group (Figure 18.10). If humans were to artificially intervene and fertilize the egg of a bald eagle withthe sperm of an African fish eagle and a chick did hatch, that offspring, called a hybrid (a cross between two species), wouldprobably be infertile—unable to successfully reproduce after it reached maturity. Different species may have different genesthat are active in development; therefore, it may not be possible to develop a viable offspring with two different sets ofdirections. Thus, even though hybridization may take place, the two species still remain separate.
The (a) African fish eagle is similar in appearance to the (b) bald eagle, but the two birds are members ofdifferent species. (credit a: modification of work by Nigel Wedge; credit b: modification of work by U.S. Fish and WildlifeService)Populations of species share a gene pool: a collection of all the variants of genes in the species. Again, the basis toany changes in a group or population of organisms must be genetic for this is the only way to share and pass on traits.When variations occur within a species, they can only be passed to the next generation along two main pathways: asexualreproduction or sexual reproduction. The change will be passed on asexually simply if the reproducing cell possessesthe changed trait. For the changed trait to be passed on by sexual reproduction, a gamete, such as a sperm or egg cell,must possess the changed trait. In other words, sexually-reproducing organisms can experience several genetic changesin their body cells, but if these changes do not occur in a sperm or egg cell, the changed trait will never reach the nextgeneration. Only heritable traits can evolve. Therefore, reproduction plays a paramount role for genetic change to take rootin a population or species. In short, organisms must be able to reproduce with each other to pass new traits to offspring.SpeciationThe biological definition of species, which works for sexually reproducing organisms, is a group of actually or potentiallyinterbreeding individuals. There are exceptions to this rule. Many species are similar enough that hybrid offspring arepossible and may often occur in nature, but for the majority of species this rule generally holds. In fact, the presence innature of hybrids between similar species suggests that they may have descended from a single interbreeding species, andthe speciation process may not yet be completed.Given the extraordinary diversity of life on the planet there must be mechanisms for speciation: the formation of twospecies from one original species. Darwin envisioned this process as a branching event and diagrammed the process in theonly illustration found in On the Origin of Species (Figure 18.11a). Compare this illustration to the diagram of elephant
evolution (Figure 18.11b), which shows that as one species changes over time, it branches to form more than one newspecies, repeatedly, as long as the population survives or until the organism becomes extinct.
The only illustration in Darwin's On the Origin of Species is (a) a diagram showing speciation eventsleading to biological diversity. The diagram shows similarities to phylogenetic charts that are drawn today to illustratethe relationships of species. (b) Modern elephants evolved from the Palaeomastodon, a species that lived in Egypt35–50 million years ago.For speciation to occur, two new populations must be formed from one original population and they must evolve in sucha way that it becomes impossible for individuals from the two new populations to interbreed. Biologists have proposedmechanisms by which this could occur that fall into two broad categories. Allopatric speciation (allo- = "other"; -patric= "homeland") involves geographic separation of populations from a parent species and subsequent evolution. Sympatricspeciation (sym- = "same"; -patric = "homeland") involves speciation occurring within a parent species remaining in onelocation.Biologists think of speciation events as the splitting of one ancestral species into two descendant species. There is no reasonwhy there might not be more than two species formed at one time except that it is less likely and multiple events can beconceptualized as single splits occurring close in time.Allopatric SpeciationA geographically continuous population has a gene pool that is relatively homogeneous. Gene flow, the movement of allelesacross the range of the species, is relatively free because individuals can move and then mate with individuals in their newlocation. Thus, the frequency of an allele at one end of a distribution will be similar to the frequency of the allele at the otherend. When populations become geographically discontinuous, that free-flow of alleles is prevented. When that separationlasts for a period of time, the two populations are able to evolve along different trajectories. Thus, their allele frequenciesat numerous genetic loci gradually become more and more different as new alleles independently arise by mutation ineach population. Typically, environmental conditions, such as climate, resources, predators, and competitors for the twopopulations will differ causing natural selection to favor divergent adaptations in each group.Isolation of populations leading to allopatric speciation can occur in a variety of ways: a river forming a new branch, erosionforming a new valley, a group of organisms traveling to a new location without the ability to return, or seeds floatingover the ocean to an island. The nature of the geographic separation necessary to isolate populations depends entirely onthe biology of the organism and its potential for dispersal. If two flying insect populations took up residence in separatenearby valleys, chances are, individuals from each population would fly back and forth continuing gene flow. However, iftwo rodent populations became divided by the formation of a new lake, continued gene flow would be unlikely; therefore,speciation would be more likely.Biologists group allopatric processes into two categories: dispersal and vicariance. Dispersal is when a few members of aspecies move to a new geographical area, and vicariance is when a natural situation arises to physically divide organisms.Scientists have documented numerous cases of allopatric speciation taking place. For example, along the west coast ofthe United States, two separate sub-species of spotted owls exist. The northern spotted owl has genetic and phenotypicdifferences from its close relative: the Mexican spotted owl, which lives in the south (Figure 18.12).
The northern spotted owl and the Mexican spotted owl inhabit geographically separate locations withdifferent climates and ecosystems. The owl is an example of allopatric speciation. (credit "northern spotted owl":modification of work by John and Karen Hollingsworth; credit "Mexican spotted owl": modification of work by Bill Radke)Additionally, scientists have found that the further the distance between two groups that once were the same species, themore likely it is that speciation will occur. This seems logical because as the distance increases, the various environmentalfactors would likely have less in common than locations in close proximity. Consider the two owls: in the north, the climateis cooler than in the south; the types of organisms in each ecosystem differ, as do their behaviors and habits; also, the huntinghabits and prey choices of the southern owls vary from the northern owls. These variances can lead to evolved differencesin the owls, and speciation likely will occur.Adaptive RadiationIn some cases, a population of one species disperses throughout an area, and each finds a distinct niche or isolated habitat.Over time, the varied demands of their new lifestyles lead to multiple speciation events originating from a single species.This is called adaptive radiation because many adaptations evolve from a single point of origin; thus, causing the species toradiate into several new ones. Island archipelagos like the Hawaiian Islands provide an ideal context for adaptive radiationevents because water surrounds each island which leads to geographical isolation for many organisms. The Hawaiianhoneycreeper illustrates one example of adaptive radiation. From a single species, called the founder species, numerousspecies have evolved, including the six shown in Figure 18.13.
The honeycreeper birds illustrate adaptive radiation. From one original species of bird, multiple othersevolved, each with its own distinctive characteristics.Notice the differences in the species’ beaks in Figure 18.13. Evolution in response to natural selection based on specificfood sources in each new habitat led to evolution of a different beak suited to the specific food source. The seed-eating birdhas a thicker, stronger beak which is suited to break hard nuts. The nectar-eating birds have long beaks to dip into flowersto reach the nectar. The insect-eating birds have beaks like swords, appropriate for stabbing and impaling insects. Darwin’sfinches are another example of adaptive radiation in an archipelago.
Sympatric SpeciationCan divergence occur if no physical barriers are in place to separate individuals who continue to live and reproduce inthe same habitat? The answer is yes. The process of speciation within the same space is called sympatric speciation; theprefix “sym” means same, so “sympatric” means “same homeland” in contrast to “allopatric” meaning “other homeland.”A number of mechanisms for sympatric speciation have been proposed and studied.One form of sympatric speciation can begin with a serious chromosomal error during cell division. In a normal cell divisionevent chromosomes replicate, pair up, and then separate so that each new cell has the same number of chromosomes.However, sometimes the pairs separate and the end cell product has too many or too few individual chromosomes in acondition called aneuploidy (Figure 18.14).
Polyploidy is a condition in which a cell or organism has an extra set, or sets, of chromosomes. Scientists have identifiedtwo main types of polyploidy that can lead to reproductive isolation of an individual in the polyploidy state. Reproductiveisolation is the inability to interbreed. In some cases, a polyploid individual will have two or more complete sets ofchromosomes from its own species in a condition called autopolyploidy (Figure 18.15). The prefix “auto-” means “self,”so the term means multiple chromosomes from one’s own species. Polyploidy results from an error in meiosis in which allof the chromosomes move into one cell instead of separating.
Autopolyploidy results when mitosis is not followed by cytokinesis.For example, if a plant species with 2n = 6 produces autopolyploid gametes that are also diploid (2n = 6, when they shouldbe n = 3), the gametes now have twice as many chromosomes as they should have. These new gametes will be incompatiblewith the normal gametes produced by this plant species. However, they could either self-pollinate or reproduce with otherautopolyploid plants with gametes having the same diploid number. In this way, sympatric speciation can occur quickly byforming offspring with 4n called a tetraploid. These individuals would immediately be able to reproduce only with those ofthis new kind and not those of the ancestral species.The other form of polyploidy occurs when individuals of two different species reproduce to form a viable offspring calledan allopolyploid. The prefix “allo-” means “other” (recall from allopatric): therefore, an allopolyploid occurs when gametesfrom two different species combine. Figure 18.16 illustrates one possible way an allopolyploid can form. Notice how ittakes two generations, or two reproductive acts, before the viable fertile hybrid results.
Alloploidy results when two species mate to produce viable offspring. In the example shown, a normalgamete from one species fuses with a polyploidy gamete from another. Two matings are necessary to produce viableoffspring.The cultivated forms of wheat, cotton, and tobacco plants are all allopolyploids. Although polyploidy occurs occasionallyin animals, it takes place most commonly in plants. (Animals with any of the types of chromosomal aberrations describedhere are unlikely to survive and produce normal offspring.) Scientists have discovered more than half of all plant speciesstudied relate back to a species evolved through polyploidy. With such a high rate of polyploidy in plants, some scientistshypothesize that this mechanism takes place more as an adaptation than as an error.Reproductive IsolationGiven enough time, the genetic and phenotypic divergence between populations will affect characters that influencereproduction: if individuals of the two populations were to be brought together, mating would be less likely, but if matingoccurred, offspring would be non-viable or infertile. Many types of diverging characters may affect the reproductiveisolation, the ability to interbreed, of the two populations.Reproductive isolation can take place in a variety of ways. Scientists organize them into two groups: prezygotic barriers andpostzygotic barriers. Recall that a zygote is a fertilized egg: the first cell of the development of an organism that reproducessexually. Therefore, a prezygotic barrier is a mechanism that blocks reproduction from taking place; this includes barriersthat prevent fertilization when organisms attempt reproduction. A postzygotic barrier occurs after zygote formation; thisincludes organisms that don’t survive the embryonic stage and those that are born sterile.Some types of prezygotic barriers prevent reproduction entirely. Many organisms only reproduce at certain times of theyear, often just annually. Differences in breeding schedules, called temporal isolation, can act as a form of reproductiveisolation. For example, two species of frogs inhabit the same area, but one reproduces from January to March, whereas theother reproduces from March to May (Figure 18.17).
These two related frog species exhibit temporal reproductive isolation. (a) Rana aurora breeds earlier inthe year than (b) Rana boylii.
In some cases, populations of a species move or are moved to a new habitat and take up residence in a place that no longeroverlaps with the other populations of the same species. This situation is called habitat isolation. Reproduction with theparent species ceases, and a new group exists that is now reproductively and genetically independent. For example, a cricketpopulation that was divided after a flood could no longer interact with each other. Over time, the forces of natural selection,mutation, and genetic drift will likely result in the divergence of the two groups (Figure 18.18).
Speciation can occur when two populations occupy different habitats. The habitats need not be far apart.The cricket (a) Gryllus pennsylvanicus prefers sandy soil, and the cricket (b) Gryllus firmus prefers loamy soil. The twospecies can live in close proximity, but because of their different soil preferences, they became genetically isolated.Behavioral isolation occurs when the presence or absence of a specific behavior prevents reproduction from taking place.For example, male fireflies use specific light patterns to attract females. Various species of fireflies display their lightsdifferently. If a male of one species tried to attract the female of another, she would not recognize the light pattern and wouldnot mate with the male.Other prezygotic barriers work when differences in their gamete cells (eggs and sperm) prevent fertilization from takingplace; this is called a gametic barrier. Similarly, in some cases closely related organisms try to mate, but their reproductivestructures simply do not fit together. For example, damselfly males of different species have differently shaped reproductiveorgans. If one species tries to mate with the female of another, their body parts simply do not fit together. (Figure 18.19).
The shape of the male reproductive organ varies among male damselfly species, and is only compatiblewith the female of that species. Reproductive organ incompatibility keeps the species reproductively isolated.In plants, certain structures aimed to attract one type of pollinator simultaneously prevent a different pollinator fromaccessing the pollen. The tunnel through which an animal must access nectar can vary widely in length and diameter, whichprevents the plant from being cross-pollinated with a different species (Figure 18.20).
Some flowers have evolved to attract certain pollinators. The (a) wide foxglove flower is adapted forpollination by bees, while the (b) long, tube-shaped trumpet creeper flower is adapted for pollination by humming birds.When fertilization takes place and a zygote forms, postzygotic barriers can prevent reproduction. Hybrid individuals inmany cases cannot form normally in the womb and simply do not survive past the embryonic stages. This is called hybrid
inviability because the hybrid organisms simply are not viable. In another postzygotic situation, reproduction leads to thebirth and growth of a hybrid that is sterile and unable to reproduce offspring of their own; this is called hybrid sterility.Habitat Influence on SpeciationSympatric speciation may also take place in ways other than polyploidy. For example, consider a species of fish that lives ina lake. As the population grows, competition for food also grows. Under pressure to find food, suppose that a group of thesefish had the genetic flexibility to discover and feed off another resource that was unused by the other fish. What if this newfood source was found at a different depth of the lake? Over time, those feeding on the second food source would interactmore with each other than the other fish; therefore, they would breed together as well. Offspring of these fish would likelybehave as their parents: feeding and living in the same area and keeping separate from the original population. If this groupof fish continued to remain separate from the first population, eventually sympatric speciation might occur as more geneticdifferences accumulated between them.This scenario does play out in nature, as do others that lead to reproductive isolation. One such place is Lake Victoria inAfrica, famous for its sympatric speciation of cichlid fish. Researchers have found hundreds of sympatric speciation eventsin these fish, which have not only happened in great number, but also over a short period of time. Figure 18.21 showsthis type of speciation among a cichlid fish population in Nicaragua. In this locale, two types of cichlids live in the samegeographic location but have come to have different morphologies that allow them to eat various food sources.
Cichlid fish from Lake Apoyeque, Nicaragua, show evidence of sympatric speciation. Lake Apoyeque,a crater lake, is 1800 years old, but genetic evidence indicates that the lake was populated only 100 years ago by asingle population of cichlid fish. Nevertheless, two populations with distinct morphologies and diets now exist in thelake, and scientists believe these populations may be in an early stage of speciation.
Reconnection and Rates of Speciation
Speciation occurs over a span of evolutionary time, so when a new species arises, there is a transition period during whichthe closely related species continue to interact.ReconnectionAfter speciation, two species may recombine or even continue interacting indefinitely. Individual organisms will matewith any nearby individual who they are capable of breeding with. An area where two closely related species continue tointeract and reproduce, forming hybrids, is called a hybrid zone. Over time, the hybrid zone may change depending on thefitness of the hybrids and the reproductive barriers (Figure 18.22). If the hybrids are less fit than the parents, reinforcementof speciation occurs, and the species continue to diverge until they can no longer mate and produce viable offspring. Ifreproductive barriers weaken, fusion occurs and the two species become one. Barriers remain the same if hybrids are fit andreproductive: stability may occur and hybridization continues.
Hybrids can be either less fit than the parents, more fit, or about the same. Usually hybrids tend to be less fit; therefore, suchreproduction diminishes over time, nudging the two species to diverge further in a process called reinforcement. This termis used because the low success of the hybrids reinforces the original speciation. If the hybrids are as fit or more fit than theparents, the two species may fuse back into one species (Figure 18.23). Scientists have also observed that sometimes twospecies will remain separate but also continue to interact to produce some hybrid individuals; this is classified as stabilitybecause no real net change is taking place.Varying Rates of SpeciationScientists around the world study speciation, documenting observations both of living organisms and those found in thefossil record. As their ideas take shape and as research reveals new details about how life evolves, they develop modelsto help explain rates of speciation. In terms of how quickly speciation occurs, two patterns are currently observed: gradualspeciation model and punctuated equilibrium model.In the gradual speciation model, species diverge gradually over time in small steps. In the punctuated equilibriummodel, a new species undergoes changes quickly from the parent species, and then remains largely unchanged for longperiods of time afterward (Figure 18.23). This early change model is called punctuated equilibrium, because it begins witha punctuated or periodic change and then remains in balance afterward. While punctuated equilibrium suggests a fastertempo, it does not necessarily exclude gradualism.
The primary influencing factor on changes in speciation rate is environmental conditions. Under some conditions, selectionoccurs quickly or radically. Consider a species of snails that had been living with the same basic form for many thousandsof years. Layers of their fossils would appear similar for a long time. When a change in the environment takes place—suchas a drop in the water level—a small number of organisms are separated from the rest in a brief period of time, essentiallyforming one large and one tiny population. The tiny population faces new environmental conditions. Because its gene poolquickly became so small, any variation that surfaces and that aids in surviving the new conditions becomes the predominantform.
