IntroductionThe plasma membrane, which is also called the cell membrane, has many functions, but the most basic one is to definethe borders of the cell and keep the cell functional. The plasma membrane is selectively permeable. This means that themembrane allows some materials to freely enter or leave the cell, while other materials cannot move freely, but require theuse of a specialized structure, and occasionally, even energy investment for crossing.
A cell’s plasma membrane defines the cell, outlines its borders, and determines the nature of its interaction with itsenvironment (see Table 5.1 for a summary). Cells exclude some substances, take in others, and excrete still others, all incontrolled quantities. The plasma membrane must be very flexible to allow certain cells, such as red blood cells and whiteblood cells, to change shape as they pass through narrow capillaries. These are the more obvious functions of a plasmamembrane. In addition, the surface of the plasma membrane carries markers that allow cells to recognize one another, whichis vital for tissue and organ formation during early development, and which later plays a role in the “self” versus “non-self”distinction of the immune response.Among the most sophisticated functions of the plasma membrane is the ability to transmit signals by means of complex,integral proteins known as receptors. These proteins act both as receivers of extracellular inputs and as activators ofintracellular processes. These membrane receptors provide extracellular attachment sites for effectors like hormones andgrowth factors, and they activate intracellular response cascades when their effectors are bound. Occasionally, receptorsare hijacked by viruses (HIV, human immunodeficiency virus, is one example) that use them to gain entry into cells, andat times, the genes encoding receptors become mutated, causing the process of signal transduction to malfunction withdisastrous consequences.Fluid Mosaic ModelThe existence of the plasma membrane was identified in the 1890s, and its chemical components were identified in1915. The principal components identified at that time were lipids and proteins. The first widely accepted model of theplasma membrane’s structure was proposed in 1935 by Hugh Davson and James Danielli; it was based on the “railroadtrack” appearance of the plasma membrane in early electron micrographs. They theorized that the structure of the plasmamembrane resembles a sandwich, with protein being analogous to the bread, and lipids being analogous to the filling. Inthe 1950s, advances in microscopy, notably transmission electron microscopy (TEM), allowed researchers to see that thecore of the plasma membrane consisted of a double, rather than a single, layer. A new model that better explains both themicroscopic observations and the function of that plasma membrane was proposed by S.J. Singer and Garth L. Nicolson in1972.The explanation proposed by Singer and Nicolson is called the fluid mosaic model. The model has evolved somewhat overtime, but it still best accounts for the structure and functions of the plasma membrane as we now understand them. Thefluid mosaic model describes the structure of the plasma membrane as a mosaic of components—including phospholipids,cholesterol, proteins, and carbohydrates—that gives the membrane a fluid character. Plasma membranes range from 5 to10 nm in thickness. For comparison, human red blood cells, visible via light microscopy, are approximately 8 μm wide, orapproximately 1,000 times wider than a plasma membrane. The membrane does look a bit like a sandwich.
The fluid mosaic model of the plasma membrane describes the plasma membrane as a fluid combination ofphospholipids, cholesterol, and proteins. Carbohydrates attached to lipids (glycolipids) and to proteins (glycoproteins)extend from the outward-facing surface of the membrane.The principal components of a plasma membrane are lipids (phospholipids and cholesterol), proteins, and carbohydratesattached to some of the lipids and some of the proteins. A phospholipid is a molecule consisting of glycerol, two fatty acids,and a phosphate-linked head group. Cholesterol, another lipid composed of four fused carbon rings, is found alongside thephospholipids in the core of the membrane. The proportions of proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates in the plasma membranevary with cell type, but for a typical human cell, protein accounts for about 50 percent of the composition by mass, lipids(of all types) account for about 40 percent of the composition by mass, with the remaining 10 percent of the compositionby mass being carbohydrates. However, the concentration of proteins and lipids varies with different cell membranes. Forexample, myelin, an outgrowth of the membrane of specialized cells that insulates the axons of the peripheral nerves,contains only 18 percent protein and 76 percent lipid. The mitochondrial inner membrane contains 76 percent protein andonly 24 percent lipid. The plasma membrane of human red blood cells is 30 percent lipid. Carbohydrates are present onlyon the exterior surface of the plasma membrane and are attached to proteins, forming glycoproteins, or attached to lipids,forming glycolipids.PhospholipidsThe main fabric of the membrane is composed of amphiphilic, phospholipid molecules. The hydrophilic or “water-loving”areas of these molecules (which look like a collection of balls in an artist’s rendition of the model) (Figure 5.2) are in contactwith the aqueous fluid both inside and outside the cell. Hydrophobic, or water-hating molecules, tend to be non-polar.They interact with other non-polar molecules in chemical reactions, but generally do not interact with polar molecules.When placed in water, hydrophobic molecules tend to form a ball or cluster. The hydrophilic regions of the phospholipidstend to form hydrogen bonds with water and other polar molecules on both the exterior and interior of the cell. Thus, themembrane surfaces that face the interior and exterior of the cell are hydrophilic. In contrast, the interior of the cell membraneis hydrophobic and will not interact with water. Therefore, phospholipids form an excellent two-layer cell membrane thatseparates fluid within the cell from the fluid outside of the cell.A phospholipid molecule (Figure 5.3) consists of a three-carbon glycerol backbone with two fatty acid molecules attachedto carbons 1 and 2, and a phosphate-containing group attached to the third carbon. This arrangement gives the overallmolecule an area described as its head (the phosphate-containing group), which has a polar character or negative charge,and an area called the tail (the fatty acids), which has no charge. The head can form hydrogen bonds, but the tail cannot. Amolecule with this arrangement of a positively or negatively charged area and an uncharged, or non-polar, area is referredto as amphiphilic or “dual-loving.”
This phospholipid molecule is composed of a hydrophilic head and two hydrophobic tails. The hydrophilichead group consists of a phosphate-containing group attached to a glycerol molecule. The hydrophobic tails, eachcontaining either a saturated or an unsaturated fatty acid, are long hydrocarbon chains.This characteristic is vital to the structure of a plasma membrane because, in water, phospholipids tend to become arrangedwith their hydrophobic tails facing each other and their hydrophilic heads facing out. In this way, they form a lipidbilayer—a barrier composed of a double layer of phospholipids that separates the water and other materials on one side ofthe barrier from the water and other materials on the other side. In fact, phospholipids heated in an aqueous solution tendto spontaneously form small spheres or droplets (called micelles or liposomes), with their hydrophilic heads forming theexterior and their hydrophobic tails on the inside.
In an aqueous solution, phospholipids tend to arrange themselves with their polar heads facing outwardand their hydrophobic tails facing inward. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)ProteinsProteins make up the second major component of plasma membranes. Integral proteins (some specialized types are calledintegrins) are, as their name suggests, integrated completely into the membrane structure, and their hydrophobic membranespanningregions interact with the hydrophobic region of the the phospholipid bilayer (Figure 5.2). Single-pass integralmembrane proteins usually have a hydrophobic transmembrane segment that consists of 20–25 amino acids. Some spanonly part of the membrane—associating with a single layer—while others stretch from one side of the membrane to theother, and are exposed on either side. Some complex proteins are composed of up to 12 segments of a single protein, whichare extensively folded and embedded in the membrane (Figure 5.5). This type of protein has a hydrophilic region or regions,and one or several mildly hydrophobic regions. This arrangement of regions of the protein tends to orient the proteinalongside the phospholipids, with the hydrophobic region of the protein adjacent to the tails of the phospholipids and thehydrophilic region or regions of the protein protruding from the membrane and in contact with the cytosol or extracellularfluid.
Integral membranes proteins may have one or more alpha-helices that span the membrane (examples 1and 2), or they may have beta-sheets that span the membrane (example 3). (credit: “Foobar”/Wikimedia Commons)Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 139Peripheral proteins are found on the exterior and interior surfaces of membranes, attached either to integral proteins orto phospholipids. Peripheral proteins, along with integral proteins, may serve as enzymes, as structural attachments forthe fibers of the cytoskeleton, or as part of the cell’s recognition sites. These are sometimes referred to as “cell-specific”proteins. The body recognizes its own proteins and attacks foreign proteins associated with invasive pathogens.CarbohydratesCarbohydrates are the third major component of plasma membranes. They are always found on the exterior surface of cellsand are bound either to proteins (forming glycoproteins) or to lipids (forming glycolipids) (Figure 5.2). These carbohydratechains may consist of 2–60 monosaccharide units and can be either straight or branched. Along with peripheral proteins,carbohydrates form specialized sites on the cell surface that allow cells to recognize each other. These sites have uniquepatterns that allow the cell to be recognized, much the way that the facial features unique to each person allow him or her tobe recognized. This recognition function is very important to cells, as it allows the immune system to differentiate betweenbody cells (called “self”) and foreign cells or tissues (called “non-self”). Similar types of glycoproteins and glycolipids arefound on the surfaces of viruses and may change frequently, preventing immune cells from recognizing and attacking them.These carbohydrates on the exterior surface of the cell—the carbohydrate components of both glycoproteins andglycolipids—are collectively referred to as the glycocalyx (meaning “sugar coating”). The glycocalyx is highly hydrophilicand attracts large amounts of water to the surface of the cell. This aids in the interaction of the cell with its wateryenvironment and in the cell’s ability to obtain substances dissolved in the water. As discussed above, the glycocalyx isalso important for cell identification, self/non-self determination, and embryonic development, and is used in cell-cellattachments to form tissues.
Membrane FluidityThe mosaic characteristic of the membrane, described in the fluid mosaic model, helps to illustrate its nature. Theintegral proteins and lipids exist in the membrane as separate but loosely attached molecules. These resemble the separate,multicolored tiles of a mosaic picture, and they float, moving somewhat with respect to one another. The membrane is notlike a balloon, however, that can expand and contract; rather, it is fairly rigid and can burst if penetrated or if a cell takes in too much water. However, because of its mosaic nature, a very fine needle can easily penetrate a plasma membrane withoutcausing it to burst, and the membrane will flow and self-seal when the needle is extracted.The mosaic characteristics of the membrane explain some but not all of its fluidity. There are two other factors that helpmaintain this fluid characteristic. One factor is the nature of the phospholipids themselves. In their saturated form, the fattyacids in phospholipid tails are saturated with bound hydrogen atoms. There are no double bonds between adjacent carbonatoms. This results in tails that are relatively straight. In contrast, unsaturated fatty acids do not contain a maximal numberof hydrogen atoms, but they do contain some double bonds between adjacent carbon atoms; a double bond results in a bendin the string of carbons of approximately 30 degrees (Figure 5.3).Thus, if saturated fatty acids, with their straight tails, are compressed by decreasing temperatures, they press in on eachother, making a dense and fairly rigid membrane. If unsaturated fatty acids are compressed, the “kinks” in their tailselbow adjacent phospholipid molecules away, maintaining some space between the phospholipid molecules. This “elbowroom” helps to maintain fluidity in the membrane at temperatures at which membranes with saturated fatty acid tails intheir phospholipids would “freeze” or solidify. The relative fluidity of the membrane is particularly important in a coldenvironment. A cold environment tends to compress membranes composed largely of saturated fatty acids, making themless fluid and more susceptible to rupturing. Many organisms (fish are one example) are capable of adapting to coldenvironments by changing the proportion of unsaturated fatty acids in their membranes in response to the lowering of thetemperature.
Animals have an additional membrane constituent that assists in maintaining fluidity. Cholesterol, which lies alongside thephospholipids in the membrane, tends to dampen the effects of temperature on the membrane. Thus, this lipid functionsas a buffer, preventing lower temperatures from inhibiting fluidity and preventing increased temperatures from increasingfluidity too much. Thus, cholesterol extends, in both directions, the range of temperature in which the membrane isappropriately fluid and consequently functional. Cholesterol also serves other functions, such as organizing clusters oftransmembrane proteins into lipid rafts.
Plasma membranes must allow certain substances to enter and leave a cell, and prevent some harmful materials fromentering and some essential materials from leaving. In other words, plasma membranes are selectively permeable—theyallow some substances to pass through, but not others. If they were to lose this selectivity, the cell would no longer be ableto sustain itself, and it would be destroyed. Some cells require larger amounts of specific substances than do other cells;they must have a way of obtaining these materials from extracellular fluids. This may happen passively, as certain materialsmove back and forth, or the cell may have special mechanisms that facilitate transport. Some materials are so important to acell that it spends some of its energy, hydrolyzing adenosine triphosphate (ATP), to obtain these materials. Red blood cellsuse some of their energy doing just that. All cells spend the majority of their energy to maintain an imbalance of sodiumand potassium ions between the interior and exterior of the cell.The most direct forms of membrane transport are passive. Passive transport is a naturally occurring phenomenon and doesnot require the cell to exert any of its energy to accomplish the movement. In passive transport, substances move from anarea of higher concentration to an area of lower concentration. A physical space in which there is a range of concentrationsof a single substance is said to have a concentration gradient.Selective PermeabilityPlasma membranes are asymmetric: the interior of the membrane is not identical to the exterior of the membrane. In fact,there is a considerable difference between the array of phospholipids and proteins between the two leaflets that form amembrane. On the interior of the membrane, some proteins serve to anchor the membrane to fibers of the cytoskeleton.There are peripheral proteins on the exterior of the membrane that bind elements of the extracellular matrix. Carbohydrates, attached to lipids or proteins, are also found on the exterior surface of the plasma membrane. These carbohydrate complexeshelp the cell bind substances that the cell needs in the extracellular fluid. This adds considerably to the selective nature ofplasma membranes.
The exterior surface of the plasma membrane is not identical to the interior surface of the same membrane.Recall that plasma membranes are amphiphilic: They have hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions. This characteristic helpsthe movement of some materials through the membrane and hinders the movement of others. Lipid-soluble material with alow molecular weight can easily slip through the hydrophobic lipid core of the membrane. Substances such as the fat-solublevitamins A, D, E, and K readily pass through the plasma membranes in the digestive tract and other tissues. Fat-solubledrugs and hormones also gain easy entry into cells and are readily transported into the body’s tissues and organs. Moleculesof oxygen and carbon dioxide have no charge and so pass through membranes by simple diffusion.Polar substances present problems for the membrane. While some polar molecules connect easily with the outside of acell, they cannot readily pass through the lipid core of the plasma membrane. Additionally, while small ions could easilyslip through the spaces in the mosaic of the membrane, their charge prevents them from doing so. Ions such as sodium,potassium, calcium, and chloride must have special means of penetrating plasma membranes. Simple sugars and aminoacids also need help with transport across plasma membranes, achieved by various transmembrane proteins (channels).DiffusionDiffusion is a passive process of transport. A single substance tends to move from an area of high concentration to an areaof low concentration until the concentration is equal across a space. You are familiar with diffusion of substances throughthe air. For example, think about someone opening a bottle of ammonia in a room filled with people. The ammonia gas is atits highest concentration in the bottle; its lowest concentration is at the edges of the room. The ammonia vapor will diffuse,or spread away, from the bottle, and gradually, more and more people will smell the ammonia as it spreads. Materials movewithin the cell’s cytosol by diffusion, and certain materials move through the plasma membrane by diffusion (Figure 5.8).Diffusion expends no energy. On the contrary, concentration gradients are a form of potential energy, dissipated as thegradient is eliminated.
Diffusion through a permeable membrane moves a substance from an area of high concentration(extracellular fluid, in this case) down its concentration gradient (into the cytoplasm). (credit: modification of work byMariana Ruiz Villareal)Each separate substance in a medium, such as the extracellular fluid, has its own concentration gradient, independent ofthe concentration gradients of other materials. In addition, each substance will diffuse according to that gradient. Within asystem, there will be different rates of diffusion of the different substances in the medium.Factors That Affect DiffusionMolecules move constantly in a random manner, at a rate that depends on their mass, their environment, and the amountof thermal energy they possess, which in turn is a function of temperature. This movement accounts for the diffusion ofmolecules through whatever medium in which they are localized. A substance will tend to move into any space availableto it until it is evenly distributed throughout it. After a substance has diffused completely through a space, removing itsconcentration gradient, molecules will still move around in the space, but there will be no net movement of the number ofmolecules from one area to another. This lack of a concentration gradient in which there is no net movement of a substanceis known as dynamic equilibrium. While diffusion will go forward in the presence of a concentration gradient of a substance,several factors affect the rate of diffusion.• Extent of the concentration gradient: The greater the difference in concentration, the more rapid the diffusion. Thecloser the distribution of the material gets to equilibrium, the slower the rate of diffusion becomes.• Mass of the molecules diffusing: Heavier molecules move more slowly; therefore, they diffuse more slowly. Thereverse is true for lighter molecules.• Temperature: Higher temperatures increase the energy and therefore the movement of the molecules, increasing therate of diffusion. Lower temperatures decrease the energy of the molecules, thus decreasing the rate of diffusion.• Solvent density: As the density of a solvent increases, the rate of diffusion decreases. The molecules slow downbecause they have a more difficult time getting through the denser medium. If the medium is less dense, diffusionincreases. Because cells primarily use diffusion to move materials within the cytoplasm, any increase in thecytoplasm’s density will inhibit the movement of the materials. An example of this is a person experiencingdehydration. As the body’s cells lose water, the rate of diffusion decreases in the cytoplasm, and the cells’ functionsdeteriorate. Neurons tend to be very sensitive to this effect. Dehydration frequently leads to unconsciousness andpossibly coma because of the decrease in diffusion rate within the cells.• Solubility: As discussed earlier, nonpolar or lipid-soluble materials pass through plasma membranes more easily thanpolar materials, allowing a faster rate of diffusion.• Surface area and thickness of the plasma membrane: Increased surface area increases the rate of diffusion, whereas athicker membrane reduces it.• Distance travelled: The greater the distance that a substance must travel, the slower the rate of diffusion. This placesan upper limitation on cell size. A large, spherical cell will die because nutrients or waste cannot reach or leave thecenter of the cell, respectively. Therefore, cells must either be small in size, as in the case of many prokaryotes, or beflattened, as with many single-celled eukaryotes.A variation of diffusion is the process of filtration. In filtration, material moves according to its concentration gradientthrough a membrane; sometimes the rate of diffusion is enhanced by pressure, causing the substances to filter more rapidly.
This occurs in the kidney, where blood pressure forces large amounts of water and accompanying dissolved substances, orsolutes, out of the blood and into the renal tubules. The rate of diffusion in this instance is almost totally dependent onpressure. One of the effects of high blood pressure is the appearance of protein in the urine, which is “squeezed through” bythe abnormally high pressure.Facilitated transportIn facilitated transport, also called facilitated diffusion, materials diffuse across the plasma membrane with the helpof membrane proteins. A concentration gradient exists that would allow these materials to diffuse into the cell withoutexpending cellular energy. However, these materials are ions are polar molecules that are repelled by the hydrophobicparts of the cell membrane. Facilitated transport proteins shield these materials from the repulsive force of the membrane,allowing them to diffuse into the cell.The material being transported is first attached to protein or glycoprotein receptors on the exterior surface of the plasmamembrane. This allows the material that is needed by the cell to be removed from the extracellular fluid. The substances arethen passed to specific integral proteins that facilitate their passage. Some of these integral proteins are collections of betapleated sheets that form a pore or channel through the phospholipid bilayer. Others are carrier proteins which bind with thesubstance and aid its diffusion through the membrane.ChannelsThe integral proteins involved in facilitated transport are collectively referred to as transport proteins, and they functionas either channels for the material or carriers. In both cases, they are transmembrane proteins. Channels are specificfor the substance that is being transported. Channel proteins have hydrophilic domains exposed to the intracellular andextracellular fluids; they additionally have a hydrophilic channel through their core that provides a hydrated openingthrough the membrane layers (Figure 5.9). Passage through the channel allows polar compounds to avoid the nonpolarcentral layer of the plasma membrane that would otherwise slow or prevent their entry into the cell. Aquaporins are channelproteins that allow water to pass through the membrane at a very high rate.
Facilitated transport moves substances down their concentration gradients. They may cross the plasmamembrane with the aid of channel proteins. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)Channel proteins are either open at all times or they are “gated,” which controls the opening of the channel. The attachmentof a particular ion to the channel protein may control the opening, or other mechanisms or substances may be involved.In some tissues, sodium and chloride ions pass freely through open channels, whereas in other tissues a gate must beopened to allow passage. An example of this occurs in the kidney, where both forms of channels are found in differentparts of the renal tubules. Cells involved in the transmission of electrical impulses, such as nerve and muscle cells, havegated channels for sodium, potassium, and calcium in their membranes. Opening and closing of these channels changesthe relative concentrations on opposing sides of the membrane of these ions, resulting in the facilitation of electricaltransmission along membranes (in the case of nerve cells) or in muscle contraction (in the case of muscle cells).
Carrier ProteinsAnother type of protein embedded in the plasma membrane is a carrier protein. This aptly named protein binds a substanceand, in doing so, triggers a change of its own shape, moving the bound molecule from the outside of the cell to its interior(Figure 5.10); depending on the gradient, the material may move in the opposite direction. Carrier proteins are typicallyspecific for a single substance. This selectivity adds to the overall selectivity of the plasma membrane. The exact mechanismfor the change of shape is poorly understood. Proteins can change shape when their hydrogen bonds are affected, but thismay not fully explain this mechanism. Each carrier protein is specific to one substance, and there are a finite number ofthese proteins in any membrane. This can cause problems in transporting enough of the material for the cell to functionproperly. When all of the proteins are bound to their ligands, they are saturated and the rate of transport is at its maximum.Increasing the concentration gradient at this point will not result in an increased rate of transport.
Some substances are able to move down their concentration gradient across the plasma membrane withthe aid of carrier proteins. Carrier proteins change shape as they move molecules across the membrane. (credit:modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)An example of this process occurs in the kidney. Glucose, water, salts, ions, and amino acids needed by the body are filteredin one part of the kidney. This filtrate, which includes glucose, is then reabsorbed in another part of the kidney. Becausethere are only a finite number of carrier proteins for glucose, if more glucose is present than the proteins can handle, theexcess is not transported and it is excreted from the body in the urine. In a diabetic individual, this is described as “spillingglucose into the urine.” A different group of carrier proteins called glucose transport proteins, or GLUTs, are involved intransporting glucose and other hexose sugars through plasma membranes within the body.Channel and carrier proteins transport material at different rates. Channel proteins transport much more quickly than docarrier proteins. Channel proteins facilitate diffusion at a rate of tens of millions of molecules per second, whereas carrierproteins work at a rate of a thousand to a million molecules per second.OsmosisOsmosis is the movement of water through a semipermeable membrane according to the concentration gradient of wateracross the membrane, which is inversely proportional to the concentration of solutes. While diffusion transports materialacross membranes and within cells, osmosis transports only water across a membrane and the membrane limits the diffusionof solutes in the water. Not surprisingly, the aquaporins that facilitate water movement play a large role in osmosis, mostprominently in red blood cells and the membranes of kidney tubules.MechanismOsmosis is a special case of diffusion. Water, like other substances, moves from an area of high concentration to one of lowconcentration. An obvious question is what makes water move at all? Imagine a beaker with a semipermeable membraneseparating the two sides or halves (Figure 5.11). On both sides of the membrane the water level is the same, but there aredifferent concentrations of a dissolved substance, or solute, that cannot cross the membrane (otherwise the concentrationson each side would be balanced by the solute crossing the membrane). If the volume of the solution on both sides of themembrane is the same, but the concentrations of solute are different, then there are different amounts of water, the solvent,on either side of the membrane.
In osmosis, water always moves from an area of higher water concentration to one of lower concentration.In the diagram shown, the solute cannot pass through the selectively permeable membrane, but the water can.To illustrate this, imagine two full glasses of water. One has a single teaspoon of sugar in it, whereas the second one containsone-quarter cup of sugar. If the total volume of the solutions in both cups is the same, which cup contains more water?Because the large amount of sugar in the second cup takes up much more space than the teaspoon of sugar in the first cup,the first cup has more water in it.Returning to the beaker example, recall that it has a mixture of solutes on either side of the membrane. A principle ofdiffusion is that the molecules move around and will spread evenly throughout the medium if they can. However, only thematerial capable of getting through the membrane will diffuse through it. In this example, the solute cannot diffuse throughthe membrane, but the water can. Water has a concentration gradient in this system. Thus, water will diffuse down itsconcentration gradient, crossing the membrane to the side where it is less concentrated. This diffusion of water through themembrane—osmosis—will continue until the concentration gradient of water goes to zero or until the hydrostatic pressureof the water balances the osmotic pressure. Osmosis proceeds constantly in living systems.TonicityTonicity describes how an extracellular solution can change the volume of a cell by affecting osmosis. A solution's tonicityoften directly correlates with the osmolarity of the solution. Osmolarity describes the total solute concentration of thesolution. A solution with low osmolarity has a greater number of water molecules relative to the number of solute particles;a solution with high osmolarity has fewer water molecules with respect to solute particles. In a situation in which solutionsof two different osmolarities are separated by a membrane permeable to water, though not to the solute, water will movefrom the side of the membrane with lower osmolarity (and more water) to the side with higher osmolarity (and less water).This effect makes sense if you remember that the solute cannot move across the membrane, and thus the only component inthe system that can move—the water—moves along its own concentration gradient. An important distinction that concernsliving systems is that osmolarity measures the number of particles (which may be molecules) in a solution. Therefore, asolution that is cloudy with cells may have a lower osmolarity than a solution that is clear, if the second solution containsmore dissolved molecules than there are cells.Hypotonic SolutionsThree terms—hypotonic, isotonic, and hypertonic—are used to relate the osmolarity of a cell to the osmolarity of theextracellular fluid that contains the cells. In a hypotonic situation, the extracellular fluid has lower osmolarity than thefluid inside the cell, and water enters the cell. (In living systems, the point of reference is always the cytoplasm, so theprefix hypo- means that the extracellular fluid has a lower concentration of solutes, or a lower osmolarity, than the cellcytoplasm.) It also means that the extracellular fluid has a higher concentration of water in the solution than does the cell.In this situation, water will follow its concentration gradient and enter the cell.Hypertonic SolutionsAs for a hypertonic solution, the prefix hyper- refers to the extracellular fluid having a higher osmolarity than the cell’scytoplasm; therefore, the fluid contains less water than the cell does. Because the cell has a relatively higher concentrationof water, water will leave the cell.Isotonic SolutionsIn an isotonic solution, the extracellular fluid has the same osmolarity as the cell. If the osmolarity of the cell matches thatof the extracellular fluid, there will be no net movement of water into or out of the cell, although water will still move in andout. Blood cells and plant cells in hypertonic, isotonic, and hypotonic solutions take on characteristic appearances.
Tonicity in Living SystemsIn a hypotonic environment, water enters a cell, and the cell swells. In an isotonic condition, the relative concentrations ofsolute and solvent are equal on both sides of the membrane. There is no net water movement; therefore, there is no changein the size of the cell. In a hypertonic solution, water leaves a cell and the cell shrinks. If either the hypo- or hyper- conditiongoes to excess, the cell’s functions become compromised, and the cell may be destroyed.A red blood cell will burst, or lyse, when it swells beyond the plasma membrane’s capability to expand. Remember, themembrane resembles a mosaic, with discrete spaces between the molecules composing it. If the cell swells, and the spacesbetween the lipids and proteins become too large, the cell will break apart.In contrast, when excessive amounts of water leave a red blood cell, the cell shrinks, or crenates. This has the effect ofconcentrating the solutes left in the cell, making the cytosol denser and interfering with diffusion within the cell. The cell’sability to function will be compromised and may also result in the death of the cell.Various living things have ways of controlling the effects of osmosis—a mechanism called osmoregulation. Someorganisms, such as plants, fungi, bacteria, and some protists, have cell walls that surround the plasma membrane and preventcell lysis in a hypotonic solution. The plasma membrane can only expand to the limit of the cell wall, so the cell will notlyse. In fact, the cytoplasm in plants is always slightly hypertonic to the cellular environment, and water will always entera cell if water is available. This inflow of water produces turgor pressure, which stiffens the cell walls of the plant (Figure5.13). In nonwoody plants, turgor pressure supports the plant. Conversly, if the plant is not watered, the extracellular fluidwill become hypertonic, causing water to leave the cell. In this condition, the cell does not shrink because the cell wall isnot flexible. However, the cell membrane detaches from the wall and constricts the cytoplasm. This is called plasmolysis.Plants lose turgor pressure in this condition and wilt (Figure 5.14).
The turgor pressure within a plant cell depends on the tonicity of the solution that it is bathed in.
Without adequate water, the plant on the left has lost turgor pressure, visible in its wilting; the turgorpressure is restored by watering it (right). (credit: Victor M. Vicente Selvas)Tonicity is a concern for all living things. For example, paramecia and amoebas, which are protists that lack cell walls, havecontractile vacuoles. This vesicle collects excess water from the cell and pumps it out, keeping the cell from lysing as ittakes on water from its environment.
A paramecium’s contractile vacuole, here visualized using bright field light microscopy at 480xmagnification, continuously pumps water out of the organism’s body to keep it from bursting in a hypotonic medium.(credit: modification of work by NIH; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)Many marine invertebrates have internal salt levels matched to their environments, making them isotonic with the waterin which they live. Fish, however, must spend approximately five percent of their metabolic energy maintaining osmotichomeostasis. Freshwater fish live in an environment that is hypotonic to their cells. These fish actively take in salt throughtheir gills and excrete diluted urine to rid themselves of excess water. Saltwater fish live in the reverse environment, whichis hypertonic to their cells, and they secrete salt through their gills and excrete highly concentrated urine.In vertebrates, the kidneys regulate the amount of water in the body. Osmoreceptors are specialized cells in the brainthat monitor the concentration of solutes in the blood. If the levels of solutes increase beyond a certain range, a hormoneis released that retards water loss through the kidney and dilutes the blood to safer levels. Animals also have highconcentrations of albumin, which is produced by the liver, in their blood. This protein is too large to pass easily throughplasma membranes and is a major factor in controlling the osmotic pressures applied to tissues.
Active transport mechanisms require the use of the cell’s energy, usually in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Ifa substance must move into the cell against its concentration gradient—that is, if the concentration of the substance insidethe cell is greater than its concentration in the extracellular fluid (and vice versa)—the cell must use energy to move thesubstance. Some active transport mechanisms move small-molecular weight materials, such as ions, through the membrane.Other mechanisms transport much larger molecules.Electrochemical GradientWe have discussed simple concentration gradients—differential concentrations of a substance across a space or amembrane—but in living systems, gradients are more complex. Because ions move into and out of cells and becausecells contain proteins that do not move across the membrane and are mostly negatively charged, there is also an electricalgradient, a difference of charge, across the plasma membrane. The interior of living cells is electrically negative with respectto the extracellular fluid in which they are bathed, and at the same time, cells have higher concentrations of potassium (K+)and lower concentrations of sodium (Na+) than does the extracellular fluid. So in a living cell, the concentration gradientof Na+ tends to drive it into the cell, and the electrical gradient of Na+ (a positive ion) also tends to drive it inward to thenegatively charged interior. The situation is more complex, however, for other elements such as potassium. The electricalgradient of K+, a positive ion, also tends to drive it into the cell, but the concentration gradient of K+ tends to drive K+out of the cell (Figure 5.16). The combined gradient of concentration and electrical charge that affects an ion is called itselectrochemical gradient.
Moving Against a GradientTo move substances against a concentration or electrochemical gradient, the cell must use energy. This energy is harvestedfrom ATP generated through the cell’s metabolism. Active transport mechanisms, collectively called pumps, work againstelectrochemical gradients. Small substances constantly pass through plasma membranes. Active transport maintainsconcentrations of ions and other substances needed by living cells in the face of these passive movements. Much of a cell’ssupply of metabolic energy may be spent maintaining these processes. (Most of a red blood cell’s metabolic energy is usedto maintain the imbalance between exterior and interior sodium and potassium levels required by the cell.) Because activetransport mechanisms depend on a cell’s metabolism for energy, they are sensitive to many metabolic poisons that interferewith the supply of ATP.Two mechanisms exist for the transport of small-molecular weight material and small molecules. Primary active transportmoves ions across a membrane and creates a difference in charge across that membrane, which is directly dependent on ATP.Secondary active transport describes the movement of material that is due to the electrochemical gradient established byprimary active transport that does not directly require ATP.Carrier Proteins for Active TransportAn important membrane adaption for active transport is the presence of specific carrier proteins or pumps to facilitatemovement: there are three types of these proteins or transporters (Figure 5.17). A uniporter carries one specific ion ormolecule. A symporter carries two different ions or molecules, both in the same direction. An antiporter also carries twodifferent ions or molecules, but in different directions. All of these transporters can also transport small, uncharged organicmolecules like glucose. These three types of carrier proteins are also found in facilitated diffusion, but they do not requireATP to work in that process. Some examples of pumps for active transport are Na+-K+ ATPase, which carries sodiumand potassium ions, and H+-K+ ATPase, which carries hydrogen and potassium ions. Both of these are antiporter carrier proteins. Two other carrier proteins are Ca2+ ATPase and H+ ATPase, which carry only calcium and only hydrogen ions,respectively. Both are pumps.
A uniporter carries one molecule or ion. A symporter carries two different molecules or ions, both in thesame direction. An antiporter also carries two different molecules or ions, but in different directions. (credit: modificationof work by “Lupask”/Wikimedia Commons)Primary Active TransportThe primary active transport that functions with the active transport of sodium and potassium allows secondary activetransport to occur. The second transport method is still considered active because it depends on the use of energy as doesprimary transport (Figure 5.18).
Primary active transport moves ions across a membrane, creating an electrochemical gradient(electrogenic transport). (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)One of the most important pumps in animals cells is the sodium-potassium pump (Na+-K+ ATPase), which maintains theelectrochemical gradient (and the correct concentrations of Na+ and K+) in living cells. The sodium-potassium pump movesK+ into the cell while moving Na+ out at the same time, at a ratio of three Na+ for every two K+ ions moved in. The Na+-K+ ATPase exists in two forms, depending on its orientation to the interior or exterior of the cell and its affinity for eithersodium or potassium ions. The process consists of the following six steps.1. With the enzyme oriented towards the interior of the cell, the carrier has a high affinity for sodium ions. Three ionsbind to the protein.2. ATP is hydrolyzed by the protein carrier and a low-energy phosphate group attaches to it.3. As a result, the carrier changes shape and re-orients itself towards the exterior of the membrane. The protein’s affinityfor sodium decreases and the three sodium ions leave the carrier.4. The shape change increases the carrier’s affinity for potassium ions, and two such ions attach to the protein.Subsequently, the low-energy phosphate group detaches from the carrier.5. With the phosphate group removed and potassium ions attached, the carrier protein repositions itself towards theinterior of the cell.
The carrier protein, in its new configuration, has a decreased affinity for potassium, and the two ions are released intothe cytoplasm. The protein now has a higher affinity for sodium ions, and the process starts again.
Several things have happened as a result of this process. At this point, there are more sodium ions outside of the cell thaninside and more potassium ions inside than out. For every three ions of sodium that move out, two ions of potassium movein. This results in the interior being slightly more negative relative to the exterior. This difference in charge is importantin creating the conditions necessary for the secondary process. The sodium-potassium pump is, therefore, an electrogenicpump (a pump that creates a charge imbalance), creating an electrical imbalance across the membrane and contributing tothe membrane potential.
Secondary Active Transport (Co-transport)Secondary active transport brings sodium ions, and possibly other compounds, into the cell. As sodium ion concentrationsbuild outside of the plasma membrane because of the action of the primary active transport process, an electrochemicalgradient is created. If a channel protein exists and is open, the sodium ions will be pulled through the membrane. Thismovement is used to transport other substances that can attach themselves to the transport protein through the membrane(Figure 5.19). Many amino acids, as well as glucose, enter a cell this way. This secondary process is also used to storehigh-energy hydrogen ions in the mitochondria of plant and animal cells for the production of ATP. The potential energythat accumulates in the stored hydrogen ions is translated into kinetic energy as the ions surge through the channel proteinATP synthase, and that energy is used to convert ADP into ATP.
In addition to moving small ions and molecules through the membrane, cells also need to remove and take in largermolecules and particles (see Table 5.2 for examples). Some cells are even capable of engulfing entire unicellularmicroorganisms. You might have correctly hypothesized that the uptake and release of large particles by the cell requiresenergy. A large particle, however, cannot pass through the membrane, even with energy supplied by the cell.EndocytosisEndocytosis is a type of active transport that moves particles, such as large molecules, parts of cells, and even whole cells,into a cell. There are different variations of endocytosis, but all share a common characteristic: The plasma membrane of thecell invaginates, forming a pocket around the target particle. The pocket pinches off, resulting in the particle being containedin a newly created intracellular vesicle formed from the plasma membrane.PhagocytosisPhagocytosis (the condition of “cell eating”) is the process by which large particles, such as cells or relatively large particles,are taken in by a cell. For example, when microorganisms invade the human body, a type of white blood cell called aneutrophil will remove the invaders through this process, surrounding and engulfing the microorganism, which is thendestroyed by the neutrophil (Figure 5.20).
In phagocytosis, the cell membrane surrounds the particle and engulfs it. (credit: Mariana Ruiz Villareal)In preparation for phagocytosis, a portion of the inward-facing surface of the plasma membrane becomes coated with aprotein called clathrin, which stabilizes this section of the membrane. The coated portion of the membrane then extendsfrom the body of the cell and surrounds the particle, eventually enclosing it. Once the vesicle containing the particleis enclosed within the cell, the clathrin disengages from the membrane and the vesicle merges with a lysosome for thebreakdown of the material in the newly formed compartment (endosome). When accessible nutrients from the degradationof the vesicular contents have been extracted, the newly formed endosome merges with the plasma membrane and releasesits contents into the extracellular fluid. The endosomal membrane again becomes part of the plasma membrane.PinocytosisA variation of endocytosis is called pinocytosis. This literally means “cell drinking” and was named at a time when theassumption was that the cell was purposefully taking in extracellular fluid. In reality, this is a process that takes in molecules,including water, which the cell needs from the extracellular fluid. Pinocytosis results in a much smaller vesicle than doesphagocytosis, and the vesicle does not need to merge with a lysosome.
In pinocytosis, the cell membrane invaginates, surrounds a small volume of fluid, and pinches off. (credit:Mariana Ruiz Villareal)A variation of pinocytosis is called potocytosis. This process uses a coating protein, called caveolin, on the cytoplasmicside of the plasma membrane, which performs a similar function to clathrin. The cavities in the plasma membrane that formthe vacuoles have membrane receptors and lipid rafts in addition to caveolin. The vacuoles or vesicles formed in caveolae(singular caveola) are smaller than those in pinocytosis. Potocytosis is used to bring small molecules into the cell and totransport these molecules through the cell for their release on the other side of the cell, a process called transcytosis.Receptor-mediated EndocytosisA targeted variation of endocytosis employs receptor proteins in the plasma membrane that have a specific binding affinityfor certain substances.
In receptor-mediated endocytosis, uptake of substances by the cell is targeted to a single type ofsubstance that binds to the receptor on the external surface of the cell membrane. (credit: modification of work byMariana Ruiz Villareal)In receptor-mediated endocytosis, as in phagocytosis, clathrin is attached to the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane.If uptake of a compound is dependent on receptor-mediated endocytosis and the process is ineffective, the material willnot be removed from the tissue fluids or blood. Instead, it will stay in those fluids and increase in concentration. Somehuman diseases are caused by the failure of receptor-mediated endocytosis. For example, the form of cholesterol termedlow-density lipoprotein or LDL (also referred to as “bad” cholesterol) is removed from the blood by receptor-mediatedendocytosis. In the human genetic disease familial hypercholesterolemia, the LDL receptors are defective or missingentirely. People with this condition have life-threatening levels of cholesterol in their blood, because their cells cannot clearLDL particles from their blood.Although receptor-mediated endocytosis is designed to bring specific substances that are normally found in the extracellularfluid into the cell, other substances may gain entry into the cell at the same site. Flu viruses, diphtheria, and cholera toxinall have sites that cross-react with normal receptor-binding sites and gain entry into cells.
ExocytosisThe reverse process of moving material into a cell is the process of exocytosis. Exocytosis is the opposite of the processesdiscussed above in that its purpose is to expel material from the cell into the extracellular fluid. Waste material is envelopedin a membrane and fuses with the interior of the plasma membrane. This fusion opens the membranous envelope on158 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma MembranesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11448/1.10the exterior of the cell, and the waste material is expelled into the extracellular space (Figure 5.23). Other examplesof cells releasing molecules via exocytosis include the secretion of proteins of the extracellular matrix and secretion ofneurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft by synaptic vesicles.