THE EVOLUTION OFPOPULATIONS
Living things may be single-celled or complex, multicellular organisms. They may be plants, animals, fungi,bacteria, or archaea. This diversity results from evolution.
IntroductionAll life on Earth is related. Evolutionary theory states that humans, beetles, plants, and bacteria all share a commonancestor, but that millions of years of evolution have shaped each of these organisms into the forms seen today. Scientistsconsider evolution a key concept to understanding life. Natural selection is one of the most dominant evolutionary forces.Natural selection acts to promote traits and behaviors that increase an organism’s chances of survival and reproduction,while eliminating those traits and behaviors that are to the organism’s detriment. But natural selection can only, as itsname implies, select—it cannot create. The introduction of novel traits and behaviors falls on the shoulders of anotherevolutionary force—mutation. Mutation and other sources of variation among individuals, as well as the evolutionary forcesthat act upon them, alter populations and species. This combination of processes has led to the world of life we see today.
Population Evolution
The mechanisms of inheritance, or genetics, were not understood at the time Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallacewere developing their idea of natural selection. This lack of understanding was a stumbling block to understanding manyaspects of evolution. In fact, the predominant (and incorrect) genetic theory of the time, blending inheritance, made itdifficult to understand how natural selection might operate. Darwin and Wallace were unaware of the genetics work byAustrian monk Gregor Mendel, which was published in 1866, not long after publication of Darwin's book, On the Originof Species. Mendel’s work was rediscovered in the early twentieth century at which time geneticists were rapidly comingto an understanding of the basics of inheritance. Initially, the newly discovered particulate nature of genes made it difficultfor biologists to understand how gradual evolution could occur. But over the next few decades genetics and evolution wereintegrated in what became known as the modern synthesis—the coherent understanding of the relationship between naturalselection and genetics that took shape by the 1940s and is generally accepted today. In sum, the modern synthesis describeshow evolutionary processes, such as natural selection, can affect a population’s genetic makeup, and, in turn, how this canresult in the gradual evolution of populations and species. The theory also connects this change of a population over time,called microevolution, with the processes that gave rise to new species and higher taxonomic groups with widely divergentcharacters, called macroevolution.
Evolution and Flu VaccinesEvery fall, the media starts reporting on flu vaccinations and potential outbreaks. Scientists, health experts,and institutions determine recommendations for different parts of the population, predict optimal productionand inoculation schedules, create vaccines, and set up clinics to provide inoculations. You may think of theannual flu shot as a lot of media hype, an important health protection, or just a briefly uncomfortable prick inyour arm. But do you think of it in terms of evolution?The media hype of annual flu shots is scientifically grounded in our understanding of evolution. Each year,scientists across the globe strive to predict the flu strains that they anticipate being most widespread andharmful in the coming year. This knowledge is based in how flu strains have evolved over time and overthe past few flu seasons. Scientists then work to create the most effective vaccine to combat those selectedstrains. Hundreds of millions of doses are produced in a short period in order to provide vaccinations to keypopulations at the optimal time.Because viruses, like the flu, evolve very quickly (especially in evolutionary time), this poses quite achallenge. Viruses mutate and replicate at a fast rate, so the vaccine developed to protect against last year’sflu strain may not provide the protection needed against the coming year’s strain. Evolution of these virusesmeans continued adaptions to ensure survival, including adaptations to survive previous vaccines.
Population GeneticsRecall that a gene for a particular character may have several alleles, or variants, that code for different traits associatedwith that character. For example, in the ABO blood type system in humans, three alleles determine the particular blood-typeprotein on the surface of red blood cells. Each individual in a population of diploid organisms can only carry two allelesfor a particular gene, but more than two may be present in the individuals that make up the population. Mendel followedalleles as they were inherited from parent to offspring. In the early twentieth century, biologists in a field of study knownas population genetics began to study how selective forces change a population through changes in allele and genotypicfrequencies.
The allele frequency (or gene frequency) is the rate at which a specific allele appears within a population. Until nowwe have discussed evolution as a change in the characteristics of a population of organisms, but behind that phenotypicchange is genetic change. In population genetics, the term evolution is defined as a change in the frequency of an allele ina population. Using the ABO blood type system as an example, the frequency of one of the alleles, IA, is the number ofcopies of that allele divided by all the copies of the ABO gene in the population. For example, a study in Jordan[1]found afrequency of IA to be 26.1 percent. The IB and I0 alleles made up 13.4 percent and 60.5 percent of the alleles respectively,and all of the frequencies added up to 100 percent. A change in this frequency over time would constitute evolution in thepopulation.The allele frequency within a given population can change depending on environmental factors; therefore, certain allelesbecome more widespread than others during the process of natural selection. Natural selection can alter the population’sgenetic makeup; for example, if a given allele confers a phenotype that allows an individual to better survive or have moreoffspring. Because many of those offspring will also carry the beneficial allele, and often the corresponding phenotype,they will have more offspring of their own that also carry the allele, thus, perpetuating the cycle. Over time, the allele willspread throughout the population. Some alleles will quickly become fixed in this way, meaning that every individual of thepopulation will carry the allele, while detrimental mutations may be swiftly eliminated if derived from a dominant allelefrom the gene pool. The gene pool is the sum of all the alleles in a population.Sometimes, allele frequencies within a population change randomly with no advantage to the population over existing allelefrequencies. This phenomenon is called genetic drift. Natural selection and genetic drift usually occur simultaneously inpopulations and are not isolated events. It is hard to determine which process dominates because it is often nearly impossibleto determine the cause of change in allele frequencies at each occurrence. An event that initiates an allele frequency changein an isolated part of the population, which is not typical of the original population, is called the founder effect. Naturalselection, random drift, and founder effects can lead to significant changes in the genome of a population.Hardy-Weinberg Principle of EquilibriumIn the early twentieth century, English mathematician Godfrey Hardy and German physician Wilhelm Weinberg stated theprinciple of equilibrium to describe the genetic makeup of a population. The theory, which later became known as theHardy-Weinberg principle of equilibrium, states that a population’s allele and genotype frequencies are inherently stable—unless some kind of evolutionary force is acting upon the population, neither the allele nor the genotypic frequencies wouldchange. The Hardy-Weinberg principle assumes conditions with no mutations, migration, emigration, or selective pressurefor or against genotype, plus an infinite population; while no population can satisfy those conditions, the principle offers auseful model against which to compare real population changes.Working under this theory, population geneticists represent different alleles as different variables in their mathematicalmodels. The variable p, for example, often represents the frequency of a particular allele, say Y for the trait of yellow inMendel’s peas, while the variable q represents the frequency of y alleles that confer the color green. If these are the onlytwo possible alleles for a given locus in the population, p + q = 1. In other words, all the p alleles and all the q alleles makeup all of the alleles for that locus that are found in the population.But what ultimately interests most biologists is not the frequencies of different alleles, but the frequencies of the resultinggenotypes, known as the population’s genetic structure, from which scientists can surmise the distribution of phenotypes.If the phenotype is observed, only the genotype of the homozygous recessive alleles can be known; the calculations providean estimate of the remaining genotypes. Since each individual carries two alleles per gene, if the allele frequencies (p and q)are known, predicting the frequencies of these genotypes is a simple mathematical calculation to determine the probabilityof getting these genotypes if two alleles are drawn at random from the gene pool. So in the above scenario, an individualpea plant could be pp (YY), and thus produce yellow peas; pq (Yy), also yellow; or qq (yy), and thus producing green peas(Figure 19.2). In other words, the frequency of pp individuals is simply p2; the frequency of pq individuals is 2pq; and thefrequency of qq individuals is q2. And, again, if p and q are the only two possible alleles for a given trait in the population,these genotypes frequencies will sum to one: p2 + 2pq + q2 = 1.
When populations are in the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, the allelic frequency is stable fromgeneration to generation and the distribution of alleles can be determined from the Hardy-Weinberg equation. Ifthe allelic frequency measured in the field differs from the predicted value, scientists can make inferences aboutwhat evolutionary forces are at play.In plants, violet flower color (V) is dominant over white (v). If p = 0.8 and q = 0.2 in a population of 500plants, how many individuals would you expect to be homozygous dominant (VV), heterozygous (Vv), andhomozygous recessive (vv)? How many plants would you expect to have violet flowers, and how manywould have white flowers?
In theory, if a population is at equilibrium—that is, there are no evolutionary forces acting upon it—generation aftergeneration would have the same gene pool and genetic structure, and these equations would all hold true all of the time.Of course, even Hardy and Weinberg recognized that no natural population is immune to evolution. Populations in natureare constantly changing in genetic makeup due to drift, mutation, possibly migration, and selection. As a result, the onlyway to determine the exact distribution of phenotypes in a population is to go out and count them. But the Hardy-Weinbergprinciple gives scientists a mathematical baseline of a non-evolving population to which they can compare evolvingpopulations and thereby infer what evolutionary forces might be at play. If the frequencies of alleles or genotypes deviatefrom the value expected from the Hardy-Weinberg equation, then the population is evolving.
Individuals of a population often display different phenotypes, or express different alleles of a particular gene, referredto as polymorphisms. Populations with two or more variations of particular characteristics are called polymorphic. Thedistribution of phenotypes among individuals, known as the population variation, is influenced by a number of factors,including the population’s genetic structure and the environment (Figure 19.3). Understanding the sources of a phenotypicvariation in a population is important for determining how a population will evolve in response to different evolutionarypressures.
Population Genetics
Genetic VarianceNatural selection and some of the other evolutionary forces can only act on heritable traits, namely an organism’s geneticcode. Because alleles are passed from parent to offspring, those that confer beneficial traits or behaviors may be selectedfor, while deleterious alleles may be selected against. Acquired traits, for the most part, are not heritable. For example, if anathlete works out in the gym every day, building up muscle strength, the athlete’s offspring will not necessarily grow up tobe a body builder. If there is a genetic basis for the ability to run fast, on the other hand, this may be passed to a child.
Heritability is the fraction of phenotype variation that can be attributed to genetic differences, or genetic variance, amongindividuals in a population. The greater the hereditability of a population’s phenotypic variation, the more susceptible it isto the evolutionary forces that act on heritable variation.The diversity of alleles and genotypes within a population is called genetic variance. When scientists are involved inthe breeding of a species, such as with animals in zoos and nature preserves, they try to increase a population’s geneticvariance to preserve as much of the phenotypic diversity as they can. This also helps reduce the risks associated withinbreeding, the mating of closely related individuals, which can have the undesirable effect of bringing together deleteriousrecessive mutations that can cause abnormalities and susceptibility to disease. For example, a disease that is caused by arare, recessive allele might exist in a population, but it will only manifest itself when an individual carries two copies ofthe allele. Because the allele is rare in a normal, healthy population with unrestricted habitat, the chance that two carrierswill mate is low, and even then, only 25 percent of their offspring will inherit the disease allele from both parents. While itis likely to happen at some point, it will not happen frequently enough for natural selection to be able to swiftly eliminatethe allele from the population, and as a result, the allele will be maintained at low levels in the gene pool. However, if afamily of carriers begins to interbreed with each other, this will dramatically increase the likelihood of two carriers matingand eventually producing diseased offspring, a phenomenon known as inbreeding depression.Changes in allele frequencies that are identified in a population can shed light on how it is evolving. In addition to naturalselection, there are other evolutionary forces that could be in play: genetic drift, gene flow, mutation, nonrandom mating,and environmental variances.Genetic DriftThe theory of natural selection stems from the observation that some individuals in a population are more likely to survivelonger and have more offspring than others; thus, they will pass on more of their genes to the next generation. A big,powerful male gorilla, for example, is much more likely than a smaller, weaker one to become the population’s silverback,the pack’s leader who mates far more than the other males of the group. The pack leader will father more offspring, whoshare half of his genes, and are likely to also grow bigger and stronger like their father. Over time, the genes for bigger sizewill increase in frequency in the population, and the population will, as a result, grow larger on average. That is, this wouldoccur if this particular selection pressure, or driving selective force, were the only one acting on the population. In otherexamples, better camouflage or a stronger resistance to drought might pose a selection pressure.Another way a population’s allele and genotype frequencies can change is genetic drift (Figure 19.4), which is simply theeffect of chance. By chance, some individuals will have more offspring than others—not due to an advantage conferredby some genetically-encoded trait, but just because one male happened to be in the right place at the right time (when thereceptive female walked by) or because the other one happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time (when a fox washunting).
Genetic drift in a population can lead to the elimination of an allele from a population by chance.In this example, rabbits with the brown coat color allele (B) are dominant over rabbits with the white coat colorallele (b). In the first generation, the two alleles occur with equal frequency in the population, resulting in p andq values of .5. Only half of the individuals reproduce, resulting in a second generation with p and q values of .7and .3, respectively. Only two individuals in the second generation reproduce, and by chance these individualsare homozygous dominant for brown coat color. As a result, in the third generation the recessive b allele is lost.
Small populations are more susceptible to the forces of genetic drift. Large populations, on the other hand, are bufferedagainst the effects of chance. If one individual of a population of 10 individuals happens to die at a young age before it
leaves any offspring to the next generation, all of its genes—1/10 of the population’s gene pool—will be suddenly lost. Ina population of 100, that’s only 1 percent of the overall gene pool; therefore, it is much less impactful on the population’sgenetic structure.
Genetic drift can also be magnified by natural events, such as a natural disaster that kills—at random—a large portion of thepopulation. Known as the bottleneck effect, it results in a large portion of the genome suddenly being wiped out (Figure19.5). In one fell swoop, the genetic structure of the survivors becomes the genetic structure of the entire population, whichmay be very different from the pre-disaster population.
population leaves to start a new population in a new location or if a population gets divided by a physical barrier ofsome kind. In this situation, those individuals are unlikely to be representative of the entire population, which results inthe founder effect. The founder effect occurs when the genetic structure changes to match that of the new population’sfounding fathers and mothers. The founder effect is believed to have been a key factor in the genetic history of the Afrikanerpopulation of Dutch settlers in South Africa, as evidenced by mutations that are common in Afrikaners but rare in mostother populations. This is likely due to the fact that a higher-than-normal proportion of the founding colonists carriedthese mutations. As a result, the population expresses unusually high incidences of Huntington’s disease (HD) and Fanconianemia (FA), a genetic disorder known to cause blood marrow and congenital abnormalities—even cancer.[2]
Testing the Bottleneck EffectQuestion: How do natural disasters affect the genetic structure of a population?Background: When much of a population is suddenly wiped out by an earthquake or hurricane, theindividuals that survive the event are usually a random sampling of the original group. As a result, thegenetic makeup of the population can change dramatically. This phenomenon is known as the bottleneckeffect.Hypothesis: Repeated natural disasters will yield different population genetic structures; therefore, eachtime this experiment is run, the results will vary.Test the hypothesis: Count out the original population using different colored beads. For example, red,blue, and yellow beads might represent red, blue, and yellow individuals. After recording the number ofeach individual in the original population, place them all in a bottle with a narrow neck that will only allow afew beads out at a time. Then, pour 1/3 of the bottle’s contents into a bowl. This represents the survivingindividuals after a natural disaster kills a majority of the population. Count the number of the different coloredbeads in the bowl, and record it. Then, place all of the beads back in the bottle and repeat the experimentfour more times.Analyze the data: Compare the five populations that resulted from the experiment. Do the populations allcontain the same number of different colored beads, or do they vary? Remember, these populations allcame from the same exact parent population.Form a conclusion: Most likely, the five resulting populations will differ quite dramatically. This is becausenatural disasters are not selective—they kill and spare individuals at random. Now think about how thismight affect a real population. What happens when a hurricane hits the Mississippi Gulf Coast? How do theseabirds that live on the beach fare?
Gene FlowAnother important evolutionary force is gene flow: the flow of alleles in and out of a population due to the migration ofindividuals or gametes (Figure 19.6). While some populations are fairly stable, others experience more flux. Many plants,for example, send their pollen far and wide, by wind or by bird, to pollinate other populations of the same species somedistance away. Even a population that may initially appear to be stable, such as a pride of lions, can experience its fair shareof immigration and emigration as developing males leave their mothers to seek out a new pride with genetically unrelatedfemales. This variable flow of individuals in and out of the group not only changes the gene structure of the population, butit can also introduce new genetic variation to populations in different geological locations and habitats.
MutationMutations are changes to an organism’s DNA and are an important driver of diversity in populations. Species evolvebecause of the accumulation of mutations that occur over time. The appearance of new mutations is the most commonway to introduce novel genotypic and phenotypic variance. Some mutations are unfavorable or harmful and are quicklyeliminated from the population by natural selection. Others are beneficial and will spread through the population. Whetheror not a mutation is beneficial or harmful is determined by whether it helps an organism survive to sexual maturity andreproduce. Some mutations do not do anything and can linger, unaffected by natural selection, in the genome. Some canhave a dramatic effect on a gene and the resulting phenotype.Nonrandom MatingIf individuals nonrandomly mate with their peers, the result can be a changing population. There are many reasonsnonrandom mating occurs. One reason is simple mate choice; for example, female peahens may prefer peacocks withbigger, brighter tails. Traits that lead to more matings for an individual become selected for by natural selection. Onecommon form of mate choice, called assortative mating, is an individual’s preference to mate with partners who arephenotypically similar to themselves.Another cause of nonrandom mating is physical location. This is especially true in large populations spread over largegeographic distances where not all individuals will have equal access to one another. Some might be miles apart throughwoods or over rough terrain, while others might live immediately nearby.Environmental VarianceGenes are not the only players involved in determining population variation. Phenotypes are also influenced by otherfactors, such as the environment (Figure 19.7). A beachgoer is likely to have darker skin than a city dweller, for example,due to regular exposure to the sun, an environmental factor. Some major characteristics, such as gender, are determinedby the environment for some species. For example, some turtles and other reptiles have temperature-dependent sexdetermination (TSD). TSD means that individuals develop into males if their eggs are incubated within a certain temperaturerange, or females at a different temperature range.
The sex of the American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis) is determined by the temperature at whichthe eggs are incubated. Eggs incubated at 30°C produce females, and eggs incubated at 33°C produce males. (credit:Steve Hillebrand, USFWS)Geographic separation between populations can lead to differences in the phenotypic variation between those populations.Such geographical variation is seen between most populations and can be significant. One type of geographic variation,called a cline, can be seen as populations of a given species vary gradually across an ecological gradient. Species of warmbloodedanimals, for example, tend to have larger bodies in the cooler climates closer to the earth’s poles, allowing them tobetter conserve heat. This is considered a latitudinal cline. Alternatively, flowering plants tend to bloom at different timesdepending on where they are along the slope of a mountain, known as an altitudinal cline.If there is gene flow between the populations, the individuals will likely show gradual differences in phenotype along thecline. Restricted gene flow, on the other hand, can lead to abrupt differences, even speciation.
Adaptive Evolution
Natural selection only acts on the population’s heritable traits: selecting for beneficial alleles and thus increasing theirfrequency in the population, while selecting against deleterious alleles and thereby decreasing their frequency—a processknown as adaptive evolution. Natural selection does not act on individual alleles, however, but on entire organisms. Anindividual may carry a very beneficial genotype with a resulting phenotype that, for example, increases the ability toreproduce (fecundity), but if that same individual also carries an allele that results in a fatal childhood disease, that fecundityphenotype will not be passed on to the next generation because the individual will not live to reach reproductive age. Naturalselection acts at the level of the individual; it selects for individuals with greater contributions to the gene pool of the nextgeneration, known as an organism’s evolutionary (Darwinian) fitness.Fitness is often quantifiable and is measured by scientists in the field. However, it is not the absolute fitness of an individualthat counts, but rather how it compares to the other organisms in the population. This concept, called relative fitness, allowsresearchers to determine which individuals are contributing additional offspring to the next generation, and thus, how thepopulation might evolve.There are several ways selection can affect population variation: stabilizing selection, directional selection, diversifyingselection, frequency-dependent selection, and sexual selection. As natural selection influences the allele frequencies in apopulation, individuals can either become more or less genetically similar and the phenotypes displayed can become moresimilar or more disparate.
Stabilizing SelectionIf natural selection favors an average phenotype, selecting against extreme variation, the population will undergo stabilizingselection (Figure 19.8). In a population of mice that live in the woods, for example, natural selection is likely to favorindividuals that best blend in with the forest floor and are less likely to be spotted by predators. Assuming the ground is afairly consistent shade of brown, those mice whose fur is most closely matched to that color will be most likely to surviveand reproduce, passing on their genes for their brown coat. Mice that carry alleles that make them a bit lighter or a bit darkerwill stand out against the ground and be more likely to fall victim to predation. As a result of this selection, the population’sgenetic variance will decrease.Directional SelectionWhen the environment changes, populations will often undergo directional selection (Figure 19.8), which selects forphenotypes at one end of the spectrum of existing variation. A classic example of this type of selection is the evolutionof the peppered moth in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century England. Prior to the Industrial Revolution, the moths werepredominately light in color, which allowed them to blend in with the light-colored trees and lichens in their environment.But as soot began spewing from factories, the trees became darkened, and the light-colored moths became easier forpredatory birds to spot. Over time, the frequency of the melanic form of the moth increased because they had a highersurvival rate in habitats affected by air pollution because their darker coloration blended with the sooty trees. Similarly,the hypothetical mouse population may evolve to take on a different coloration if something were to cause the forest floorwhere they live to change color. The result of this type of selection is a shift in the population’s genetic variance toward thenew, fit phenotype.
Diversifying SelectionSometimes two or more distinct phenotypes can each have their advantages and be selected for by natural selection, whilethe intermediate phenotypes are, on average, less fit. Known as diversifying selection (Figure 19.8), this is seen in manypopulations of animals that have multiple male forms. Large, dominant alpha males obtain mates by brute force, whilesmall males can sneak in for furtive copulations with the females in an alpha male’s territory. In this case, both the alphamales and the “sneaking” males will be selected for, but medium-sized males, which can’t overtake the alpha males andare too big to sneak copulations, are selected against. Diversifying selection can also occur when environmental changesfavor individuals on either end of the phenotypic spectrum. Imagine a population of mice living at the beach where thereis light-colored sand interspersed with patches of tall grass. In this scenario, light-colored mice that blend in with the sandwould be favored, as well as dark-colored mice that can hide in the grass. Medium-colored mice, on the other hand, wouldnot blend in with either the grass or the sand, and would thus be more likely to be eaten by predators. The result of this typeof selection is increased genetic variance as the population becomes more diverse.
Different types of natural selection can impact the distribution of phenotypes within a population. In(a) stabilizing selection, an average phenotype is favored. In (b) directional selection, a change in the environmentshifts the spectrum of phenotypes observed. In (c) diversifying selection, two or more extreme phenotypes areselected for, while the average phenotype is selected against.
Frequency-dependent SelectionAnother type of selection, called frequency-dependent selection, favors phenotypes that are either common (positivefrequency-dependent selection) or rare (negative frequency-dependent selection). An interesting example of this type ofselection is seen in a unique group of lizards of the Pacific Northwest. Male common side-blotched lizards come in threethroat-color patterns: orange, blue, and yellow. Each of these forms has a different reproductive strategy: orange malesare the strongest and can fight other males for access to their females; blue males are medium-sized and form strong pairbonds with their mates; and yellow males (Figure 19.9) are the smallest, and look a bit like females, which allows themto sneak copulations. Like a game of rock-paper-scissors, orange beats blue, blue beats yellow, and yellow beats orange inthe competition for females. That is, the big, strong orange males can fight off the blue males to mate with the blue’s pairbondedfemales, the blue males are successful at guarding their mates against yellow sneaker males, and the yellow malescan sneak copulations from the potential mates of the large, polygynous orange males.
A yellow-throated side-blotched lizard is smaller than either the blue-throated or orange-throated malesand appears a bit like the females of the species, allowing it to sneak copulations.
In this scenario, orange males will be favored by natural selection when the population is dominated by blue males, bluemales will thrive when the population is mostly yellow males, and yellow males will be selected for when orange males arethe most populous. As a result, populations of side-blotched lizards cycle in the distribution of these phenotypes—in onegeneration, orange might be predominant, and then yellow males will begin to rise in frequency. Once yellow males makeup a majority of the population, blue males will be selected for. Finally, when blue males become common, orange maleswill once again be favored.Negative frequency-dependent selection serves to increase the population’s genetic variance by selecting for rarephenotypes, whereas positive frequency-dependent selection usually decreases genetic variance by selecting for commonphenotypes.Sexual SelectionMales and females of certain species are often quite different from one another in ways beyond the reproductive organs.Males are often larger, for example, and display many elaborate colors and adornments, like the peacock’s tail, whilefemales tend to be smaller and duller in decoration. Such differences are known as sexual dimorphisms (Figure 19.10),which arise from the fact that in many populations, particularly animal populations, there is more variance in thereproductive success of the males than there is of the females. That is, some males—often the bigger, stronger, or moredecorated males—get the vast majority of the total matings, while others receive none. This can occur because the malesare better at fighting off other males, or because females will choose to mate with the bigger or more decorated males. Ineither case, this variation in reproductive success generates a strong selection pressure among males to get those matings,resulting in the evolution of bigger body size and elaborate ornaments to get the females’ attention. Females, on the otherhand, tend to get a handful of selected matings; therefore, they are more likely to select more desirable males.Sexual dimorphism varies widely among species, of course, and some species are even sex-role reversed. In such cases,females tend to have a greater variance in their reproductive success than males and are correspondingly selected for thebigger body size and elaborate traits usually characteristic of males.
Sexual dimorphism is observed in (a) peacocks and peahens, (b) Argiope appensa spiders (the femalespider is the large one), and in (c) wood ducks
The selection pressures on males and females to obtain matings is known as sexual selection; it can result in thedevelopment of secondary sexual characteristics that do not benefit the individual’s likelihood of survival but help tomaximize its reproductive success. Sexual selection can be so strong that it selects for traits that are actually detrimentalto the individual’s survival. Think, once again, about the peacock’s tail. While it is beautiful and the male with the largest,most colorful tail is more likely to win the female, it is not the most practical appendage. In addition to being more visibleto predators, it makes the males slower in their attempted escapes. There is some evidence that this risk, in fact, is whyfemales like the big tails in the first place. The speculation is that large tails carry risk, and only the best males survive thatrisk: the bigger the tail, the more fit the male. This idea is known as the handicap principle.The good genes hypothesis states that males develop these impressive ornaments to show off their efficient metabolismor their ability to fight disease. Females then choose males with the most impressive traits because it signals their geneticsuperiority, which they will then pass on to their offspring. Though it might be argued that females should not be pickybecause it will likely reduce their number of offspring, if better males father more fit offspring, it may be beneficial. Fewer,healthier offspring may increase the chances of survival more than many, weaker offspring.
thus giving females a way to find the fittest mates— males that will pass the best genes to their offspring.
In both the handicap principle and the good genes hypothesis, the trait is said to be an honest signal of the males’ quality,
thus giving females a way to find the fittest mates— males that will pass the best genes to their offspring.
No Perfect OrganismNatural selection is a driving force in evolution and can generate populations that are better adapted to survive andsuccessfully reproduce in their environments. But natural selection cannot produce the perfect organism. Natural selectioncan only select on existing variation in the population; it does not create anything from scratch. Thus, it is limited by apopulation’s existing genetic variance and whatever new alleles arise through mutation and gene flow.Natural selection is also limited because it works at the level of individuals, not alleles, and some alleles are linked dueto their physical proximity in the genome, making them more likely to be passed on together (linkage disequilibrium).Any given individual may carry some beneficial alleles and some unfavorable alleles. It is the net effect of these alleles,or the organism’s fitness, upon which natural selection can act. As a result, good alleles can be lost if they are carriedby individuals that also have several overwhelmingly bad alleles; likewise, bad alleles can be kept if they are carried byindividuals that have enough good alleles to result in an overall fitness benefit.
Furthermore, natural selection can be constrained by the relationships between different polymorphisms. One morph mayconfer a higher fitness than another, but may not increase in frequency due to the fact that going from the less beneficialto the more beneficial trait would require going through a less beneficial phenotype. Think back to the mice that live atthe beach. Some are light-colored and blend in with the sand, while others are dark and blend in with the patches of grass.The dark-colored mice may be, overall, more fit than the light-colored mice, and at first glance, one might expect the lightcoloredmice be selected for a darker coloration. But remember that the intermediate phenotype, a medium-colored coat, isvery bad for the mice—they cannot blend in with either the sand or the grass and are more likely to be eaten by predators.As a result, the light-colored mice would not be selected for a dark coloration because those individuals that began movingin that direction (began being selected for a darker coat) would be less fit than those that stayed light.Finally, it is important to understand that not all evolution is adaptive. While natural selection selects the fittest individualsand often results in a more fit population overall, other forces of evolution, including genetic drift and gene flow, often dothe opposite: introducing deleterious alleles to the population’s gene pool. Evolution has no purpose—it is not changinga population into a preconceived ideal. It is simply the sum of the various forces described in this chapter and how theyinfluence the genetic and phenotypic variance of a population.
