Certain prokaryotes can live in extreme environments such as the Morning Glory pool, a hot spring inYellowstone National Park. The spring’s vivid blue color is from the prokaryotes that thrive in its very hot waters.
In the recent past, scientists grouped living things into five kingdoms—animals, plants, fungi, protists, andprokaryotes—based on several criteria, such as the absence or presence of a nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles,the absence or presence of cell walls, multicellularity, and so on. In the late 20th century, the pioneering work of Carl Woeseand others compared sequences of small-subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA), which resulted in a more fundamentalway to group organisms on Earth. Based on differences in the structure of cell membranes and in rRNA, Woese and hiscolleagues proposed that all life on Earth evolved along three lineages, called domains. The domain Bacteria comprises allorganisms in the kingdom Bacteria, the domain Archaea comprises the rest of the prokaryotes, and the domain Eukaryacomprises all eukaryotes—including organisms in the kingdoms Animalia, Plantae, Fungi, and Protista.Two of the three domains—Bacteria and Archaea—are prokaryotic. Prokaryotes were the first inhabitants on Earth,appearing 3.5 to 3.8 billion years ago. These organisms are abundant and ubiquitous; that is, they are present everywhere.
In addition to inhabiting moderate environments, they are found in extreme conditions: from boiling springs to permanentlyfrozen environments in Antarctica; from salty environments like the Dead Sea to environments under tremendous pressure,such as the depths of the ocean; and from areas without oxygen, such as a waste management plant, to radioactivelycontaminated regions, such as Chernobyl. Prokaryotes reside in the human digestive system and on the skin, are responsiblefor certain illnesses, and serve an important role in the preparation of many foods.
Prokaryotes are ubiquitous. They cover every imaginable surface where there is sufficient moisture, and they live on andinside of other living things. In the typical human body, prokaryotic cells outnumber human body cells by about ten to one.They comprise the majority of living things in all ecosystems. Some prokaryotes thrive in environments that are inhospitablefor most living things. Prokaryotes recycle nutrients—essential substances (such as carbon and nitrogen)—and they drivethe evolution of new ecosystems, some of which are natural and others man-made. Prokaryotes have been on Earth sincelong before multicellular life appeared.
Prokaryotes, the First Inhabitants of EarthWhen and where did life begin? What were the conditions on Earth when life began? Prokaryotes were the first forms of lifeon Earth, and they existed for billions of years before plants and animals appeared. The Earth and its moon are thought to beabout 4.54 billion years old. This estimate is based on evidence from radiometric dating of meteorite material together withother substrate material from Earth and the moon. Early Earth had a very different atmosphere (contained less molecularoxygen) than it does today and was subjected to strong radiation; thus, the first organisms would have flourished wherethey were more protected, such as in ocean depths or beneath the surface of the Earth. At this time too, strong volcanicactivity was common on Earth, so it is likely that these first organisms—the first prokaryotes—were adapted to very hightemperatures. Early Earth was prone to geological upheaval and volcanic eruption, and was subject to bombardment bymutagenic radiation from the sun. The first organisms were prokaryotes that could withstand these harsh conditions.Microbial MatsMicrobial mats or large biofilms may represent the earliest forms of life on Earth; there is fossil evidence of their presencestarting about 3.5 billion years ago. A microbial mat is a multi-layered sheet of prokaryotes (Figure 22.2) that includesmostly bacteria, but also archaea. Microbial mats are a few centimeters thick, and they typically grow where different typesof materials interface, mostly on moist surfaces. The various types of prokaryotes that comprise them carry out differentmetabolic pathways, and that is the reason for their various colors. Prokaryotes in a microbial mat are held together by aglue-like sticky substance that they secrete called extracellular matrix.The first microbial mats likely obtained their energy from chemicals found near hydrothermal vents. A hydrothermalvent is a breakage or fissure in the Earth’s surface that releases geothermally heated water. With the evolution ofphotosynthesis about 3 billion years ago, some prokaryotes in microbial mats came to use a more widely available energysource—sunlight—whereas others were still dependent on chemicals from hydrothermal vents for energy and food.
This (a) microbial mat, about one meter in diameter, grows over a hydrothermal vent in the Pacific Oceanin a region known as the “Pacific Ring of Fire.” The mat helps retain microbial nutrients. Chimneys such as theone indicated by the arrow allow gases to escape. (b) In this micrograph, bacteria are visualized using fluorescencemicroscopy.
StromatolitesFossilized microbial mats represent the earliest record of life on Earth. A stromatolite is a sedimentary structure formedwhen minerals are precipitated out of water by prokaryotes in a microbial mat (Figure 22.3). Stromatolites form layeredrocks made of carbonate or silicate. Although most stromatolites are artifacts from the past, there are places on Earth wherestromatolites are still forming. For example, growing stromatolites have been found in the Anza-Borrego Desert State Parkin San Diego County, California.
These living stromatolites are located in Shark Bay, Australia. (b) These fossilized stromatolites, foundin Glacier National Park, Montana, are nearly 1.5 billion years old.
The Ancient AtmosphereEvidence indicates that during the first two billion years of Earth’s existence, the atmosphere was anoxic, meaning that therewas no molecular oxygen. Therefore, only those organisms that can grow without oxygen— anaerobic organisms—wereable to live. Autotrophic organisms that convert solar energy into chemical energy are called phototrophs, and theyappeared within one billion years of the formation of Earth. Then, cyanobacteria, also known as blue-green algae,evolved from these simple phototrophs one billion years later. Cyanobacteria (Figure 22.4) began the oxygenation of theatmosphere. Increased atmospheric oxygen allowed the development of more efficient O2-utilizing catabolic pathways. Italso opened up the land to increased colonization, because some O2 is converted into O3 (ozone) and ozone effectivelyabsorbs the ultraviolet light that would otherwise cause lethal mutations in DNA. Ultimately, the increase in O2concentrations allowed the evolution of other life forms.
This hot spring in Yellowstone National Park flows toward the foreground. Cyanobacteria in the spring aregreen, and as water flows down the gradient, the intensity of the color increases as cell density increases. The wateris cooler at the edges of the stream than in the center, causing the edges to appear greener.
Microbes Are Adaptable: Life in Moderate and Extreme EnvironmentsSome organisms have developed strategies that allow them to survive harsh conditions. Prokaryotes thrive in a vast arrayof environments: Some grow in conditions that would seem very normal to us, whereas others are able to thrive and growunder conditions that would kill a plant or animal. Almost all prokaryotes have a cell wall, a protective structure that allowsthem to survive in both hyper- and hypo-osmotic conditions. Some soil bacteria are able to form endospores that resistheat and drought, thereby allowing the organism to survive until favorable conditions recur. These adaptations, along withothers, allow bacteria to be the most abundant life form in all terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems.Other bacteria and archaea are adapted to grow under extreme conditions and are called extremophiles, meaning “lovers ofextremes.” Extremophiles have been found in all kinds of environments: the depth of the oceans, hot springs, the Artic andthe Antarctic, in very dry places, deep inside Earth, in harsh chemical environments, and in high radiation environments(Figure 22.5), just to mention a few. These organisms give us a better understanding of prokaryotic diversity and open upthe possibility of finding new prokaryotic species that may lead to the discovery of new therapeutic drugs or have industrialapplications. Because they have specialized adaptations that allow them to live in extreme conditions, many extremophilescannot survive in moderate environments. There are many different groups of extremophiles: They are identified based onthe conditions in which they grow best, and several habitats are extreme in multiple ways. For example, a soda lake isboth salty and alkaline, so organisms that live in a soda lake must be both alkaliphiles and halophiles (Table 22.1). Otherextremophiles, like radioresistant organisms, do not prefer an extreme environment (in this case, one with high levels ofradiation), but have adapted to survive in it.
Extremophiles and Their Preferred Conditions
Extremophile Type Conditions for Optimal Growth
Acidophiles pH 3 or below
Alkaliphiles pH 9 or above
Thermophiles Temperature 60–80 °C (140–176 °F)
Hyperthermophiles Temperature 80–122 °C (176–250 °F)
Psychrophiles Temperature of -15-10 °C (5-50 °F) or lower
Halophiles Salt concentration of at least 0.2 M
Osmophiles High sugar concentration
Deinococcus radiodurans, visualized in this false color transmission electron micrograph, is a prokaryotethat can tolerate very high doses of ionizing radiation. It has developed DNA repair mechanisms that allow it toreconstruct its chromosome even if it has been broken into hundreds of pieces by radiation or heat.
Prokaryotes in the Dead SeaOne example of a very harsh environment is the Dead Sea, a hypersaline basin that is located between Jordan and Israel.Hypersaline environments are essentially concentrated seawater. In the Dead Sea, the sodium concentration is 10 timeshigher than that of seawater, and the water contains high levels of magnesium (about 40 times higher than in seawater)that would be toxic to most living things. Iron, calcium, and magnesium, elements that form divalent ions (Fe2+, Ca2+, andMg2+), produce what is commonly referred to as “hard” water. Taken together, the high concentration of divalent cations,the acidic pH (6.0), and the intense solar radiation flux make the Dead Sea a unique, and uniquely hostile, ecosystem[1](Figure 22.6).What sort of prokaryotes do we find in the Dead Sea? The extremely salt-tolerant bacterial mats include Halobacterium,Haloferax volcanii (which is found in other locations, not only the Dead Sea), Halorubrum sodomense, and Halobaculumgomorrense, and the archaea Haloarcula marismortui, among others.
The Dead Sea is hypersaline. Nevertheless, salt-tolerant bacteria thrive in this sea. (b) Thesehalobacteria cells can form salt-tolerant bacterial mats.
Unculturable Prokaryotes and the Viable-but-Non-Culturable StateMicrobiologists typically grow prokaryotes in the laboratory using an appropriate culture medium containing all thenutrients needed by the target organism. The medium can be liquid, broth, or solid. After an incubation time at the righttemperature, there should be evidence of microbial growth (Figure 22.7). The process of culturing bacteria is complex and is one of the greatest discoveries of modern science. German physician Robert Koch is credited with discovering thetechniques for pure culture, including staining and using growth media. His assistant Julius Petri invented the Petri dishwhose use persists in today’s laboratories. Koch worked primarily with the Mycobacterium tuberculosis bacterium thatcauses tuberculosis and developed postulates to identify disease-causing organisms that continue to be widely used in themedical community. Koch’s postulates include that an organism can be identified as the cause of disease when it is present inall infected samples and absent in all healthy samples, and it is able to reproduce the infection after being cultured multipletimes. Today, cultures remain a primary diagnostic tool in medicine and other areas of molecular biology.
In these agar plates, the growth medium is supplemented with red blood cells. Blood agar becomestransparent in the presence of hemolytic Streptococcus, which destroys red blood cells and is used to diagnoseStreptococcus infections. The plate on the left is inoculated with non-hemolytic Staphylococcus (large white colonies),and the plate on the right is inoculated with hemolytic Streptococcus (tiny clear colonies). If you look closely at the rightplate, you can see that the agar surrounding the bacteria has turned clear.
Some prokaryotes, however, cannot grow in a laboratory setting. In fact, over 99 percent of bacteria and archaea areunculturable. For the most part, this is due to a lack of knowledge as to what to feed these organisms and how to grow them;they have special requirements for growth that remain unknown to scientists, such as needing specific micronutrients, pH,temperature, pressure, co-factors, or co-metabolites. Some bacteria cannot be cultured because they are obligate intracellularparasites and cannot be grown outside a host cell.In other cases, culturable organisms become unculturable under stressful conditions, even though the same organism couldbe cultured previously. Those organisms that cannot be cultured but are not dead are in a viable-but-non-culturable(VBNC) state. The VBNC state occurs when prokaryotes respond to environmental stressors by entering a dormant statethat allows their survival. The criteria for entering into the VBNC state are not completely understood. In a process calledresuscitation, the prokaryote can go back to “normal” life when environmental conditions improve.Is the VBNC state an unusual way of living for prokaryotes? In fact, most of the prokaryotes living in the soil or in oceanicwaters are non-culturable. It has been said that only a small fraction, perhaps one percent, of prokaryotes can be culturedunder laboratory conditions. If these organisms are non-culturable, then how is it known whether they are present and alive?Microbiologists use molecular techniques, such as the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), to amplify selected portions ofDNA of prokaryotes, demonstrating their existence. Recall that PCR can make billions of copies of a DNA segment in aprocess called amplification.The Ecology of BiofilmsUntil a couple of decades ago, microbiologists used to think of prokaryotes as isolated entities living apart. This model,however, does not reflect the true ecology of prokaryotes, most of which prefer to live in communities where they caninteract. A biofilm is a microbial community (Figure 22.8) held together in a gummy-textured matrix that consists primarilyof polysaccharides secreted by the organisms, together with some proteins and nucleic acids. Biofilms grow attached tosurfaces. Some of the best-studied biofilms are composed of prokaryotes, although fungal biofilms have also been describedas well as some composed of a mixture of fungi and bacteria.Biofilms are present almost everywhere: they can cause the clogging of pipes and readily colonize surfaces in industrialsettings. In recent, large-scale outbreaks of bacterial contamination of food, biofilms have played a major role. They alsocolonize household surfaces, such as kitchen counters, cutting boards, sinks, and toilets, as well as places on the humanbody, such as the surfaces of our teeth.Interactions among the organisms that populate a biofilm, together with their protective exopolysaccharidic (EPS)environment, make these communities more robust than free-living, or planktonic, prokaryotes. The sticky substancethat holds bacteria together also excludes most antibiotics and disinfectants, making biofilm bacteria hardier than their planktonic counterparts. Overall, biofilms are very difficult to destroy because they are resistant to many common forms ofsterilization.
There are many differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. However, all cells have four common structures: theplasma membrane, which functions as a barrier for the cell and separates the cell from its environment; the cytoplasm, ajelly-like substance inside the cell; nucleic acids, the genetic material of the cell; and ribosomes, where protein synthesistakes place. Prokaryotes come in various shapes, but many fall into three categories: cocci (spherical), bacilli (rod-shaped), and spirilli (spiral-shaped).
Prokaryotes fall into three basic categories based on their shape, visualized here using scanning electronmicroscopy: (a) cocci, or spherical (a pair is shown); (b) bacilli, or rod-shaped; and (c) spirilli, or spiral-shaped.
The Prokaryotic CellRecall that prokaryotes (Figure 22.10) are unicellular organisms that lack organelles or other internal membrane-boundstructures. Therefore, they do not have a nucleus but instead generally have a single chromosome—a piece of circular,double-stranded DNA located in an area of the cell called the nucleoid. Most prokaryotes have a cell wall outside the plasmamembrane.
The features of a typical prokaryotic cell are shown.Recall that prokaryotes are divided into two different domains, Bacteria and Archaea, which together with Eukarya,comprise the three domains of life.
Bacteria and Archaea are both prokaryotes but differ enough to be placed in separate domains. Anancestor of modern Archaea is believed to have given rise to Eukarya, the third domain of life. Archaeal and bacterialphyla are shown; the evolutionary relationship between these phyla is still open to debate.The composition of the cell wall differs significantly between the domains Bacteria and Archaea. The composition oftheir cell walls also differs from the eukaryotic cell walls found in plants (cellulose) or fungi and insects (chitin). The cellwall functions as a protective layer, and it is responsible for the organism’s shape. Some bacteria have an outer capsuleoutside the cell wall. Other structures are present in some prokaryotic species, but not in others (Table 22.2). For example,the capsule found in some species enables the organism to attach to surfaces, protects it from dehydration and attack byphagocytic cells, and makes pathogens more resistant to our immune responses. Some species also have flagella (singular,flagellum) used for locomotion, and pili (singular, pilus) used for attachment to surfaces. Plasmids, which consist of extrachromosomalDNA, are also present in many species of bacteria and archaea.
Phylum Proteobacteria is one of up to 52 bacteria phyla. Proteobacteria is further subdivided into fiveclasses, Alpha through Epsilon.
Chlamydia, Spirochetes, Cyanobacteria, and Gram-positive bacteria are described in this table. Notethat bacterial shape is not phylum-dependent; bacteria within a phylum may be cocci, rod-shaped, or spiral.
Archaea are separated into four phyla: the Korarchaeota, Euryarchaeota, Crenarchaeota, and Nanoarchaeota.
The Plasma MembraneThe plasma membrane is a thin lipid bilayer (6 to 8 nanometers) that completely surrounds the cell and separates the insidefrom the outside. Its selectively permeable nature keeps ions, proteins, and other molecules within the cell and prevents themfrom diffusing into the extracellular environment, while other molecules may move through the membrane. Recall that thegeneral structure of a cell membrane is a phospholipid bilayer composed of two layers of lipid molecules. In archaeal cellmembranes, isoprene (phytanyl) chains linked to glycerol replace the fatty acids linked to glycerol in bacterial membranes.Some archaeal membranes are lipid monolayers instead of bilayers.
Archaeal phospholipids differ from those found in Bacteria and Eukarya in two ways. First, they havebranched phytanyl sidechains instead of linear ones. Second, an ether bond instead of an ester bond connects thelipid to the glycerol.The Cell WallThe cytoplasm of prokaryotic cells has a high concentration of dissolved solutes. Therefore, the osmotic pressure withinthe cell is relatively high. The cell wall is a protective layer that surrounds some cells and gives them shape and rigidity.It is located outside the cell membrane and prevents osmotic lysis (bursting due to increasing volume). The chemicalcomposition of the cell walls varies between archaea and bacteria, and also varies between bacterial species.Bacterial cell walls contain peptidoglycan, composed of polysaccharide chains that are cross-linked by unusual peptidescontaining both L- and D-amino acids including D-glutamic acid and D-alanine. Proteins normally have only L-aminoacids; as a consequence, many of our antibiotics work by mimicking D-amino acids and therefore have specific effects onbacterial cell wall development. There are more than 100 different forms of peptidoglycan. S-layer (surface layer) proteinsare also present on the outside of cell walls of both archaea and bacteria.Bacteria are divided into two major groups: Gram positive and Gram negative, based on their reaction to Gram staining.Note that all Gram-positive bacteria belong to one phylum; bacteria in the other phyla (Proteobacteria, Chlamydias,Spirochetes, Cyanobacteria, and others) are Gram-negative. The Gram staining method is named after its inventor, Danishscientist Hans Christian Gram (1853–1938). The different bacterial responses to the staining procedure are ultimately due tocell wall structure. Gram-positive organisms typically lack the outer membrane found in Gram-negative organisms (Figure22.15). Up to 90 percent of the cell wall in Gram-positive bacteria is composed of peptidoglycan, and most of the restis composed of acidic substances called teichoic acids. Teichoic acids may be covalently linked to lipids in the plasmamembrane to form lipoteichoic acids. Lipoteichoic acids anchor the cell wall to the cell membrane. Gram-negative bacteriahave a relatively thin cell wall composed of a few layers of peptidoglycan (only 10 percent of the total cell wall), surroundedby an outer envelope containing lipopolysaccharides (LPS) and lipoproteins. This outer envelope is sometimes referred to asa second lipid bilayer. The chemistry of this outer envelope is very different, however, from that of the typical lipid bilayerthat forms plasma membranes.
Archaean cell walls do not have peptidoglycan. There are four different types of Archaean cell walls. One type iscomposed of pseudopeptidoglycan, which is similar to peptidoglycan in morphology but contains different sugars in thepolysaccharide chain. The other three types of cell walls are composed of polysaccharides, glycoproteins, or pure protein.
ReproductionReproduction in prokaryotes is asexual and usually takes place by binary fission. Recall that the DNA of a prokaryote existsas a single, circular chromosome. Prokaryotes do not undergo mitosis. Rather the chromosome is replicated and the tworesulting copies separate from one another, due to the growth of the cell. The prokaryote, now enlarged, is pinched inward atits equator and the two resulting cells, which are clones, separate. Binary fission does not provide an opportunity for geneticrecombination or genetic diversity, but prokaryotes can share genes by three other mechanisms.
In transformation, the prokaryote takes in DNA found in its environment that is shed by other prokaryotes. If anonpathogenic bacterium takes up DNA for a toxin gene from a pathogen and incorporates the new DNA into its ownchromosome, it too may become pathogenic. In transduction, bacteriophages, the viruses that infect bacteria, sometimesalso move short pieces of chromosomal DNA from one bacterium to another. Transduction results in a recombinantorganism. Archaea are not affected by bacteriophages but instead have their own viruses that translocate genetic materialfrom one individual to another. In conjugation, DNA is transferred from one prokaryote to another by means of a pilus,which brings the organisms into contact with one another. The DNA transferred can be in the form of a plasmid or as ahybrid, containing both plasmid and chromosomal DNA. These three processes of DNA exchange are shown in Figure22.17.Reproduction can be very rapid: a few minutes for some species. This short generation time coupled with mechanisms ofgenetic recombination and high rates of mutation result in the rapid evolution of prokaryotes, allowing them to respond toenvironmental changes (such as the introduction of an antibiotic) very quickly.
Besides binary fission, there are three other mechanisms by which prokaryotes can exchange DNA. In(a) transformation, the cell takes up prokaryotic DNA directly from the environment. The DNA may remain separate asplasmid DNA or be incorporated into the host genome. In (b) transduction, a bacteriophage injects DNA into the cellthat contains a small fragment of DNA from a different prokaryote. In (c) conjugation, DNA is transferred from one cellto another via a mating bridge that connects the two cells after the sex pilus draws the two bacteria close enough toform the bridge.
Prokaryotes are metabolically diverse organisms. There are many different environments on Earth with various energy andcarbon sources, and variable conditions. Prokaryotes have been able to live in every environment by using whatever energyand carbon sources are available. Prokaryotes fill many niches on Earth, including being involved in nutrient cycles suchas nitrogen and carbon cycles, decomposing dead organisms, and thriving inside living organisms, including humans. Thevery broad range of environments that prokaryotes occupy is possible because they have diverse metabolic processes.Needs of ProkaryotesThe diverse environments and ecosystems on Earth have a wide range of conditions in terms of temperature, availablenutrients, acidity, salinity, and energy sources. Prokaryotes are very well equipped to make their living out of a vast array ofnutrients and conditions. To live, prokaryotes need a source of energy, a source of carbon, and some additional nutrients.MacronutrientsCells are essentially a well-organized assemblage of macromolecules and water. Recall that macromolecules are producedby the polymerization of smaller units called monomers. For cells to build all of the molecules required to sustain life, theyneed certain substances, collectively called nutrients. When prokaryotes grow in nature, they obtain their nutrients fromthe environment. Nutrients that are required in large amounts are called macronutrients, whereas those required in smaller or trace amounts are called micronutrients. Just a handful of elements are considered macronutrients—carbon, hydrogen,oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur. (A mnemonic for remembering these elements is the acronym CHONPS.)Why are these macronutrients needed in large amounts? They are the components of organic compounds in cells, includingwater. Carbon is the major element in all macromolecules: carbohydrates, proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, and many othercompounds. Carbon accounts for about 50 percent of the composition of the cell. Nitrogen represents 12 percent of the totaldry weight of a typical cell and is a component of proteins, nucleic acids, and other cell constituents. Most of the nitrogenavailable in nature is either atmospheric nitrogen (N2) or another inorganic form. Diatomic (N2) nitrogen, however, canbe converted into an organic form only by certain organisms, called nitrogen-fixing organisms. Both hydrogen and oxygenare part of many organic compounds and of water. Phosphorus is required by all organisms for the synthesis of nucleotidesand phospholipids. Sulfur is part of the structure of some amino acids such as cysteine and methionine, and is also presentin several vitamins and coenzymes. Other important macronutrients are potassium (K), magnesium (Mg), calcium (Ca),and sodium (Na). Although these elements are required in smaller amounts, they are very important for the structure andfunction of the prokaryotic cell.MicronutrientsIn addition to these macronutrients, prokaryotes require various metallic elements in small amounts. These are referredto as micronutrients or trace elements. For example, iron is necessary for the function of the cytochromes involved inelectron-transport reactions. Some prokaryotes require other elements—such as boron (B), chromium (Cr), and manganese(Mn)—primarily as enzyme cofactors.The Ways in Which Prokaryotes Obtain EnergyProkaryotes can use different sources of energy to assemble macromolecules from smaller molecules. Phototrophs(or phototrophic organisms) obtain their energy from sunlight. Chemotrophs (or chemosynthetic organisms) obtaintheir energy from chemical compounds. Chemotrophs that can use organic compounds as energy sources are calledchemoorganotrophs. Those that can also use inorganic compounds as energy sources are called chemolitotrophs.The Ways in Which Prokaryotes Obtain CarbonProkaryotes not only can use different sources of energy but also different sources of carbon compounds. Recall thatorganisms that are able to fix inorganic carbon are called autotrophs. Autotrophic prokaryotes synthesize organic moleculesfrom carbon dioxide. In contrast, heterotrophic prokaryotes obtain carbon from organic compounds. To make the picturemore complex, the terms that describe how prokaryotes obtain energy and carbon can be combined. Thus, photoautotrophsuse energy from sunlight, and carbon from carbon dioxide and water, whereas chemoheterotrophs obtain energy and carbonfrom an organic chemical source. Chemolitoautotrophs obtain their energy from inorganic compounds, and they buildtheir complex molecules from carbon dioxide. The table below (Table 22.3) summarizes carbon and energy sources inprokaryotes.
Role of Prokaryotes in EcosystemsProkaryotes are ubiquitous: There is no niche or ecosystem in which they are not present. Prokaryotes play many roles inthe environments they occupy. The roles they play in the carbon and nitrogen cycles are vital to life on Earth.Prokaryotes and the Carbon CycleCarbon is one of the most important macronutrients, and prokaryotes play an important role in the carbon cycle (Figure22.18). Carbon is cycled through Earth’s major reservoirs: land, the atmosphere, aquatic environments, sediments and rocks,and biomass. The movement of carbon is via carbon dioxide, which is removed from the atmosphere by land plants andmarine prokaryotes, and is returned to the atmosphere via the respiration of chemoorganotrophic organisms, including prokaryotes, fungi, and animals. Although the largest carbon reservoir in terrestrial ecosystems is in rocks and sediments,that carbon is not readily available.A large amount of available carbon is found in land plants. Plants, which are producers, use carbon dioxide from the airto synthesize carbon compounds. Related to this, one very significant source of carbon compounds is humus, which isa mixture of organic materials from dead plants and prokaryotes that have resisted decomposition. Consumers such asanimals use organic compounds generated by producers and release carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. Then, bacteria andfungi, collectively called decomposers, carry out the breakdown (decomposition) of plants and animals and their organiccompounds. The most important contributor of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere is microbial decomposition of deadmaterial (dead animals, plants, and humus) that undergo respiration.In aqueous environments and their anoxic sediments, there is another carbon cycle taking place. In this case, the cycle isbased on one-carbon compounds. In anoxic sediments, prokaryotes, mostly archaea, produce methane (CH4). This methanemoves into the zone above the sediment, which is richer in oxygen and supports bacteria called methane oxidizers thatoxidize methane to carbon dioxide, which then returns to the atmosphere.
Prokaryotes play a significant role in continuously moving carbon through the biosphere.
Prokaryotes and the Nitrogen CycleNitrogen is a very important element for life because it is part of proteins and nucleic acids. It is a macronutrient, and innature, it is recycled from organic compounds to ammonia, ammonium ions, nitrate, nitrite, and nitrogen gas by myriadprocesses, many of which are carried out only by prokaryotes. As illustrated in Figure 22.19, prokaryotes are key to thenitrogen cycle. The largest pool of nitrogen available in the terrestrial ecosystem is gaseous nitrogen from the air, but thisnitrogen is not usable by plants, which are primary producers. Gaseous nitrogen is transformed, or “fixed” into more readilyavailable forms such as ammonia through the process of nitrogen fixation. Ammonia can be used by plants or converted toother forms.Another source of ammonia is ammonification, the process by which ammonia is released during the decomposition ofnitrogen-containing organic compounds. Ammonia released to the atmosphere, however, represents only 15 percent of thetotal nitrogen released; the rest is as N2 and N2O. Ammonia is catabolized anaerobically by some prokaryotes, yielding N2as the final product. Nitrification is the conversion of ammonium to nitrite and nitrate. Nitrification in soils is carried outby bacteria belonging to the genera Nitrosomas, Nitrobacter, and Nitrospira. The bacteria performs the reverse process, thereduction of nitrate from the soils to gaseous compounds such as N2O, NO, and N2, a process called denitrification.
Devastating pathogen-borne diseases and plagues, both viral and bacterial in nature, have affected humans since thebeginning of human history. The true cause of these diseases was not understood at the time, and some people thoughtthat diseases were a spiritual punishment. Over time, people came to realize that staying apart from afflicted persons, anddisposing of the corpses and personal belongings of victims of illness, reduced their own chances of getting sick.Epidemiologists study how diseases affect a population. An epidemic is a disease that occurs in an unusually high numberof individuals in a population at the same time. A pandemic is a widespread, usually worldwide, epidemic. An endemicdisease is a disease that is constantly present, usually at low incidence, in a population.
Long History of Bacterial DiseaseThere are records about infectious diseases as far back as 3000 B.C. A number of significant pandemics caused by bacteriahave been documented over several hundred years. Some of the most memorable pandemics led to the decline of cities andnations.In the 21st century, infectious diseases remain among the leading causes of death worldwide, despite advances made inmedical research and treatments in recent decades. A disease spreads when the pathogen that causes it is passed from oneperson to another. For a pathogen to cause disease, it must be able to reproduce in the host’s body and damage the host insome way.The Plague of AthensIn 430 B.C., the Plague of Athens killed one-quarter of the Athenian troops that were fighting in the great PeloponnesianWar and weakened Athens’ dominance and power. The plague impacted people living in overcrowded Athens as wellas troops aboard ships that had to return to Athens. The source of the plague may have been identified recently whenresearchers from the University of Athens were able to use DNA from teeth recovered from a mass grave. The scientistsidentified nucleotide sequences from a pathogenic bacterium, Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi (Figure 22.20), whichcauses typhoid fever.[3]This disease is commonly seen in overcrowded areas and has caused epidemics throughout recordedhistory.
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi, the causative agent of Typhoid fever, is a Gram-negative, rodshapedgamma protobacterium. Typhoid fever, which is spread through feces, causes intestinal hemorrhage, highfever, delirium and dehydration. Today, between 16 and 33 million cases of this re-emerging disease occur annually,resulting in over 200,000 deaths. Carriers of the disease can be asymptomatic. In a famous case in the early 1900s, acook named Mary Mallon unknowingly spread the disease to over fifty people, three of whom died. Other Salmonellaserotypes cause food poisoning.
Bubonic PlaguesFrom 541 to 750, an outbreak of what was likely a bubonic plague (the Plague of Justinian), eliminated one-quarter to onehalfof the human population in the eastern Mediterranean region. The population in Europe dropped by 50 percent duringthis outbreak. Bubonic plague would strike Europe more than once.One of the most devastating pandemics was the Black Death (1346 to 1361) that is believed to have been another outbreakof bubonic plague caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis. It is thought to have originated initially in China and spreadalong the Silk Road, a network of land and sea trade routes, to the Mediterranean region and Europe, carried by rat fleasliving on black rats that were always present on ships. The Black Death reduced the world’s population from an estimated450 million to about 350 to 375 million. Bubonic plague struck London hard again in the mid-1600s (Figure 22.21). Inmodern times, approximately 1,000 to 3,000 cases of plague arise globally each year. Although contracting bubonic plaguebefore antibiotics meant almost certain death, the bacterium responds to several types of modern antibiotics, and mortalityrates from plague are now very low.
The (a) Great Plague of London killed an estimated 200,000 people, or about twenty percent of the city’spopulation. The causative agent, the (b) bacterium Yersinia pestis, is a Gram-negative, rod-shaped bacterium fromthe class Gamma Proteobacteria. The disease is transmitted through the bite of an infected flea, which is infectedby a rodent. Symptoms include swollen lymph nodes, fever, seizure, vomiting of blood, and (c) gangrene
Migration of Diseases to New PopulationsOver the centuries, Europeans tended to develop genetic immunity to endemic infectious diseases, but when Europeanconquerors reached the western hemisphere, they brought with them disease-causing bacteria and viruses, which triggeredepidemics that completely devastated populations of Native Americans, who had no natural resistance to many Europeandiseases. It has been estimated that up to 90 percent of Native Americans died from infectious diseases after the arrival ofEuropeans, making conquest of the New World a foregone conclusion.Emerging and Re-emerging DiseasesThe distribution of a particular disease is dynamic. Therefore, changes in the environment, the pathogen, or the hostpopulation can dramatically impact the spread of a disease. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) anemerging disease (Figure 22.22) is one that has appeared in a population for the first time, or that may have existedpreviously but is rapidly increasing in incidence or geographic range. This definition also includes re-emerging diseasesthat were previously under control. Approximately 75 percent of recently emerging infectious diseases affecting humans arezoonotic diseases, zoonoses, diseases that primarily infect animals and are transmitted to humans; some are of viral originand some are of bacterial origin. Brucellosis is an example of a prokaryotic zoonosis that is re-emerging in some regions,and necrotizing fasciitis (commonly known as flesh-eating bacteria) has been increasing in virulence for the last 80 yearsfor unknown reasons.
The map shows regions where bacterial diseases are emerging or reemerging.
Some of the present emerging diseases are not actually new, but are diseases that were catastrophic in the past (Figure22.23). They devastated populations and became dormant for a while, just to come back, sometimes more virulent thanbefore, as was the case with bubonic plague. Other diseases, like tuberculosis, were never eradicated but were under controlin some regions of the world until coming back, mostly in urban centers with high concentrations of immunocompromisedpeople. The WHO has identified certain diseases whose worldwide re-emergence should be monitored. Among these aretwo viral diseases (dengue fever and yellow fever), and three bacterial diseases (diphtheria, cholera, and bubonic plague).The war against infectious diseases has no foreseeable end.
Lyme disease often, but not always, results in (a) a characteristic bullseye rash. The disease is caused bya (b) Gram-negative spirochete bacterium of the genus Borrelia. The bacteria (c) infect ticks, which in turns infect mice.Deer are the preferred secondary host, but the ticks also may feed on humans. Untreated, the disease causes chronicdisorders in the nervous system, eyes, joints, and heart. The disease is named after Lyme, Connecticut, where anoutbreak occurred in 1995 and has subsequently spread. The disease is not new, however. Genetic evidence suggeststhat Ötzi the Iceman, a 5,300-year-old mummy found in the Alps, was infected with Borrelia.
Biofilms and DiseaseRecall that biofilms are microbial communities that are very difficult to destroy. They are responsible for diseases such asinfections in patients with cystic fibrosis, Legionnaires’ disease, and otitis media. They produce dental plaque and colonizecatheters, prostheses, transcutaneous and orthopedic devices, contact lenses, and internal devices such as pacemakers.They also form in open wounds and burned tissue. In healthcare environments, biofilms grow on hemodialysis machines,mechanical ventilators, shunts, and other medical equipment. In fact, 65 percent of all infections acquired in the hospital(nosocomial infections) are attributed to biofilms. Biofilms are also related to diseases contracted from food because theycolonize the surfaces of vegetable leaves and meat, as well as food-processing equipment that isn’t adequately cleaned.Biofilm infections develop gradually; sometimes, they do not cause symptoms immediately. They are rarely resolved byhost defense mechanisms. Once an infection by a biofilm is established, it is very difficult to eradicate, because biofilms tend to be resistant to most of the methods used to control microbial growth, including antibiotics. Biofilms respond poorlyor only temporarily to antibiotics; it has been said that they can resist up to 1,000 times the antibiotic concentrations usedto kill the same bacteria when they are free-living or planktonic. An antibiotic dose that large would harm the patient;therefore, scientists are working on new ways to get rid of biofilms.Antibiotics: Are We Facing a Crisis?The word antibiotic comes from the Greek anti meaning “against” and bios meaning “life.” An antibiotic is a chemical,produced either by microbes or synthetically, that is hostile to the growth of other organisms. Today’s news and media oftenaddress concerns about an antibiotic crisis. Are the antibiotics that easily treated bacterial infections in the past becomingobsolete? Are there new “superbugs”—bacteria that have evolved to become more resistant to our arsenal of antibiotics? Isthis the beginning of the end of antibiotics? All these questions challenge the healthcare community.One of the main causes of resistant bacteria is the abuse of antibiotics. The imprudent and excessive use of antibioticshas resulted in the natural selection of resistant forms of bacteria. The antibiotic kills most of the infecting bacteria, andtherefore only the resistant forms remain. These resistant forms reproduce, resulting in an increase in the proportion ofresistant forms over non-resistant ones. Another major misuse of antibiotics is in patients with colds or the flu, for whichantibiotics are useless. Another problem is the excessive use of antibiotics in livestock. The routine use of antibiotics inanimal feed promotes bacterial resistance as well. In the United States, 70 percent of the antibiotics produced are fed toanimals. These antibiotics are given to livestock in low doses, which maximize the probability of resistance developing, andthese resistant bacteria are readily transferred to humans.
One of the Superbugs: MRSAThe imprudent use of antibiotics has paved the way for bacteria to expand populations of resistant forms. For example,Staphylococcus aureus, often called “staph,” is a common bacterium that can live in the human body and is usuallyeasily treated with antibiotics. A very dangerous strain, however, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)has made the news over the past few years (Figure 22.24). This strain is resistant to many commonly used antibiotics,including methicillin, amoxicillin, penicillin, and oxacillin. MRSA can cause infections of the skin, but it can alsoinfect the bloodstream, lungs, urinary tract, or sites of injury. While MRSA infections are common among people inhealthcare facilities, they have also appeared in healthy people who haven’t been hospitalized but who live or work in tightpopulations (like military personnel and prisoners). Researchers have expressed concern about the way this latter sourceof MRSA targets a much younger population than those residing in care facilities. The Journal of the American MedicalAssociation reported that, among MRSA-afflicted persons in healthcare facilities, the average age is 68, whereas peoplewith “community-associated MRSA” ( CA-MRSA) have an average age of 23.
This scanning electron micrograph shows methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteria,commonly known as MRSA. S. aureus is not always pathogenic, but can cause diseases such as food poisoning andskin and respiratory infections.
In summary, the medical community is facing an antibiotic crisis. Some scientists believe that after years of being protectedfrom bacterial infections by antibiotics, we may be returning to a time in which a simple bacterial infection could againdevastate the human population. Researchers are developing new antibiotics, but it takes many years to of research andclinical trials, plus financial investments in the millions of dollars, to generate an effective and approved drug.Foodborne DiseasesProkaryotes are everywhere: They readily colonize the surface of any type of material, and food is not an exception. Most ofthe time, prokaryotes colonize food and food-processing equipment in the form of a biofilm. Outbreaks of bacterial infectionrelated to food consumption are common. A foodborne disease (colloquially called “food poisoning”) is an illness resultingfrom the consumption the pathogenic bacteria, viruses, or other parasites that contaminate food. Although the United Stateshas one of the safest food supplies in the world, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has reportedthat “76 million people get sick, more than 300,000 are hospitalized, and 5,000 Americans die each year from foodborneillness.”The characteristics of foodborne illnesses have changed over time. In the past, it was relatively common to hear aboutsporadic cases of botulism, the potentially fatal disease produced by a toxin from the anaerobic bacterium Clostridiumbotulinum. Some of the most common sources for this bacterium were non-acidic canned foods, homemade pickles, andprocessed meat and sausages. The can, jar, or package created a suitable anaerobic environment where Clostridium couldgrow. Proper sterilization and canning procedures have reduced the incidence of this disease.While people may tend to think of foodborne illnesses as associated with animal-based foods, most cases are now linkedto produce. There have been serious, produce-related outbreaks associated with raw spinach in the United States and withvegetable sprouts in Germany, and these types of outbreaks have become more common. The raw spinach outbreak in2006 was produced by the bacterium E. coli serotype O157:H7. A serotype is a strain of bacteria that carries a set ofsimilar antigens on its cell surface, and there are often many different serotypes of a bacterial species. Most E. coli are notparticularly dangerous to humans, but serotype O157:H7 can cause bloody diarrhea and is potentially fatal.All types of food can potentially be contaminated with bacteria. Recent outbreaks of Salmonella reported by the CDCoccurred in foods as diverse as peanut butter, alfalfa sprouts, and eggs. A deadly outbreak in Germany in 2010 was causedby E. coli contamination of vegetable sprouts (Figure 22.25). The strain that caused the outbreak was found to be a newserotype not previously involved in other outbreaks, which indicates that E. coli is continuously evolving.
Vegetable sprouts grown at an organic farm were the cause of an (b) E. coli outbreak that killed32 people and sickened 3,800 in Germany in 2011. The strain responsible, E. coli O104:H4, produces Shiga toxin,a substance that inhibits protein synthesis in the host cell. The toxin (c) destroys red blood cells resulting in bloodydiarrhea. Deformed red blood cells clog the capillaries of the kidney, which can lead to kidney failure, as happened to845 patients in the 2011 outbreak. Kidney failure is usually reversible, but some patients experience kidney problemsyears later.
Not all prokaryotes are pathogenic. On the contrary, pathogens represent only a very small percentage of the diversity ofthe microbial world. In fact, our life would not be possible without prokaryotes. Just think about the role of prokaryotes inbiogeochemical cycles.Cooperation between Bacteria and Eukaryotes: Nitrogen FixationNitrogen is a very important element to living things, because it is part of nucleotides and amino acids that are thebuilding blocks of nucleic acids and proteins, respectively. Nitrogen is usually the most limiting element in terrestrialecosystems, with atmospheric nitrogen, N2, providing the largest pool of available nitrogen. However, eukaryotes cannotuse atmospheric, gaseous nitrogen to synthesize macromolecules. Fortunately, nitrogen can be “fixed,” meaning it isconverted into ammonia (NH3) either biologically or abiotically. Abiotic nitrogen fixation occurs as a result of lightning orby industrial processes.Biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) is exclusively carried out by prokaryotes: soil bacteria, cyanobacteria, and Frankiaspp. (filamentous bacteria interacting with actinorhizal plants such as alder, bayberry, and sweet fern). After photosynthesis,BNF is the second most important biological process on Earth. The equation representing the process is as followsN2 + 16ATP + 8e− + 8H+ → 2NH3 + 16ADP + 16Pi + H2where Pi stands for inorganic phosphate. The total fixed nitrogen through BNF is about 100 to 180 million metric tons peryear. Biological processes contribute 65 percent of the nitrogen used in agriculture.Cyanobacteria are the most important nitrogen fixers in aquatic environments. In soil, members of the genus Clostridiumare examples of free-living, nitrogen-fixing bacteria. Other bacteria live symbiotically with legume plants, providing themost important source of BNF. Symbionts may fix more nitrogen in soils than free-living organisms by a factor of 10. Soilbacteria, collectively called rhizobia, are able to symbiotically interact with legumes to form nodules, specialized structureswhere nitrogen fixation occurs (Figure 22.27). Nitrogenase, the enzyme that fixes nitrogen, is inactivated by oxygen, sothe nodule provides an oxygen-free area for nitrogen fixation to take place. This process provides a natural and inexpensiveplant fertilizer, as it reduces atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia, which is easily usable by plants. The use of legumes is anexcellent alternative to chemical fertilization and is of special interest to sustainable agriculture, which seeks to minimizethe use of chemicals and conserve natural resources. Through symbiotic nitrogen fixation, the plant benefits from usingan endless source of nitrogen: the atmosphere. Bacteria benefit from using photosynthates (carbohydrates produced duringphotosynthesis) from the plant and having a protected niche. Additionally, the soil benefits from being naturally fertilized.Therefore, the use of rhizobia as biofertilizers is a sustainable practice.Why are legumes so important? Some, like soybeans, are key sources of agricultural protein. Some of the most importantgrain legumes are soybean, peanuts, peas, chickpeas, and beans. Other legumes, such as alfalfa, are used to feed cattle.
Soybean (Glycine max) is a legume that interacts symbiotically with the soil bacterium Bradyrhizobiumjaponicum to form specialized structures on the roots called nodules where nitrogen fixation occurs.
Early Biotechnology: Cheese, Bread, Wine, Beer, and YogurtAccording to the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity, biotechnology is “any technological application thatuses biological systems, living organisms, or derivatives thereof, to make or modify products or processes for specificuse."[5]The concept of “specific use” involves some sort of commercial application. Genetic engineering, artificial selection,antibiotic production, and cell culture are current topics of study in biotechnology. However, humans have used prokaryotesbefore the term biotechnology was even coined. In addition, some of the goods and services are as simple as cheese, bread,wine, beer, and yogurt, which employ both bacteria and other microbes, such as yeast, a fungus.
Some of the products derived from the use of prokaryotes in early biotechnology include (a) cheese, (b)wine, (c) beer and bread, and (d) yogurt.
Cheese production began around 4,000–7,000 years ago when humans began to breed animals and process their milk.Fermentation in this case preserves nutrients: Milk will spoil relatively quickly, but when processed as cheese, it is morestable. As for beer, the oldest records of brewing are about 6,000 years old and refer to the Sumerians. Evidence indicatesthat the Sumerians discovered fermentation by chance. Wine has been produced for about 4,500 years, and evidencesuggests that cultured milk products, like yogurt, have existed for at least 4,000 years.Using Prokaryotes to Clean up Our Planet: BioremediationMicrobial bioremediation is the use of prokaryotes (or microbial metabolism) to remove pollutants. Bioremediationhas been used to remove agricultural chemicals (pesticides, fertilizers) that leach from soil into groundwater and thesubsurface. Certain toxic metals and oxides, such as selenium and arsenic compounds, can also be removed from water bybioremediation. The reduction of SeO4-2 to SeO3-2 and to Se0 (metallic selenium) is a method used to remove seleniumions from water. Mercury is an example of a toxic metal that can be removed from an environment by bioremediation.As an active ingredient of some pesticides, mercury is used in industry and is also a by-product of certain processes,such as battery production. Methyl mercury is usually present in very low concentrations in natural environments, but itis highly toxic because it accumulates in living tissues. Several species of bacteria can carry out the biotransformation oftoxic mercury into nontoxic forms. These bacteria, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, can convert Hg+2 into Hg0, which isnontoxic to humans.One of the most useful and interesting examples of the use of prokaryotes for bioremediation purposes is the cleanup ofoil spills. The importance of prokaryotes to petroleum bioremediation has been demonstrated in several oil spills in recentyears, such as the Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska (1989) (Figure 22.29), the Prestige oil spill in Spain (2002), the spillinto the Mediterranean from a Lebanon power plant (2006), and more recently, the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico(2010). To clean up these spills, bioremediation is promoted by the addition of inorganic nutrients that help bacteria to grow.Hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria feed on hydrocarbons in the oil droplet, breaking down the hydrocarbons. Some species,such as Alcanivorax borkumensis, produce surfactants that solubilize the oil, whereas other bacteria degrade the oil intocarbon dioxide. In the case of oil spills in the ocean, ongoing, natural bioremediation tends to occur, inasmuch as there are oil-consuming bacteria in the ocean prior to the spill. In addition to naturally occurring oil-degrading bacteria, humans selectand engineer bacteria that possess the same capability with increased efficacy and spectrum of hydrocarbon compounds thatcan be processed. Under ideal conditions, it has been reported that up to 80 percent of the nonvolatile components in oil canbe degraded within one year of the spill. Other oil fractions containing aromatic and highly branched hydrocarbon chainsare more difficult to remove and remain in the environment for longer periods of time.
Cleaning up oil after the Valdez spill in Alaska, workers hosed oil from beaches and then used afloating boom to corral the oil, which was finally skimmed from the water surface. Some species of bacteria are ableto solubilize and degrade the oil. (b) One of the most catastrophic consequences of oil spills is the damage to fauna.
