VIRUSES
The tobacco mosaic virus (left), seen here by transmission electron microscopy, was the first virus to bediscovered. The virus causes disease in tobacco and other plants, such as the orchid.
IntroductionNo one knows exactly when viruses emerged or from where they came, since viruses do not leave historical footprints suchas fossils. Modern viruses are thought to be a mosaic of bits and pieces of nucleic acids picked up from various sourcesalong their respective evolutionary paths. Viruses are acellular, parasitic entities that are not classified within any kingdom.Unlike most living organisms, viruses are not cells and cannot divide. Instead, they infect a host cell and use the host’sreplication processes to produce identical progeny virus particles. Viruses infect organisms as diverse as bacteria, plants,and animals. They exist in a netherworld between a living organism and a nonliving entity. Living things grow, metabolize,and reproduce. Viruses replicate, but to do so, they are entirely dependent on their host cells. They do not metabolize orgrow, but are assembled in their mature form.
Viral Evolution, Morphology, and Classification
Viruses are diverse entities. They vary in their structure, their replication methods, and in their target hosts. Nearly all formsof life—from bacteria and archaea to eukaryotes such as plants, animals, and fungi—have viruses that infect them. Whilemost biological diversity can be understood through evolutionary history, such as how species have adapted to conditionsand environments, much about virus origins and evolution remains unknown.
Discovery and DetectionViruses were first discovered after the development of a porcelain filter, called the Chamberland-Pasteur filter, which couldremove all bacteria visible in the microscope from any liquid sample. In 1886, Adolph Meyer demonstrated that a disease oftobacco plants, tobacco mosaic disease, could be transferred from a diseased plant to a healthy one via liquid plant extracts.In 1892, Dmitri Ivanowski showed that this disease could be transmitted in this way even after the Chamberland-Pasteurfilter had removed all viable bacteria from the extract. Still, it was many years before it was proven that these “filterable”infectious agents were not simply very small bacteria but were a new type of very small, disease-causing particle.Virions, single virus particles, are very small, about 20–250 nanometers in diameter. These individual virus particles are theinfectious form of a virus outside the host cell. Unlike bacteria (which are about 100-times larger), we cannot see viruseswith a light microscope, with the exception of some large virions of the poxvirus family. It was not until the development ofthe electron microscope in the late 1930s that scientists got their first good view of the structure of the tobacco mosaic virus(TMV) (Figure 21.1) and other viruses (Figure 21.2). The surface structure of virions can be observed by both scanningand transmission electron microscopy, whereas the internal structures of the virus can only be observed in images from atransmission electron microscope. The use of these technologies has allowed for the discovery of many viruses of all typesof living organisms. They were initially grouped by shared morphology. Later, groups of viruses were classified by the typeof nucleic acid they contained, DNA or RNA, and whether their nucleic acid was single- or double-stranded. More recently,molecular analysis of viral replicative cycles has further refined their classification.
In these transmission electron micrographs, (a) a virus is dwarfed by the bacterial cell it infects, while (b)these E. coli cells are dwarfed by cultured colon cells.
Evolution of VirusesAlthough biologists have accumulated a significant amount of knowledge about how present-day viruses evolve, muchless is known about how viruses originated in the first place. When exploring the evolutionary history of most organisms,scientists can look at fossil records and similar historic evidence. However, viruses do not fossilize, so researchers mustconjecture by investigating how today’s viruses evolve and by using biochemical and genetic information to createspeculative virus histories.While most findings agree that viruses don’t have a single common ancestor, scholars have yet to find a single hypothesisabout virus origins that is fully accepted in the field. One such hypothesis, called devolution or the regressive hypothesis,proposes to explain the origin of viruses by suggesting that viruses evolved from free-living cells. However, manycomponents of how this process might have occurred are a mystery. A second hypothesis (called escapist or the progressivehypothesis) accounts for viruses having either an RNA or a DNA genome and suggests that viruses originated from RNAand DNA molecules that escaped from a host cell. A third hypothesis posits a system of self-replication similar to that of
other self-replicating molecules, likely evolving alongside the cells they rely on as hosts; studies of some plant pathogenssupport this hypothesis.As technology advances, scientists may develop and refine further hypotheses to explain the origin of viruses. The emergingfield called virus molecular systematics attempts to do just that through comparisons of sequenced genetic material. Theseresearchers hope to one day better understand the origin of viruses, a discovery that could lead to advances in the treatmentsfor the ailments they produce.Viral MorphologyViruses are acellular, meaning they are biological entities that do not have a cellular structure. They therefore lack most ofthe components of cells, such as organelles, ribosomes, and the plasma membrane. A virion consists of a nucleic acid core,an outer protein coating or capsid, and sometimes an outer envelope made of protein and phospholipid membranes derivedfrom the host cell. Viruses may also contain additional proteins, such as enzymes. The most obvious difference betweenmembers of viral families is their morphology, which is quite diverse. An interesting feature of viral complexity is that thecomplexity of the host does not correlate with the complexity of the virion. Some of the most complex virion structures areobserved in bacteriophages, viruses that infect the simplest living organisms, bacteria.MorphologyViruses come in many shapes and sizes, but these are consistent and distinct for each viral family. All virions have a nucleicacid genome covered by a protective layer of proteins, called a capsid. The capsid is made up of protein subunits calledcapsomeres. Some viral capsids are simple polyhedral “spheres,” whereas others are quite complex in structure.In general, the shapes of viruses are classified into four groups: filamentous, isometric (or icosahedral), enveloped, and headand tail. Filamentous viruses are long and cylindrical. Many plant viruses are filamentous, including TMV. Isometric viruseshave shapes that are roughly spherical, such as poliovirus or herpesviruses. Enveloped viruses have membranes surroundingcapsids. Animal viruses, such as HIV, are frequently enveloped. Head and tail viruses infect bacteria and have a head that issimilar to icosahedral viruses and a tail shape like filamentous viruses.Many viruses use some sort of glycoprotein to attach to their host cells via molecules on the cell called viral receptors(Figure 21.3). For these viruses, attachment is a requirement for later penetration of the cell membrane, so they cancomplete their replication inside the cell. The receptors that viruses use are molecules that are normally found on cellsurfaces and have their own physiological functions. Viruses have simply evolved to make use of these molecules for theirown replication. For example, HIV uses the CD4 molecule on T lymphocytes as one of its receptors. CD4 is a type ofmolecule called a cell adhesion molecule, which functions to keep different types of immune cells in close proximity toeach other during the generation of a T lymphocyte immune response.
The KSHV virus binds the xCT receptor on the surface of human cells. xCT receptors protect cells againststress. Stressed cells express more xCT receptors than non-stressed cells. The KSHV virion causes cells to becomestressed, thereby increasing expression of the receptor to which it binds.
Among the most complex virions known, the T4 bacteriophage, which infects the Escherichia coli bacterium, has a tailstructure that the virus uses to attach to host cells and a head structure that houses its DNA.Adenovirus, a non-enveloped animal virus that causes respiratory illnesses in humans, uses glycoprotein spikes protrudingfrom its capsomeres to attach to host cells. Non-enveloped viruses also include those that cause polio (poliovirus), plantarwarts (papillomavirus), and hepatitis A (hepatitis A virus).Enveloped virions like HIV, the causative agent in AIDS, consist of nucleic acid (RNA in the case of HIV) and capsidproteins surrounded by a phospholipid bilayer envelope and its associated proteins. Glycoproteins embedded in the viralenvelope are used to attach to host cells. Other envelope proteins are the matrix proteins that stabilize the envelope andoften play a role in the assembly of progeny virions. Chicken pox, influenza, and mumps are examples of diseases causedby viruses with envelopes. Because of the fragility of the envelope, non-enveloped viruses are more resistant to changes intemperature, pH, and some disinfectants than enveloped viruses.Overall, the shape of the virion and the presence or absence of an envelope tell us little about what disease the virus maycause or what species it might infect, but they are still useful means to begin viral classification (Figure 21.4).
Viruses can be either complex in shape or relatively simple. This figure shows three relativelycomplex virions: the bacteriophage T4, with its DNA-containing head group and tail fibers that attach to host cells;adenovirus, which uses spikes from its capsid to bind to host cells; and HIV, which uses glycoproteins embeddedin its envelope to bind to host cells. Notice that HIV has proteins called matrix proteins, internal to the envelope,which help stabilize virion shape.
Types of Nucleic AcidUnlike nearly all living organisms that use DNA as their genetic material, viruses may use either DNA or RNA as theirs.The virus core contains the genome or total genetic content of the virus. Viral genomes tend to be small, containing only
those genes that encode proteins that the virus cannot get from the host cell. This genetic material may be single- or doublestranded.It may also be linear or circular. While most viruses contain a single nucleic acid, others have genomes that haveseveral, which are called segments.In DNA viruses, the viral DNA directs the host cell’s replication proteins to synthesize new copies of the viral genome andto transcribe and translate that genome into viral proteins. DNA viruses cause human diseases, such as chickenpox, hepatitisB, and some venereal diseases, like herpes and genital warts.RNA viruses contain only RNA as their genetic material. To replicate their genomes in the host cell, the RNA virusesencode enzymes that can replicate RNA into DNA, which cannot be done by the host cell. These RNA polymerase enzymesare more likely to make copying errors than DNA polymerases, and therefore often make mistakes during transcription. Forthis reason, mutations in RNA viruses occur more frequently than in DNA viruses. This causes them to change and adaptmore rapidly to their host. Human diseases caused by RNA viruses include hepatitis C, measles, and rabies.Virus ClassificationTo understand the features shared among different groups of viruses, a classification scheme is necessary. As most virusesare not thought to have evolved from a common ancestor, however, the methods that scientists use to classify living thingsare not very useful. Biologists have used several classification systems in the past, based on the morphology and geneticsof the different viruses. However, these earlier classification methods grouped viruses differently, based on which featuresof the virus they were using to classify them. The most commonly used classification method today is called the Baltimoreclassification scheme and is based on how messenger RNA (mRNA) is generated in each particular type of virus.Past Systems of ClassificationViruses are classified in several ways: by factors such as their core content (Table 21.1 and Figure 21.3), the structureof their capsids, and whether they have an outer envelope. The type of genetic material (DNA or RNA) and its structure(single- or double-stranded, linear or circular, and segmented or non-segmented) are used to classify the virus corestructures.
Viruses are classified based on their core genetic material and capsid design. (a) Rabies virus has asingle-stranded RNA (ssRNA) core and an enveloped helical capsid, whereas (b) variola virus, the causative agent ofsmallpox, has a double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) core and a complex capsid. Rabies transmission occurs when salivafrom an infected mammal enters a wound. The virus travels through neurons in the peripheral nervous system to thecentral nervous system where it impairs brain function, and then travels to other tissues. The virus can infect anymammal, and most die within weeks of infection. Smallpox is a human virus transmitted by inhalation of the variolavirus, localized in the skin, mouth, and throat, which causes a characteristic rash. Before its eradication in 1979,infection resulted in a 30–35 percent mortality rate.
Viruses can also be classified by the design of their capsids (Figure 21.4 and Figure 21.5). Capsids are classified as nakedicosahedral, enveloped icosahedral, enveloped helical, naked helical, and complex (Figure 21.6 and Figure 21.7). The typeof genetic material (DNA or RNA) and its structure (single- or double-stranded, linear or circular, and segmented or nonsegmented)are used to classify the virus core structures (Table 21.2).
Adenovirus (left) is depicted with a double-stranded DNA genome enclosed in an icosahedral capsid thatis 90–100 nm across. The virus, shown clustered in the micrograph (right), is transmitted orally and causes a variety ofillnesses in vertebrates, including human eye and respiratory infections. (
Transmission electron micrographs of various viruses show their structures. The capsid of the (a) poliovirus is naked icosahedral; (b) the Epstein-Barr virus capsid is enveloped icosahedral; (c) the mumps virus capsid isan enveloped helix; (d) the tobacco mosaic virus capsid is naked helical; and (e) the herpesvirus capsid is complex.
Baltimore ClassificationThe most commonly used system of virus classification was developed by Nobel Prize-winning biologist David Baltimorein the early 1970s. In addition to the differences in morphology and genetics mentioned above, the Baltimore classificationscheme groups viruses according to how the mRNA is produced during the replicative cycle of the virus.Group I viruses contain double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) as their genome. Their mRNA is produced by transcription inmuch the same way as with cellular DNA. Group II viruses have single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) as their genome. Theyconvert their single-stranded genomes into a dsDNA intermediate before transcription to mRNA can occur. Group IIIviruses use dsRNA as their genome. The strands separate, and one of them is used as a template for the generation of mRNAusing the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase encoded by the virus. Group IV viruses have ssRNA as their genome with apositive polarity. Positive polarity means that the genomic RNA can serve directly as mRNA. Intermediates of dsRNA,called replicative intermediates, are made in the process of copying the genomic RNA. Multiple, full-length RNA strands
of negative polarity (complimentary to the positive-stranded genomic RNA) are formed from these intermediates, whichmay then serve as templates for the production of RNA with positive polarity, including both full-length genomic RNAand shorter viral mRNAs. Group V viruses contain ssRNA genomes with a negative polarity, meaning that their sequenceis complementary to the mRNA. As with Group IV viruses, dsRNA intermediates are used to make copies of the genomeand produce mRNA. In this case, the negative-stranded genome can be converted directly to mRNA. Additionally, fulllengthpositive RNA strands are made to serve as templates for the production of the negative-stranded genome. GroupVI viruses have diploid (two copies) ssRNA genomes that must be converted, using the enzyme reverse transcriptase, todsDNA; the dsDNA is then transported to the nucleus of the host cell and inserted into the host genome. Then, mRNA canbe produced by transcription of the viral DNA that was integrated into the host genome. Group VII viruses have partialdsDNA genomes and make ssRNA intermediates that act as mRNA, but are also converted back into dsDNA genomes byreverse transcriptase, necessary for genome replication. The characteristics of each group in the Baltimore classification aresummarized in Table 21.3 with examples of each group.
Virus Infections and Hosts
certain species of hosts and only certain cells within that host. Cells that a virus may use to replicate are called permissive.For most viruses, the molecular basis for this specificity is that a particular surface molecule known as the viral receptormust be found on the host cell surface for the virus to attach. Also, metabolic and host cell immune response differencesseen in different cell types based on differential gene expression are a likely factor in which cells a virus may target forreplication. The permissive cell must make the substances that the virus needs or the virus will not be able to replicate there.Steps of Virus InfectionsA virus must use cell processes to replicate. The viral replication cycle can produce dramatic biochemical and structuralchanges in the host cell, which may cause cell damage. These changes, called cytopathic (causing cell damage) effects,can change cell functions or even destroy the cell. Some infected cells, such as those infected by the common cold virusknown as rhinovirus, die through lysis (bursting) or apoptosis (programmed cell death or “cell suicide”), releasing allprogeny virions at once. The symptoms of viral diseases result from the immune response to the virus, which attempts tocontrol and eliminate the virus from the body, and from cell damage caused by the virus. Many animal viruses, such asHIV (human immunodeficiency virus), leave the infected cells of the immune system by a process known as budding,where virions leave the cell individually. During the budding process, the cell does not undergo lysis and is not immediatelykilled. However, the damage to the cells that the virus infects may make it impossible for the cells to function normally,even though the cells remain alive for a period of time. Most productive viral infections follow similar steps in the virusreplication cycle: attachment, penetration, uncoating, replication, assembly, and release (Figure 21.8).AttachmentA virus attaches to a specific receptor site on the host cell membrane through attachment proteins in the capsid or viaglycoproteins embedded in the viral envelope. The specificity of this interaction determines the host—and the cells withinthe host—that can be infected by a particular virus. This can be illustrated by thinking of several keys and several locks,where each key will fit only one specific lock.
EntryThe nucleic acid of bacteriophages enters the host cell naked, leaving the capsid outside the cell. Plant and animal virusescan enter through endocytosis, in which the cell membrane surrounds and engulfs the entire virus. Some enveloped virusesenter the cell when the viral envelope fuses directly with the cell membrane. Once inside the cell, the viral capsid isdegraded, and the viral nucleic acid is released, which then becomes available for replication and transcription.Replication and AssemblyThe replication mechanism depends on the viral genome. DNA viruses usually use host cell proteins and enzymes tomake additional DNA that is transcribed to messenger RNA (mRNA), which is then used to direct protein synthesis.RNA viruses usually use the RNA core as a template for synthesis of viral genomic RNA and mRNA. The viral mRNAdirects the host cell to synthesize viral enzymes and capsid proteins, and assemble new virions. Of course, there areexceptions to this pattern. If a host cell does not provide the enzymes necessary for viral replication, viral genes supplythe information to direct synthesis of the missing proteins. Retroviruses, such as HIV, have an RNA genome that mustbe reverse transcribed into DNA, which then is incorporated into the host cell genome. They are within group VI of theBaltimore classification scheme. To convert RNA into DNA, retroviruses must contain genes that encode the virus-specificenzyme reverse transcriptase that transcribes an RNA template to DNA. Reverse transcription never occurs in uninfectedhost cells—the needed enzyme reverse transcriptase is only derived from the expression of viral genes within the infectedhost cells. The fact that HIV produces some of its own enzymes not found in the host has allowed researchers to developdrugs that inhibit these enzymes. These drugs, including the reverse transcriptase inhibitor AZT, inhibit HIV replication byreducing the activity of the enzyme without affecting the host’s metabolism. This approach has led to the development of avariety of drugs used to treat HIV and has been effective at reducing the number of infectious virions (copies of viral RNA)in the blood to non-detectable levels in many HIV-infected individuals.
EgressThe last stage of viral replication is the release of the new virions produced in the host organism, where they are able toinfect adjacent cells and repeat the replication cycle. As you’ve learned, some viruses are released when the host cell dies,and other viruses can leave infected cells by budding through the membrane without directly killing the cell.
In influenza virus infection, glycoproteins attach to a host epithelial cell. As a result, the virus isengulfed. RNA and proteins are made and assembled into new virions.
Different Hosts and Their VirusesAs you’ve learned, viruses are often very specific as to which hosts and which cells within the host they will infect. Thisfeature of a virus makes it specific to one or a few species of life on Earth. On the other hand, so many different typesof viruses exist on Earth that nearly every living organism has its own set of viruses that tries to infect its cells. Even thesmallest and simplest of cells, prokaryotic bacteria, may be attacked by specific types of viruses.
This transmission electron micrograph shows bacteriophages attached to a bacterial cell. (credit:modification of work by Dr. Graham Beards; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)Bacteriophages are viruses that infect bacteria (Figure 21.9). When infection of a cell by a bacteriophage results in theproduction of new virions, the infection is said to be productive. If the virions are released by bursting the cell, the virusreplicates by means of a lytic cycle (Figure 21.10). An example of a lytic bacteriophage is T4, which infects Escherichiacoli found in the human intestinal tract. Sometimes, however, a virus can remain within the cell without being released. Forexample, when a temperate bacteriophage infects a bacterial cell, it replicates by means of a lysogenic cycle (Figure 21.10),and the viral genome is incorporated into the genome of the host cell. When the phage DNA is incorporated into the hostcell genome, it is called a prophage. An example of a lysogenic bacteriophage is the λ (lambda) virus, which also infectsthe E. coli bacterium. Viruses that infect plant or animal cells may also undergo infections where they are not producingvirions for long periods. An example is the animal herpesviruses, including herpes simplex viruses, the cause of oral andgenital herpes in humans. In a process called latency, these viruses can exist in nervous tissue for long periods of timewithout producing new virions, only to leave latency periodically and cause lesions in the skin where the virus replicates.Even though there are similarities between lysogeny and latency, the term lysogenic cycle is usually reserved to describebacteriophages. Latency will be described in more detail below.
A temperate bacteriophage has both lytic and lysogenic cycles. In the lytic cycle, the phagereplicates and lyses the host cell. In the lysogenic cycle, phage DNA is incorporated into the host genome,where it is passed on to subsequent generations. Environmental stressors such as starvation or exposure to toxicchemicals may cause the prophage to excise and enter the lytic cycle.
Animal VirusesAnimal viruses, unlike the viruses of plants and bacteria, do not have to penetrate a cell wall to gain access to the host cell.Non-enveloped or “naked” animal viruses may enter cells in two different ways. As a protein in the viral capsid binds toits receptor on the host cell, the virus may be taken inside the cell via a vesicle during the normal cell process of receptormediatedendocytosis. An alternative method of cell penetration used by non-enveloped viruses is for capsid proteins toundergo shape changes after binding to the receptor, creating channels in the host cell membrane. The viral genome is then“injected” into the host cell through these channels in a manner analogous to that used by many bacteriophages. Envelopedviruses also have two ways of entering cells after binding to their receptors: receptor-mediated endocytosis, or fusion. Manyenveloped viruses enter the cell by receptor-mediated endocytosis in a fashion similar to some non-enveloped viruses. Onthe other hand, fusion only occurs with enveloped virions. These viruses, which include HIV among others, use specialfusion proteins in their envelopes to cause the envelope to fuse with the plasma membrane of the cell, thus releasing thegenome and capsid of the virus into the cell cytoplasm.After making their proteins and copying their genomes, animal viruses complete the assembly of new virions and exit thecell. As we have already discussed using the example of HIV, enveloped animal viruses may bud from the cell membrane asthey assemble themselves, taking a piece of the cell’s plasma membrane in the process. On the other hand, non-envelopedviral progeny, such as rhinoviruses, accumulate in infected cells until there is a signal for lysis or apoptosis, and all virionsare released together.
As you will learn in the next module, animal viruses are associated with a variety of human diseases. Some of them followthe classic pattern of acute disease, where symptoms get increasingly worse for a short period followed by the eliminationof the virus from the body by the immune system and eventual recovery from the infection. Examples of acute viraldiseases are the common cold and influenza. Other viruses cause long-term chronic infections, such as the virus causinghepatitis C, whereas others, like herpes simplex virus, only cause intermittent symptoms. Still other viruses, such ashuman herpesviruses 6 and 7, which in some cases can cause the minor childhood disease roseola, often successfully causeproductive infections without causing any symptoms at all in the host, and thus we say these patients have an asymptomaticinfection.In hepatitis C infections, the virus grows and reproduces in liver cells, causing low levels of liver damage. The damage isso low that infected individuals are often unaware that they are infected, and many infections are detected only by routineblood work on patients with risk factors such as intravenous drug use. On the other hand, since many of the symptomsof viral diseases are caused by immune responses, a lack of symptoms is an indication of a weak immune response to thevirus. This allows for the virus to escape elimination by the immune system and persist in individuals for years, all the whileproducing low levels of progeny virions in what is known as a chronic viral disease. Chronic infection of the liver by thisvirus leads to a much greater chance of developing liver cancer, sometimes as much as 30 years after the initial infection.As already discussed, herpes simplex virus can remain in a state of latency in nervous tissue for months, even years. Asthe virus “hides” in the tissue and makes few if any viral proteins, there is nothing for the immune response to act against,and immunity to the virus slowly declines. Under certain conditions, including various types of physical and psychologicalstress, the latent herpes simplex virus may be reactivated and undergo a lytic replication cycle in the skin, causing the lesionsassociated with the disease. Once virions are produced in the skin and viral proteins are synthesized, the immune responseis again stimulated and resolves the skin lesions in a few days by destroying viruses in the skin. As a result of this type ofreplicative cycle, appearances of cold sores and genital herpes outbreaks only occur intermittently, even though the virusesremain in the nervous tissue for life. Latent infections are common with other herpesviruses as well, including the varicellazostervirus that causes chickenpox. After having a chickenpox infection in childhood, the varicella-zoster virus can remainlatent for many years and reactivate in adults to cause the painful condition known as “shingles” (Figure 21.11ab).
(a) Varicella-zoster, the virus that causes chickenpox, has an enveloped icosahedral capsid visible in thistransmission electron micrograph. Its double-stranded DNA genome becomes incorporated in the host DNA and canreactivate after latency in the form of (b) shingles, often exhibiting a rash.
Some animal-infecting viruses, including the hepatitis C virus discussed above, are known as oncogenic viruses: Theyhave the ability to cause cancer. These viruses interfere with the normal regulation of the host cell cycle either by eitherintroducing genes that stimulate unregulated cell growth (oncogenes) or by interfering with the expression of genes thatinhibit cell growth. Oncogenic viruses can be either DNA or RNA viruses. Cancers known to be associated with viralinfections include cervical cancer caused by human papillomavirus (HPV) (Figure 21.12), liver cancer caused by hepatitisB virus, T-cell leukemia, and several types of lymphoma.
HPV, or human papillomavirus, has a naked icosahedral capsid visible in this transmission electronmicrograph and a double-stranded DNA genome that is incorporated into the host DNA. The virus, which is sexuallytransmitted, is oncogenic and can lead to cervical cancer.
Plant VirusesPlant viruses, like other viruses, contain a core of either DNA or RNA. You have already learned about one of these, thetobacco mosaic virus. As plant viruses have a cell wall to protect their cells, these viruses do not use receptor-mediatedendocytosis to enter host cells as is seen with animal viruses. For many plant viruses to be transferred from plant to plant,damage to some of the plants’ cells must occur to allow the virus to enter a new host. This damage is often caused byweather, insects, animals, fire, or human activities like farming or landscaping. Additionally, plant offspring may inheritviral diseases from parent plants. Plant viruses can be transmitted by a variety of vectors, through contact with an infectedplant’s sap, by living organisms such as insects and nematodes, and through pollen. When plants viruses are transferredbetween different plants, this is known as horizontal transmission, and when they are inherited from a parent, this is calledvertical transmission.Symptoms of viral diseases vary according to the virus and its host (Table 21.4). One common symptom is hyperplasia, theabnormal proliferation of cells that causes the appearance of plant tumors known as galls. Other viruses induce hypoplasia,or decreased cell growth, in the leaves of plants, causing thin, yellow areas to appear. Still other viruses affect the plant bydirectly killing plant cells, a process known as cell necrosis. Other symptoms of plant viruses include malformed leaves,black streaks on the stems of the plants, altered growth of stems, leaves, or fruits, and ring spots, which are circular or linearareas of discoloration found in a leaf.
Plant viruses can seriously disrupt crop growth and development, significantly affecting our food supply. They areresponsible for poor crop quality and quantity globally, and can bring about huge economic losses annually. Others virusesmay damage plants used in landscaping. Some viruses that infect agricultural food plants include the name of the plantthey infect, such as tomato spotted wilt virus, bean common mosaic virus, and cucumber mosaic virus. In plants used forlandscaping, two of the most common viruses are peony ring spot and rose mosaic virus. There are far too many plantviruses to discuss each in detail, but symptoms of bean common mosaic virus result in lowered bean production and stunted,unproductive plants. In the ornamental rose, the rose mosaic disease causes wavy yellow lines and colored splotches on theleaves of the plant.
Prevention and Treatment of Viral Infections
Viruses cause a variety of diseases in animals, including humans, ranging from the common cold to potentially fatal illnesseslike meningitis (Figure 21.13). These diseases can be treated by antiviral drugs or by vaccines, but some viruses, such asHIV, are capable of both avoiding the immune response and mutating to become resistant to antiviral drugs.
Viruses can cause dozens of ailments in humans, ranging from mild illnesses to serious diseases.
Vaccines for PreventionWhile we do have limited numbers of effective antiviral drugs, such as those used to treat HIV and influenza, the primarymethod of controlling viral disease is by vaccination, which is intended to prevent outbreaks by building immunity to avirus or virus family (Figure 21.14). Vaccines may be prepared using live viruses, killed viruses, or molecular subunits ofthe virus. The killed viral vaccines and subunit viruses are both incapable of causing disease.Live viral vaccines are designed in the laboratory to cause few symptoms in recipients while giving them protectiveimmunity against future infections. Polio was one disease that represented a milestone in the use of vaccines. Massimmunization campaigns in the 1950s (killed vaccine) and 1960s (live vaccine) significantly reduced the incidence of thedisease, which caused muscle paralysis in children and generated a great amount of fear in the general population whenregional epidemics occurred. The success of the polio vaccine paved the way for the routine dispensation of childhoodvaccines against measles, mumps, rubella, chickenpox, and other diseases.The danger of using live vaccines, which are usually more effective than killed vaccines, is the low but significantdanger that these viruses will revert to their disease-causing form by back mutations. Live vaccines are usually madeby attenuating (weakening) the “wild-type” (disease-causing) virus by growing it in the laboratory in tissues or attemperatures different from what the virus is accustomed to in the host. Adaptations to these new cells or temperaturesinduce mutations in the genomes of the virus, allowing it to grow better in the laboratory while inhibiting its ability to causedisease when reintroduced into conditions found in the host. These attenuated viruses thus still cause infection, but they donot grow very well, allowing the immune response to develop in time to prevent major disease. Back mutations occur whenthe vaccine undergoes mutations in the host such that it readapts to the host and can again cause disease, which can then bespread to other humans in an epidemic. This type of scenario happened as recently as 2007 in Nigeria where mutations in apolio vaccine led to an epidemic of polio in that country.Some vaccines are in continuous development because certain viruses, such as influenza and HIV, have a high mutation ratecompared to other viruses and normal host cells. With influenza, mutations in the surface molecules of the virus help theorganism evade the protective immunity that may have been obtained in a previous influenza season, making it necessaryfor individuals to get vaccinated every year. Other viruses, such as those that cause the childhood diseases measles, mumps,and rubella, mutate so infrequently that the same vaccine is used year after year.
Vaccines and Anti-viral Drugs for TreatmentIn some cases, vaccines can be used to treat an active viral infection. The concept behind this is that by giving thevaccine, immunity is boosted without adding more disease-causing virus. In the case of rabies, a fatal neurological diseasetransmitted via the saliva of rabies virus-infected animals, the progression of the disease from the time of the animal biteto the time it enters the central nervous system may be 2 weeks or longer. This is enough time to vaccinate an individualwho suspects that they have been bitten by a rabid animal, and their boosted immune response is sufficient to prevent thevirus from entering nervous tissue. Thus, the potentially fatal neurological consequences of the disease are averted, and theindividual only has to recover from the infected bite. This approach is also being used for the treatment of Ebola, one of thefastest and most deadly viruses on earth. Transmitted by bats and great apes, this disease can cause death in 70–90 percentof infected humans within 2 weeks. Using newly developed vaccines that boost the immune response in this way, there ishope that affected individuals will be better able to control the virus, potentially saving a greater percentage of infectedpersons from a rapid and very painful death.Another way of treating viral infections is the use of antiviral drugs. These drugs often have limited success in curing viraldisease, but in many cases, they have been used to control and reduce symptoms for a wide variety of viral diseases. Formost viruses, these drugs can inhibit the virus by blocking the actions of one or more of its proteins. It is important that thetargeted proteins be encoded by viral genes and that these molecules are not present in a healthy host cell. In this way, viralgrowth is inhibited without damaging the host. There are large numbers of antiviral drugs available to treat infections, somespecific for a particular virus and others that can affect multiple viruses.Antivirals have been developed to treat genital herpes (herpes simplex II) and influenza. For genital herpes, drugs such asacyclovir can reduce the number and duration of episodes of active viral disease, during which patients develop viral lesionsin their skin cells. As the virus remains latent in nervous tissue of the body for life, this drug is not curative but can make thesymptoms of the disease more manageable. For influenza, drugs like Tamiflu (oseltamivir) (Figure 21.15) can reduce theduration of “flu” symptoms by 1 or 2 days, but the drug does not prevent symptoms entirely. Tamiflu works by inhibiting
an enzyme (viral neuraminidase) that allows new virions to leave their infected cells. Thus, Tamiflu inhibits the spread ofvirus from infected to uninfected cells. Other antiviral drugs, such as Ribavirin, have been used to treat a variety of viralinfections, although its mechanism of action against certain viruses remains unclear.
(a) Tamiflu inhibits a viral enzyme called neuraminidase (NA) found in the influenza viral envelope.(b) Neuraminidase cleaves the connection between viral hemagglutinin (HA), also found in the viral envelope, andglycoproteins on the host cell surface. Inhibition of neuraminidase prevents the virus from detaching from the host cell,thereby blocking further infection.
By far, the most successful use of antivirals has been in the treatment of the retrovirus HIV, which causes a disease that, ifuntreated, is usually fatal within 10–12 years after infection. Anti-HIV drugs have been able to control viral replication tothe point that individuals receiving these drugs survive for a significantly longer time than the untreated.Anti-HIV drugs inhibit viral replication at many different phases of the HIV replicative cycle (Figure 21.16). Drugshave been developed that inhibit the fusion of the HIV viral envelope with the plasma membrane of the host cell (fusioninhibitors), the conversion of its RNA genome into double-stranded DNA (reverse transcriptase inhibitors), the integrationof the viral DNA into the host genome (integrase inhibitors), and the processing of viral proteins (protease inhibitors).
HIV, an enveloped, icosahedral virus, attaches to the CD4 receptor of an immune cell and fuses withthe cell membrane. Viral contents are released into the cell, where viral enzymes convert the single-stranded RNAgenome into DNA and incorporate it into the host genome. (credit: NIAID, NIH)When any of these drugs are used individually, the high mutation rate of the virus allows it to easily and rapidly developresistance to the drug, limiting the drug’s effectiveness. The breakthrough in the treatment of HIV was the developmentof HAART, highly active anti-retroviral therapy, which involves a mixture of different drugs, sometimes called a drug“cocktail.” By attacking the virus at different stages of its replicative cycle, it is much more difficult for the virus to developresistance to multiple drugs at the same time. Still, even with the use of combination HAART therapy, there is concern that,over time, the virus will develop resistance to this therapy. Thus, new anti-HIV drugs are constantly being developed withthe hope of continuing the battle against this highly fatal virus.
Applied VirologyThe study of viruses has led to the development of a variety of new ways to treat non-viral diseases.Viruses have been used in gene therapy. Gene therapy is used to treat genetic diseases such as severecombined immunodeficiency (SCID), a heritable, recessive disease in which children are born with severelycompromised immune systems. One common type of SCID is due to the lack of an enzyme, adenosinedeaminase (ADA), which breaks down purine bases. To treat this disease by gene therapy, bone marrowcells are taken from a SCID patient and the ADA gene is inserted. This is where viruses come in, andtheir use relies on their ability to penetrate living cells and bring genes in with them. Viruses such asadenovirus, an upper respiratory human virus, are modified by the addition of the ADA gene, and the virusthen transports this gene into the cell. The modified cells, now capable of making ADA, are then givenback to the patients in the hope of curing them. Gene therapy using viruses as carrier of genes (viralvectors), although still experimental, holds promise for the treatment of many genetic diseases. Still, manytechnological problems need to be solved for this approach to be a viable method for treating geneticdisease.Another medical use for viruses relies on their specificity and ability to kill the cells they infect. Oncolyticviruses are engineered in the laboratory specifically to attack and kill cancer cells. A genetically modifiedadenovirus known as H101 has been used since 2005 in clinical trials in China to treat head and neckcancers. The results have been promising, with a greater short-term response rate to the combination ofchemotherapy and viral therapy than to chemotherapy treatment alone. This ongoing research may heraldthe beginning of a new age of cancer therapy, where viruses are engineered to find and specifically killcancer cells, regardless of where in the body they may have spread.A third use of viruses in medicine relies on their specificity and involves using bacteriophages in thetreatment of bacterial infections. Bacterial diseases have been treated with antibiotics since the 1940s.However, over time, many bacteria have developed resistance to antibiotics. A good example is methicillinresistantStaphylococcus aureus (MRSA, pronounced “mersa”), an infection commonly acquired inhospitals. This bacterium is resistant to a variety of antibiotics, making it difficult to treat. The use ofbacteriophages specific for such bacteria would bypass their resistance to antibiotics and specifically killthem. Although phage therapy is in use in the Republic of Georgia to treat antibiotic-resistant bacteria,its use to treat human diseases has not been approved in most countries. However, the safety of thetreatment was confirmed in the United States when the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approvedspraying meats with bacteriophages to destroy the food pathogen Listeria. As more and more antibioticresistantstrains of bacteria evolve, the use of bacteriophages might be a potential solution to the problem,and the development of phage therapy is of much interest to researchers worldwide.
Prions and viroids are pathogens (agents with the ability to cause disease) that have simpler structures than viruses but, inthe case of prions, still can produce deadly diseases.PrionsPrions, so-called because they are proteinaceous, are infectious particles—smaller than viruses—that contain no nucleicacids (neither DNA nor RNA). Historically, the idea of an infectious agent that did not use nucleic acids was consideredimpossible, but pioneering work by Nobel Prize-winning biologist Stanley Prusiner has convinced the majority of biologiststhat such agents do indeed exist.
Fatal neurodegenerative diseases, such as kuru in humans and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in cattle(commonly known as “mad cow disease”) were shown to be transmitted by prions. The disease was spread by theconsumption of meat, nervous tissue, or internal organs between members of the same species. Kuru, native to humans inPapua New Guinea, was spread from human to human via ritualistic cannibalism. BSE, originally detected in the UnitedKingdom, was spread between cattle by the practice of including cattle nervous tissue in feed for other cattle. Individualswith kuru and BSE show symptoms of loss of motor control and unusual behaviors, such as uncontrolled bursts of laughterwith kuru, followed by death. Kuru was controlled by inducing the population to abandon its ritualistic cannibalism.On the other hand, BSE was initially thought to only affect cattle. Cattle dying of the disease were shown to have developedlesions or “holes” in the brain, causing the brain tissue to resemble a sponge. Later on in the outbreak, however, it wasshown that a similar encephalopathy in humans known as variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) could be acquired fromeating beef from animals with BSE, sparking bans by various countries on the importation of British beef and causingconsiderable economic damage to the British beef industry (Figure 21.17). BSE still exists in various areas, and although arare disease, individuals that acquire CJD are difficult to treat. The disease can be spread from human to human by blood,so many countries have banned blood donation from regions associated with BSE.The cause of spongiform encephalopathies, such as kuru and BSE, is an infectious structural variant of a normal cellularprotein called PrP (prion protein). It is this variant that constitutes the prion particle. PrP exists in two forms, PrPc, thenormal form of the protein, and PrPsc, the infectious form. Once introduced into the body, the PrPsc contained within theprion binds to PrPc and converts it to PrPsc. This leads to an exponential increase of the PrPsc protein, which aggregates.PrPsc is folded abnormally, and the resulting conformation (shape) is directly responsible for the lesions seen in the brainsof infected cattle. Thus, although not without some detractors among scientists, the prion seems likely to be an entirely newform of infectious agent, the first one found whose transmission is not reliant upon genes made of DNA or RNA.
(a) Endogenous normal prion protein (PrPc) is converted into the disease-causing form (PrPsc) when itencounters this variant form of the protein. PrPsc may arise spontaneously in brain tissue, especially if a mutant formof the protein is present, or it may occur via the spread of misfolded prions consumed in food into brain tissue. (b) Thisprion-infected brain tissue, visualized using light microscopy, shows the vacuoles that give it a spongy texture, typicalof transmissible spongiform encephalopathies.
ViroidsViroids are plant pathogens: small, single-stranded, circular RNA particles that are much simpler than a virus. They do nothave a capsid or outer envelope, but like viruses can reproduce only within a host cell. Viroids do not, however, manufactureany proteins, and they only produce a single, specific RNA molecule. Human diseases caused by viroids have yet to beidentified.Viroids are known to infect plants (Figure 21.18) and are responsible for crop failures and the loss of millions of dollarsin agricultural revenue each year. Some of the plants they infect include potatoes, cucumbers, tomatoes, chrysanthemums,avocados, and coconut palms.
These potatoes have been infected by the potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTV), which is typically spreadwhen infected knives are used to cut healthy potatoes, which are then planted.
VirologistVirology is the study of viruses, and a virologist is an individual trained in this discipline. Training in virologycan lead to many different career paths. Virologists are actively involved in academic research and teachingin colleges and medical schools. Some virologists treat patients or are involved in the generation andproduction of vaccines. They might participate in epidemiologic studies (Figure 21.19) or become sciencewriters, to name just a few possible careers.
centers have departments of virology, and smaller hospitals usually have virology labs within theirmicrobiology departments. Volunteer in a virology lab for a semester or work in one over the summer.Discussing the profession and getting a first-hand look at the work will help you decide whether a career invirology is right for you. The American Society of Virology’s website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/asv) isa good resource for information regarding training and careers in virology.
