Seedless plants, like these horsetails (Equisetum sp.), thrive in damp, shaded environments under a treecanopy where dryness is rare.
An incredible variety of seedless plants populates the terrestrial landscape. Mosses may grow on a tree trunk, and horsetailsmay display their jointed stems and spindly leaves across the forest floor. Today, seedless plants represent only a smallfraction of the plants in our environment; yet, three hundred million years ago, seedless plants dominated the landscape andgrew in the enormous swampy forests of the Carboniferous period. Their decomposition created large deposits of coal thatwe mine today.Current evolutionary thought holds that all plants—green algae as well as land dwellers—are monophyletic; that is, theyare descendants of a single common ancestor. The evolutionary transition from water to land imposed severe constraints onplants. They had to develop strategies to avoid drying out, to disperse reproductive cells in air, for structural support, andfor capturing and filtering sunlight. While seed plants developed adaptations that allowed them to populate even the mostarid habitats on Earth, full independence from water did not happen in all plants. Most seedless plants still require a moistenvironment.
The kingdom Plantae constitutes large and varied groups of organisms. There are more than 300,000 species of cataloguedplants. Of these, more than 260,000 are seed plants. Mosses, ferns, conifers, and flowering plants are all members of theplant kingdom. Most biologists also consider green algae to be plants, although others exclude all algae from the plantkingdom. The reason for this disagreement stems from the fact that only green algae, the Charophytes, share commoncharacteristics with land plants (such as using chlorophyll a and b plus carotene in the same proportion as plants). Thesecharacteristics are absent in other types of algae.
Plant Adaptations to Life on LandAs organisms adapted to life on land, they had to contend with several challenges in the terrestrial environment. Water hasbeen described as “the stuff of life.” The cell’s interior is a watery soup: in this medium, most small molecules dissolve and diffuse, and the majority of the chemical reactions of metabolism take place. Desiccation, or drying out, is a constant dangerfor an organism exposed to air. Even when parts of a plant are close to a source of water, the aerial structures are likely to dryout. Water also provides buoyancy to organisms. On land, plants need to develop structural support in a medium that doesnot give the same lift as water. The organism is also subject to bombardment by mutagenic radiation, because air does notfilter out ultraviolet rays of sunlight. Additionally, the male gametes must reach the female gametes using new strategies,because swimming is no longer possible. Therefore, both gametes and zygotes must be protected from desiccation. Thesuccessful land plants developed strategies to deal with all of these challenges. Not all adaptations appeared at once. Somespecies never moved very far from the aquatic environment, whereas others went on to conquer the driest environments onEarth.To balance these survival challenges, life on land offers several advantages. First, sunlight is abundant.Water acts as a filter,altering the spectral quality of light absorbed by the photosynthetic pigment chlorophyll. Second, carbon dioxide is morereadily available in air than in water, since it diffuses faster in air. Third, land plants evolved before land animals; therefore,until dry land was colonized by animals, no predators threatened plant life. This situation changed as animals emerged fromthe water and fed on the abundant sources of nutrients in the established flora. In turn, plants developed strategies to deterpredation: from spines and thorns to toxic chemicals.Early land plants, like the early land animals, did not live very far from an abundant source of water and developed survivalstrategies to combat dryness. One of these strategies is called tolerance. Many mosses, for example, can dry out to a brownand brittle mat, but as soon as rain or a flood makes water available, mosses will absorb it and are restored to their healthygreen appearance. Another strategy is to colonize environments with high humidity, where droughts are uncommon. Ferns,which are considered an early lineage of plants, thrive in damp and cool places such as the understory of temperate forests.Later, plants moved away from moist or aquatic environments using resistance to desiccation, rather than tolerance. Theseplants, like cacti, minimize the loss of water to such an extent they can survive in extremely dry environments.The most successful adaptation solution was the development of new structures that gave plants the advantage whencolonizing new and dry environments. Four major adaptations are found in all terrestrial plants: the alternation ofgenerations, a sporangium in which the spores are formed, a gametangium that produces haploid cells, and apical meristemtissue in roots and shoots. The evolution of a waxy cuticle and a cell wall with lignin also contributed to the success of landplants. These adaptations are noticeably lacking in the closely related green algae—another reason for the debate over theirplacement in the plant kingdom.Alternation of GenerationsAlternation of generations describes a life cycle in which an organism has both haploid and diploid multicellular stages.
Alternation of generations between the 1n gametophyte and 2n sporophyte is shown.
Haplontic refers to a lifecycle in which there is a dominant haploid stage, and diplontic refers to a lifecycle in which thediploid is the dominant life stage. Humans are diplontic. Most plants exhibit alternation of generations, which is describedas haplodiplodontic: the haploid multicellular form, known as a gametophyte, is followed in the development sequence bya multicellular diploid organism: the sporophyte. The gametophyte gives rise to the gametes (reproductive cells) by mitosis.This can be the most obvious phase of the life cycle of the plant, as in the mosses, or it can occur in a microscopic structure,such as a pollen grain, in the higher plants (a common collective term for the vascular plants). The sporophyte stage is barelynoticeable in lower plants (the collective term for the plant groups of mosses, liverworts, and lichens). Towering trees arethe diplontic phase in the lifecycles of plants such as sequoias and pines.Protection of the embryo is a major requirement for land plants. The vulnerable embryo must be sheltered from desiccationand other environmental hazards. In both seedless and seed plants, the female gametophyte provides protection and nutrients to the embryo as it develops into the new generation of sporophyte. This distinguishing feature of land plants gave the groupits alternate name of embryophytes.Sporangia in Seedless PlantsThe sporophyte of seedless plants is diploid and results from syngamy (fusion) of two gametes. The sporophyte bears thesporangia (singular, sporangium): organs that first appeared in the land plants. The term “sporangia” literally means “sporein a vessel,” as it is a reproductive sac that contains spores Figure 25.3. Inside the multicellular sporangia, the diploidsporocytes, or mother cells, produce haploid spores by meiosis, where the 2n chromosome number is reduced to 1n (notethat many plant sporophytes are polyploid: for example, durum wheat is tetraploid, bread wheat is hexaploid, and someferns are 1000-ploid). The spores are later released by the sporangia and disperse in the environment. Two different typesof spores are produced in land plants, resulting in the separation of sexes at different points in the lifecycle. Seedless nonvascularplants produce only one kind of spore and are called homosporous. The gametophyte phase is dominant in theseplants. After germinating from a spore, the resulting gametophyte produces both male and female gametangia, usually onthe same individual. In contrast, heterosporous plants produce two morphologically different types of spores. The malespores are called microspores, because of their smaller size, and develop into the male gametophyte; the comparativelylarger megaspores develop into the female gametophyte. Heterospory is observed in a few seedless vascular plants and inall seed plants.
Spore-producing sacs called sporangia grow at the ends of long, thin stalks in this photo of the mossEsporangios bryum.
When the haploid spore germinates in a hospitable environment, it generates a multicellular gametophyte by mitosis. Thegametophyte supports the zygote formed from the fusion of gametes and the resulting young sporophyte (vegetative form).The cycle then begins anew.The spores of seedless plants are surrounded by thick cell walls containing a tough polymer known as sporopollenin. Thiscomplex substance is characterized by long chains of organic molecules related to fatty acids and carotenoids: hence theyellow color of most pollen. Sporopollenin is unusually resistant to chemical and biological degradation. In seed plants,which use pollen to transfer the male sperm to the female egg, the toughness of sporopollenin explains the existence ofwell-preserved pollen fossils. Sporopollenin was once thought to be an innovation of land plants; however, the green algaeColeochaetes forms spores that contain sporopollenin.Gametangia in Seedless PlantsGametangia (singular, gametangium) are structures observed on multicellular haploid gametophytes. In the gametangia,precursor cells give rise to gametes by mitosis. The male gametangium ( antheridium) releases sperm. Many seedlessplants produce sperm equipped with flagella that enable them to swim in a moist environment to the archegonia: the femalegametangium. The embryo develops inside the archegonium as the sporophyte. Gametangia are prominent in seedlessplants, but are very rarely found in seed plants.Apical MeristemsShoots and roots of plants increase in length through rapid cell division in a tissue called the apical meristem, which is asmall zone of cells found at the shoot tip or root tip (Figure 25.4). The apical meristem is made of undifferentiated cellsthat continue to proliferate throughout the life of the plant. Meristematic cells give rise to all the specialized tissues of theorganism. Elongation of the shoots and roots allows a plant to access additional space and resources: light in the case of the shoot, and water and minerals in the case of roots. A separate meristem, called the lateral meristem, produces cells thatincrease the diameter of tree trunks.
Addition of new cells in a root occurs at the apical meristem. Subsequent enlargement of these cellscauses the organ to grow and elongate. The root cap protects the fragile apical meristem as the root tip is pushedthrough the soil by cell elongation.Additional Land Plant AdaptationsAs plants adapted to dry land and became independent from the constant presence of water in damp habitats, new organsand structures made their appearance. Early land plants did not grow more than a few inches off the ground, competing forlight on these low mats. By developing a shoot and growing taller, individual plants captured more light. Because air offerssubstantially less support than water, land plants incorporated more rigid molecules in their stems (and later, tree trunks). Insmall plants such as single-celled algae, simple diffusion suffices to distribute water and nutrients throughout the organism.However, for plants to evolve larger forms, the evolution of vascular tissue for the distribution of water and solutes was aprerequisite. The vascular system contains xylem and phloem tissues. Xylem conducts water and minerals absorbed fromthe soil up to the shoot, while phloem transports food derived from photosynthesis throughout the entire plant. A root systemevolved to take up water and minerals from the soil, and to anchor the increasingly taller shoot in the soil.In land plants, a waxy, waterproof cover called a cuticle protects the leaves and stems from desiccation. However, the cuticlealso prevents intake of carbon dioxide needed for the synthesis of carbohydrates through photosynthesis. To overcome this,stomata or pores that open and close to regulate traffic of gases and water vapor appeared in plants as they moved awayfrom moist environments into drier habitats.Water filters ultraviolet-B (UVB) light, which is harmful to all organisms, especially those that must absorb light to survive.This filtering does not occur for land plants. This presented an additional challenge to land colonization, which was metby the evolution of biosynthetic pathways for the synthesis of protective flavonoids and other compounds: pigments thatabsorb UV wavelengths of light and protect the aerial parts of plants from photodynamic damage.Plants cannot avoid being eaten by animals. Instead, they synthesize a large range of poisonous secondary metabolites:complex organic molecules such as alkaloids, whose noxious smells and unpleasant taste deter animals. These toxiccompounds can also cause severe diseases and even death, thus discouraging predation. Humans have used many of thesecompounds for centuries as drugs, medications, or spices. In contrast, as plants co-evolved with animals, the developmentof sweet and nutritious metabolites lured animals into providing valuable assistance in dispersing pollen grains, fruit, orseeds. Plants have been enlisting animals to be their helpers in this way for hundreds of millions of years.Evolution of Land PlantsNo discussion of the evolution of plants on land can be undertaken without a brief review of the timeline of the geologicaleras. The early era, known as the Paleozoic, is divided into six periods. It starts with the Cambrian period, followed bythe Ordovician, Silurian, Devonian, Carboniferous, and Permian. The major event to mark the Ordovician, more than 500million years ago, was the colonization of land by the ancestors of modern land plants. Fossilized cells, cuticles, and sporesof early land plants have been dated as far back as the Ordovician period in the early Paleozoic era. The oldest-knownvascular plants have been identified in deposits from the Devonian. One of the richest sources of information is the Rhyniechert, a sedimentary rock deposit found in Rhynie, Scotland (Figure 25.5), where embedded fossils of some of the earliestvascular plants have been identified.
This Rhynie chert contains fossilized material from vascular plants. The area inside the circle containsbulbous underground stems called corms, and root-like structures called rhizoids.
Paleobotanists distinguish between extinct species, as fossils, and extant species, which are still living. The extinct vascularplants, classified as zosterophylls and trimerophytes, most probably lacked true leaves and roots and formed low vegetationmats similar in size to modern-day mosses, although some trimetophytes could reach one meter in height. The later genusCooksonia, which flourished during the Silurian, has been extensively studied from well-preserved examples. Imprintsof Cooksonia show slender branching stems ending in what appear to be sporangia. From the recovered specimens, itis not possible to establish for certain whether Cooksonia possessed vascular tissues. Fossils indicate that by the end ofthe Devonian period, ferns, horsetails, and seed plants populated the landscape, giving rising to trees and forests. Thisluxuriant vegetation helped enrich the atmosphere in oxygen, making it easier for air-breathing animals to colonize dry land.Plants also established early symbiotic relationships with fungi, creating mycorrhizae: a relationship in which the fungalnetwork of filaments increases the efficiency of the plant root system, and the plants provide the fungi with byproducts ofphotosynthesis.The Major Divisions of Land PlantsThe green algae and land plants are grouped together into a subphylum called the Streptophytina, and thus are calledStreptophytes. In a further division, land plants are classified into two major groups according to the absence or presenceof vascular tissue, as detailed in Figure 25.6. Plants that lack vascular tissue, which is formed of specialized cells for thetransport of water and nutrients, are referred to as non-vascular plants. Liverworts, mosses, and hornworts are seedless,non-vascular plants that likely appeared early in land plant evolution. Vascular plants developed a network of cells thatconduct water and solutes. The first vascular plants appeared in the late Ordovician and were probably similar to lycophytes,which include club mosses (not to be confused with the mosses) and the pterophytes (ferns, horsetails, and whisk ferns).Lycophytes and pterophytes are referred to as seedless vascular plants, because they do not produce seeds. The seed plants,or spermatophytes, form the largest group of all existing plants, and hence dominate the landscape. Seed plants includegymnosperms, most notably conifers (Gymnosperms), which produce “naked seeds,” and the most successful of all plants,the flowering plants (Angiosperms). Angiosperms protect their seeds inside chambers at the center of a flower; the walls ofthe chamber later develop into a fruit.
StreptophytesUntil recently, all photosynthetic eukaryotes were considered members of the kingdom Plantae. The brown, red, and goldalgae, however, have been reassigned to the Protista kingdom. This is because apart from their ability to capture light energyand fix CO2, they lack many structural and biochemical traits that distinguish plants from protists. The position of greenalgae is more ambiguous. Green algae contain the same carotenoids and chlorophyll a and b as land plants, whereas otheralgae have different accessory pigments and types of chlorophyll molecules in addition to chlorophyll a. Both green algaeand land plants also store carbohydrates as starch. Cells in green algae divide along cell plates called phragmoplasts, andtheir cell walls are layered in the same manner as the cell walls of embryophytes. Consequently, land plants and closelyrelated green algae are now part of a new monophyletic group called Streptophyta.The remaining green algae, which belong to a group called Chlorophyta, include more than 7000 different species that livein fresh or brackish water, in seawater, or in snow patches. A few green algae even survive on soil, provided it is coveredby a thin film of moisture in which they can live. Periodic dry spells provide a selective advantage to algae that can survivewater stress. Some green algae may already be familiar, in particular Spirogyra and desmids. Their cells contain chloroplaststhat display a dizzying variety of shapes, and their cell walls contain cellulose, as do land plants. Some green algae are singlecells, such as Chlorella and Chlamydomonas, which adds to the ambiguity of green algae classification, because plants aremulticellular. Other algae, like Ulva (commonly called sea lettuce), form colonies.
Chlorophyta include (a) Spirogyra, (b) desmids, (c) Chlamydomonas, and (d) Ulva. Desmids andChlamydomonas are single-celled organisms, Spirogyra forms chains of cells, and Ulva forms colonies resemblingleaves.
Reproduction of Green AlgaeGreen algae reproduce both asexually, by fragmentation or dispersal of spores, or sexually, by producing gametes thatfuse during fertilization. In a single-celled organism such as Chlamydomonas, there is no mitosis after fertilization. In themulticellular Ulva, a sporophyte grows by mitosis after fertilization. Both Chlamydomonas and Ulva produce flagellatedgametes.CharalesGreen algae in the order Charales, and the coleochaetes (microscopic green algae that enclose their spores in sporopollenin),are considered the closest living relatives of embryophytes. The Charales can be traced back 420 million years. They livein a range of fresh water habitats and vary in size from a few millimeters to a meter in length. The representative species isChara (Figure 25.8), often called muskgrass or skunkweed because of its unpleasant smell. Large cells form the thallus: themain stem of the alga. Branches arising from the nodes are made of smaller cells. Male and female reproductive structuresare found on the nodes, and the sperm have flagella. Unlike land plants, Charales do not undergo alternation of generationsin their lifecycle. Charales exhibit a number of traits that are significant in their adaptation to land life. They produce thecompounds lignin and sporopollenin, and form plasmodesmata that connect the cytoplasm of adjacent cells. The egg, andlater, the zygote, form in a protected chamber on the parent plant.
The representative alga, Chara, is a noxious weed in Florida, where it clogs waterways.
New information from recent, extensive DNA sequence analysis of green algae indicates that the Zygnematales aremore closely related to the embryophytes than the Charales. The Zygnematales include the familiar genus Spirogyra. Astechniques in DNA analysis improve and new information on comparative genomics arises, the phylogenetic connectionsbetween species will change. Clearly, plant biologists have not yet solved the mystery of the origin of land plants.
Bryophytes are the group of plants that are the closest extant relative of early terrestrial plants. The first bryophytes(liverworts) most likely appeared in the Ordovician period, about 450 million years ago. Because of the lack of ligninand other resistant structures, the likelihood of bryophytes forming fossils is rather small. Some spores protected bysporopollenin have survived and are attributed to early bryophytes. By the Silurian period, however, vascular plants hadspread through the continents. This compelling fact is used as evidence that non-vascular plants must have preceded theSilurian period.More than 25,000 species of bryophytes thrive in mostly damp habitats, although some live in deserts. They constitute themajor flora of inhospitable environments like the tundra, where their small size and tolerance to desiccation offer distinctadvantages. They generally lack lignin and do not have actual tracheids (xylem cells specialized for water conduction).Rather, water and nutrients circulate inside specialized conducting cells. Although the term non-tracheophyte is moreaccurate, bryophytes are commonly called nonvascular plants.In a bryophyte, all the conspicuous vegetative organs—including the photosynthetic leaf-like structures, the thallus, stem,and the rhizoid that anchors the plant to its substrate—belong to the haploid organism or gametophyte. The sporophyte isbarely noticeable. The gametes formed by bryophytes swim with a flagellum, as do gametes in a few of the tracheophytes.The sporangium—the multicellular sexual reproductive structure—is present in bryophytes and absent in the majorityof algae. The bryophyte embryo also remains attached to the parent plant, which protects and nourishes it. This is acharacteristic of land plants.The bryophytes are divided into three phyla: the liverworts or Hepaticophyta, the hornworts or Anthocerotophyta, and themosses or true Bryophyta.
LiverwortsLiverworts (Hepaticophyta) are viewed as the plants most closely related to the ancestor that moved to land. Liverwortshave colonized every terrestrial habitat on Earth and diversified to more than 7000 existing species (Figure 25.9). Somegametophytes form lobate green structures, as seen in Figure 25.10. The shape is similar to the lobes of the liver, and henceprovides the origin of the name given to the phylum.
This 1904 drawing shows the variety of forms of Hepaticophyta.
A liverwort, Lunularia cruciata, displays its lobate, flat thallus. The organism in the photograph is in thegametophyte stage.Openings that allow the movement of gases may be observed in liverworts. However, these are not stomata, because they donot actively open and close. The plant takes up water over its entire surface and has no cuticle to prevent desiccation. Figure25.11 represents the lifecycle of a liverwort. The cycle starts with the release of haploid spores from the sporangium thatdeveloped on the sporophyte. Spores disseminated by wind or water germinate into flattened thalli attached to the substrateby thin, single-celled filaments. Male and female gametangia develop on separate, individual plants. Once released, male gametes swim with the aid of their flagella to the female gametangium (the archegonium), and fertilization ensues. Thezygote grows into a small sporophyte still attached to the parent gametophyte. It will give rise, by meiosis, to the nextgeneration of spores. Liverwort plants can also reproduce asexually, by the breaking of branches or the spreading of leaffragments called gemmae. In this latter type of reproduction, the gemmae—small, intact, complete pieces of plant that areproduced in a cup on the surface of the thallus (shown in Figure 25.11)—are splashed out of the cup by raindrops. Thegemmae then land nearby and develop into gametophytes.
The life cycle of a typical liverwort is shown. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)HornwortsThe hornworts (Anthocerotophyta) belong to the broad bryophyte group. They have colonized a variety of habitats onland, although they are never far from a source of moisture. The short, blue-green gametophyte is the dominant phase ofthe lifecycle of a hornwort. The narrow, pipe-like sporophyte is the defining characteristic of the group. The sporophytesemerge from the parent gametophyte and continue to grow throughout the life of the plant.
Hornworts grow a tall and slender sporophyte.
Stomata appear in the hornworts and are abundant on the sporophyte. Photosynthetic cells in the thallus contain a singlechloroplast. Meristem cells at the base of the plant keep dividing and adding to its height. Many hornworts establishsymbiotic relationships with cyanobacteria that fix nitrogen from the environment.The lifecycle of hornworts (Figure 25.13) follows the general pattern of alternation of generations. The gametophytes growas flat thalli on the soil with embedded gametangia. Flagellated sperm swim to the archegonia and fertilize eggs. The zygotedevelops into a long and slender sporophyte that eventually splits open, releasing spores. Thin cells called pseudoelaterssurround the spores and help propel them further in the environment. Unlike the elaters observed in horsetails, the hornwortpseudoelaters are single-celled structures. The haploid spores germinate and give rise to the next generation of gametophyte.
The alternation of generation in hornworts is shown.
MossesMore than 10,000 species of mosses have been catalogued. Their habitats vary from the tundra, where they are the mainvegetation, to the understory of tropical forests. In the tundra, the mosses’ shallow rhizoids allow them to fasten to asubstrate without penetrating the frozen soil. Mosses slow down erosion, store moisture and soil nutrients, and provideshelter for small animals as well as food for larger herbivores, such as the musk ox. Mosses are very sensitive to air pollution and are used to monitor air quality. They are also sensitive to copper salts, so these salts are a common ingredient ofcompounds marketed to eliminate mosses from lawns.Mosses form diminutive gametophytes, which are the dominant phase of the lifecycle. Green, flat structures—resemblingtrue leaves, but lacking vascular tissue—are attached in a spiral to a central stalk. The plants absorb water and nutrientsdirectly through these leaf-like structures. Some mosses have small branches. Some primitive traits of green algae, suchas flagellated sperm, are still present in mosses that are dependent on water for reproduction. Other features of mosses areclearly adaptations to dry land. For example, stomata are present on the stems of the sporophyte, and a primitive vascularsystem runs up the sporophyte’s stalk. Additionally, mosses are anchored to the substrate—whether it is soil, rock, or rooftiles—by multicellular rhizoids. These structures are precursors of roots. They originate from the base of the gametophyte,but are not the major route for the absorption of water and minerals. The lack of a true root system explains why it is soeasy to rip moss mats from a tree trunk. The moss lifecycle follows the pattern of alternation of generations as shown inFigure 25.14. The most familiar structure is the haploid gametophyte, which germinates from a haploid spore and formsfirst a protonema—usually, a tangle of single-celled filaments that hug the ground. Cells akin to an apical meristem activelydivide and give rise to a gametophore, consisting of a photosynthetic stem and foliage-like structures. Rhizoids form at thebase of the gametophore. Gametangia of both sexes develop on separate gametophores. The male organ (the antheridium)produces many sperm, whereas the archegonium (the female organ) forms a single egg. At fertilization, the sperm swimsdown the neck to the venter and unites with the egg inside the archegonium. The zygote, protected by the archegonium,divides and grows into a sporophyte, still attached by its foot to the gametophyte.
The slender seta (plural, setae), as seen in Figure 25.15, contains tubular cells that transfer nutrients from the base of thesporophyte (the foot) to the sporangium or capsule.
This photograph shows the long slender stems, called setae, connected to capsules of the mossThamnobryum alopecurum.
A structure called a peristome increases the spread of spores after the tip of the capsule falls off at dispersal. The concentrictissue around the mouth of the capsule is made of triangular, close-fitting units, a little like “teeth”; these open and closedepending on moisture levels, and periodically release spores.
The vascular plants, or tracheophytes, are the dominant and most conspicuous group of land plants. More than 260,000species of tracheophytes represent more than 90 percent of Earth’s vegetation. Several evolutionary innovations explaintheir success and their ability to spread to all habitats.Bryophytes may have been successful at the transition from an aquatic habitat to land, but they are still dependent on waterfor reproduction, and absorb moisture and nutrients through the gametophyte surface. The lack of roots for absorbing waterand minerals from the soil, as well as a lack of reinforced conducting cells, limits bryophytes to small sizes. Although theymay survive in reasonably dry conditions, they cannot reproduce and expand their habitat range in the absence of water.Vascular plants, on the other hand, can achieve enormous heights, thus competing successfully for light. Photosyntheticorgans become leaves, and pipe-like cells or vascular tissues transport water, minerals, and fixed carbon throughout theorganism.In seedless vascular plants, the diploid sporophyte is the dominant phase of the lifecycle. The gametophyte is now aninconspicuous, but still independent, organism. Throughout plant evolution, there is an evident reversal of roles in thedominant phase of the lifecycle. Seedless vascular plants still depend on water during fertilization, as the sperm must swimon a layer of moisture to reach the egg. This step in reproduction explains why ferns and their relatives are more abundantin damp environments.Vascular Tissue: Xylem and PhloemThe first fossils that show the presence of vascular tissue date to the Silurian period, about 430 million years ago. Thesimplest arrangement of conductive cells shows a pattern of xylem at the center surrounded by phloem. Xylem is the tissueresponsible for the storage and long-distance transport of water and nutrients, as well as the transfer of water-soluble growth factors from the organs of synthesis to the target organs. The tissue consists of conducting cells, known as tracheids, andsupportive filler tissue, called parenchyma. Xylem conductive cells incorporate the compound lignin into their walls, andare thus described as lignified. Lignin itself is a complex polymer that is impermeable to water and confers mechanicalstrength to vascular tissue. With their rigid cell walls, the xylem cells provide support to the plant and allow it to achieveimpressive heights. Tall plants have a selective advantage by being able to reach unfiltered sunlight and disperse their sporesor seeds further away, thus expanding their range. By growing higher than other plants, tall trees cast their shadow on shorterplants and limit competition for water and precious nutrients in the soil.Phloem is the second type of vascular tissue; it transports sugars, proteins, and other solutes throughout the plant. Phloemcells are divided into sieve elements (conducting cells) and cells that support the sieve elements. Together, xylem andphloem tissues form the vascular system of plants.Roots: Support for the PlantRoots are not well preserved in the fossil record. Nevertheless, it seems that roots appeared later in evolution than vasculartissue. The development of an extensive network of roots represented a significant new feature of vascular plants. Thinrhizoids attached bryophytes to the substrate, but these rather flimsy filaments did not provide a strong anchor for the plant;neither did they absorb substantial amounts of water and nutrients. In contrast, roots, with their prominent vascular tissuesystem, transfer water and minerals from the soil to the rest of the plant. The extensive network of roots that penetrates deepinto the soil to reach sources of water also stabilizes trees by acting as a ballast or anchor. The majority of roots establisha symbiotic relationship with fungi, forming mycorrhizae, which benefit the plant by greatly increasing the surface area forabsorption of water and soil minerals and nutrients.Leaves, Sporophylls, and StrobiliA third innovation marks the seedless vascular plants. Accompanying the prominence of the sporophyte and thedevelopment of vascular tissue, the appearance of true leaves improved their photosynthetic efficiency. Leaves capture moresunlight with their increased surface area by employing more chloroplasts to trap light energy and convert it to chemicalenergy, which is then used to fix atmospheric carbon dioxide into carbohydrates. The carbohydrates are exported to the restof the plant by the conductive cells of phloem tissue.The existence of two types of morphology suggests that leaves evolved independently in several groups of plants. The firsttype of leaf is the microphyll, or “little leaf,” which can be dated to 350 million years ago in the late Silurian. A microphyllis small and has a simple vascular system. A single unbranched vein—a bundle of vascular tissue made of xylem andphloem—runs through the center of the leaf. Microphylls may have originated from the flattening of lateral branches, orfrom sporangia that lost their reproductive capabilities. Microphylls are present in the club mosses and probably precededthe development of megaphylls, or “big leaves”, which are larger leaves with a pattern of branching veins. Megaphyllsmost likely appeared independently several times during the course of evolution. Their complex networks of veins suggestthat several branches may have combined into a flattened organ, with the gaps between the branches being filled withphotosynthetic tissue.In addition to photosynthesis, leaves play another role in the life of the plants. Pine cones, mature fronds of ferns, andflowers are all sporophylls—leaves that were modified structurally to bear sporangia. Strobili are cone-like structures thatcontain sporangia. They are prominent in conifers and are commonly known as pine cones.Ferns and Other Seedless Vascular PlantsBy the late Devonian period, plants had evolved vascular tissue, well-defined leaves, and root systems. With theseadvantages, plants increased in height and size. During the Carboniferous period, swamp forests of club mosses andhorsetails—some specimens reaching heights of more than 30 m (100 ft)—covered most of the land. These forests gave riseto the extensive coal deposits that gave the Carboniferous its name. In seedless vascular plants, the sporophyte became thedominant phase of the lifecycle.Water is still required for fertilization of seedless vascular plants, and most favor a moist environment. Modern-day seedlesstracheophytes include club mosses, horsetails, ferns, and whisk ferns.Phylum Lycopodiophyta: Club MossesThe club mosses, or phylum Lycopodiophyta, are the earliest group of seedless vascular plants. They dominated thelandscape of the Carboniferous, growing into tall trees and forming large swamp forests. Today’s club mosses arediminutive, evergreen plants consisting of a stem (which may be branched) and microphylls (Figure 25.16). The phylumLycopodiophyta consists of close to 1,200 species, including the quillworts (Isoetales), the club mosses (Lycopodiales), andspike mosses (Selaginellales), none of which are true mosses or bryophytes. Lycophytes follow the pattern of alternation of generations seen in the bryophytes, except that the sporophyte is the majorstage of the lifecycle. The gametophytes do not depend on the sporophyte for nutrients. Some gametophytes developunderground and form mycorrhizal associations with fungi. In club mosses, the sporophyte gives rise to sporophyllsarranged in strobili, cone-like structures that give the class its name. Lycophytes can be homosporous or heterosporous.
In the club mosses such as Lycopodium clavatum, sporangia are arranged in clusters called strobili.
Phylum Monilophyta: Class Equisetopsida (Horsetails)Horsetails, whisk ferns and ferns belong to the phylum Monilophyta, with horsetails placed in the Class Equisetopsida. Thesingle genus Equisetum is the survivor of a large group of plants, known as Arthrophyta, which produced large trees andentire swamp forests in the Carboniferous. The plants are usually found in damp environments and marshes.
Horsetails thrive in a marsh.
The stem of a horsetail is characterized by the presence of joints or nodes, hence the name Arthrophyta (arthro- = "joint";-phyta = "plant"). Leaves and branches come out as whorls from the evenly spaced joints. The needle-shaped leaves do notcontribute greatly to photosynthesis, the majority of which takes place in the green stem.
Thin leaves originating at the joints are noticeable on the horsetail plant. Horsetails were once used asscrubbing brushes and were nicknamed scouring brushes.
Silica collects in the epidermal cells, contributing to the stiffness of horsetail plants. Underground stems known as rhizomesanchor the plants to the ground. Modern-day horsetails are homosporous and produce bisexual gametophytes.Phylum Monilophyta: Class Psilotopsida (Whisk Ferns)While most ferns form large leaves and branching roots, the whisk ferns, Class Psilotopsida, lack both roots and leaves,probably lost by reduction. Photosynthesis takes place in their green stems, and small yellow knobs form at the tip of thebranch stem and contain the sporangia. Whisk ferns were considered an early pterophytes. However, recent comparativeDNA analysis suggests that this group may have lost both vascular tissue and roots through evolution, and is more closelyrelated to ferns.
The whisk fern Psilotum nudum has conspicuous green stems with knob-shaped sporangia.
Phylum Monilophyta: Class Psilotopsida (Ferns)With their large fronds, ferns are the most readily recognizable seedless vascular plants. They are considered the mostadvanced seedless vascular plants and display characteristics commonly observed in seed plants. More than 20,000 speciesof ferns live in environments ranging from tropics to temperate forests. Although some species survive in dry environments,most ferns are restricted to moist, shaded places. Ferns made their appearance in the fossil record during the Devonianperiod and expanded during the Carboniferous.
The dominant stage of the lifecycle of a fern is the sporophyte, which consists of large compound leaves called fronds.Fronds fulfill a double role; they are photosynthetic organs that also carry reproductive organs. The stem may be buriedunderground as a rhizome, from which adventitious roots grow to absorb water and nutrients from the soil; or, they maygrow above ground as a trunk in tree ferns (Figure 25.20). Adventitious organs are those that grow in unusual places, suchas roots growing from the side of a stem.
Some specimens of this short tree-fern species can grow very tall.
The tip of a developing fern frond is rolled into a crozier, or fiddlehead (Figure 25.21a and Figure 25.21b). Fiddleheadsunroll as the frond develops.
Croziers, or fiddleheads, are the tips of fern fronds.
Most ferns produce the same type of spores and are therefore homosporous. The diploid sporophyte is the most conspicuousstage of the lifecycle. On the underside of its mature fronds, sori (singular, sorus) form as small clusters where sporangiadevelop.
Sori appear as small bumps on the underside of a fern frond.
Inside the sori, spores are produced by meiosis and released into the air. Those that land on a suitable substrate germinateand form a heart-shaped gametophyte, which is attached to the ground by thin filamentous rhizoids.
Shown here are a young sporophyte (upper part of image) and a heart-shaped gametophyte.
The inconspicuous gametophyte harbors both sex gametangia. Flagellated sperm released from the antheridium swim on awet surface to the archegonium, where the egg is fertilized. The newly formed zygote grows into a sporophyte that emergesfrom the gametophyte and grows by mitosis into the next generation sporophyte.
This landscaped border at a college campus was designed by students in the horticulture andlandscaping department of the college.
The Importance of Seedless Vascular PlantsMosses and liverworts are often the first macroscopic organisms to colonize an area, both in a primary succession—wherebare land is settled for the first time by living organisms—or in a secondary succession, where soil remains intact after acatastrophic event wipes out many existing species. Their spores are carried by the wind, birds, or insects. Once mosses andliverworts are established, they provide food and shelter for other species. In a hostile environment, like the tundra wherethe soil is frozen, bryophytes grow well because they do not have roots and can dry and rehydrate rapidly once water isagain available. Mosses are at the base of the food chain in the tundra biome. Many species—from small insects to muskoxen and reindeer—depend on mosses for food. In turn, predators feed on the herbivores, which are the primary consumers.Some reports indicate that bryophytes make the soil more amenable to colonization by other plants. Because they establishsymbiotic relationships with nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria, mosses replenish the soil with nitrogen.
At the end of the nineteenth century, scientists observed that lichens and mosses were becoming increasingly rare in urbanand suburban areas. Since bryophytes have neither a root system for absorption of water and nutrients, nor a cuticle layerthat protects them from desiccation, pollutants in rainwater readily penetrate their tissues; they absorb moisture and nutrientsthrough their entire exposed surfaces. Therefore, pollutants dissolved in rainwater penetrate plant tissues readily and have alarger impact on mosses than on other plants. The disappearance of mosses can be considered a bioindicator for the level ofpollution in the environment.Ferns contribute to the environment by promoting the weathering of rock, accelerating the formation of topsoil, and slowingdown erosion by spreading rhizomes in the soil. The water ferns of the genus Azolla harbor nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteriaand restore this important nutrient to aquatic habitats.Seedless plants have historically played a role in human life through uses as tools, fuel, and medicine. Dried peat moss,Sphagnum, is commonly used as fuel in some parts of Europe and is considered a renewable resource. Sphagnum bogs(Figure 25.26) are cultivated with cranberry and blueberry bushes. The ability of Sphagnum to hold moisture makes themoss a common soil conditioner. Florists use blocks of Sphagnum to maintain moisture for floral arrangements.
Sphagnum acutifolium is dried peat moss and can be used as fuel.
The attractive fronds of ferns make them a favorite ornamental plant. Because they thrive in low light, they are well suitedas house plants. More importantly, fiddleheads are a traditional spring food of Native Americans in the Pacific Northwest,and are popular as a side dish in French cuisine. The licorice fern, Polypodium glycyrrhiza, is part of the diet of the PacificNorthwest coastal tribes, owing in part to the sweetness of its rhizomes. It has a faint licorice taste and serves as a sweetener.The rhizome also figures in the pharmacopeia of Native Americans for its medicinal properties and is used as a remedy forsore throat.
By far the greatest impact of seedless vascular plants on human life, however, comes from their extinct progenitors. The tallclub mosses, horsetails, and tree-like ferns that flourished in the swampy forests of the Carboniferous period gave rise tolarge deposits of coal throughout the world. Coal provided an abundant source of energy during the Industrial Revolution,which had tremendous consequences on human societies, including rapid technological progress and growth of large cities,as well as the degradation of the environment. Coal is still a prime source of energy and also a major contributor to globalwarming.