Chromosomes are threadlike nuclear structures consisting of DNA and proteins that serve as therepositories for genetic information. The chromosomes depicted here were isolated from a fruit fly’s salivary gland,stained with dye, and visualized under a microscope. Akin to miniature bar codes, chromosomes absorb different dyesto produce characteristic banding patterns, which allows for their routine identification.
IntroductionThe gene is the physical unit of inheritance, and genes are arranged in a linear order on chromosomes. The behaviorsand interactions of chromosomes during meiosis explain, at a cellular level, the patterns of inheritance that we observe inpopulations. Genetic disorders involving alterations in chromosome number or structure may have dramatic effects and canprevent a fertilized egg from developing altogether.
studying heredity in 1843.With the improvement of microscopic techniques during the late 1800s, cell biologists could stainand visualize subcellular structures with dyes and observe their actions during cell division and meiosis. With each mitoticdivision, chromosomes replicated, condensed from an amorphous (no constant shape) nuclear mass into distinct X-shapedbodies (pairs of identical sister chromatids), and migrated to separate cellular poles.Chromosomal Theory of InheritanceThe speculation that chromosomes might be the key to understanding heredity led several scientists to examine Mendel’spublications and re-evaluate his model in terms of the behavior of chromosomes during mitosis and meiosis. In 1902,Theodor Boveri observed that proper embryonic development of sea urchins does not occur unless chromosomes arepresent. That same year, Walter Sutton observed the separation of chromosomes into daughter cells during meiosis (Figure13.2). Together, these observations led to the development of the Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance, which identifiedchromosomes as the genetic material responsible for Mendelian inheritance.
(a) Walter Sutton and (b) Theodor Boveri are credited with developing the Chromosomal Theory ofInheritance, which states that chromosomes carry the unit of heredity (genes).The Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance was consistent with Mendel’s laws and was supported by the followingobservations:• During meiosis, homologous chromosome pairs migrate as discrete structures that are independent of otherchromosome pairs.• The sorting of chromosomes from each homologous pair into pre-gametes appears to be random.• Each parent synthesizes gametes that contain only half of their chromosomal complement.• Even though male and female gametes (sperm and egg) differ in size and morphology, they have the same number ofchromosomes, suggesting equal genetic contributions from each parent.• The gametic chromosomes combine during fertilization to produce offspring with the same chromosome number astheir parents.
Despite compelling correlations between the behavior of chromosomes during meiosis and Mendel’s abstract laws, theChromosomal Theory of Inheritance was proposed long before there was any direct evidence that traits were carriedon chromosomes. Critics pointed out that individuals had far more independently segregating traits than they hadchromosomes. It was only after several years of carrying out crosses with the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, thatThomas Hunt Morgan provided experimental evidence to support the Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance.Genetic Linkage and DistancesMendel’s work suggested that traits are inherited independently of each other. Morgan identified a 1:1 correspondencebetween a segregating trait and the X chromosome, suggesting that the random segregation of chromosomes was thephysical basis of Mendel’s model. This also demonstrated that linked genes disrupt Mendel’s predicted outcomes. The factthat each chromosome can carry many linked genes explains how individuals can have many more traits than they havechromosomes. However, observations by researchers in Morgan’s laboratory suggested that alleles positioned on the samechromosome were not always inherited together. During meiosis, linked genes somehow became unlinked.Homologous RecombinationIn 1909, Frans Janssen observed chiasmata—the point at which chromatids are in contact with each other and may exchangesegments—prior to the first division of meiosis. He suggested that alleles become unlinked and chromosomes physicallyexchange segments. As chromosomes condensed and paired with their homologs, they appeared to interact at distinctpoints. Janssen suggested that these points corresponded to regions in which chromosome segments were exchanged. Itis now known that the pairing and interaction between homologous chromosomes, known as synapsis, does more thansimply organize the homologs for migration to separate daughter cells. When synapsed, homologous chromosomes undergoreciprocal physical exchanges at their arms in a process called homologous recombination, or more simply, “crossingover.”To better understand the type of experimental results that researchers were obtaining at this time, consider a heterozygousindividual that inherited dominant maternal alleles for two genes on the same chromosome (such as AB) and two recessivepaternal alleles for those same genes (such as ab). If the genes are linked, one would expect this individual to producegametes that are either AB or ab with a 1:1 ratio. If the genes are unlinked, the individual should produce AB, Ab, aB, and abgametes with equal frequencies, according to the Mendelian concept of independent assortment. Because they correspondto new allele combinations, the genotypes Ab and aB are nonparental types that result from homologous recombinationduring meiosis. Parental types are progeny that exhibit the same allelic combination as their parents. Morgan and hiscolleagues, however, found that when such heterozygous individuals were test crossed to a homozygous recessive parent(AaBb × aabb), both parental and nonparental cases occurred. For example, 950 offspring might be recovered that wereeither AaBb or aabb, but 50 offspring would also be obtained that were either Aabb or aaBb. These results suggested thatlinkage occurred most often, but a significant minority of offspring were the products of recombination.
Inheritance patterns of unlinked and linked genes are shown. In (a), two genes are located ondifferent chromosomes so independent assortment occurs during meiosis. The offspring have an equal chanceof being the parental type (inheriting the same combination of traits as the parents) or a nonparental type(inheriting a different combination of traits than the parents). In (b), two genes are very close together on thesame chromosome so that no crossing over occurs between them. The genes are therefore always inheritedtogether and all of the offspring are the parental type. In (c), two genes are far apart on the chromosome such thatcrossing over occurs during every meiotic event. The recombination frequency will be the same as if the geneswere on separate chromosomes. (d) The actual recombination frequency of fruit fly wing length and body colorthat Thomas Morgan observed in 1912 was 17 percent. A crossover frequency between 0 percent and 50 percentindicates that the genes are on the same chromosome and crossover occurs some of the time.
Genetic MapsJanssen did not have the technology to demonstrate crossing over so it remained an abstract idea that was not widelyaccepted. Scientists thought chiasmata were a variation on synapsis and could not understand how chromosomes couldbreak and rejoin. Yet, the data were clear that linkage did not always occur. Ultimately, it took a young undergraduatestudent and an “all-nighter” to mathematically elucidate the problem of linkage and recombination.In 1913, Alfred Sturtevant, a student in Morgan’s laboratory, gathered results from researchers in the laboratory, and tookthem home one night to mull them over. By the next morning, he had created the first “chromosome map,” a linearrepresentation of gene order and relative distance on a chromosome.
As shown in Figure 13.4, by using recombination frequency to predict genetic distance, the relative order of genes onchromosome 2 could be inferred. The values shown represent map distances in centimorgans (cM), which correspond torecombination frequencies (in percent). Therefore, the genes for body color and wing size were 65.5 − 48.5 = 17 cM apart,indicating that the maternal and paternal alleles for these genes recombine in 17 percent of offspring, on average.To construct a chromosome map, Sturtevant assumed that genes were ordered serially on threadlike chromosomes. He alsoassumed that the incidence of recombination between two homologous chromosomes could occur with equal likelihoodanywhere along the length of the chromosome. Operating under these assumptions, Sturtevant postulated that allelesthat were far apart on a chromosome were more likely to dissociate during meiosis simply because there was a largerregion over which recombination could occur. Conversely, alleles that were close to each other on the chromosome werelikely to be inherited together. The average number of crossovers between two alleles—that is, their recombinationfrequency—correlated with their genetic distance from each other, relative to the locations of other genes on thatchromosome. Considering the example cross between AaBb and aabb above, the frequency of recombination could becalculated as 50/1000 = 0.05. That is, the likelihood of a crossover between genes A/a and B/b was 0.05, or 5 percent.Such a result would indicate that the genes were definitively linked, but that they were far enough apart for crossovers tooccasionally occur. Sturtevant divided his genetic map into map units, or centimorgans (cM), in which a recombinationfrequency of 0.01 corresponds to 1 cM.By representing alleles in a linear map, Sturtevant suggested that genes can range from being perfectly linked(recombination frequency = 0) to being perfectly unlinked (recombination frequency = 0.5) when genes are on differentchromosomes or genes are separated very far apart on the same chromosome. Perfectly unlinked genes correspond to thefrequencies predicted by Mendel to assort independently in a dihybrid cross. A recombination frequency of 0.5 indicatesthat 50 percent of offspring are recombinants and the other 50 percent are parental types. That is, every type of allelecombination is represented with equal frequency. This representation allowed Sturtevant to additively calculate distancesbetween several genes on the same chromosome. However, as the genetic distances approached 0.50, his predictions becameless accurate because it was not clear whether the genes were very far apart on the same chromosome or on differentchromosomes.In 1931, Barbara McClintock and Harriet Creighton demonstrated the crossover of homologous chromosomes in cornplants. Weeks later, homologous recombination in Drosophila was demonstrated microscopically by Curt Stern. Stern
observed several X-linked phenotypes that were associated with a structurally unusual and dissimilar X chromosome pairin which one X was missing a small terminal segment, and the other X was fused to a piece of the Y chromosome. Bycrossing flies, observing their offspring, and then visualizing the offspring’s chromosomes, Stern demonstrated that everytime the offspring allele combination deviated from either of the parental combinations, there was a corresponding exchangeof an X chromosome segment. Using mutant flies with structurally distinct X chromosomes was the key to observing theproducts of recombination because DNA sequencing and other molecular tools were not yet available. It is now known thathomologous chromosomes regularly exchange segments in meiosis by reciprocally breaking and rejoining their DNA atprecise locations.
Mendel’s Mapped TraitsHomologous recombination is a common genetic process, yet Mendel never observed it. Had he investigated both linkedand unlinked genes, it would have been much more difficult for him to create a unified model of his data on the basisof probabilistic calculations. Researchers who have since mapped the seven traits investigated by Mendel onto the sevenchromosomes of the pea plant genome have confirmed that all of the genes he examined are either on separate chromosomesor are sufficiently far apart as to be statistically unlinked. Some have suggested that Mendel was enormously lucky to selectonly unlinked genes, whereas others question whether Mendel discarded any data suggesting linkage. In any case, Mendelconsistently observed independent assortment because he examined genes that were effectively unlinked.
Inherited disorders can arise when chromosomes behave abnormally during meiosis. Chromosome disorders can be dividedinto two categories: abnormalities in chromosome number and chromosomal structural rearrangements. Because even smallsegments of chromosomes can span many genes, chromosomal disorders are characteristically dramatic and often fatal.Identification of ChromosomesThe isolation and microscopic observation of chromosomes forms the basis of cytogenetics and is the primary methodby which clinicians detect chromosomal abnormalities in humans. A karyotype is the number and appearance ofchromosomes, and includes their length, banding pattern, and centromere position. To obtain a view of an individual’skaryotype, cytologists photograph the chromosomes and then cut and paste each chromosome into a chart, or karyogram,also known as an ideogram.
This karyotype is of a female human. Notice that homologous chromosomes are the same size, and havethe same centromere positions and banding patterns. A human male would have an XY chromosome pair instead ofthe XX pair shown. (credit: Andreas Blozer et al)In a given species, chromosomes can be identified by their number, size, centromere position, and banding pattern. Ina human karyotype, autosomes or “body chromosomes” (all of the non–sex chromosomes) are generally organized inapproximate order of size from largest (chromosome 1) to smallest (chromosome 22). The X and Y chromosomes are notautosomes. However, chromosome 21 is actually shorter than chromosome 22. This was discovered after the naming ofDown syndrome as trisomy 21, reflecting how this disease results from possessing one extra chromosome 21 (three total).Not wanting to change the name of this important disease, chromosome 21 retained its numbering, despite describing theshortest set of chromosomes. The chromosome “arms” projecting from either end of the centromere may be designated asshort or long, depending on their relative lengths. The short arm is abbreviated p (for “petite”), whereas the long arm isabbreviated q (because it follows “p” alphabetically). Each arm is further subdivided and denoted by a number. Using thisnaming system, locations on chromosomes can be described consistently in the scientific literature.
Geneticists Use Karyograms to Identify Chromosomal AberrationsAlthough Mendel is referred to as the “father of modern genetics,” he performed his experiments withnone of the tools that the geneticists of today routinely employ. One such powerful cytological techniqueis karyotyping, a method in which traits characterized by chromosomal abnormalities can be identifiedfrom a single cell. To observe an individual’s karyotype, a person’s cells (like white blood cells) are firstcollected from a blood sample or other tissue. In the laboratory, the isolated cells are stimulated to beginactively dividing. A chemical called colchicine is then applied to cells to arrest condensed chromosomesin metaphase. Cells are then made to swell using a hypotonic solution so the chromosomes spread apart.Finally, the sample is preserved in a fixative and applied to a slide.The geneticist then stains chromosomes with one of several dyes to better visualize the distinct andreproducible banding patterns of each chromosome pair. Following staining, the chromosomes are viewedusing bright-field microscopy. A common stain choice is the Giemsa stain. Giemsa staining results inapproximately 400–800 bands (of tightly coiled DNA and condensed proteins) arranged along all of the 23chromosome pairs; an experienced geneticist can identify each band. In addition to the banding patterns,chromosomes are further identified on the basis of size and centromere location. To obtain the classicdepiction of the karyotype in which homologous pairs of chromosomes are aligned in numerical orderfrom longest to shortest, the geneticist obtains a digital image, identifies each chromosome, and manuallyarranges the chromosomes into this pattern (Figure 13.5).At its most basic, the karyogram may reveal genetic abnormalities in which an individual has too many ortoo few chromosomes per cell. Examples of this are Down Syndrome, which is identified by a third copy ofchromosome 21, and Turner Syndrome, which is characterized by the presence of only one X chromosomein women instead of the normal two. Geneticists can also identify large deletions or insertions of DNA.For instance, Jacobsen Syndrome—which involves distinctive facial features as well as heart and bleedingdefects—is identified by a deletion on chromosome 11. Finally, the karyotype can pinpoint translocations,which occur when a segment of genetic material breaks from one chromosome and reattaches to anotherchromosome or to a different part of the same chromosome. Translocations are implicated in certaincancers, including chronic myelogenous leukemia.During Mendel’s lifetime, inheritance was an abstract concept that could only be inferred by performingcrosses and observing the traits expressed by offspring. By observing a karyogram, today’s geneticists canactually visualize the chromosomal composition of an individual to confirm or predict genetic abnormalitiesin offspring, even before birth.
Disorders in Chromosome NumberOf all of the chromosomal disorders, abnormalities in chromosome number are the most obviously identifiable from akaryogram. Disorders of chromosome number include the duplication or loss of entire chromosomes, as well as changes inthe number of complete sets of chromosomes. They are caused by nondisjunction, which occurs when pairs of homologouschromosomes or sister chromatids fail to separate during meiosis. Misaligned or incomplete synapsis, or a dysfunction ofthe spindle apparatus that facilitates chromosome migration, can cause nondisjunction. The risk of nondisjunction occurringincreases with the age of the parents.Nondisjunction can occur during either meiosis I or II, with differing results (Figure 13.6). If homologous chromosomesfail to separate during meiosis I, the result is two gametes that lack that particular chromosome and two gametes with twocopies of the chromosome. If sister chromatids fail to separate during meiosis II, the result is one gamete that lacks thatchromosome, two normal gametes with one copy of the chromosome, and one gamete with two copies of the chromosome.
AneuploidyAn individual with the appropriate number of chromosomes for their species is called euploid; in humans, euploidycorresponds to 22 pairs of autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes. An individual with an error in chromosome numberis described as aneuploid, a term that includes monosomy (loss of one chromosome) or trisomy (gain of an extraneouschromosome). Monosomic human zygotes missing any one copy of an autosome invariably fail to develop to birth becausethey lack essential genes. This underscores the importance of “gene dosage” in humans. Most autosomal trisomies also failto develop to birth; however, duplications of some of the smaller chromosomes (13, 15, 18, 21, or 22) can result in offspringthat survive for several weeks to many years. Trisomic individuals suffer from a different type of genetic imbalance: anexcess in gene dose. Individuals with an extra chromosome may synthesize an abundance of the gene products encodedby that chromosome. This extra dose (150 percent) of specific genes can lead to a number of functional challenges andoften precludes development. The most common trisomy among viable births is that of chromosome 21, which correspondsto Down Syndrome. Individuals with this inherited disorder are characterized by short stature and stunted digits, facialdistinctions that include a broad skull and large tongue, and significant developmental delays. The incidence of Downsyndrome is correlated with maternal age; older women are more likely to become pregnant with fetuses carrying thetrisomy 21 genotype.
An individual with more than the correct number of chromosome sets (two for diploid species) is called polyploid. Forinstance, fertilization of an abnormal diploid egg with a normal haploid sperm would yield a triploid zygote. Polyploidanimals are extremely rare, with only a few examples among the flatworms, crustaceans, amphibians, fish, and lizards.Polyploid animals are sterile because meiosis cannot proceed normally and instead produces mostly aneuploid daughtercells that cannot yield viable zygotes. Rarely, polyploid animals can reproduce asexually by haplodiploidy, in which anunfertilized egg divides mitotically to produce offspring. In contrast, polyploidy is very common in the plant kingdom, andpolyploid plants tend to be larger and more robust than euploids of their species (Figure 13.8).
The incidence of having a fetus with trisomy 21 increases dramatically with maternal age.
As with many polyploid plants, this triploid orange daylily (Hemerocallis fulva) is particularly large androbust, and grows flowers with triple the number of petals of its diploid counterparts. (credit: Steve Karg)Sex Chromosome Nondisjunction in HumansHumans display dramatic deleterious effects with autosomal trisomies and monosomies. Therefore, it may seemcounterintuitive that human females and males can function normally, despite carrying different numbers of the Xchromosome. Rather than a gain or loss of autosomes, variations in the number of sex chromosomes are associated withrelatively mild effects. In part, this occurs because of a molecular process called X inactivation. Early in development,when female mammalian embryos consist of just a few thousand cells (relative to trillions in the newborn), one Xchromosome in each cell inactivates by tightly condensing into a quiescent (dormant) structure called a Barr body. Thechance that an X chromosome (maternally or paternally derived) is inactivated in each cell is random, but once theinactivation occurs, all cells derived from that one will have the same inactive X chromosome or Barr body. By thisprocess, females compensate for their double genetic dose of X chromosome. In so-called “tortoiseshell” cats, embryonic Xinactivation is observed as color variegation (Figure 13.9). Females that are heterozygous for an X-linked coat color genewill express one of two different coat colors over different regions of their body, corresponding to whichever X chromosomeis inactivated in the embryonic cell progenitor of that region.
In cats, the gene for coat color is located on the X chromosome. In the embryonic development of femalecats, one of the two X chromosomes is randomly inactivated in each cell, resulting in a tortoiseshell pattern if the cathas two different alleles for coat color. Male cats, having only one X chromosome, never exhibit a tortoiseshell coatcolor. (credit: Michael Bodega)An individual carrying an abnormal number of X chromosomes will inactivate all but one X chromosome in each of hercells. However, even inactivated X chromosomes continue to express a few genes, and X chromosomes must reactivatefor the proper maturation of female ovaries. As a result, X-chromosomal abnormalities are typically associated with mild
mental and physical defects, as well as sterility. If the X chromosome is absent altogether, the individual will not develop inutero.Several errors in sex chromosome number have been characterized. Individuals with three X chromosomes, called triplo-X, are phenotypically female but express developmental delays and reduced fertility. The XXY genotype, correspondingto one type of Klinefelter syndrome, corresponds to phenotypically male individuals with small testes, enlarged breasts,and reduced body hair. More complex types of Klinefelter syndrome exist in which the individual has as many as five Xchromosomes. In all types, every X chromosome except one undergoes inactivation to compensate for the excess geneticdosage. This can be seen as several Barr bodies in each cell nucleus. Turner syndrome, characterized as an X0 genotype(i.e., only a single sex chromosome), corresponds to a phenotypically female individual with short stature, webbed skin inthe neck region, hearing and cardiac impairments, and sterility.Duplications and DeletionsIn addition to the loss or gain of an entire chromosome, a chromosomal segment may be duplicated or lost. Duplicationsand deletions often produce offspring that survive but exhibit physical and mental abnormalities. Duplicated chromosomalsegments may fuse to existing chromosomes or may be free in the nucleus. Cri-du-chat (from the French for “cry of the cat”)is a syndrome associated with nervous system abnormalities and identifiable physical features that result from a deletion ofmost of 5p (the small arm of chromosome 5) (Figure 13.10). Infants with this genotype emit a characteristic high-pitchedcry on which the disorder’s name is based.
This individual with cri-du-chat syndrome is shown at two, four, nine, and 12 years of age.
Chromosomal Structural RearrangementsCytologists have characterized numerous structural rearrangements in chromosomes, but chromosome inversions andtranslocations are the most common. Both are identified during meiosis by the adaptive pairing of rearranged chromosomeswith their former homologs to maintain appropriate gene alignment. If the genes carried on two homologs are not orientedcorrectly, a recombination event could result in the loss of genes from one chromosome and the gain of genes on the other.This would produce aneuploid gametes.
Chromosome InversionsA chromosome inversion is the detachment, 180° rotation, and reinsertion of part of a chromosome. Inversions may occurin nature as a result of mechanical shear, or from the action of transposable elements (special DNA sequences capableof facilitating the rearrangement of chromosome segments with the help of enzymes that cut and paste DNA sequences).Unless they disrupt a gene sequence, inversions only change the orientation of genes and are likely to have more mildeffects than aneuploid errors. However, altered gene orientation can result in functional changes because regulators of geneexpression could be moved out of position with respect to their targets, causing aberrant levels of gene products.An inversion can be pericentric and include the centromere, or paracentric and occur outside of the centromere (Figure13.11). A pericentric inversion that is asymmetric about the centromere can change the relative lengths of the chromosomearms, making these inversions easily identifiable.
Pericentric inversions include the centromere, and paracentric inversions do not. A pericentric inversioncan change the relative lengths of the chromosome arms; a paracentric inversion cannot.When one homologous chromosome undergoes an inversion but the other does not, the individual is described as aninversion heterozygote. To maintain point-for-point synapsis during meiosis, one homolog must form a loop, and the otherhomolog must mold around it. Although this topology can ensure that the genes are correctly aligned, it also forces thehomologs to stretch and can be associated with regions of imprecise synapsis.
When one chromosome undergoes an inversion but the other does not, one chromosome must form aninverted loop to retain point-for-point interaction during synapsis. This inversion pairing is essential to maintaining genealignment during meiosis and to allow for recombination.
The Chromosome 18 InversionNot all structural rearrangements of chromosomes produce nonviable, impaired, or infertile individuals. Inrare instances, such a change can result in the evolution of a new species. In fact, a pericentric inversion inchromosome 18 appears to have contributed to the evolution of humans. This inversion is not present in ourclosest genetic relatives, the chimpanzees. Humans and chimpanzees differ cytogenetically by pericentricinversions on several chromosomes and by the fusion of two separate chromosomes in chimpanzees thatcorrespond to chromosome two in humans.The pericentric chromosome 18 inversion is believed to have occurred in early humans following theirdivergence from a common ancestor with chimpanzees approximately five million years ago. Researcherscharacterizing this inversion have suggested that approximately 19,000 nucleotide bases were duplicatedon 18p, and the duplicated region inverted and reinserted on chromosome 18 of an ancestral human.A comparison of human and chimpanzee genes in the region of this inversion indicates that twogenes—ROCK1 and USP14—that are adjacent on chimpanzee chromosome 17 (which corresponds tohuman chromosome 18) are more distantly positioned on human chromosome 18. This suggests that oneof the inversion breakpoints occurred between these two genes. Interestingly, humans and chimpanzeesexpress USP14 at distinct levels in specific cell types, including cortical cells and fibroblasts. Perhaps thechromosome 18 inversion in an ancestral human repositioned specific genes and reset their expressionlevels in a useful way. Because both ROCK1 and USP14 encode cellular enzymes, a change in theirexpression could alter cellular function. It is not known how this inversion contributed to hominid evolution,but it appears to be a significant factor in the divergence of humans from other primates.
TranslocationsA translocation occurs when a segment of a chromosome dissociates and reattaches to a different, nonhomologouschromosome. Translocations can be benign or have devastating effects depending on how the positions of genes are alteredwith respect to regulatory sequences. Notably, specific translocations have been associated with several cancers and withschizophrenia. Reciprocal translocations result from the exchange of chromosome segments between two nonhomologouschromosomes such that there is no gain or loss of genetic information.
A reciprocal translocation occurs when a segment of DNA is transferred from one chromosome toanother, nonhomologous chromosome.

