BIOTECHNOLOGYAND GENOMICS
In genomics, the DNA of different organisms is compared, enabling scientists to create maps with whichto navigate the DNA of different organisms.
IntroductionThe study of nucleic acids began with the discovery of DNA, progressed to the study of genes and small fragments, andhas now exploded to the field of genomics. Genomics is the study of entire genomes, including the complete set of genes,their nucleotide sequence and organization, and their interactions within a species and with other species. The advancesin genomics have been made possible by DNA sequencing technology. Just as information technology has led to Googlemaps that enable people to get detailed information about locations around the globe, genomic information is used to createsimilar maps of the DNA of different organisms. These findings have helped anthropologists to better understand humanmigration and have aided the field of medicine through the mapping of human genetic diseases. The ways in which genomicinformation can contribute to scientific understanding are varied and quickly growing.
Biotechnology
Biotechnology is the use of biological agents for technological advancement. Biotechnology was used for breedinglivestock and crops long before the scientific basis of these techniques was understood. Since the discovery of the structureof DNA in 1953, the field of biotechnology has grown rapidly through both academic research and private companies.The primary applications of this technology are in medicine (production of vaccines and antibiotics) and agriculture(genetic modification of crops, such as to increase yields). Biotechnology also has many industrial applications, such asfermentation, the treatment of oil spills, and the production of biofuels (Figure 17.2).
Antibiotics are chemicals produced by fungi, bacteria, and other organisms that have antimicrobialproperties. The first antibiotic discovered was penicillin. Antibiotics are now commercially produced and tested for theirpotential to inhibit bacterial growth. (credit "advertisement": modification of work by NIH; credit "test plate": modificationof work by Don Stalons/CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)Basic Techniques to Manipulate Genetic Material (DNA and RNA)To understand the basic techniques used to work with nucleic acids, remember that nucleic acids are macromolecules madeof nucleotides (a sugar, a phosphate, and a nitrogenous base) linked by phosphodiester bonds. The phosphate groups onthese molecules each have a net negative charge. An entire set of DNA molecules in the nucleus is called the genome.DNA has two complementary strands linked by hydrogen bonds between the paired bases. The two strands can be separatedby exposure to high temperatures (DNA denaturation) and can be reannealed by cooling. The DNA can be replicated bythe DNA polymerase enzyme. Unlike DNA, which is located in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells, RNA molecules leave thenucleus. The most common type of RNA that is analyzed is the messenger RNA (mRNA) because it represents the proteincodinggenes that are actively expressed. However, RNA molecules present some other challenges to analysis, as they areoften less stable than DNA.DNA and RNA ExtractionTo study or manipulate nucleic acids, the DNA or RNA must first be isolated or extracted from the cells. Various techniquesare used to extract different types of DNA (Figure 17.3). Most nucleic acid extraction techniques involve steps to breakopen the cell and use enzymatic reactions to destroy all macromolecules that are not desired (such as degradation ofunwanted molecules and separation from the DNA sample). Cells are broken using a lysis buffer (a solution which ismostly a detergent); lysis means “to split.” These enzymes break apart lipid molecules in the cell membranes and nuclearmembranes. Macromolecules are inactivated using enzymes such as proteases that break down proteins, and ribonucleases(RNAses) that break down RNA. The DNA is then precipitated using alcohol. Human genomic DNA is usually visible as agelatinous, white mass. The DNA samples can be stored frozen at –80°C for several years.
This diagram shows the basic method used for extraction of DNA.RNA analysis is performed to study gene expression patterns in cells. RNA is naturally very unstable because RNAses arecommonly present in nature and very difficult to inactivate. Similar to DNA, RNA extraction involves the use of variousbuffers and enzymes to inactivate macromolecules and preserve the RNA.Gel ElectrophoresisBecause nucleic acids are negatively charged ions at neutral or basic pH in an aqueous environment, they can be mobilizedby an electric field. Gel electrophoresis is a technique used to separate molecules on the basis of size, using this charge.The nucleic acids can be separated as whole chromosomes or fragments. The nucleic acids are loaded into a slot near thenegative electrode of a semisolid, porous gel matrix and pulled toward the positive electrode at the opposite end of the gel.Smaller molecules move through the pores in the gel faster than larger molecules; this difference in the rate of migrationseparates the fragments on the basis of size. There are molecular weight standard samples that can be run alongside themolecules to provide a size comparison. Nucleic acids in a gel matrix can be observed using various fluorescent or coloreddyes. Distinct nucleic acid fragments appear as bands at specific distances from the top of the gel (the negative electrodeend) on the basis of their size (Figure 17.4). A mixture of genomic DNA fragments of varying sizes appear as a long smear,whereas uncut genomic DNA is usually too large to run through the gel and forms a single large band at the top of the gel.
Shown are DNA fragments from seven samples run on a gel, stained with a fluorescent dye, and viewedunder UV light. (credit: James Jacob, Tompkins Cortland Community College)Amplification of Nucleic Acid Fragments by Polymerase Chain ReactionAlthough genomic DNA is visible to the naked eye when it is extracted in bulk, DNA analysis often requires focusing onone or more specific regions of the genome. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique used to amplify specificregions of DNA for further analysis (Figure 17.5). PCR is used for many purposes in laboratories, such as the cloning ofgene fragments to analyze genetic diseases, identification of contaminant foreign DNA in a sample, and the amplification ofDNA for sequencing. More practical applications include the determination of paternity and detection of genetic diseases.
Polymerase chain reaction, or PCR, is used to amplify a specific sequence of DNA. Primers—short piecesof DNA complementary to each end of the target sequence—are combined with genomic DNA, Taq polymerase, anddeoxynucleotides. Taq polymerase is a DNA polymerase isolated from the thermostable bacterium Thermus aquaticusthat is able to withstand the high temperatures used in PCR. Thermus aquaticus grows in the Lower Geyser Basin ofYellowstone National Park. Reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) is similar to PCR, but cDNA is made from an RNAtemplate before PCR begins.DNA fragments can also be amplified from an RNA template in a process called reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR).The first step is to recreate the original DNA template strand (called cDNA) by applying DNA nucleotides to the mRNA.This process is called reverse transcription. This requires the presence of an enzyme called reverse transcriptase. After thecDNA is made, regular PCR can be used to amplify it.
Hybridization, Southern Blotting, and Northern BlottingNucleic acid samples, such as fragmented genomic DNA and RNA extracts, can be probed for the presence of certainsequences. Short DNA fragments called probes are designed and labeled with radioactive or fluorescent dyes to aiddetection. Gel electrophoresis separates the nucleic acid fragments according to their size. The fragments in the gel are thentransferred onto a nylon membrane in a procedure called blotting (Figure 17.6). The nucleic acid fragments that are boundto the surface of the membrane can then be probed with specific radioactively or fluorescently labeled probe sequences.When DNA is transferred to a nylon membrane, the technique is called Southern blotting, and when RNA is transferred toa nylon membrane, it is called northern blotting. Southern blots are used to detect the presence of certain DNA sequencesin a given genome, and northern blots are used to detect gene expression.
Southern blotting is used to find a particular sequence in a sample of DNA. DNA fragments are separatedon a gel, transferred to a nylon membrane, and incubated with a DNA probe complementary to the sequence ofinterest. Northern blotting is similar to Southern blotting, but RNA is run on the gel instead of DNA. In western blotting,proteins are run on a gel and detected using antibodies.Molecular CloningIn general, the word “cloning” means the creation of a perfect replica; however, in biology, the re-creation of a wholeorganism is referred to as “reproductive cloning.” Long before attempts were made to clone an entire organism, researcherslearned how to reproduce desired regions or fragments of the genome, a process that is referred to as molecular cloning.Cloning small fragments of the genome allows for the manipulation and study of specific genes (and their protein products),or noncoding regions in isolation. A plasmid (also called a vector) is a small circular DNA molecule that replicatesindependently of the chromosomal DNA. In cloning, the plasmid molecules can be used to provide a "folder" in whichto insert a desired DNA fragment. Plasmids are usually introduced into a bacterial host for proliferation. In the bacterialcontext, the fragment of DNA from the human genome (or the genome of another organism that is being studied) is referredto as foreign DNA, or a transgene, to differentiate it from the DNA of the bacterium, which is called the host DNA.Plasmids occur naturally in bacterial populations (such as Escherichia coli) and have genes that can contribute favorabletraits to the organism, such as antibiotic resistance (the ability to be unaffected by antibiotics). Plasmids have beenrepurposed and engineered as vectors for molecular cloning and the large-scale production of important reagents, such asinsulin and human growth hormone. An important feature of plasmid vectors is the ease with which a foreign DNA fragmentcan be introduced via the multiple cloning site (MCS). The MCS is a short DNA sequence containing multiple sitesthat can be cut with different commonly available restriction endonucleases. Restriction endonucleases recognize specificDNA sequences and cut them in a predictable manner; they are naturally produced by bacteria as a defense mechanismagainst foreign DNA. Many restriction endonucleases make staggered cuts in the two strands of DNA, such that the cutends have a 2- or 4-base single-stranded overhang. Because these overhangs are capable of annealing with complementaryoverhangs, these are called “sticky ends.” Addition of an enzyme called DNA ligase permanently joins the DNA fragmentsvia phosphodiester bonds. In this way, any DNA fragment generated by restriction endonuclease cleavage can be splicedbetween the two ends of a plasmid DNA that has been cut with the same restriction endonuclease (Figure 17.7).
Recombinant DNA MoleculesPlasmids with foreign DNA inserted into them are called recombinant DNA molecules because they are created artificiallyand do not occur in nature. They are also called chimeric molecules because the origin of different parts of the molecules canbe traced back to different species of biological organisms or even to chemical synthesis. Proteins that are expressed fromrecombinant DNA molecules are called recombinant proteins. Not all recombinant plasmids are capable of expressinggenes. The recombinant DNA may need to be moved into a different vector (or host) that is better designed for geneexpression. Plasmids may also be engineered to express proteins only when stimulated by certain environmental factors, sothat scientists can control the expression of the recombinant proteins.
Cellular CloningUnicellular organisms, such as bacteria and yeast, naturally produce clones of themselves when they replicate asexually bybinary fission; this is known as cellular cloning. The nuclear DNA duplicates by the process of mitosis, which creates anexact replica of the genetic material.Reproductive CloningReproductive cloning is a method used to make a clone or an identical copy of an entire multicellular organism. Mostmulticellular organisms undergo reproduction by sexual means, which involves genetic hybridization of two individuals(parents), making it impossible for generation of an identical copy or a clone of either parent. Recent advances inbiotechnology have made it possible to artificially induce asexual reproduction of mammals in the laboratory.Parthenogenesis, or “virgin birth,” occurs when an embryo grows and develops without the fertilization of the eggoccurring; this is a form of asexual reproduction. An example of parthenogenesis occurs in species in which the female laysan egg and if the egg is fertilized, it is a diploid egg and the individual develops into a female; if the egg is not fertilized, itremains a haploid egg and develops into a male. The unfertilized egg is called a parthenogenic, or virgin, egg. Some insectsand reptiles lay parthenogenic eggs that can develop into adults.Sexual reproduction requires two cells; when the haploid egg and sperm cells fuse, a diploid zygote results. The zygotenucleus contains the genetic information to produce a new individual. However, early embryonic development requires thecytoplasmic material contained in the egg cell. This idea forms the basis for reproductive cloning. Therefore, if the haploidnucleus of an egg cell is replaced with a diploid nucleus from the cell of any individual of the same species (called a donor),it will become a zygote that is genetically identical to the donor. Somatic cell nuclear transfer is the technique of transferringa diploid nucleus into an enucleated egg. It can be used for either therapeutic cloning or reproductive cloning.The first cloned animal was Dolly, a sheep who was born in 1996. The success rate of reproductive cloning at the time wasvery low. Dolly lived for seven years and died of respiratory complications (Figure 17.8). There is speculation that becausethe cell DNA belongs to an older individual, the age of the DNA may affect the life expectancy of a cloned individual.Since Dolly, several animals such as horses, bulls, and goats have been successfully cloned, although these individuals oftenexhibit facial, limb, and cardiac abnormalities. There have been attempts at producing cloned human embryos as sources ofembryonic stem cells, sometimes referred to as cloning for therapeutic purposes. Therapeutic cloning produces stem cellsto attempt to remedy detrimental diseases or defects (unlike reproductive cloning, which aims to reproduce an organism).Still, therapeutic cloning efforts have met with resistance because of bioethical considerations.
Dolly the sheep was the first mammal to be cloned. To create Dolly, the nucleus was removedfrom a donor egg cell. The nucleus from a second sheep was then introduced into the cell, which was allowedto divide to the blastocyst stage before being implanted in a surrogate mother.
Genetic EngineeringGenetic engineering is the alteration of an organism’s genotype using recombinant DNA technology to modify anorganism’s DNA to achieve desirable traits. The addition of foreign DNA in the form of recombinant DNA vectorsgenerated by molecular cloning is the most common method of genetic engineering. The organism that receives therecombinant DNA is called a genetically modified organism (GMO). If the foreign DNA that is introduced comes froma different species, the host organism is called transgenic. Bacteria, plants, and animals have been genetically modifiedsince the early 1970s for academic, medical, agricultural, and industrial purposes. In the US, GMOs such as Roundup-readysoybeans and borer-resistant corn are part of many common processed foods.Gene TargetingAlthough classical methods of studying the function of genes began with a given phenotype and determined the geneticbasis of that phenotype, modern techniques allow researchers to start at the DNA sequence level and ask: "What doesthis gene or DNA element do?" This technique, called reverse genetics, has resulted in reversing the classic geneticmethodology. This method would be similar to damaging a body part to determine its function. An insect that loses a wingcannot fly, which means that the function of the wing is flight. The classical genetic method would compare insects thatcannot fly with insects that can fly, and observe that the non-flying insects have lost wings. Similarly, mutating or deletinggenes provides researchers with clues about gene function. The methods used to disable gene function are collectively calledgene targeting. Gene targeting is the use of recombinant DNA vectors to alter the expression of a particular gene, eitherby introducing mutations in a gene, or by eliminating the expression of a certain gene by deleting a part or all of the genesequence from the genome of an organism.
Biotechnology in Medicine and AgricultureIt is easy to see how biotechnology can be used for medicinal purposes. Knowledge of the genetic makeup of our species,the genetic basis of heritable diseases, and the invention of technology to manipulate and fix mutant genes provides methodsto treat the disease. Biotechnology in agriculture can enhance resistance to disease, pest, and environmental stress, andimprove both crop yield and quality.Genetic Diagnosis and Gene TherapyThe process of testing for suspected genetic defects before administering treatment is called genetic diagnosis by genetictesting. Depending on the inheritance patterns of a disease-causing gene, family members are advised to undergo genetictesting. For example, women diagnosed with breast cancer are usually advised to have a biopsy so that the medical team candetermine the genetic basis of cancer development. Treatment plans are based on the findings of genetic tests that determinethe type of cancer. If the cancer is caused by inherited gene mutations, other female relatives are also advised to undergogenetic testing and periodic screening for breast cancer. Genetic testing is also offered for fetuses (or embryos with in vitrofertilization) to determine the presence or absence of disease-causing genes in families with specific debilitating diseases.Gene therapy is a genetic engineering technique used to cure disease. In its simplest form, it involves the introduction of agood gene at a random location in the genome to aid the cure of a disease that is caused by a mutated gene. The good geneis usually introduced into diseased cells as part of a vector transmitted by a virus that can infect the host cell and deliverthe foreign DNA (Figure 17.9). More advanced forms of gene therapy try to correct the mutation at the original site in thegenome, such as is the case with treatment of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID).
Production of Vaccines, Antibiotics, and HormonesTraditional vaccination strategies use weakened or inactive forms of microorganisms to mount the initial immune response.Modern techniques use the genes of microorganisms cloned into vectors to mass produce the desired antigen. The antigenis then introduced into the body to stimulate the primary immune response and trigger immune memory. Genes cloned fromthe influenza virus have been used to combat the constantly changing strains of this virus.Antibiotics are a biotechnological product. They are naturally produced by microorganisms, such as fungi, to attain anadvantage over bacterial populations. Antibiotics are produced on a large scale by cultivating and manipulating fungal cells.Recombinant DNA technology was used to produce large-scale quantities of human insulin in E. coli as early as 1978.Previously, it was only possible to treat diabetes with pig insulin, which caused allergic reactions in humans because of
differences in the gene product. In addition, human growth hormone (HGH) is used to treat growth disorders in children.The HGH gene was cloned from a cDNA library and inserted into E. coli cells by cloning it into a bacterial vector.Transgenic AnimalsAlthough several recombinant proteins used in medicine are successfully produced in bacteria, some proteins require aeukaryotic animal host for proper processing. For this reason, the desired genes are cloned and expressed in animals, suchas sheep, goats, chickens, and mice. Animals that have been modified to express recombinant DNA are called transgenicanimals. Several human proteins are expressed in the milk of transgenic sheep and goats, and some are expressed in the eggsof chickens. Mice have been used extensively for expressing and studying the effects of recombinant genes and mutations.Transgenic PlantsManipulating the DNA of plants (i.e., creating GMOs) has helped to create desirable traits, such as disease resistance,herbicide and pesticide resistance, better nutritional value, and better shelf-life (Figure 17.10). Plants are the most importantsource of food for the human population. Farmers developed ways to select for plant varieties with desirable traits longbefore modern-day biotechnology practices were established.
Plants that have received recombinant DNA from other species are called transgenic plants. Because they are not natural,transgenic plants and other GMOs are closely monitored by government agencies to ensure that they are fit for humanconsumption and do not endanger other plant and animal life. Because foreign genes can spread to other species in theenvironment, extensive testing is required to ensure ecological stability. Staples like corn, potatoes, and tomatoes were thefirst crop plants to be genetically engineered.Transformation of Plants Using Agrobacterium tumefaciensGene transfer occurs naturally between species in microbial populations. Many viruses that cause human diseases, such ascancer, act by incorporating their DNA into the human genome. In plants, tumors caused by the bacterium Agrobacteriumtumefaciens occur by transfer of DNA from the bacterium to the plant. Although the tumors do not kill the plants, they makethe plants stunted and more susceptible to harsh environmental conditions. Many plants, such as walnuts, grapes, nut trees,and beets, are affected by A. tumefaciens. The artificial introduction of DNA into plant cells is more challenging than inanimal cells because of the thick plant cell wall.
Researchers used the natural transfer of DNA from Agrobacterium to a plant host to introduce DNA fragments of theirchoice into plant hosts. In nature, the disease-causing A. tumefaciens have a set of plasmids, called the Ti plasmids (tumorinducingplasmids), that contain genes for the production of tumors in plants. DNA from the Ti plasmid integrates intothe infected plant cell’s genome. Researchers manipulate the Ti plasmids to remove the tumor-causing genes and insert thedesired DNA fragment for transfer into the plant genome. The Ti plasmids carry antibiotic resistance genes to aid selectionand can be propagated in E. coli cells as well.The Organic Insecticide Bacillus thuringiensisBacillus thuringiensis (Bt) is a bacterium that produces protein crystals during sporulation that are toxic to many insectspecies that affect plants. Bt toxin has to be ingested by insects for the toxin to be activated. Insects that have eaten Bt toxinstop feeding on the plants within a few hours. After the toxin is activated in the intestines of the insects, death occurs withina couple of days. Modern biotechnology has allowed plants to encode their own crystal Bt toxin that acts against insects.The crystal toxin genes have been cloned from Bt and introduced into plants. Bt toxin has been found to be safe for theenvironment, non-toxic to humans and other mammals, and is approved for use by organic farmers as a natural insecticide.Flavr Savr TomatoThe first GM crop to be introduced into the market was the Flavr Savr Tomato produced in 1994. Antisense RNAtechnology was used to slow down the process of softening and rotting caused by fungal infections, which led to increasedshelf life of the GM tomatoes. Additional genetic modification improved the flavor of this tomato. The Flavr Savr tomatodid not successfully stay in the market because of problems maintaining and shipping the crop.
Mapping Genomes
Genomics is the study of entire genomes, including the complete set of genes, their nucleotide sequence and organization,and their interactions within a species and with other species. Genome mapping is the process of finding the locations ofgenes on each chromosome. The maps created by genome mapping are comparable to the maps that we use to navigatestreets. A genetic map is an illustration that lists genes and their location on a chromosome. Genetic maps provide the bigpicture (similar to a map of interstate highways) and use genetic markers (similar to landmarks). A genetic marker is agene or sequence on a chromosome that co-segregates (shows genetic linkage) with a specific trait. Early geneticists calledthis linkage analysis. Physical maps present the intimate details of smaller regions of the chromosomes (similar to a detailedroad map). A physical map is a representation of the physical distance, in nucleotides, between genes or genetic markers.Both genetic linkage maps and physical maps are required to build a complete picture of the genome. Having a completemap of the genome makes it easier for researchers to study individual genes. Human genome maps help researchers in theirefforts to identify human disease-causing genes related to illnesses like cancer, heart disease, and cystic fibrosis. Genomemapping can be used in a variety of other applications, such as using live microbes to clean up pollutants or even preventpollution. Research involving plant genome mapping may lead to producing higher crop yields or developing plants thatbetter adapt to climate change.Genetic MapsThe study of genetic maps begins with linkage analysis, a procedure that analyzes the recombination frequency betweengenes to determine if they are linked or show independent assortment. The term linkage was used before the discoveryof DNA. Early geneticists relied on the observation of phenotypic changes to understand the genotype of an organism.Shortly after Gregor Mendel (the father of modern genetics) proposed that traits were determined by what are now knownas genes, other researchers observed that different traits were often inherited together, and thereby deduced that the geneswere physically linked by being located on the same chromosome. The mapping of genes relative to each other based onlinkage analysis led to the development of the first genetic maps.Observations that certain traits were always linked and certain others were not linked came from studying the offspring ofcrosses between parents with different traits. For example, in experiments performed on the garden pea, it was discoveredthat the color of the flower and shape of the plant’s pollen were linked traits, and therefore the genes encoding these traitswere in close proximity on the same chromosome. The exchange of DNA between homologous pairs of chromosomes is
called genetic recombination, which occurs by the crossing over of DNA between homologous strands of DNA, such asnonsister chromatids. Linkage analysis involves studying the recombination frequency between any two genes. The greaterthe distance between two genes, the higher the chance that a recombination event will occur between them, and the higherthe recombination frequency between them. Two possibilities for recombination between two nonsister chromatids duringmeiosis are shown in Figure 17.11. If the recombination frequency between two genes is less than 50 percent, they are saidto be linked.
Crossover may occur at different locations on the chromosome. Recombination between genes A and Bis more frequent than recombination between genes B and C because genes A and B are farther apart; a crossover istherefore more likely to occur between them.The generation of genetic maps requires markers, just as a road map requires landmarks (such as rivers and mountains).Early genetic maps were based on the use of known genes as markers. More sophisticated markers, including those basedon non-coding DNA, are now used to compare the genomes of individuals in a population. Although individuals of a givenspecies are genetically similar, they are not identical; every individual has a unique set of traits. These minor differences inthe genome between individuals in a population are useful for the purposes of genetic mapping. In general, a good geneticmarker is a region on the chromosome that shows variability or polymorphism (multiple forms) in the population.Some genetic markers used in generating genetic maps are restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLP), variablenumber of tandem repeats (VNTRs), microsatellite polymorphisms, and the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).RFLPs (sometimes pronounced “rif-lips”) are detected when the DNA of an individual is cut with a restriction endonucleasethat recognizes specific sequences in the DNA to generate a series of DNA fragments, which are then analyzed by gelelectrophoresis. The DNA of every individual will give rise to a unique pattern of bands when cut with a particularset of restriction endonucleases; this is sometimes referred to as an individual’s DNA “fingerprint.” Certain regions ofthe chromosome that are subject to polymorphism will lead to the generation of the unique banding pattern. VNTRsare repeated sets of nucleotides present in the non-coding regions of DNA. Non-coding, or “junk,” DNA has no knownbiological function; however, research shows that much of this DNA is actually transcribed. While its function is uncertain,it is certainly active, and it may be involved in the regulation of coding genes. The number of repeats may vary in individualorganisms of a population. Microsatellite polymorphisms are similar to VNTRs, but the repeat unit is very small. SNPs arevariations in a single nucleotide.Because genetic maps rely completely on the natural process of recombination, mapping is affected by natural increasesor decreases in the level of recombination in any given area of the genome. Some parts of the genome are recombinationhotspots, whereas others do not show a propensity for recombination. For this reason, it is important to look at mappinginformation developed by multiple methods.Physical MapsA physical map provides detail of the actual physical distance between genetic markers, as well as the number ofnucleotides. There are three methods used to create a physical map: cytogenetic mapping, radiation hybrid mapping,
and sequence mapping. Cytogenetic mapping uses information obtained by microscopic analysis of stained sections ofthe chromosome (Figure 17.12). It is possible to determine the approximate distance between genetic markers usingcytogenetic mapping, but not the exact distance (number of base pairs). Radiation hybrid mapping uses radiation, suchas x-rays, to break the DNA into fragments. The amount of radiation can be adjusted to create smaller or larger fragments.This technique overcomes the limitation of genetic mapping and is not affected by increased or decreased recombinationfrequency. Sequence mapping resulted from DNA sequencing technology that allowed for the creation of detailed physicalmaps with distances measured in terms of the number of base pairs. The creation of genomic libraries and complementaryDNA (cDNA) libraries (collections of cloned sequences or all DNA from a genome) has sped up the process of physicalmapping. A genetic site used to generate a physical map with sequencing technology (a sequence-tagged site, or STS) is aunique sequence in the genome with a known exact chromosomal location. An expressed sequence tag (EST) and a singlesequence length polymorphism (SSLP) are common STSs. An EST is a short STS that is identified with cDNA libraries,while SSLPs are obtained from known genetic markers and provide a link between genetic maps and physical maps.
cytogenetic map shows the appearance of a chromosome after it is stained and examined under amicroscope. (credit: National Human Genome Research Institute)Integration of Genetic and Physical MapsGenetic maps provide the outline and physical maps provide the details. It is easy to understand why both types ofgenome mapping techniques are important to show the big picture. Information obtained from each technique is usedin combination to study the genome. Genomic mapping is being used with different model organisms that are used forresearch. Genome mapping is still an ongoing process, and as more advanced techniques are developed, more advances areexpected. Genome mapping is similar to completing a complicated puzzle using every piece of available data. Mappinginformation generated in laboratories all over the world is entered into central databases, such as GenBank at the NationalCenter for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Efforts are being made to make the information more easily accessible to
researchers and the general public. Just as we use global positioning systems instead of paper maps to navigate throughroadways, NCBI has created a genome viewer tool to simplify the data-mining process.
Whole-Genome Sequencing
Although there have been significant advances in the medical sciences in recent years, doctors are still confounded by somediseases, and they are using whole-genome sequencing to get to the bottom of the problem. Whole-genome sequencing isa process that determines the DNA sequence of an entire genome. Whole-genome sequencing is a brute-force approach toproblem solving when there is a genetic basis at the core of a disease. Several laboratories now provide services to sequence,analyze, and interpret entire genomes.For example, whole-exome sequencing is a lower-cost alternative to whole genome sequencing. In exome sequencing, onlythe coding, exon-producing regions of the DNA are sequenced. In 2010, whole-exome sequencing was used to save a youngboy whose intestines had multiple mysterious abscesses. The child had several colon operations with no relief. Finally,whole-exome sequencing was performed, which revealed a defect in a pathway that controls apoptosis (programmed celldeath). A bone-marrow transplant was used to overcome this genetic disorder, leading to a cure for the boy. He was the firstperson to be successfully treated based on a diagnosis made by whole-exome sequencing. Today, human genome sequencingis more readily available and can be completed in a day or two for about $1000.
Strategies Used in Sequencing ProjectsThe basic sequencing technique used in all modern day sequencing projects is the chain termination method (also knownas the dideoxy method), which was developed by Fred Sanger in the 1970s. The chain termination method involves DNAreplication of a single-stranded template with the use of a primer and a regular deoxynucleotide (dNTP), which is amonomer, or a single unit, of DNA. The primer and dNTP are mixed with a small proportion of fluorescently labeleddideoxynucleotides (ddNTPs). The ddNTPs are monomers that are missing a hydroxyl group (–OH) at the site at whichanother nucleotide usually attaches to form a chain (Figure 17.13). Each ddNTP is labeled with a different color offluorophore. Every time a ddNTP is incorporated in the growing complementary strand, it terminates the process of DNAreplication, which results in multiple short strands of replicated DNA that are each terminated at a different point duringreplication. When the reaction mixture is processed by gel electrophoresis after being separated into single strands, themultiple newly replicated DNA strands form a ladder because of the differing sizes. Because the ddNTPs are fluorescentlylabeled, each band on the gel reflects the size of the DNA strand and the ddNTP that terminated the reaction. The differentcolors of the fluorophore-labeled ddNTPs help identify the ddNTP incorporated at that position. Reading the gel on thebasis of the color of each band on the ladder produces the sequence of the template strand (Figure 17.14).
A dideoxynucleotide is similar in structure to a deoxynucleotide, but is missing the 3' hydroxyl group(indicated by the box). When a dideoxynucleotide is incorporated into a DNA strand, DNA synthesis stops.
Frederick Sanger's dideoxy chain termination method is illustrated. Using dideoxynucleotides, the DNAfragment can be terminated at different points. The DNA is separated on the basis of size, and these bands, based onthe size of the fragments, can be read.Early Strategies: Shotgun Sequencing and Pair-Wise End SequencingIn shotgun sequencing method, several copies of a DNA fragment are cut randomly into many smaller pieces (somewhatlike what happens to a round shot cartridge when fired from a shotgun). All of the segments are then sequenced usingthe chain-sequencing method. Then, with the help of a computer, the fragments are analyzed to see where their sequencesoverlap. By matching up overlapping sequences at the end of each fragment, the entire DNA sequence can be reformed.
A larger sequence that is assembled from overlapping shorter sequences is called a contig. As an analogy, consider thatsomeone has four copies of a landscape photograph that you have never seen before and know nothing about how it shouldappear. The person then rips up each photograph with their hands, so that different size pieces are present from each copy.The person then mixes all of the pieces together and asks you to reconstruct the photograph. In one of the smaller piecesyou see a mountain. In a larger piece, you see that the same mountain is behind a lake. A third fragment shows only thelake, but it reveals that there is a cabin on the shore of the lake. Therefore, from looking at the overlapping information inthese three fragments, you know that the picture contains a mountain behind a lake that has a cabin on its shore. This is theprinciple behind reconstructing entire DNA sequences using shotgun sequencing.Originally, shotgun sequencing only analyzed one end of each fragment for overlaps. This was sufficient for sequencingsmall genomes. However, the desire to sequence larger genomes, such as that of a human, led to the development of doublebarrelshotgun sequencing, more formally known as pairwise-end sequencing. In pairwise-end sequencing, both ends ofeach fragment are analyzed for overlap. Pairwise-end sequencing is, therefore, more cumbersome than shotgun sequencing,but it is easier to reconstruct the sequence because there is more available information.Next-generation SequencingSince 2005, automated sequencing techniques used by laboratories are under the umbrella of next-generation sequencing,which is a group of automated techniques used for rapid DNA sequencing. These automated low-cost sequencers cangenerate sequences of hundreds of thousands or millions of short fragments (25 to 500 base pairs) in the span of one day.These sequencers use sophisticated software to get through the cumbersome process of putting all the fragments in order.
Comparing SequencesA sequence alignment is an arrangement of proteins, DNA, or RNA; it is used to identify regions of similaritybetween cell types or species, which may indicate conservation of function or structures. Sequencealignments may be used to construct phylogenetic trees. The following website uses a software programcalled BLAST (basic local alignment search tool) (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) .Under “Basic Blast,” click “Nucleotide Blast.” Input the following sequence into the large "query sequence"box: ATTGCTTCGATTGCA. Below the box, locate the "Species" field and type "human" or "Homo sapiens".Then click “BLAST” to compare the inputted sequence against known sequences of the human genome.The result is that this sequence occurs in over a hundred places in the human genome. Scroll down belowthe graphic with the horizontal bars and you will see short description of each of the matching hits. Pick oneof the hits near the top of the list and click on "Graphics". This will bring you to a page that shows wherethe sequence is found within the entire human genome. You can move the slider that looks like a green flagback and forth to view the sequences immediately around the selected gene. You can then return to yourselected sequence by clicking the "ATG" button.
Use of Whole-Genome Sequences of Model OrganismsThe first genome to be completely sequenced was of a bacterial virus, the bacteriophage fx174 (5368 base pairs); this wasaccomplished by Fred Sanger using shotgun sequencing. Several other organelle and viral genomes were later sequenced.The first organism whose genome was sequenced was the bacterium Haemophilus influenzae; this was accomplished byCraig Venter in the 1980s. Approximately 74 different laboratories collaborated on the sequencing of the genome of theyeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which began in 1989 and was completed in 1996, because it was 60 times bigger than anyother genome that had been sequenced. By 1997, the genome sequences of two important model organisms were available:the bacterium Escherichia coli K12 and the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genomes of other model organisms, such asthe mouse Mus musculus, the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, the nematode Caenorhabditis. elegans, and humans Homosapiens are now known. A lot of basic research is performed in model organisms because the information can be appliedto genetically similar organisms. A model organism is a species that is studied as a model to understand the biologicalprocesses in other species represented by the model organism. Having entire genomes sequenced helps with the researchefforts in these model organisms. The process of attaching biological information to gene sequences is called genomeannotation. Annotation of gene sequences helps with basic experiments in molecular biology, such as designing PCRprimers and RNA targets.
Uses of Genome SequencesDNA microarrays are methods used to detect gene expression by analyzing an array of DNA fragments that are fixed to aglass slide or a silicon chip to identify active genes and identify sequences. Almost one million genotypic abnormalities canbe discovered using microarrays, whereas whole-genome sequencing can provide information about all six billion base pairsin the human genome. Although the study of medical applications of genome sequencing is interesting, this discipline tendsto dwell on abnormal gene function. Knowledge of the entire genome will allow future onset diseases and other geneticdisorders to be discovered early, which will allow for more informed decisions to be made about lifestyle, medication, andhaving children. Genomics is still in its infancy, although someday it may become routine to use whole-genome sequencingto screen every newborn to detect genetic abnormalities.In addition to disease and medicine, genomics can contribute to the development of novel enzymes that convert biomassto biofuel, which results in higher crop and fuel production, and lower cost to the consumer. This knowledge should allowbetter methods of control over the microbes that are used in the production of biofuels. Genomics could also improve themethods used to monitor the impact of pollutants on ecosystems and help clean up environmental contaminants. Genomicshas allowed for the development of agrochemicals and pharmaceuticals that could benefit medical science and agriculture.It sounds great to have all the knowledge we can get from whole-genome sequencing; however, humans have aresponsibility to use this knowledge wisely. Otherwise, it could be easy to misuse the power of such knowledge, leading todiscrimination based on a person's genetics, human genetic engineering, and other ethical concerns. This information couldalso lead to legal issues regarding health and privacy.
Applying Genomics
The introduction of DNA sequencing and whole genome sequencing projects, particularly the Human Genome project, hasexpanded the applicability of DNA sequence information. Genomics is now being used in a wide variety of fields, such asmetagenomics, pharmacogenomics, and mitochondrial genomics. The most commonly known application of genomics is tounderstand and find cures for diseases.Predicting Disease Risk at the Individual LevelPredicting the risk of disease involves screening currently healthy individuals by genome analysis at the individual level.Intervention with lifestyle changes and drugs can be recommended before disease onset. However, this approach is mostapplicable when the problem resides within a single gene defect. Such defects only account for approximately 5 percentof diseases in developed countries. Most of the common diseases, such as heart disease, are multi-factored or polygenic,which is a phenotypic characteristic that involves two or more genes, and also involve environmental factors such as diet.In April 2010, scientists at Stanford University published the genome analysis of a healthy individual (Stephen Quake, ascientist at Stanford University, who had his genome sequenced); the analysis predicted his propensity to acquire variousdiseases. A risk assessment was performed to analyze Quake’s percentage of risk for 55 different medical conditions. A raregenetic mutation was found, which showed him to be at risk for sudden heart attack. He was also predicted to have a 23percent risk of developing prostate cancer and a 1.4 percent risk of developing Alzheimer’s. The scientists used databases
and several publications to analyze the genomic data. Even though genomic sequencing is becoming more affordable andanalytical tools are becoming more reliable, ethical issues surrounding genomic analysis at a population level remain to beaddressed.
PCA3 is a gene that is expressed in prostate epithelial cells and overexpressed in cancerous cells.A high concentration of PCA3 in urine is indicative of prostate cancer. The PCA3 test is considered to be a betterindicator of cancer than the more well know PSA test, which measures the level of PSA (prostate-specific antigen)in the blood.In 2011, the United States Preventative Services Task Force recommended against using the PSA test toscreen healthy men for prostate cancer. Their recommendation is based on evidence that screening doesnot reduce the risk of death from prostate cancer. Prostate cancer often develops very slowly and does notcause problems, while the cancer treatment can have severe side effects. The PCA3 test is considered to bemore accurate, but screening may still result in men who would not have been harmed by the cancer itselfsuffering side effects from treatment. What do you think? Should all healthy men be screened for prostatecancer using the PCA3 or PSA test? Should people in general be screened to find out if they have a geneticrisk for cancer or other diseases?
Pharmacogenomics and ToxicogenomicsPharmacogenomics, also called toxicogenomics, involves evaluating the effectiveness and safety of drugs on the basis ofinformation from an individual's genomic sequence. Genomic responses to drugs can be studied using experimental animals(such as laboratory rats or mice) or live cells in the laboratory before embarking on studies with humans. Studying changesin gene expression could provide information about the transcription profile in the presence of the drug, which can beused as an early indicator of the potential for toxic effects. For example, genes involved in cellular growth and controlledcell death, when disturbed, could lead to the growth of cancerous cells. Genome-wide studies can also help to find newgenes involved in drug toxicity. Personal genome sequence information can be used to prescribe medications that will bemost effective and least toxic on the basis of the individual patient’s genotype. The gene signatures may not be completelyaccurate, but can be tested further before pathologic symptoms arise.Microbial Genomics: MetagenomicsTraditionally, microbiology has been taught with the view that microorganisms are best studied under pure cultureconditions, which involves isolating a single type of cell and culturing it in the laboratory. Because microorganisms can gothrough several generations in a matter of hours, their gene expression profiles adapt to the new laboratory environmentvery quickly. In addition, the vast majority of bacterial species resist being cultured in isolation. Most microorganisms donot live as isolated entities, but in microbial communities known as biofilms. For all of these reasons, pure culture is notalways the best way to study microorganisms. Metagenomics is the study of the collective genomes of multiple species
that grow and interact in an environmental niche. Metagenomics can be used to identify new species more rapidly and toanalyze the effect of pollutants on the environment (Figure 17.16).
Microbial Genomics: Creation of New BiofuelsKnowledge of the genomics of microorganisms is being used to find better ways to harness biofuels from algae andcyanobacteria. The primary sources of fuel today are coal, oil, wood, and other plant products, such as ethanol. Althoughplants are renewable resources, there is still a need to find more alternative renewable sources of energy to meet ourpopulation’s energy demands. The microbial world is one of the largest resources for genes that encode new enzymesand produce new organic compounds, and it remains largely untapped. Microorganisms are used to create products, suchas enzymes that are used in research, antibiotics, and other anti-microbial mechanisms. Microbial genomics is helping todevelop diagnostic tools, improved vaccines, new disease treatments, and advanced environmental cleanup techniques.Mitochondrial GenomicsMitochondria are intracellular organelles that contain their own DNA. Mitochondrial DNA mutates at a rapid rate and isoften used to study evolutionary relationships. Another feature that makes studying the mitochondrial genome interesting isthat the mitochondrial DNA in most multicellular organisms is passed on from the mother during the process of fertilization.For this reason, mitochondrial genomics is often used to trace genealogy.Information and clues obtained from DNA samples found at crime scenes have been used as evidence in court cases, andgenetic markers have been used in forensic analysis. Genomic analysis has also become useful in this field. In 2001, thefirst use of genomics in forensics was published. It was a collaborative attempt between academic research institutionsand the FBI to solve the mysterious cases of anthrax communicated via the US Postal Service. Using microbial genomics,researchers determined that a specific strain of anthrax was used in all the mailings.Genomics in AgricultureGenomics can reduce the trials and failures involved in scientific research to a certain extent, which could improve thequality and quantity of crop yields in agriculture. Linking traits to genes or gene signatures helps to improve crop breedingto generate hybrids with the most desirable qualities. Scientists use genomic data to identify desirable traits, and thentransfer those traits to a different organism. Scientists are discovering how genomics can improve the quality and quantityof agricultural production. For example, scientists could use desirable traits to create a useful product or enhance an existingproduct, such as making a drought-sensitive crop more tolerant of the dry season.
Proteins are the final products of genes, which help perform the function encoded by the gene. Proteins are composedof amino acids and play important roles in the cell. All enzymes (except ribozymes) are proteins that act as catalysts toaffect the rate of reactions. Proteins are also regulatory molecules, and some are hormones. Transport proteins, such ashemoglobin, help transport oxygen to various organs. Antibodies that defend against foreign particles are also proteins. Inthe diseased state, protein function can be impaired because of changes at the genetic level or because of direct impact on aspecific protein.A proteome is the entire set of proteins produced by a cell type. Proteomes can be studied using the knowledge ofgenomes because genes code for mRNAs, and the mRNAs encode proteins. Although mRNA analysis is a step in theright direction, not all mRNAs are translated into proteins. The study of the function of proteomes is called proteomics.Proteomics complements genomics and is useful when scientists want to test their hypotheses that were based on genes.Even though all cells of a multicellular organism have the same set of genes, the set of proteins produced in different tissuesis different and dependent on gene expression. Thus, the genome is constant, but the proteome varies and is dynamic withinan organism. In addition, RNAs can be alternately spliced (cut and pasted to create novel combinations and novel proteins)and many proteins are modified after translation by processes such as proteolytic cleavage, phosphorylation, glycosylation,and ubiquitination. There are also protein-protein interactions, which complicate the study of proteomes. Although thegenome provides a blueprint, the final architecture depends on several factors that can change the progression of events thatgenerate the proteome.Metabolomics is related to genomics and proteomics. Metabolomics involves the study of small molecule metabolitesfound in an organism. The metabolome is the complete set of metabolites that are related to the genetic makeup of anorganism. Metabolomics offers an opportunity to compare genetic makeup and physical characteristics, as well as geneticmakeup and environmental factors. The goal of metabolome research is to identify, quantify, and catalogue all of themetabolites that are found in the tissues and fluids of living organisms.Basic Techniques in Protein AnalysisThe ultimate goal of proteomics is to identify or compare the proteins expressed from a given genome under specificconditions, study the interactions between the proteins, and use the information to predict cell behavior or develop drugtargets. Just as the genome is analyzed using the basic technique of DNA sequencing, proteomics requires techniquesfor protein analysis. The basic technique for protein analysis, analogous to DNA sequencing, is mass spectrometry. Massspectrometry is used to identify and determine the characteristics of a molecule. Advances in spectrometry have allowedresearchers to analyze very small samples of protein. X-ray crystallography, for example, enables scientists to determine thethree-dimensional structure of a protein crystal at atomic resolution. Another protein imaging technique, nuclear magneticresonance (NMR), uses the magnetic properties of atoms to determine the three-dimensional structure of proteins in aqueoussolution. Protein microarrays have also been used to study interactions between proteins. Large-scale adaptations of thebasic two-hybrid screen (Figure 17.17) have provided the basis for protein microarrays. Computer software is used toanalyze the vast amount of data generated for proteomic analysis.Genomic- and proteomic-scale analyses are part of systems biology. Systems biology is the study of whole biologicalsystems (genomes and proteomes) based on interactions within the system. The European Bioinformatics Institute and theHuman Proteome Organization (HUPO) are developing and establishing effective tools to sort through the enormous pileof systems biology data. Because proteins are the direct products of genes and reflect activity at the genomic level, it isnatural to use proteomes to compare the protein profiles of different cells to identify proteins and genes involved in diseaseprocesses. Most pharmaceutical drug trials target proteins. Information obtained from proteomics is being used to identifynovel drugs and understand their mechanisms of action.
Two-hybrid screening is used to determine whether two proteins interact. In this method, a transcriptionfactor is split into a DNA-binding domain (BD) and an activator domain (AD). The binding domain is able to bind thepromoter in the absence of the activator domain, but it does not turn on transcription. A protein called the bait isattached to the BD, and a protein called the prey is attached to the AD. Transcription occurs only if the prey “catches”the bait.The challenge of techniques used for proteomic analyses is the difficulty in detecting small quantities of proteins. Althoughmass spectrometry is good for detecting small amounts of proteins, variations in protein expression in diseased states canbe difficult to discern. Proteins are naturally unstable molecules, which makes proteomic analysis much more difficult thangenomic analysis.Cancer ProteomicsGenomes and proteomes of patients suffering from specific diseases are being studied to understand the genetic basis ofthe disease. The most prominent disease being studied with proteomic approaches is cancer. Proteomic approaches arebeing used to improve screening and early detection of cancer; this is achieved by identifying proteins whose expressionis affected by the disease process. An individual protein is called a biomarker, whereas a set of proteins with alteredexpression levels is called a protein signature. For a biomarker or protein signature to be useful as a candidate for earlyscreening and detection of a cancer, it must be secreted in body fluids, such as sweat, blood, or urine, such that largescalescreenings can be performed in a non-invasive fashion. The current problem with using biomarkers for the earlydetection of cancer is the high rate of false-negative results. A false negative is an incorrect test result that should havebeen positive. In other words, many cases of cancer go undetected, which makes biomarkers unreliable. Some examples ofprotein biomarkers used in cancer detection are CA-125 for ovarian cancer and PSA for prostate cancer. Protein signaturesmay be more reliable than biomarkers to detect cancer cells. Proteomics is also being used to develop individualizedtreatment plans, which involves the prediction of whether or not an individual will respond to specific drugs and the sideeffects that the individual may experience. Proteomics is also being used to predict the possibility of disease recurrence.The National Cancer Institute has developed programs to improve the detection and treatment of cancer. The ClinicalProteomic Technologies for Cancer and the Early Detection Research Network are efforts to identify protein signaturesspecific to different types of cancers. The Biomedical Proteomics Program is designed to identify protein signatures anddesign effective therapies for cancer patients.


