IntroductionA human, as well as every sexually reproducing organism, begins life as a fertilized egg (embryo) or zygote. Trillionsof cell divisions subsequently occur in a controlled manner to produce a complex, multicellular human. In other words,that original single cell is the ancestor of every other cell in the body. Once a being is fully grown, cell reproduction isstill necessary to repair or regenerate tissues. For example, new blood and skin cells are constantly being produced. Allmulticellular organisms use cell division for growth and the maintenance and repair of cells and tissues. Cell division istightly regulated, and the occasional failure of regulation can have life-threatening consequences. Single-celled organismsuse cell division as their method of reproduction.
The continuity of life from one cell to another has its foundation in the reproduction of cells by way of the cell cycle. Thecell cycle is an orderly sequence of events that describes the stages of a cell’s life from the division of a single parent cell tothe production of two new daughter cells. The mechanisms involved in the cell cycle are highly regulated.
Genomic DNABefore discussing the steps a cell must undertake to replicate, a deeper understanding of the structure and function of acell’s genetic information is necessary. A cell’s DNA, packaged as a double-stranded DNA molecule, is called its genome.In prokaryotes, the genome is composed of a single, double-stranded DNA molecule in the form of a loop or circle (Figure10.2). The region in the cell containing this genetic material is called a nucleoid. Some prokaryotes also have smaller loopsof DNA called plasmids that are not essential for normal growth. Bacteria can exchange these plasmids with other bacteria,sometimes receiving beneficial new genes that the recipient can add to their chromosomal DNA. Antibiotic resistance isone trait that often spreads through a bacterial colony through plasmid exchange.
Prokaryotes, including bacteria and archaea, have a single, circular chromosome located in a centralregion called the nucleoid.In eukaryotes, the genome consists of several double-stranded linear DNA molecules (Figure 10.3). Each species ofeukaryotes has a characteristic number of chromosomes in the nuclei of its cells. Human body cells have 46 chromosomes,while human gametes (sperm or eggs) have 23 chromosomes each. A typical body cell, or somatic cell, contains twomatched sets of chromosomes, a configuration known as diploid. The letter n is used to represent a single set ofchromosomes; therefore, a diploid organism is designated 2n. Human cells that contain one set of chromosomes are calledgametes, or sex cells; these are eggs and sperm, and are designated 1n, or haploid.
There are 23 pairs of homologous chromosomes in a female human somatic cell. The condensedchromosomes are viewed within the nucleus (top), removed from a cell in mitosis and spread out on a slide (right),and artificially arranged according to length (left); an arrangement like this is called a karyotype. In this image,the chromosomes were exposed to fluorescent stains for differentiation of the different chromosomes. A method ofstaining called “chromosome painting” employs fluorescent dyes that highlight chromosomes in different colors.
Matched pairs of chromosomes in a diploid organism are called homologous (“same knowledge”) chromosomes.Homologous chromosomes are the same length and have specific nucleotide segments called genes in exactly the samelocation, or locus. Genes, the functional units of chromosomes, determine specific characteristics by coding for specificproteins. Traits are the variations of those characteristics. For example, hair color is a characteristic with traits that areblonde, brown, or black.Each copy of a homologous pair of chromosomes originates from a different parent; therefore, the genes themselves arenot identical. The variation of individuals within a species is due to the specific combination of the genes inherited fromboth parents. Even a slightly altered sequence of nucleotides within a gene can result in an alternative trait. For example,there are three possible gene sequences on the human chromosome that code for blood type: sequence A, sequence B, andsequence O. Because all diploid human cells have two copies of the chromosome that determines blood type, the blood type(the trait) is determined by which two versions of the marker gene are inherited. It is possible to have two copies of thesame gene sequence on both homologous chromosomes, with one on each (for example, AA, BB, or OO), or two differentsequences, such as AB.Minor variations of traits, such as blood type, eye color, and handedness, contribute to the natural variation found withina species. However, if the entire DNA sequence from any pair of human homologous chromosomes is compared, thedifference is less than one percent. The sex chromosomes, X and Y, are the single exception to the rule of homologouschromosome uniformity: Other than a small amount of homology that is necessary to accurately produce gametes, the genesfound on the X and Y chromosomes are different.Eukaryotic Chromosomal Structure and CompactionIf the DNA from all 46 chromosomes in a human cell nucleus was laid out end to end, it would measure approximatelytwo meters; however, its diameter would be only 2 nm. Considering that the size of a typical human cell is about 10 μm(100,000 cells lined up to equal one meter), DNA must be tightly packaged to fit in the cell’s nucleus. At the same time, itmust also be readily accessible for the genes to be expressed. During some stages of the cell cycle, the long strands of DNAare condensed into compact chromosomes. There are a number of ways that chromosomes are compacted.In the first level of compaction, short stretches of the DNA double helix wrap around a core of eight histone proteins atregular intervals along the entire length of the chromosome (Figure 10.4). The DNA-histone complex is called chromatin.The beadlike, histone DNA complex is called a nucleosome, and DNA connecting the nucleosomes is called linker DNA.A DNA molecule in this form is about seven times shorter than the double helix without the histones, and the beads areabout 10 nm in diameter, in contrast with the 2-nm diameter of a DNA double helix. The next level of compaction occursas the nucleosomes and the linker DNA between them are coiled into a 30-nm chromatin fiber. This coiling further shortensthe chromosome so that it is now about 50 times shorter than the extended form. In the third level of packing, a variety offibrous proteins is used to pack the chromatin. These fibrous proteins also ensure that each chromosome in a non-dividingcell occupies a particular area of the nucleus that does not overlap with that of any other chromosome.
Double-stranded DNA wraps around histone proteins to form nucleosomes that have the appearance of“beads on a string.” The nucleosomes are coiled into a 30-nm chromatin fiber. When a cell undergoes mitosis, thechromosomes condense even further.DNA replicates in the S phase of interphase. After replication, the chromosomes are composed of two linked sisterchromatids. When fully compact, the pairs of identically packed chromosomes are bound to each other by cohesin proteins.The connection between the sister chromatids is closest in a region called the centromere. The conjoined sister chromatids,with a diameter of about 1 μm, are visible under a light microscope. The centromeric region is highly condensed and thuswill appear as a constricted area.
The cell cycle is an ordered series of events involving cell growth and cell division that produces two new daughter cells.Cells on the path to cell division proceed through a series of precisely timed and carefully regulated stages of growth,DNA replication, and division that produces two identical (clone) cells. The cell cycle has two major phases: interphase andthe mitotic phase (Figure 10.5). During interphase, the cell grows and DNA is replicated. During the mitotic phase, thereplicated DNA and cytoplasmic contents are separated, and the cell divides.
The cell cycle consists of interphase and the mitotic phase. During interphase, the cell grows and thenuclear DNA is duplicated. Interphase is followed by the mitotic phase. During the mitotic phase, the duplicatedchromosomes are segregated and distributed into daughter nuclei. The cytoplasm is usually divided as well, resultingin two daughter cells.InterphaseDuring interphase, the cell undergoes normal growth processes while also preparing for cell division. In order for a cellto move from interphase into the mitotic phase, many internal and external conditions must be met. The three stages ofinterphase are called G1, S, and G2.G1 Phase (First Gap)The first stage of interphase is called the G1 phase (first gap) because, from a microscopic aspect, little change is visible.However, during the G1 stage, the cell is quite active at the biochemical level. The cell is accumulating the building blocksof chromosomal DNA and the associated proteins as well as accumulating sufficient energy reserves to complete the taskof replicating each chromosome in the nucleus.
S Phase (Synthesis of DNA)Throughout interphase, nuclear DNA remains in a semi-condensed chromatin configuration. In the S phase, DNAreplication can proceed through the mechanisms that result in the formation of identical pairs of DNA molecules—sisterchromatids—that are firmly attached to the centromeric region. The centrosome is duplicated during the S phase. The twocentrosomes will give rise to the mitotic spindle, the apparatus that orchestrates the movement of chromosomes duringmitosis. At the center of each animal cell, the centrosomes of animal cells are associated with a pair of rod-like objects, thecentrioles, which are at right angles to each other. Centrioles help organize cell division. Centrioles are not present in thecentrosomes of other eukaryotic species, such as plants and most fungi.G2 Phase (Second Gap)In the G2 phase, the cell replenishes its energy stores and synthesizes proteins necessary for chromosome manipulation.Some cell organelles are duplicated, and the cytoskeleton is dismantled to provide resources for the mitotic phase. Theremay be additional cell growth during G2. The final preparations for the mitotic phase must be completed before the cell isable to enter the first stage of mitosis.The Mitotic PhaseThe mitotic phase is a multistep process during which the duplicated chromosomes are aligned, separated, and move intotwo new, identical daughter cells. The first portion of the mitotic phase is called karyokinesis, or nuclear division. Thesecond portion of the mitotic phase, called cytokinesis, is the physical separation of the cytoplasmic components into thetwo daughter cells.
Karyokinesis (Mitosis)Karyokinesis, also known as mitosis, is divided into a series of phases—prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase, andtelophase—that result in the division of the cell nucleus (Figure 10.6). Karyokinesis is also called mitosis.
During prophase, the “first phase,” the nuclear envelope starts to dissociate into small vesicles, and the membranousorganelles (such as the Golgi complex or Golgi apparatus, and endoplasmic reticulum), fragment and disperse towardthe periphery of the cell. The nucleolus disappears (disperses). The centrosomes begin to move to opposite poles of thecell. Microtubules that will form the mitotic spindle extend between the centrosomes, pushing them farther apart as themicrotubule fibers lengthen. The sister chromatids begin to coil more tightly with the aid of condensin proteins and becomevisible under a light microscope.
During prometaphase, the “first change phase,” many processes that were begun in prophase continue to advance. Theremnants of the nuclear envelope fragment. The mitotic spindle continues to develop as more microtubules assemble andstretch across the length of the former nuclear area. Chromosomes become more condensed and discrete. Each sisterchromatid develops a protein structure called a kinetochore in the centromeric region (Figure 10.7). The proteins ofthe kinetochore attract and bind mitotic spindle microtubules. As the spindle microtubules extend from the centrosomes,some of these microtubules come into contact with and firmly bind to the kinetochores. Once a mitotic fiber attachesto a chromosome, the chromosome will be oriented until the kinetochores of sister chromatids face the opposite poles.Eventually, all the sister chromatids will be attached via their kinetochores to microtubules from opposing poles. Spindlemicrotubules that do not engage the chromosomes are called polar microtubules. These microtubules overlap each othermidway between the two poles and contribute to cell elongation. Astral microtubules are located near the poles, aid inspindle orientation, and are required for the regulation of mitosis.
During prometaphase, mitotic spindle microtubules from opposite poles attach to each sister chromatid atthe kinetochore. In anaphase, the connection between the sister chromatids breaks down, and the microtubules pullthe chromosomes toward opposite poles.During metaphase, the “change phase,” all the chromosomes are aligned in a plane called the metaphase plate, or theequatorial plane, midway between the two poles of the cell. The sister chromatids are still tightly attached to each other bycohesin proteins. At this time, the chromosomes are maximally condensed.During anaphase, the “upward phase,” the cohesin proteins degrade, and the sister chromatids separate at the centromere.Each chromatid, now called a chromosome, is pulled rapidly toward the centrosome to which its microtubule is attached.The cell becomes visibly elongated (oval shaped) as the polar microtubules slide against each other at the metaphase platewhere they overlap.During telophase, the “distance phase,” the chromosomes reach the opposite poles and begin to decondense (unravel),relaxing into a chromatin configuration. The mitotic spindles are depolymerized into tubulin monomers that will beused to assemble cytoskeletal components for each daughter cell. Nuclear envelopes form around the chromosomes, andnucleosomes appear within the nuclear area.CytokinesisCytokinesis, or “cell motion,” is the second main stage of the mitotic phase during which cell division is completed viathe physical separation of the cytoplasmic components into two daughter cells. Division is not complete until the cellcomponents have been apportioned and completely separated into the two daughter cells. Although the stages of mitosis aresimilar for most eukaryotes, the process of cytokinesis is quite different for eukaryotes that have cell walls, such as plantcells.In cells such as animal cells that lack cell walls, cytokinesis follows the onset of anaphase. A contractile ring composed ofactin filaments forms just inside the plasma membrane at the former metaphase plate. The actin filaments pull the equatorof the cell inward, forming a fissure. This fissure, or “crack,” is called the cleavage furrow. The furrow deepens as the actinring contracts, and eventually the membrane is cleaved in two (Figure 10.8).In plant cells, a new cell wall must form between the daughter cells. During interphase, the Golgi apparatus accumulatesenzymes, structural proteins, and glucose molecules prior to breaking into vesicles and dispersing throughout the dividingcell. During telophase, these Golgi vesicles are transported on microtubules to form a phragmoplast (a vesicular structure) atthe metaphase plate. There, the vesicles fuse and coalesce from the center toward the cell walls; this structure is called a cell plate. As more vesicles fuse, the cell plate enlarges until it merges with the cell walls at the periphery of the cell. Enzymesuse the glucose that has accumulated between the membrane layers to build a new cell wall. The Golgi membranes becomeparts of the plasma membrane on either side of the new cell wall.
During cytokinesis in animal cells, a ring of actin filaments forms at the metaphase plate. The ringcontracts, forming a cleavage furrow, which divides the cell in two. In plant cells, Golgi vesicles coalesce at the formermetaphase plate, forming a phragmoplast. A cell plate formed by the fusion of the vesicles of the phragmoplast growsfrom the center toward the cell walls, and the membranes of the vesicles fuse to form a plasma membrane that dividesthe cell in two.G0 PhaseNot all cells adhere to the classic cell cycle pattern in which a newly formed daughter cell immediately enters thepreparatory phases of interphase, closely followed by the mitotic phase. Cells in G0 phase are not actively preparing todivide. The cell is in a quiescent (inactive) stage that occurs when cells exit the cell cycle. Some cells enter G0 temporarilyuntil an external signal triggers the onset of G1. Other cells that never or rarely divide, such as mature cardiac muscle andnerve cells, remain in G0 permanently.
The length of the cell cycle is highly variable, even within the cells of a single organism. In humans, the frequency of cellturnover ranges from a few hours in early embryonic development, to an average of two to five days for epithelial cells, andto an entire human lifetime spent in G0 by specialized cells, such as cortical neurons or cardiac muscle cells. There is alsovariation in the time that a cell spends in each phase of the cell cycle. When fast-dividing mammalian cells are grown in culture (outside the body under optimal growing conditions), the length of the cycle is about 24 hours. In rapidly dividinghuman cells with a 24-hour cell cycle, the G1 phase lasts approximately nine hours, the S phase lasts 10 hours, the G2 phaselasts about four and one-half hours, and the M phase lasts approximately one-half hour. In early embryos of fruit flies, thecell cycle is completed in about eight minutes. The timing of events in the cell cycle is controlled by mechanisms that areboth internal and external to the cell.Regulation of the Cell Cycle by External EventsBoth the initiation and inhibition of cell division are triggered by events external to the cell when it is about to begin thereplication process. An event may be as simple as the death of a nearby cell or as sweeping as the release of growthpromotinghormones, such as human growth hormone (HGH). A lack of HGH can inhibit cell division, resulting indwarfism, whereas too much HGH can result in gigantism. Crowding of cells can also inhibit cell division. Another factorthat can initiate cell division is the size of the cell; as a cell grows, it becomes inefficient due to its decreasing surface-tovolumeratio. The solution to this problem is to divide.Whatever the source of the message, the cell receives the signal, and a series of events within the cell allows it to proceedinto interphase. Moving forward from this initiation point, every parameter required during each cell cycle phase must bemet or the cycle cannot progress.Regulation at Internal CheckpointsIt is essential that the daughter cells produced be exact duplicates of the parent cell. Mistakes in the duplication ordistribution of the chromosomes lead to mutations that may be passed forward to every new cell produced from an abnormalcell. To prevent a compromised cell from continuing to divide, there are internal control mechanisms that operate at threemain cell cycle checkpoints. A checkpoint is one of several points in the eukaryotic cell cycle at which the progression ofa cell to the next stage in the cycle can be halted until conditions are favorable. These checkpoints occur near the end of G1,at the G2/M transition, and during metaphase.
The cell cycle is controlled at three checkpoints. The integrity of the DNA is assessed at the G1checkpoint. Proper chromosome duplication is assessed at the G2 checkpoint. Attachment of each kinetochore to aspindle fiber is assessed at the M checkpoint.
The G1 CheckpointThe G1 checkpoint determines whether all conditions are favorable for cell division to proceed. The G1 checkpoint, alsocalled the restriction point (in yeast), is a point at which the cell irreversibly commits to the cell division process. Externalinfluences, such as growth factors, play a large role in carrying the cell past the G1 checkpoint. In addition to adequatereserves and cell size, there is a check for genomic DNA damage at the G1 checkpoint. A cell that does not meet allthe requirements will not be allowed to progress into the S phase. The cell can halt the cycle and attempt to remedy theproblematic condition, or the cell can advance into G0 and await further signals when conditions improve.The G2 CheckpointThe G2 checkpoint bars entry into the mitotic phase if certain conditions are not met. As at the G1 checkpoint, cell sizeand protein reserves are assessed. However, the most important role of the G2 checkpoint is to ensure that all of thechromosomes have been replicated and that the replicated DNA is not damaged. If the checkpoint mechanisms detectproblems with the DNA, the cell cycle is halted, and the cell attempts to either complete DNA replication or repair thedamaged DNA.The M CheckpointThe M checkpoint occurs near the end of the metaphase stage of karyokinesis. The M checkpoint is also known asthe spindle checkpoint, because it determines whether all the sister chromatids are correctly attached to the spindlemicrotubules. Because the separation of the sister chromatids during anaphase is an irreversible step, the cycle will notproceed until the kinetochores of each pair of sister chromatids are firmly anchored to at least two spindle fibers arisingfrom opposite poles of the cell.
Regulator Molecules of the Cell CycleIn addition to the internally controlled checkpoints, there are two groups of intracellular molecules that regulate the cellcycle. These regulatory molecules either promote progress of the cell to the next phase (positive regulation) or halt the cycle(negative regulation). Regulator molecules may act individually, or they can influence the activity or production of otherregulatory proteins. Therefore, the failure of a single regulator may have almost no effect on the cell cycle, especially ifmore than one mechanism controls the same event. Conversely, the effect of a deficient or non-functioning regulator can bewide-ranging and possibly fatal to the cell if multiple processes are affected.Positive Regulation of the Cell CycleTwo groups of proteins, called cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), are responsible for the progress of the cellthrough the various checkpoints. The levels of the four cyclin proteins fluctuate throughout the cell cycle in a predictablepattern (Figure 10.11). Increases in the concentration of cyclin proteins are triggered by both external and internal signals.After the cell moves to the next stage of the cell cycle, the cyclins that were active in the previous stage are degraded.
The concentrations of cyclin proteins change throughout the cell cycle. There is a direct correlationbetween cyclin accumulation and the three major cell cycle checkpoints. Also note the sharp decline of cyclin levelsfollowing each checkpoint (the transition between phases of the cell cycle), as cyclin is degraded by cytoplasmicenzymes.
Cyclins regulate the cell cycle only when they are tightly bound to Cdks. To be fully active, the Cdk/cyclin complex mustalso be phosphorylated in specific locations. Like all kinases, Cdks are enzymes (kinases) that phosphorylate other proteins.Phosphorylation activates the protein by changing its shape. The proteins phosphorylated by Cdks are involved in advancingthe cell to the next phase. (Figure 10.12). The levels of Cdk proteins are relatively stable throughout the cell cycle; however,the concentrations of cyclin fluctuate and determine when Cdk/cyclin complexes form. The different cyclins and Cdks bindat specific points in the cell cycle and thus regulate different checkpoints.
Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) are protein kinases that, when fully activated, can phosphorylate andthus activate other proteins that advance the cell cycle past a checkpoint. To become fully activated, a Cdk must bindto a cyclin protein and then be phosphorylated by another kinase.Since the cyclic fluctuations of cyclin levels are based on the timing of the cell cycle and not on specific events, regulationof the cell cycle usually occurs by either the Cdk molecules alone or the Cdk/cyclin complexes. Without a specificconcentration of fully activated cyclin/Cdk complexes, the cell cycle cannot proceed through the checkpoints.Although the cyclins are the main regulatory molecules that determine the forward momentum of the cell cycle, thereare several other mechanisms that fine-tune the progress of the cycle with negative, rather than positive, effects. Thesemechanisms essentially block the progression of the cell cycle until problematic conditions are resolved. Molecules thatprevent the full activation of Cdks are called Cdk inhibitors. Many of these inhibitor molecules directly or indirectly monitora particular cell cycle event. The block placed on Cdks by inhibitor molecules will not be removed until the specific eventthat the inhibitor monitors is completed.
Negative Regulation of the Cell CycleThe second group of cell cycle regulatory molecules are negative regulators. Negative regulators halt the cell cycle.Remember that in positive regulation, active molecules cause the cycle to progress.The best understood negative regulatory molecules are retinoblastoma protein (Rb), p53, and p21. Retinoblastomaproteins are a group of tumor-suppressor proteins common in many cells. The 53 and 21 designations refer to the functionalmolecular masses of the proteins (p) in kilodaltons. Much of what is known about cell cycle regulation comes from researchconducted with cells that have lost regulatory control. All three of these regulatory proteins were discovered to be damagedor non-functional in cells that had begun to replicate uncontrollably (became cancerous). In each case, the main cause of theunchecked progress through the cell cycle was a faulty copy of the regulatory protein.Rb, p53, and p21 act primarily at the G1 checkpoint. p53 is a multi-functional protein that has a major impact on thecommitment of a cell to division because it acts when there is damaged DNA in cells that are undergoing the preparatoryprocesses during G1. If damaged DNA is detected, p53 halts the cell cycle and recruits enzymes to repair the DNA. If theDNA cannot be repaired, p53 can trigger apoptosis, or cell suicide, to prevent the duplication of damaged chromosomes.As p53 levels rise, the production of p21 is triggered. p21 enforces the halt in the cycle dictated by p53 by binding toand inhibiting the activity of the Cdk/cyclin complexes. As a cell is exposed to more stress, higher levels of p53 and p21accumulate, making it less likely that the cell will move into the S phase.Rb exerts its regulatory influence on other positive regulator proteins. Chiefly, Rb monitors cell size. In the active,dephosphorylated state, Rb binds to proteins called transcription factors, most commonly, E2F (Figure 10.13). Transcriptionfactors “turn on” specific genes, allowing the production of proteins encoded by that gene. When Rb is bound to E2F,production of proteins necessary for the G1/S transition is blocked. As the cell increases in size, Rb is slowly phosphorylateduntil it becomes inactivated. Rb releases E2F, which can now turn on the gene that produces the transition protein, and thisparticular block is removed. For the cell to move past each of the checkpoints, all positive regulators must be “turned on,”and all negative regulators must be “turned off.”
Cancer comprises many different diseases caused by a common mechanism: uncontrolled cell growth. Despite theredundancy and overlapping levels of cell cycle control, errors do occur. One of the critical processes monitored by thecell cycle checkpoint surveillance mechanism is the proper replication of DNA during the S phase. Even when all ofthe cell cycle controls are fully functional, a small percentage of replication errors (mutations) will be passed on to thedaughter cells. If changes to the DNA nucleotide sequence occur within a coding portion of a gene and are not corrected,a gene mutation results. All cancers start when a gene mutation gives rise to a faulty protein that plays a key role incell reproduction. The change in the cell that results from the malformed protein may be minor: perhaps a slight delay inthe binding of Cdk to cyclin or an Rb protein that detaches from its target DNA while still phosphorylated. Even minormistakes, however, may allow subsequent mistakes to occur more readily. Over and over, small uncorrected errors arepassed from the parent cell to the daughter cells and amplified as each generation produces more non-functional proteinsfrom uncorrected DNA damage. Eventually, the pace of the cell cycle speeds up as the effectiveness of the control andrepair mechanisms decreases. Uncontrolled growth of the mutated cells outpaces the growth of normal cells in the area, anda tumor (“-oma”) can result.Proto-oncogenesThe genes that code for the positive cell cycle regulators are called proto-oncogenes. Proto-oncogenes are normal genesthat, when mutated in certain ways, become oncogenes, genes that cause a cell to become cancerous. Consider what mighthappen to the cell cycle in a cell with a recently acquired oncogene. In most instances, the alteration of the DNA sequencewill result in a less functional (or non-functional) protein. The result is detrimental to the cell and will likely prevent the cellfrom completing the cell cycle; however, the organism is not harmed because the mutation will not be carried forward. If acell cannot reproduce, the mutation is not propagated and the damage is minimal. Occasionally, however, a gene mutationcauses a change that increases the activity of a positive regulator. For example, a mutation that allows Cdk to be activatedwithout being partnered with cyclin could push the cell cycle past a checkpoint before all of the required conditions aremet. If the resulting daughter cells are too damaged to undergo further cell divisions, the mutation would not be propagatedand no harm would come to the organism. However, if the atypical daughter cells are able to undergo further cell divisions,subsequent generations of cells will probably accumulate even more mutations, some possibly in additional genes thatregulate the cell cycle.The Cdk gene in the above example is only one of many genes that are considered proto-oncogenes. In addition to thecell cycle regulatory proteins, any protein that influences the cycle can be altered in such a way as to override cell cyclecheckpoints. An oncogene is any gene that, when altered, leads to an increase in the rate of cell cycle progression.Tumor Suppressor GenesLike proto-oncogenes, many of the negative cell cycle regulatory proteins were discovered in cells that had becomecancerous. Tumor suppressor genes are segments of DNA that code for negative regulator proteins, the type of regulatorsthat, when activated, can prevent the cell from undergoing uncontrolled division. The collective function of the bestunderstoodtumor suppressor gene proteins, Rb, p53, and p21, is to put up a roadblock to cell cycle progression until certainevents are completed. A cell that carries a mutated form of a negative regulator might not be able to halt the cell cycle ifthere is a problem. Tumor suppressors are similar to brakes in a vehicle: Malfunctioning brakes can contribute to a car crash.Mutated p53 genes have been identified in more than one-half of all human tumor cells. This discovery is not surprising inlight of the multiple roles that the p53 protein plays at the G1 checkpoint. A cell with a faulty p53 may fail to detect errorspresent in the genomic DNA (Figure 10.14). Even if a partially functional p53 does identify the mutations, it may no longerbe able to signal the necessary DNA repair enzymes. Either way, damaged DNA will remain uncorrected. At this point, afunctional p53 will deem the cell unsalvageable and trigger programmed cell death (apoptosis). The damaged version ofp53 found in cancer cells, however, cannot trigger apoptosis.
The loss of p53 function has other repercussions for the cell cycle. Mutated p53 might lose its ability to trigger p21production. Without adequate levels of p21, there is no effective block on Cdk activation. Essentially, without a fullyfunctional p53, the G1 checkpoint is severely compromised and the cell proceeds directly from G1 to S regardless of internaland external conditions. At the completion of this shortened cell cycle, two daughter cells are produced that have inheritedthe mutated p53 gene. Given the non-optimal conditions under which the parent cell reproduced, it is likely that the daughtercells will have acquired other mutations in addition to the faulty tumor suppressor gene. Cells such as these daughter cellsquickly accumulate both oncogenes and non-functional tumor suppressor genes. Again, the result is tumor growth.
Prokaryotes, such as bacteria, propagate by binary fission. For unicellular organisms, cell division is the only method toproduce new individuals. In both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, the outcome of cell reproduction is a pair of daughtercells that are genetically identical to the parent cell. In unicellular organisms, daughter cells are individuals.To achieve the outcome of cloned offspring, certain steps are essential. The genomic DNA must be replicated and thenallocated into the daughter cells; the cytoplasmic contents must also be divided to give both new cells the machinery tosustain life. In bacterial cells, the genome consists of a single, circular DNA chromosome; therefore, the process of celldivision is simplified. Karyokinesis is unnecessary because there is no nucleus and thus no need to direct one copy of themultiple chromosomes into each daughter cell. This type of cell division is called binary (prokaryotic) fission.Binary FissionDue to the relative simplicity of the prokaryotes, the cell division process, called binary fission, is a less complicated andmuch more rapid process than cell division in eukaryotes. The single, circular DNA chromosome of bacteria is not enclosedin a nucleus, but instead occupies a specific location, the nucleoid, within the cell (Figure 10.2). Although the DNA of thenucleoid is associated with proteins that aid in packaging the molecule into a compact size, there are no histone proteins andthus no nucleosomes in prokaryotes. The packing proteins of bacteria are, however, related to the cohesin and condensinproteins involved in the chromosome compaction of eukaryotes.The bacterial chromosome is attached to the plasma membrane at about the midpoint of the cell. The starting point ofreplication, the origin, is close to the binding site of the chromosome to the plasma membrane (Figure 10.15). Replicationof the DNA is bidirectional, moving away from the origin on both strands of the loop simultaneously. As the new doublestrands are formed, each origin point moves away from the cell wall attachment toward the opposite ends of the cell. Asthe cell elongates, the growing membrane aids in the transport of the chromosomes. After the chromosomes have clearedthe midpoint of the elongated cell, cytoplasmic separation begins. The formation of a ring composed of repeating units ofa protein called FtsZ directs the partition between the nucleoids. Formation of the FtsZ ring triggers the accumulation ofother proteins that work together to recruit new membrane and cell wall materials to the site. A septum is formed betweenthe nucleoids, extending gradually from the periphery toward the center of the cell. When the new cell walls are in place,the daughter cells separate.