Lake Victoria in Africa, shown in this satellite image, was the site of one of the most extraordinaryevolutionary findings on the planet, as well as a casualty of devastating biodiversity loss.
In the 1980s, biologists working in Lake Victoria in Africa discovered one of the most extraordinary products of evolutionon the planet. Located in the Great Rift Valley, Lake Victoria is a large lake about 68,900 km2 in area (larger than LakeHuron, the second largest of North America’s Great Lakes). Biologists were studying species of a family of fish calledcichlids. They found that as they sampled for fish in different locations of the lake, they never stopped finding new species,and they identified nearly 500 evolved types of cichlids. But while studying these variations, they quickly discovered thatthe invasive Nile Perch was destroying the lake’s cichlid population, bringing hundreds of cichlid species to extinction withdevastating rapidity.
The Biodiversity CrisisBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Define biodiversityDescribe biodiversity as the equilibrium of naturally fluctuating rates of extinction and speciationIdentify historical causes of high extinction rates in Earth’s historyTraditionally, ecologists have measured biodiversity, a general term for the variety present in the biosphere, by takinginto account both the number of species and their commonness. Biodiversity can be estimated at a number of levels oforganization of living things. These estimation indexes, which came from information theory, are most useful as a first stepin quantifying biodiversity between and within ecosystems; they are less useful when the main concern among conservationbiologists is simply the loss of biodiversity. However, biologists recognize that measures of biodiversity, in terms of speciesdiversity, may help focus efforts to preserve the biologically or technologically important elements of biodiversity.The Lake Victoria cichlids provide an example through which we can begin to understand biodiversity. The biologistsstudying cichlids in the 1980s discovered hundreds of cichlid species representing a variety of specializations to particularhabitat types and specific feeding strategies: eating plankton floating in the water, scraping and then eating algae fromrocks, eating insect larvae from the bottom, and eating the eggs of other species of cichlid. The cichlids of Lake Victoriaare the product of an adaptive radiation. An adaptive radiation is a rapid (less than three million years in the case of theLake Victoria cichlids) branching through speciation of a phylogenetic tree into many closely related species; typically, thespecies “radiate” into different habitats and niches. The Galápagos finches are an example of a modest adaptive radiationwith 15 species. The cichlids of Lake Victoria are an example of a spectacular adaptive radiation that includes about 500species.At the time biologists were making this discovery, some species began to quickly disappear. A culprit in these declines wasa species of large fish that was introduced to Lake Victoria by fisheries to feed the people living around the lake. The Nileperch was introduced in 1963, but lay low until the 1980s when its populations began to surge. The Nile perch populationgrew by consuming cichlids, driving species after species to the point of extinction (the disappearance of a species). Infact, there were several factors that played a role in the extinction of perhaps 200 cichlid species in Lake Victoria: the Nileperch, declining lake water quality due to agriculture and land clearing on the shores of Lake Victoria, and increased fishingpressure. Scientists had not even catalogued all of the species present—so many were lost that were never named. Thediversity is now a shadow of what it once was.The cichlids of Lake Victoria are a thumbnail sketch of contemporary rapid species loss that occurs all over Earth and iscaused by human activity. Extinction is a natural process of macroevolution that occurs at the rate of about one out of 1million species becoming extinct per year. The fossil record reveals that there have been five periods of mass extinctionin history with much higher rates of species loss, and the rate of species loss today is comparable to those periods ofmass extinction. However, there is a major difference between the previous mass extinctions and the current extinctionwe are experiencing: human activity. Specifically, three human activities have a major impact: destruction of habitat,introduction of exotic species, and over-harvesting. Predictions of species loss within the next century, a tiny amount oftime on geological timescales, range from 10 percent to 50 percent. Extinctions on this scale have only happened five othertimes in the history of the planet, and they have been caused by cataclysmic events that changed the course of the history oflife in each instance. Earth is now in one of those times.Types of BiodiversityScientists generally accept that the term biodiversity describes the number and kinds of species in a location or on the planet.Species can be difficult to define, but most biologists still feel comfortable with the concept and are able to identify andcount eukaryotic species in most contexts. Biologists have also identified alternate measures of biodiversity, some of whichare important for planning how to preserve biodiversity.Genetic diversity is one of those alternate concepts. Genetic diversity or variation is the raw material for adaptation in aspecies. A species’ future potential for adaptation depends on the genetic diversity held in the genomes of the individuals inpopulations that make up the species. The same is true for higher taxonomic categories. A genus with very different typesof species will have more genetic diversity than a genus with species that look alike and have similar ecologies. If therewere a choice between one of these genera of species being preserved, the one with the greatest potential for subsequent
evolution is the most genetically diverse one. It would be ideal not to have to make such choices, but increasingly this maybe the norm.Many genes code for proteins, which in turn carry out the metabolic processes that keep organisms alive and reproducing.Genetic diversity can be measured as chemical diversity in that different species produce a variety of chemicals in theircells, both the proteins as well as the products and byproducts of metabolism. This chemical diversity has potential benefitfor humans as a source of pharmaceuticals, so it provides one way to measure diversity that is important to human healthand welfare.Humans have generated diversity in domestic animals, plants, and fungi. This diversity is also suffering losses because ofmigration, market forces, and increasing globalism in agriculture, especially in heavily populated regions such as China,India, and Japan. The human population directly depends on this diversity as a stable food source, and its decline is troublingbiologists and agricultural scientists.It is also useful to define ecosystem diversity, meaning the number of different ecosystems on the planet or in a givengeographic area (Figure 47.2). Whole ecosystems can disappear even if some of the species might survive by adapting toother ecosystems. The loss of an ecosystem means the loss of interactions between species, the loss of unique features ofcoadaptation, and the loss of biological productivity that an ecosystem is able to create. An example of a largely extinctecosystem in North America is the prairie ecosystem. Prairies once spanned central North America from the boreal forest innorthern Canada down into Mexico. They are now all but gone, replaced by crop fields, pasture lands, and suburban sprawl.Many of the species survive, but the hugely productive ecosystem that was responsible for creating the most productiveagricultural soils is now gone. As a consequence, soils are disappearing or must be maintained at greater expense.
The variety of ecosystems on Earth—from (a) coral reef to (b) prairie—enables a great diversity of speciesto exist.
Current Species DiversityDespite considerable effort, knowledge of the species that inhabit the planet is limited. A recent estimate suggests thatthe eukaryote species for which science has names, about 1.5 million species, account for less than 20 percent of thetotal number of eukaryote species present on the planet (8.7 million species, by one estimate). Estimates of numbers ofprokaryotic species are largely guesses, but biologists agree that science has only begun to catalog their diversity. Even withwhat is known, there is no central repository of names or samples of the described species; therefore, there is no way to besure that the 1.5 million descriptions is an accurate number. It is a best guess based on the opinions of experts in differenttaxonomic groups. Given that Earth is losing species at an accelerating pace, science is very much in the place it was withthe Lake Victoria cichlids: knowing little about what is being lost. Table 47.1 presents recent estimates of biodiversity indifferent groups.
There are various initiatives to catalog described species in accessible ways, and the internet is facilitating that effort.Nevertheless, it has been pointed out that at the current rate of species description, which according to the State of ObservedSpecies Report is 17,000 to 20,000 new species per year, it will take close to 500 years to finish describing life on thisplanet.[4]Over time, the task becomes both increasingly impossible and increasingly easier as extinction removes speciesfrom the planet.Naming and counting species may seem an unimportant pursuit given the other needs of humanity, but it is not simply anaccounting. Describing species is a complex process by which biologists determine an organism’s unique characteristics andwhether or not that organism belongs to any other described species. It allows biologists to find and recognize the speciesafter the initial discovery, and allows them to follow up on questions about its biology. In addition, the unique characteristicsof each species make it potentially valuable to humans or other species on which humans depend. Understanding thesecharacteristics is the value of finding and naming species.Patterns of BiodiversityBiodiversity is not evenly distributed on Earth. Lake Victoria contained almost 500 species of cichlids alone, ignoring theother fish families present in the lake. All of these species were found only in Lake Victoria; therefore, the 500 speciesof cichlids were endemic. Endemic species are found in only one location. Endemics with highly restricted distributionsare particularly vulnerable to extinction. Higher taxonomic levels, such as genera and families, can also be endemic. LakeHuron contains about 79 species of fish, all of which are found in many other lakes in North America. What accounts for thedifference in fish diversity in these two lakes? Lake Victoria is a tropical lake, while Lake Huron is a temperate lake. Lake Huron in its present form is only about 7,000 years old, while Lake Victoria in its present form is about 15,000 years old.Biogeographers have suggested these two factors, latitude and age, are two of several hypotheses to explain biodiversitypatterns on the planet.
One of the oldest observed patterns in ecology is that species biodiversity in almost every taxonomic group increases aslatitude declines. In other words, biodiversity increases closer to the equator.
This map illustrates the number of amphibian species across the globe and shows the trend toward higherbiodiversity at lower latitudes. A similar pattern is observed for most taxonomic groups.It is not yet clear why biodiversity increases closer to the equator, but hypotheses include the greater age of the ecosystemsin the tropics versus temperate regions that were largely devoid of life or drastically impoverished during the last glaciation.The idea is that greater age provides more time for speciation. Another possible explanation is the increased energy thetropics receive from the sun versus the decreased energy that temperate and polar regions receive. It is not entirely clearhow greater energy input could translate into more species. The complexity of tropical ecosystems may promote speciationby increasing the heterogeneity, or number of ecological niches, in the tropics relative to higher latitudes. The greaterheterogeneity provides more opportunities for coevolution, specialization, and perhaps greater selection pressures leadingto population differentiation. However, this hypothesis suffers from some circularity—ecosystems with more speciesencourage speciation, but how did they get more species to begin with? The tropics have been perceived as being morestable than temperate regions, which have a pronounced climate and day-length seasonality. The tropics have their own forms of seasonality, such as rainfall, but they are generally assumed to be more stable environments and this stability mightpromote speciation.Regardless of the mechanisms, it is certainly true that all levels of biodiversity are greatest in the tropics. Additionally, therate of endemism is highest, and there are more biodiversity hotspots. However, this richness of diversity also means thatknowledge of species is lowest, and there is a high potential for biodiversity loss.Conservation of BiodiversityIn 1988, British environmentalist Norman Myers developed a conservation concept to identify areas rich in species andat significant risk for species loss: biodiversity hotspots. Biodiversity hotspots are geographical areas that contain highnumbers of endemic species. The purpose of the concept was to identify important locations on the planet for conservationefforts, a kind of conservation triage. By protecting hotspots, governments are able to protect a larger number of species.The original criteria for a hotspot included the presence of 1500 or more endemic plant species and 70 percent of the areadisturbed by human activity. There are now 34 biodiversity hotspots (Figure 47.4) containing large numbers of endemicspecies, which include half of Earth’s endemic plants.
Conservation International has identified 34 biodiversity hotspots, which cover only 2.3 percent of theEarth’s surface but have endemic to them 42 percent of the terrestrial vertebrate species and 50 percent of the world’splants.Biodiversity Change through Geological TimeThe number of species on the planet, or in any geographical area, is the result of an equilibrium of two evolutionaryprocesses that are ongoing: speciation and extinction. Both are natural “birth” and “death” processes of macroevolution.When speciation rates begin to outstrip extinction rates, the number of species will increase; likewise, the number of specieswill decrease when extinction rates begin to overtake speciation rates. Throughout Earth’s history, these two processeshave fluctuated—sometimes leading to dramatic changes in the number of species on Earth as reflected in the fossil record.
Percent extinction occurrences as reflected in the fossil record have fluctuated throughout Earth’s history.Sudden and dramatic losses of biodiversity, called mass extinctions, have occurred five times.Paleontologists have identified five strata in the fossil record that appear to show sudden and dramatic (greater than halfof all extant species disappearing from the fossil record) losses in biodiversity. These are called mass extinctions. Thereare many lesser, yet still dramatic, extinction events, but the five mass extinctions have attracted the most research. Anargument can be made that the five mass extinctions are only the five most extreme events in a continuous series of largeextinction events throughout the Phanerozoic (since 542 million years ago). In most cases, the hypothesized causes are stillcontroversial; however, the most recent event seems clear.The Five Mass ExtinctionsThe fossil record of the mass extinctions was the basis for defining periods of geological history, so they typically occurat the transition point between geological periods. The transition in fossils from one period to another reflects the dramaticloss of species and the gradual origin of new species. These transitions can be seen in the rock strata. Table 47.2 providesdata on the five mass extinctions.
The Ordovician-Silurian extinction event is the first recorded mass extinction and the second largest. During this period,about 85 percent of marine species (few species lived outside the oceans) became extinct. The main hypothesis for its causeis a period of glaciation and then warming. The extinction event actually consists of two extinction events separated byabout 1 million years. The first event was caused by cooling, and the second event was due to the subsequent warming. Theclimate changes affected temperatures and sea levels. Some researchers have suggested that a gamma-ray burst, caused by anearby supernova, is a possible cause of the Ordovician-Silurian extinction. The gamma-ray burst would have stripped away the Earth’s ozone layer causing intense ultraviolet radiation from the sun and may account for climate changes observedat the time. The hypothesis is speculative, but extraterrestrial influences on Earth’s history are an active line of research.Recovery of biodiversity after the mass extinction took from 5 to 20 million years, depending on the location.The late Devonian extinction may have occurred over a relatively long period of time. It appears to have affected marinespecies and not the plants or animals inhabiting terrestrial habitats. The causes of this extinction are poorly understood.The end-Permian extinction was the largest in the history of life. Indeed, an argument could be made that Earth nearlybecame devoid of life during this extinction event. The planet looked very different before and after this event. Estimates arethat 96 percent of all marine species and 70 percent of all terrestrial species were lost. It was at this time, for example, thatthe trilobites, a group that survived the Ordovician–Silurian extinction, became extinct. The causes for this mass extinctionare not clear, but the leading suspect is extended and widespread volcanic activity that led to a runaway global-warmingevent. The oceans became largely anoxic, suffocating marine life. Terrestrial tetrapod diversity took 30 million years torecover after the end-Permian extinction. The Permian extinction dramatically altered Earth’s biodiversity makeup and thecourse of evolution.The causes of the Triassic–Jurassic extinction event are not clear and hypotheses of climate change, asteroid impact, andvolcanic eruptions have been argued. The extinction event occurred just before the breakup of the supercontinent Pangaea,although recent scholarship suggests that the extinctions may have occurred more gradually throughout the Triassic.The causes of the end-Cretaceous extinction event are the ones that are best understood. It was during this extinction eventabout 65 million years ago that the dinosaurs, the dominant vertebrate group for millions of years, disappeared from theplanet (with the exception of a theropod clade that gave rise to birds). Indeed, every land animal that weighed more then25 kg became extinct. The cause of this extinction is now understood to be the result of a cataclysmic impact of a largemeteorite, or asteroid, off the coast of what is now the Yucatán Peninsula. This hypothesis, proposed first in 1980, wasa radical explanation based on a sharp spike in the levels of iridium (which rains down from space in meteors at a fairlyconstant rate but is otherwise absent on Earth’s surface) at the rock stratum that marks the boundary between the Cretaceousand Paleogene periods (Figure 47.6). This boundary marked the disappearance of the dinosaurs in fossils as well as manyother taxa. The researchers who discovered the iridium spike interpreted it as a rapid influx of iridium from space to theatmosphere (in the form of a large asteroid) rather than a slowing in the deposition of sediments during that period. It wasa radical explanation, but the report of an appropriately aged and sized impact crater in 1991 made the hypothesis morebelievable. Now an abundance of geological evidence supports the theory. Recovery times for biodiversity after the end-Cretaceous extinction are shorter, in geological time, than for the end-Permian extinction, on the order of 10 million years.
The Pleistocene ExtinctionThe Pleistocene Extinction is one of the lesser extinctions, and a recent one. It is well known that the North American,and to some degree Eurasian, megafauna, or large animals, disappeared toward the end of the last glaciation period. Theextinction appears to have happened in a relatively restricted time period of 10,000–12,000 years ago. In North America, thelosses were quite dramatic and included the woolly mammoths (last dated about 4,000 years ago in an isolated population),mastodon, giant beavers, giant ground sloths, saber-toothed cats, and the North American camel, just to name a few. Thepossibility that the rapid extinction of these large animals was caused by over-hunting was first suggested in the 1900s.Research into this hypothesis continues today. It seems likely that over-hunting caused many pre-written history extinctionsin many regions of the world.In general, the timing of the Pleistocene extinctions correlated with the arrival of humans and not with climate-changeevents, which is the main competing hypothesis for these extinctions. The extinctions began in Australia about 40,000 to 50,000 years ago, just after the arrival of humans in the area: a marsupial lion, a giant one-ton wombat, and severalgiant kangaroo species disappeared. In North America, the extinctions of almost all of the large mammals occurred10,000–12,000 years ago. All that are left are the smaller mammals such as bears, elk, moose, and cougars. Finally, on manyremote oceanic islands, the extinctions of many species occurred coincident with human arrivals. Not all of the islands hadlarge animals, but when there were large animals, they were lost. Madagascar was colonized about 2,000 years ago and thelarge mammals that lived there became extinct. Eurasia and Africa do not show this pattern, but they also did not experiencea recent arrival of humans. Humans arrived in Eurasia hundreds of thousands of years ago after the origin of the species inAfrica. This topic remains an area of active research and hypothesizing. It seems clear that even if climate played a role, inmost cases human hunting precipitated the extinctions.Present-Time ExtinctionsThe sixth, or Holocene, mass extinction appears to have begun earlier than previously believed and has mostly to do with theactivities of Homo sapiens. Since the beginning of the Holocene period, there are numerous recent extinctions of individualspecies that are recorded in human writings. Most of these are coincident with the expansion of the European colonies sincethe 1500s.One of the earlier and popularly known examples is the dodo bird. The dodo bird lived in the forests of Mauritius, an islandin the Indian Ocean. The dodo bird became extinct around 1662. It was hunted for its meat by sailors and was easy preybecause the dodo, which did not evolve with humans, would approach people without fear. Introduced pigs, rats, and dogsbrought to the island by European ships also killed dodo young and eggs.Steller's sea cow became extinct in 1768; it was related to the manatee and probably once lived along the northwest coast ofNorth America. Steller's sea cow was first discovered by Europeans in 1741 and was hunted for meat and oil. The last seacow was killed in 1768. That amounts to 27 years between the sea cow’s first contact with Europeans and extinction of thespecies.In 1914, the last living passenger pigeon died in a zoo in Cincinnati, Ohio. This species had once darkened the skies ofNorth America during its migrations, but it was hunted and suffered from habitat loss through the clearing of forests forfarmland. In 1918, the last living Carolina parakeet died in captivity. This species was once common in the eastern UnitedStates, but it suffered from habitat loss. The species was also hunted because it ate orchard fruit when its native foods weredestroyed to make way for farmland. The Japanese sea lion, which inhabited a broad area around Japan and the coast ofKorea, became extinct in the 1950s due to fishermen. The Caribbean monk seal was distributed throughout the CaribbeanSea but was driven to extinction via hunting by 1952.These are only a few of the recorded extinctions in the past 500 years. The International Union for Conservation of Nature(IUCN) keeps a list of extinct and endangered species called the Red List. The list is not complete, but it describes 380extinct species of vertebrates after 1500 AD, 86 of which were driven extinct by overhunting or overfishing.Estimates of Present-Time Extinction RatesEstimates of extinction rates are hampered by the fact that most extinctions are probably happening without observation.The extinction of a bird or mammal is likely to be noticed by humans, especially if it has been hunted or used in someother way. But there are many organisms that are of less interest to humans (not necessarily of less value) and many that areundescribed.The background extinction rate is estimated to be about one per million species per year (E/MSY). For example, assumingthere are about ten million species in existence, the expectation is that ten species would become extinct each year (eachyear represents ten million species per year).One contemporary extinction rate estimate uses the extinctions in the written record since the year 1500. For birds alone thismethod yields an estimate of 26 E/MSY. However, this value may be underestimated for three reasons. First, many specieswould not have been described until much later in the time period, so their loss would have gone unnoticed. Second, thenumber of recently extinct species is increasing because extinct species now are being described from skeletal remains. Andthird, some species are probably already extinct even though conservationists are reluctant to name them as such. Takingthese factors into account raises the estimated extinction rate closer to 100 E/MSY. The predicted rate by the end of thecentury is 1500 E/MSY.A second approach to estimating present-time extinction rates is to correlate species loss with habitat loss by measuringforest-area loss and understanding species-area relationships. The species-area relationship is the rate at which new speciesare seen when the area surveyed is increased. Studies have shown that the number of species present increases as the size ofthe island increases. This phenomenon has also been shown to hold true in other habitats as well. Turning this relationshiparound, if the habitat area is reduced, the number of species living there will also decline. Estimates of extinction rates basedon habitat loss and species-area relationships have suggested that with about 90 percent habitat loss an expected 50 percentof species would become extinct. Species-area estimates have led to species extinction rate calculations of about 1000 E/MSY and higher. In general, actual observations do not show this amount of loss and suggestions have been made that thereis a delay in extinction. Recent work has also called into question the applicability of the species-area relationship whenestimating the loss of species. This work argues that the species-area relationship leads to an overestimate of extinctionrates. A better relationship to use may be the endemics-area relationship. Using this method would bring estimates down toaround 500 E/MSY in the coming century. Note that this value is still 500 times the background rate.
Studies have shown that the number of species present increases with the size of the habitat.
The Importance of Biodiversity to Human LifeBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Identify chemical diversity benefits to humansIdentify biodiversity components that support human agricultureDescribe ecosystem servicesIt may not be clear why biologists are concerned about biodiversity loss. When biodiversity loss is thought of as theextinction of the passenger pigeon, the dodo bird, and even the woolly mammoth, the loss may appear to be an emotionalone. But is the loss practically important for the welfare of the human species? From the perspective of evolution andecology, the loss of a particular individual species is unimportant (however, the loss of a keystone species can lead toecological disaster). Extinction is a normal part of macroevolution. But the accelerated extinction rate means the loss of tensof thousands of species within our lifetimes, and it is likely to have dramatic effects on human welfare through the collapseof ecosystems and in added costs to maintain food production, clean air and water, and human health.Agriculture began after early hunter-gatherer societies first settled in one place and heavily modified their immediateenvironment. This cultural transition has made it difficult for humans to recognize their dependence on undomesticatedliving things on the planet. Biologists recognize the human species is embedded in ecosystems and is dependent on them, just as every other species on the planet is dependent. Technology smoothes out the extremes of existence, but ultimatelythe human species cannot exist without its ecosystem.Human HealthContemporary societies that live close to the land often have a broad knowledge of the medicinal uses of plants growing intheir area. Most plants produce secondary plant compounds, which are toxins used to protect the plant from insects andother animals that eat them, but some of which also work as medication. For centuries in Europe, older knowledge aboutthe medical uses of plants was compiled in herbals—books that identified plants and their uses. Humans are not the onlyspecies to use plants for medicinal reasons: the great apes, orangutans, chimpanzees, bonobos, and gorillas have all beenobserved self-medicating with plants.Modern pharmaceutical science also recognizes the importance of these plant compounds. Examples of significantmedicines derived from plant compounds include aspirin, codeine, digoxin, atropine, and vincristine (Figure 47.8). Manymedicines were once derived from plant extracts but are now synthesized. It is estimated that, at one time, 25 percent ofmodern drugs contained at least one plant extract. That number has probably decreased to about 10 percent as natural plantingredients are replaced by synthetic versions. Antibiotics, which are responsible for extraordinary improvements in healthand lifespans in developed countries, are compounds largely derived from fungi and bacteria.
Catharanthus roseus, the Madagascar periwinkle, has various medicinal properties. Among other uses, itis a source of vincristine, a drug used in the treatment of lymphomas.
In recent years, animal venoms and poisons have excited intense research for their medicinal potential. By 2007, theFDA had approved five drugs based on animal toxins to treat diseases such as hypertension, chronic pain, and diabetes.Another five drugs are undergoing clinical trials, and at least six drugs are being used in other countries. Other toxins underinvestigation come from mammals, snakes, lizards, various amphibians, fish, snails, octopuses, and scorpions.Aside from representing billions of dollars in profits, these medicines improve people’s lives. Pharmaceutical companies areactively looking for new compounds synthesized by living organisms that can function as medicine. It is estimated that 1/3of pharmaceutical research and development is spent on natural compounds and that about 35 percent of new drugs broughtto market between 1981 and 2002 were from natural compounds. The opportunities for new medications will be reduced indirect proportion to the disappearance of species.Agricultural DiversitySince the beginning of human agriculture more than 10,000 years ago, human groups have been breeding and selectingcrop varieties. This crop diversity matched the cultural diversity of highly subdivided populations of humans. For example,potatoes were domesticated beginning around 7,000 years ago in the central Andes of Peru and Bolivia. The potatoes grownin that region belong to seven species and the number of varieties likely is in the thousands. Each variety has been bredto thrive at particular elevations and soil and climate conditions. The diversity is driven by the diverse demands of thetopography, the limited movement of people, and the demands created by crop rotation for different varieties that will dowell in different fields.Potatoes are only one example of human-generated diversity. Every plant, animal, and fungus that has been cultivated byhumans has been bred from original wild ancestor species into diverse varieties arising from the demands for food value,adaptation to growing conditions, and resistance to pests. The potato demonstrates a well-known example of the risks of lowcrop diversity: the tragic Irish potato famine when the single variety grown in Ireland became susceptible to a potato blight, wiping out the crop. The loss of the crop led to famine, death, and mass emigration. Resistance to disease is a chief benefitto maintaining crop biodiversity, and lack of diversity in contemporary crop species carries similar risks. Seed companies,which are the source of most crop varieties in developed countries, must continually breed new varieties to keep up withevolving pest organisms. These same seed companies, however, have participated in the decline of the number of varietiesavailable as they focus on selling fewer varieties in more areas of the world.The ability to create new crop varieties relies on the diversity of varieties available and the accessibility of wild forms relatedto the crop plant. These wild forms are often the source of new gene variants that can be bred with existing varieties to createvarieties with new attributes. Loss of wild species related to a crop will mean the loss of potential in crop improvement.Maintaining the genetic diversity of wild species related to domesticated species ensures our continued food supply.Since the 1920s, government agriculture departments have maintained seed banks of crop varieties as a way to maintain cropdiversity. This system has flaws because, over time, seed banks are lost through accidents, and there is no way to replacethem. In 2008, the Svalbard Global Seed Vault (Figure 47.9) began storing seeds from around the world as a backup systemto the regional seed banks. If a regional seed bank stores varieties in Svalbard, losses can be replaced from Svalbard. Theseed vault is located deep into the rock of an arctic island. Conditions within the vault are maintained at ideal temperatureand humidity for seed survival, but the deep underground location of the vault in the arctic means that failure of the vault’ssystems will not compromise the climatic conditions inside the vault.
Crop success s is largely dependent on the quality of the soil. Although some agricultural soils are rendered sterileusing controversial cultivation and chemical treatments, most contain a huge diversity of organisms that maintain nutrientcycles—breaking down organic matter into nutrient compounds that crops need for growth. These organisms also maintainsoil texture that affects water and oxygen dynamics in the soil that are necessary for plant growth. If farmers had to maintainarable soil using alternate means, the cost of food would be much higher than it is now. These kinds of processes are calledecosystem services. They occur within ecosystems, such as soil ecosystems, as a result of the diverse metabolic activities ofthe organisms living there, but they provide benefits to human food production, drinking water availability, and breathableair.Other key ecosystem services related to food production are plant pollination and crop pest control. Over 150 crops in theUnited States require pollination to produce. One estimate of the benefit of honeybee pollination within the United States is$1.6 billion per year; other pollinators contribute up to $6.7 billion more.Many honeybee populations are managed by apiarists who rent out their hives’ services to farmers. Honeybee populationsin North America have been suffering large losses caused by a syndrome known as colony collapse disorder, whose causeis unclear. Other pollinators include a diverse array of other bee species and various insects and birds. Loss of these specieswould make growing crops requiring pollination impossible, increasing dependence on other crops.
Finally, humans compete for their food with crop pests, most of which are insects. Pesticides control these competitors;however, pesticides are costly and lose their effectiveness over time as pest populations adapt. They also lead to collateraldamage by killing non-pest species and risking the health of consumers and agricultural workers. Ecologists believe thatthe bulk of the work in removing pests is actually done by predators and parasites of those pests, but the impact has notbeen well studied. A review found that in 74 percent of studies that looked for an effect of landscape complexity on naturalenemies of pests, the greater the complexity, the greater the effect of pest-suppressing organisms. An experimental studyfound that introducing multiple enemies of pea aphids (an important alfalfa pest) increased the yield of alfalfa significantly.This study shows the importance of landscape diversity via the question of whether a diversity of pests is more effective atcontrol than one single pest; the results showed this to be the case. Loss of diversity in pest enemies will inevitably make itmore difficult and costly to grow food.Wild Food SourcesIn addition to growing crops and raising animals for food, humans obtain food resources from wild populations, primarilyfish populations. For approximately 1 billion people, aquatic resources provide the main source of animal protein. Butsince 1990, global fish production has declined. Despite considerable effort, few fisheries on the planet are managed forsustainability.Fishery extinctions rarely lead to complete extinction of the harvested species, but rather to a radical restructuring of themarine ecosystem in which a dominant species is so over-harvested that it becomes a minor player, ecologically. In additionto humans losing the food source, these alterations affect many other species in ways that are difficult or impossible topredict. The collapse of fisheries has dramatic and long-lasting effects on local populations that work in the fishery. Inaddition, the loss of an inexpensive protein source to populations that cannot afford to replace it will increase the cost ofliving and limit societies in other ways. In general, the fish taken from fisheries have shifted to smaller species as largerspecies are fished to extinction. The ultimate outcome could clearly be the loss of aquatic systems as food sources.
Psychological and Moral ValueFinally, it has been argued that humans benefit psychologically from living in a biodiverse world. A chief proponent of thisidea is entomologist E. O.Wilson. He argues that human evolutionary history has adapted us to live in a natural environmentand that built environments generate stressors that affect human health and well-being. There is considerable research intothe psychological regenerative benefits of natural landscapes that suggests the hypothesis may hold some truth. In addition,there is a moral argument that humans have a responsibility to inflict as little harm as possible on other species.
Threats to BiodiversityBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Identify significant threats to biodiversityExplain the effects of habitat loss, exotic species, and hunting on biodiversityIdentify the early and predicted effects of climate change on biodiversityThe core threat to biodiversity on the planet, and therefore a threat to human welfare, is the combination of humanpopulation growth and resource exploitation. The human population requires resources to survive and grow, and thoseresources are being removed unsustainably from the environment. The three greatest proximate threats to biodiversityare habitat loss, overharvesting, and introduction of exotic species. The first two of these are a direct result of human population growth and resource use. The third results from increased mobility and trade. A fourth major cause of extinction,anthropogenic climate change, has not yet had a large impact, but it is predicted to become significant during this century.Global climate change is also a consequence of human population needs for energy and the use of fossil fuels to meet thoseneeds (Figure 47.10). Environmental issues, such as toxic pollution, have specific targeted effects on species, but they arenot generally seen as threats at the magnitude of the others.
Atmospheric carbon dioxide levels fluctuate in a cyclical manner. However, the burning of fossil fuels inrecent history has caused a dramatic increase in the levels of carbon dioxide in the Earth’s atmosphere, which havenow reached levels never before seen in human history. Scientists predict that the addition of this “greenhouse gas” tothe atmosphere is resulting in climate change that will significantly impact biodiversity in the coming century.Habitat LossHumans rely on technology to modify their environment and replace certain functions that were once performed by thenatural ecosystem. Other species cannot do this. Elimination of their ecosystem—whether it is a forest, a desert, a grassland,a freshwater estuarine, or a marine environment—will kill the individuals in the species. Remove the entire habitat withinthe range of a species and, unless they are one of the few species that do well in human-built environments, the specieswill become extinct. Human destruction of habitats accelerated in the latter half of the twentieth century. Consider theexceptional biodiversity of Sumatra: it is home to one species of orangutan, a species of critically endangered elephant, andthe Sumatran tiger, but half of Sumatra’s forest is now gone. The neighboring island of Borneo, home to the other speciesof orangutan, has lost a similar area of forest. Forest loss continues in protected areas of Borneo. The orangutan in Borneois listed as endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), but it is simply the most visible ofthousands of species that will not survive the disappearance of the forests of Borneo. The forests are removed for timberand to plant palm oil plantations (Figure 47.11). Palm oil is used in many products including food products, cosmetics,and biodiesel in Europe. A five-year estimate of global forest cover loss for the years 2000–2005 was 3.1 percent. In thehumid tropics where forest loss is primarily from timber extraction, 272,000 km2 was lost out of a global total of 11,564,000km2 (or 2.4 percent). In the tropics, these losses certainly also represent the extinction of species because of high levels ofendemism.
(a) One species of orangutan, Pongo pygmaeus, is found only in the rainforests of Borneo, andthe other species of orangutan (Pongo abelii) is found only in the rainforests of Sumatra. These animals areexamples of the exceptional biodiversity of (c) the islands of Sumatra and Borneo. Other species include the (b)Sumatran tiger (Panthera tigris sumatrae) and the (d) Sumatran elephant (Elephas maximus sumatranus), bothcritically endangered species. Rainforest habitat is being removed to make way for (e) oil palm plantations such as thisone in Borneo’s Sabah Province.
Habitat destruction can affect ecosystems other than forests. Rivers and streams are important ecosystems and are frequentlymodified through land development and from damming or water removal. Damming of rivers affects the water flow andaccess to all parts of a river. Differing flow regimes can reduce or eliminate populations that are adapted to these changesin flow patterns. For example, an estimated 91percent of river lengths in the United States have been developed: they havemodifications like dams, to create energy or store water; levees, to prevent flooding; or dredging or rerouting, to create landthat is more suitable for human development. Many fish species in the United States, especially rare species or species withrestricted distributions, have seen declines caused by river damming and habitat loss. Research has confirmed that speciesof amphibians that must carry out parts of their life cycles in both aquatic and terrestrial habitats have a greater chance ofsuffering population declines and extinction because of the increased likelihood that one of their habitats or access betweenthem will be lost.OverharvestingOverharvesting is a serious threat to many species, but particularly to aquatic species. There are many examples of regulatedcommercial fisheries monitored by fisheries scientists that have nevertheless collapsed. The western Atlantic cod fisheryis the most spectacular recent collapse. While it was a hugely productive fishery for 400 years, the introduction of modernfactory trawlers in the 1980s and the pressure on the fishery led to it becoming unsustainable. The causes of fishery collapseare both economic and political in nature. Most fisheries are managed as a common (shared) resource even when the fishingterritory lies within a country’s territorial waters. Common resources are subject to an economic pressure known as thetragedy of the commons in which essentially no fisher has a motivation to exercise restraint in harvesting a fishery whenit is not owned by that fisher. The natural outcome of harvests of resources held in common is their overexploitation. Whilelarge fisheries are regulated to attempt to avoid this pressure, it still exists in the background. This overexploitation isexacerbated when access to the fishery is open and unregulated and when technology gives fishers the ability to overfish.In a few fisheries, the biological growth of the resource is less than the potential growth of the profits made from fishing ifthat time and money were invested elsewhere. In these cases—whales are an example—economic forces will always drivetoward fishing the population to extinction.
For the most part, fishery extinction is not equivalent to biological extinction—the last fish of a species is rarely fished out ofthe ocean. At the same time, fishery extinction is still harmful to fish species and their ecosystems. There are some instancesin which true extinction is a possibility. Whales have slow-growing populations and are at risk of complete extinctionthrough hunting. There are some species of sharks with restricted distributions that are at risk of extinction. The groupersare another population of generally slow-growing fishes that, in the Caribbean, includes a number of species that are at riskof extinction from overfishing.Coral reefs are extremely diverse marine ecosystems that face peril from several processes. Reefs are home to 1/3 of theworld’s marine fish species—about 4,000 species—despite making up only 1 percent of marine habitat. Most home marineaquaria are stocked with wild-caught organisms, not cultured organisms. Although no species is known to have been drivenextinct by the pet trade in marine species, there are studies showing that populations of some species have declined inresponse to harvesting, indicating that the harvest is not sustainable at those levels. There are concerns about the effect ofthe pet trade on some terrestrial species such as turtles, amphibians, birds, plants, and even the orangutan.
Bush meat is the generic term used for wild animals killed for food. Hunting is practiced throughout the world, buthunting practices, particularly in equatorial Africa and parts of Asia, are believed to threaten several species with extinction.Traditionally, bush meat in Africa was hunted to feed families directly; however, recent commercialization of the practicenow has bush meat available in grocery stores, which has increased harvest rates to the level of unsustainability.Additionally, human population growth has increased the need for protein foods that are not being met from agriculture.Species threatened by the bush meat trade are mostly mammals including many primates living in the Congo basin.Exotic SpeciesExotic species are species that have been intentionally or unintentionally introduced by humans into an ecosystem inwhich they did not evolve. Such introductions likely occur frequently as natural phenomena. For example, Kudzu (Puerarialobata), which is native to Japan, was introduced in the United States in 1876. It was later planted for soil conservation.Problematically, it grows too well in the southeastern United States—up to a foot a day. It is now a pest species and coversover 7 million acres in the southeastern United States. If an introduced species is able to survive in its new habitat, thatintroduction is now reflected in the observed range of the species. Human transportation of people and goods, includingthe intentional transport of organisms for trade, has dramatically increased the introduction of species into new ecosystems,sometimes at distances that are well beyond the capacity of the species to ever travel itself and outside the range of thespecies’ natural predators.Most exotic species introductions probably fail because of the low number of individuals introduced or poor adaptation tothe ecosystem they enter. Some species, however, possess preadaptations that can make them especially successful in a newecosystem. These exotic species often undergo dramatic population increases in their new habitat and reset the ecological conditions in the new environment, threatening the species that exist there. For this reason, exotic species are also calledinvasive species. Exotic species can threaten other species through competition for resources, predation, or disease.
Lakes and islands are particularly vulnerable to extinction threats from introduced species. In Lake Victoria, as mentionedearlier, the intentional introduction of the Nile perch was largely responsible for the extinction of about 200 species ofcichlids. The accidental introduction of the brown tree snake via aircraft (Figure 47.12) from the Solomon Islands to Guamin 1950 has led to the extinction of three species of birds and three to five species of reptiles endemic to the island. Severalother species are still threatened. The brown tree snake is adept at exploiting human transportation as a means to migrate;one was even found on an aircraft arriving in Corpus Christi, Texas. Constant vigilance on the part of airport, military,and commercial aircraft personnel is required to prevent the snake from moving from Guam to other islands in the Pacific,especially Hawaii. Islands do not make up a large area of land on the globe, but they do contain a disproportionate numberof endemic species because of their isolation from mainland ancestors.
The brown tree snake, Boiga irregularis, is an exotic species that has caused numerous extinctions onthe island of Guam since its accidental introduction in 1950.
the island of Guam since its accidental introduction in 1950. (credit: NPS)It now appears that the global decline in amphibian species recognized in the 1990s is, in some part, caused by the fungusBatrachochytrium dendrobatidis, which causes the disease chytridiomycosis (Figure 47.13). There is evidence that thefungus is native to Africa and may have been spread throughout the world by transport of a commonly used laboratoryand pet species: the African clawed toad (Xenopus laevis). It may well be that biologists themselves are responsible forspreading this disease worldwide. The North American bullfrog, Rana catesbeiana, which has also been widely introducedas a food animal but which easily escapes captivity, survives most infections of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis and canact as a reservoir for the disease.
This Limosa Harlequin Frog (Atelopus limosus), an endangered species from Panama, died from a fungaldisease called chytridiomycosis. The red lesions are symptomatic of the disease.
Early evidence suggests that another fungal pathogen, Geomyces destructans, introduced from Europe is responsible forwhite-nose syndrome, which infects cave-hibernating bats in eastern North America and has spread from a point of originin western New York State (Figure 47.14). The disease has decimated bat populations and threatens extinction of speciesalready listed as endangered: the Indiana bat, Myotis sodalis, and potentially the Virginia big-eared bat, Corynorhinustownsendii virginianus. How the fungus was introduced is unclear, but one logical presumption would be that recreationalcavers unintentionally brought the fungus on clothes or equipment from Europe.
This little brown bat in Greeley Mine, Vermont, March 26, 2009, was found to have white-nose syndrome.
Climate ChangeClimate change, and specifically the anthropogenic (meaning, caused by humans) warming trend presently underway, isrecognized as a major extinction threat, particularly when combined with other threats such as habitat loss. Scientistsdisagree about the likely magnitude of the effects, with extinction rate estimates ranging from 15 percent to 40 percent of species committed to extinction by 2050. Scientists do agree, however, that climate change will alter regional climates,including rainfall and snowfall patterns, making habitats less hospitable to the species living in them. The warming trendwill shift colder climates toward the north and south poles, forcing species to move with their adapted climate normswhile facing habitat gaps along the way. The shifting ranges will impose new competitive regimes on species as they findthemselves in contact with other species not present in their historic range. One such unexpected species contact is betweenpolar bears and grizzly bears. Previously, these two species had separate ranges. Now, their ranges are overlapping andthere are documented cases of these two species mating and producing viable offspring. Changing climates also throwoff species’ delicate timing adaptations to seasonal food resources and breeding times. Many contemporary mismatches toshifts in resource availability and timing have already been documented.
Since 2008, grizzly bears (Ursus arctos horribilis) have been spotted farther north than their historicrange, a possible consequence of climate change. As a result, grizzly bear habitat now overlaps polar bear(Ursus maritimus) habitat. The two kinds of bears, which are capable of mating and producing viable offspring, areconsidered separate species as historically they lived in different habitats and never met. However, in 2006 a huntershot a wild grizzly-polar bear hybrid known as a grolar bear, the first wild hybrid ever found.Range shifts are already being observed: for example, some European bird species ranges have moved 91 km northward.The same study suggested that the optimal shift based on warming trends was double that distance, suggesting that thepopulations are not moving quickly enough. Range shifts have also been observed in plants, butterflies, other insects,freshwater fishes, reptiles, and mammals.Climate gradients will also move up mountains, eventually crowding species higher in altitude and eliminating the habitatfor those species adapted to the highest elevations. Some climates will completely disappear. The rate of warming appearsto be accelerated in the arctic, which is recognized as a serious threat to polar bear populations that require sea ice to huntseals during the winter months: seals are the only source of protein available to polar bears. A trend to decreasing sea icecoverage has occurred since observations began in the mid-twentieth century. The rate of decline observed in recent yearsis far greater than previously predicted by climate models.Finally, global warming will raise ocean levels due to melt water from glaciers and the greater volume of warmer water.Shorelines will be inundated, reducing island size, which will have an effect on some species, and a number of islands willdisappear entirely. Additionally, the gradual melting and subsequent refreezing of the poles, glaciers, and higher elevation mountains—a cycle that has provided freshwater to environments for centuries—will also be jeopardized. This could resultin an overabundance of salt water and a shortage of fresh water.Preserving BiodiversityBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Identify new technologies for describing biodiversityExplain the legislative framework for conservationDescribe principles and challenges of conservation preserve designIdentify examples of the effects of habitat restorationDiscuss the role of zoos in biodiversity conservationPreserving biodiversity is an extraordinary challenge that must be met by greater understanding of biodiversity itself,changes in human behavior and beliefs, and various preservation strategies.Measuring BiodiversityThe technology of molecular genetics and data processing and storage are maturing to the point where cataloguing theplanet’s species in an accessible way is close to feasible. DNA barcoding is one molecular genetic method, which takesadvantage of rapid evolution in a mitochondrial gene present in eukaryotes, excepting the plants, to identify speciesusing the sequence of portions of the gene. Plants may be barcoded using a combination of chloroplast genes. Rapidmass sequencing machines make the molecular genetics portion of the work relatively inexpensive and quick. Computerresources store and make available the large volumes of data. Projects are currently underway to use DNA barcoding tocatalog museum specimens, which have already been named and studied, as well as testing the method on less studiedgroups. As of mid 2012, close to 150,000 named species had been barcoded. Early studies suggest there are significantnumbers of undescribed species that looked too much like sibling species to previously be recognized as different. Thesenow can be identified with DNA barcoding.Numerous computer databases now provide information about named species and a framework for adding new species.However, as already noted, at the present rate of description of new species, it will take close to 500 years before thecomplete catalog of life is known. Many, perhaps most, species on the planet do not have that much time.There is also the problem of understanding which species known to science are threatened and to what degree they arethreatened. This task is carried out by the non-profit IUCN which, as previously mentioned, maintains the Red List—anonline listing of endangered species categorized by taxonomy, type of threat, and other criteria (Figure 47.16). The Red Listis supported by scientific research. In 2011, the list contained 61,000 species, all with supporting documentation.
Changing Human BehaviorLegislation throughout the world has been enacted to protect species. The legislation includes international treaties as wellas national and state laws. The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES)treaty came into force in 1975. The treaty, and the national legislation that supports it, provides a legal framework forpreventing approximately 33,000 listed species from being transported across nations’ borders, thus protecting them frombeing caught or killed when international trade is involved. The treaty is limited in its reach because it only deals withinternational movement of organisms or their parts. It is also limited by various countries’ ability or willingness to enforcethe treaty and supporting legislation. The illegal trade in organisms and their parts is probably a market in the hundreds ofmillions of dollars. Illegal wildlife trade is monitored by another non-profit: Trade Records Analysis of Flora and Fauna inCommerce (TRAFFIC).Within many countries there are laws that protect endangered species and regulate hunting and fishing. In the United States,the Endangered Species Act (ESA) was enacted in 1973. Species at risk are listed by the Act; the U.S. Fish & WildlifeService is required by law to develop management plans that protect the listed species and bring them back to sustainablenumbers. The Act, and others like it in other countries, is a useful tool, but it suffers because it is often difficult to get aspecies listed, or to get an effective management plan in place once it is listed. Additionally, species may be controversiallytaken off the list without necessarily having had a change in their situation. More fundamentally, the approach to protectingindividual species rather than entire ecosystems is both inefficient and focuses efforts on a few highly visible and oftencharismatic species, perhaps at the expense of other species that go unprotected. At the same time, the Act has a criticalhabitat provision outlined in the recovery mechanism that may benefit species other than the one targeted for management.The Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA) is an agreement between the United States and Canada that was signed into lawin 1918 in response to declines in North American bird species caused by hunting. The Act now lists over 800 protectedspecies. It makes it illegal to disturb or kill the protected species or distribute their parts (much of the hunting of birds in thepast was for their feathers).
The international response to global warming has been mixed. The Kyoto Protocol, an international agreement that cameout of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change that committed countries to reducing greenhouse gasemissions by 2012, was ratified by some countries, but spurned by others. Two important countries in terms of their potentialimpact that did not ratify the Kyoto Protocol were the United States and China. The United States rejected it as a result ofa powerful fossil fuel industry and China because of a concern it would stifle the nation’s growth. Some goals for reductionin greenhouse gasses were met and exceeded by individual countries, but worldwide, the effort to limit greenhouse gasproduction is not succeeding. The intended replacement for the Kyoto Protocol has not materialized because governmentscannot agree on timelines and benchmarks. Meanwhile, climate scientists predict the resulting costs to human societies andbiodiversity will be high.As already mentioned, the private non-profit sector plays a large role in the conservation effort both in North America andaround the world. The approaches range from species-specific organizations to the broadly focused IUCN and TRAFFIC.The Nature Conservancy takes a novel approach. It purchases land and protects it in an attempt to set up preserves forecosystems. Ultimately, human behavior will change when human values change. At present, the growing urbanization ofthe human population is a force that poses challenges to the valuing of biodiversity.Conservation in PreservesEstablishment of wildlife and ecosystem preserves is one of the key tools in conservation efforts. A preserve is an area ofland set aside with varying degrees of protection for the organisms that exist within the boundaries of the preserve. Preservescan be effective in the short term for protecting both species and ecosystems, but they face challenges that scientists are stillexploring to strengthen their viability as long-term solutions.How Much Area to Preserve?Due to the way protected lands are allocated (they tend to contain less economically valuable resources rather than beingset aside specifically for the species or ecosystems at risk) and the way biodiversity is distributed, determining a targetpercentage of land or marine habitat that should be protected to maintain biodiversity levels is challenging. The IUCNWorldParks Congress estimated that 11.5 percent of Earth’s land surface was covered by preserves of various kinds in 2003. Thisarea is greater than previous goals; however, it only represents 9 out of 14 recognized major biomes. Research has shownthat 12 percent of all species live only outside preserves; these percentages are much higher when only threatened speciesand high quality preserves are considered. For example, high quality preserves include only about 50 percent of threatenedamphibian species. The conclusion must be that either the percentage of area protected must increase, or the percentageof high quality preserves must increase, or preserves must be targeted with greater attention to biodiversity protection.Researchers argue that more attention to the latter solution is required.Preserve DesignThere has been extensive research into optimal preserve designs for maintaining biodiversity. The fundamental principlebehind much of the research has been the seminal theoretical work of Robert H. MacArthur and Edward O. Wilsonpublished in 1967 on island biogeography.[5]This work sought to understand the factors affecting biodiversity on islands.The fundamental conclusion was that biodiversity on an island was a function of the origin of species through migration,speciation, and extinction on that island. Islands farther from a mainland are harder to get to, so migration is lower and theequilibrium number of species is lower. Within island populations, evidence suggests that the number of species graduallyincreases to a level similar to the numbers on the mainland from which the species is suspected to have migrated. Inaddition, smaller islands are harder to find, so their immigration rates for new species are lower. Smaller islands are alsoless geographically diverse so there are fewer niches to promote speciation. And finally, smaller islands support smallerpopulations, so the probability of extinction is higher.As islands get larger, the number of species accelerates, although the effect of island area on species numbers is not adirect correlation. Conservation preserves can be seen as “islands” of habitat within “an ocean” of non-habitat. For a speciesto persist in a preserve, the preserve must be large enough. The critical size depends, in part, on the home range thatis characteristic of the species. A preserve for wolves, which range hundreds of kilometers, must be much larger than apreserve for butterflies, which might range within ten kilometers during its lifetime. But larger preserves have more corearea of optimal habitat for individual species, they have more niches to support more species, and they attract more speciesbecause they can be found and reached more easily.Preserves perform better when there are buffer zones around them of suboptimal habitat. The buffer allows organisms toexit the boundaries of the preserve without immediate negative consequences from predation or lack of resources. One largepreserve is better than the same area of several smaller preserves because there is more core habitat unaffected by edges.For this same reason, preserves in the shape of a square or circle will be better than a preserve with many thin “arms.” Ifpreserves must be smaller, then providing wildlife corridors between them so that individuals and their genes can move between the preserves, for example along rivers and streams, will make the smaller preserves behave more like a large one.All of these factors are taken into consideration when planning the nature of a preserve before the land is set aside.In addition to the physical, biological, and ecological specifications of a preserve, there are a variety of policy, legislative,and enforcement specifications related to uses of the preserve for functions other than protection of species. These caninclude anything from timber extraction, mineral extraction, regulated hunting, human habitation, and nondestructivehuman recreation. Many of these policy decisions are made based on political pressures rather than conservationconsiderations. In some cases, wildlife protection policies have been so strict that subsistence-living indigenous populationshave been forced from ancestral lands that fell within a preserve. In other cases, even if a preserve is designed to protectwildlife, if the protections are not or cannot be enforced, the preserve status will have little meaning in the face of illegalpoaching and timber extraction. This is a widespread problem with preserves in areas of the tropics.Limitations on PreservesSome of the limitations on preserves as conservation tools are evident from the discussion of preserve design. Political andeconomic pressures typically make preserves smaller, never larger, so setting aside areas that are large enough is difficult.If the area set aside is sufficiently large, there may not be sufficient area to create a buffer around the preserve. In this case,an area on the outer edges of the preserve inevitably becomes a riskier suboptimal habitat for the species in the preserve.Enforcement of protections is also a significant issue in countries without the resources or political will to prevent poachingand illegal resource extraction.Climate change will create inevitable problems with the location of preserves. The species within them will migrate tohigher latitudes as the habitat of the preserve becomes less favorable. Scientists are planning for the effects of globalwarming on future preserves and striving to predict the need for new preserves to accommodate anticipated changes tohabitats; however, the end effectiveness is tenuous since these efforts are prediction based.Finally, an argument can be made that conservation preserves reinforce the cultural perception that humans are separatefrom nature, can exist outside of it, and can only operate in ways that do damage to biodiversity. Creating preserves reducesthe pressure on human activities outside the preserves to be sustainable and non-damaging to biodiversity. Ultimately, thepolitical, economic, and human demographic pressures will degrade and reduce the size of conservation preserves if theactivities outside them are not altered to be less damaging to biodiversity.
Habitat RestorationHabitat restoration holds considerable promise as a mechanism for restoring and maintaining biodiversity. Of course oncea species has become extinct, its restoration is impossible. However, restoration can improve the biodiversity of degradedecosystems. Reintroducing wolves, a top predator, to Yellowstone National Park in 1995 led to dramatic changes in theecosystem that increased biodiversity. The wolves (Figure 47.17) function to suppress elk and coyote populations andprovide more abundant resources to the guild of carrion eaters. Reducing elk populations has allowed revegetation ofriparian areas, which has increased the diversity of species in that habitat. Decreasing the coyote population has increasedthe populations of species that were previously suppressed by this predator. The number of species of carrion eaters hasincreased because of the predatory activities of the wolves. In this habitat, the wolf is a keystone species, meaning a speciesthat is instrumental in maintaining diversity in an ecosystem. Removing a keystone species from an ecological communitymay cause a collapse in diversity. The results from the Yellowstone experiment suggest that restoring a keystone species canhave the effect of restoring biodiversity in the community. Ecologists have argued for the identification of keystone specieswhere possible and for focusing protection efforts on those species; likewise, it also makes sense to attempt to return themto their ecosystem if they have been removed.
(a) The Gibbon wolf pack in Yellowstone National Park, March 1, 2007, represents a keystone species.The reintroduction of wolves into Yellowstone National Park in 1995 led to a change in the grazing behavior of (b)elk. To avoid predation, the elk no longer grazed exposed stream and riverbeds, such as (c) the Lamar Riverbed inYellowstone. This allowed willow and cottonwood seedlings to grow. The seedlings decreased erosion and providedshading to the creek, which improved fish habitat. A new colony of (d) beaver may also have benefited from the habitatchange.Other large-scale restoration experiments underway involve dam removal. In the United States, since the mid-1980s, manyaging dams are being considered for removal rather than replacement because of shifting beliefs about the ecological valueof free-flowing rivers and because many dams no longer provide the benefit and functions that they did when they were firstbuilt. The measured benefits of dam removal include restoration of naturally fluctuating water levels (the purpose of damsis frequently to reduce variation in river flows), which leads to increased fish diversity and improved water quality. In thePacific Northwest, dam removal projects are expected to increase populations of salmon, which is considered a keystonespecies because it transports key nutrients to inland ecosystems during its annual spawning migrations. In other regionssuch as the Atlantic coast, dam removal has allowed the return of spawning anadromous fish species (species that are bornin fresh water, live most of their lives in salt water, and return to fresh water to spawn). Some of the largest dam removalprojects have yet to occur or have happened too recently for the consequences to be measured. The large-scale ecologicalexperiments that these removal projects constitute will provide valuable data for other dam projects slated either for removalor construction.The Role of Captive BreedingZoos have sought to play a role in conservation efforts both through captive breeding programs and education. Thetransformation of the missions of zoos from collection and exhibition facilities to organizations that are dedicated toconservation is ongoing. In general, it has been recognized that, except in some specific targeted cases, captive breedingprograms for endangered species are inefficient and often prone to failure when the species are reintroduced to the wild.Zoo facilities are far too limited to contemplate captive breeding programs for the numbers of species that are now atrisk. Education is another potential positive impact of zoos on conservation efforts, particularly given the global trendto urbanization and the consequent reduction in contacts between people and wildlife. A number of studies have beenperformed to look at the effectiveness of zoos on people’s attitudes and actions regarding conservation; at present, the resultstend to be mixed.