In this compound light micrograph purple-stained neutrophil (upper left) and eosinophil (lower right)are white blood cells that float among red blood cells in this blood smear. Neutrophils provide an early, rapid, andnonspecific defense against invading pathogens. Eosinophils play a variety of roles in the immune response. Redblood cells are about 7–8 μm in diameter, and a neutrophil is about 10–12μm.
The environment consists of numerous pathogens, which are agents, usually microorganisms, that cause diseases in theirhosts. A host is the organism that is invaded and often harmed by a pathogen. Pathogens include bacteria, protists, fungiand other infectious organisms. We are constantly exposed to pathogens in food and water, on surfaces, and in the air.Mammalian immune systems evolved for protection from such pathogens; they are composed of an extremely diversearray of specialized cells and soluble molecules that coordinate a rapid and flexible defense system capable of providingprotection from a majority of these disease agents.Components of the immune system constantly search the body for signs of pathogens. When pathogens are found, immunefactors are mobilized to the site of an infection. The immune factors identify the nature of the pathogen, strengthen thecorresponding cells and molecules to combat it efficiently, and then halt the immune response after the infection is clearedto avoid unnecessary host cell damage. The immune system can remember pathogens to which it has been exposed tocreate a more efficient response upon re-exposure. This memory can last several decades. Features of the immune system,such as pathogen identification, specific response, amplification, retreat, and remembrance are essential for survival againstpathogens. The immune response can be classified as either innate or active. The innate immune response is always presentand attempts to defend against all pathogens rather than focusing on specific ones. Conversely, the adaptive immuneresponse stores information about past infections and mounts pathogen-specific defenses.
Innate Immune ResponseBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Describe physical and chemical immune barriersExplain immediate and induced innate immune responsesDiscuss natural killer cellsDescribe major histocompatibility class I moleculesSummarize how the proteins in a complement system function to destroy extracellular pathogensThe immune system comprises both innate and adaptive immune responses. Innate immunity occurs naturally because ofgenetic factors or physiology; it is not induced by infection or vaccination but works to reduce the workload for the adaptiveimmune response. Both the innate and adaptive levels of the immune response involve secreted proteins, receptor-mediatedsignaling, and intricate cell-to-cell communication. The innate immune system developed early in animal evolution, roughlya billion years ago, as an essential response to infection. Innate immunity has a limited number of specific targets: anypathogenic threat triggers a consistent sequence of events that can identify the type of pathogen and either clear the infectionindependently or mobilize a highly specialized adaptive immune response. For example, tears and mucus secretions containmicrobicidal factors.Physical and Chemical BarriersBefore any immune factors are triggered, the skin functions as a continuous, impassable barrier to potentially infectiouspathogens. Pathogens are killed or inactivated on the skin by desiccation (drying out) and by the skin’s acidity. In addition,beneficial microorganisms that coexist on the skin compete with invading pathogens, preventing infection. Regions of thebody that are not protected by skin (such as the eyes and mucus membranes) have alternative methods of defense, such astears and mucus secretions that trap and rinse away pathogens, and cilia in the nasal passages and respiratory tract that pushthe mucus with the pathogens out of the body. Throughout the body are other defenses, such as the low pH of the stomach(which inhibits the growth of pathogens), blood proteins that bind and disrupt bacterial cell membranes, and the process ofurination (which flushes pathogens from the urinary tract).Despite these barriers, pathogens may enter the body through skin abrasions or punctures, or by collecting on mucosalsurfaces in large numbers that overcome the mucus or cilia. Some pathogens have evolved specific mechanisms that allowthem to overcome physical and chemical barriers. When pathogens do enter the body, the innate immune system respondswith inflammation, pathogen engulfment, and secretion of immune factors and proteins.Pathogen RecognitionAn infection may be intracellular or extracellular, depending on the pathogen. All viruses infect cells and replicate withinthose cells (intracellularly), whereas bacteria and other parasites may replicate intracellularly or extracellularly, dependingon the species. The innate immune system must respond accordingly: by identifying the extracellular pathogen and/or by identifying host cells that have already been infected. When a pathogen enters the body, cells in the blood andlymph detect the specific pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) on the pathogen’s surface. PAMPs arecarbohydrate, polypeptide, and nucleic acid “signatures” that are expressed by viruses, bacteria, and parasites but whichdiffer from molecules on host cells. The immune system has specific cells, described in Figure 42.2 and shown in Figure42.3, with receptors that recognize these PAMPs. A macrophage is a large phagocytic cell that engulfs foreign particlesand pathogens. Macrophages recognize PAMPs via complementary pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). PRRs aremolecules on macrophages and dendritic cells which are in contact with the external environment. A monocyte is a typeof white blood cell that circulates in the blood and lymph and differentiates into macrophages after it moves into infectedtissue. Dendritic cells bind molecular signatures of pathogens and promote pathogen engulfment and destruction. Toll-likereceptors (TLRs) are a type of PRR that recognizes molecules that are shared by pathogens but distinguishable from hostmolecules). TLRs are present in invertebrates as well as vertebrates, and appear to be one of the most ancient componentsof the immune system. TLRs have also been identified in the mammalian nervous system.
The characteristics and location of cells involved in the innate immune system are described.
Cells of the blood include (1) monocytes, (2) lymphocytes, (3) neutrophils, (4) red blood cells, and (5)platelets. Note the very similar morphologies of the leukocytes (1, 2, 3).
Cytokine Release AffectThe binding of PRRs with PAMPs triggers the release of cytokines, which signal that a pathogen is present and needs tobe destroyed along with any infected cells. A cytokine is a chemical messenger that regulates cell differentiation (form andfunction), proliferation (production), and gene expression to affect immune responses. At least 40 types of cytokines existin humans that differ in terms of the cell type that produces them, the cell type that responds to them, and the changes theyproduce. One type cytokine, interferon, is illustrated in Figure 42.4.One subclass of cytokines is the interleukin (IL), so named because they mediate interactions between leukocytes (whiteblood cells). Interleukins are involved in bridging the innate and adaptive immune responses. In addition to being releasedfrom cells after PAMP recognition, cytokines are released by the infected cells which bind to nearby uninfected cells andinduce those cells to release cytokines, which results in a cytokine burst.A second class of early-acting cytokines is interferons, which are released by infected cells as a warning to nearbyuninfected cells. One of the functions of an interferon is to inhibit viral replication. They also have other importantfunctions, such as tumor surveillance. Interferons work by signaling neighboring uninfected cells to destroy RNA andreduce protein synthesis, signaling neighboring infected cells to undergo apoptosis (programmed cell death), and activatingimmune cells.In response to interferons, uninfected cells alter their gene expression, which increases the cells’ resistance to infection. Oneeffect of interferon-induced gene expression is a sharply reduced cellular protein synthesis. Virally infected cells producemore viruses by synthesizing large quantities of viral proteins. Thus, by reducing protein synthesis, a cell becomes resistantto viral infection.
Interferons are cytokines that are released by a cell infected with a virus. Response of neighboring cellsto interferon helps stem the infection.Phagocytosis and InflammationThe first cytokines to be produced are pro-inflammatory; that is, they encourage inflammation, the localized redness,swelling, heat, and pain that result from the movement of leukocytes and fluid through increasingly permeable capillariesto a site of infection. The population of leukocytes that arrives at an infection site depends on the nature of the infectingpathogen. Both macrophages and dendritic cells engulf pathogens and cellular debris through phagocytosis. A neutrophilis also a phagocytic leukocyte that engulfs and digests pathogens. Neutrophils, shown in Figure 42.3, are the most abundantleukocytes of the immune system. Neutrophils have a nucleus with two to five lobes, and they contain organelles, calledlysosomes, that digest engulfed pathogens. An eosinophil is a leukocyte that works with other eosinophils to surround aparasite; it is involved in the allergic response and in protection against helminthes (parasitic worms).Neutrophils and eosinophils are particularly important leukocytes that engulf large pathogens, such as bacteria and fungi.A mast cell is a leukocyte that produces inflammatory molecules, such as histamine, in response to large pathogens. Abasophil is a leukocyte that, like a neutrophil, releases chemicals to stimulate the inflammatory response as illustratedin Figure 42.5. Basophils are also involved in allergy and hypersensitivity responses and induce specific types ofinflammatory responses. Eosinophils and basophils produce additional inflammatory mediators to recruit more leukocytes.A hypersensitive immune response to harmless antigens, such as in pollen, often involves the release of histamine bybasophils and mast cells.
In response to a cut, mast cells secrete histamines that cause nearby capillaries to dilate. Neutrophils andmonocytes leave the capillaries. Monocytes mature into macrophages. Neutrophils, dendritic cells and macrophagesrelease chemicals to stimulate the inflammatory response. Neutrophils and macrophages also consume invadingbacteria by phagocytosis.
Cytokines also send feedback to cells of the nervous system to bring about the overall symptoms of feeling sick, whichinclude lethargy, muscle pain, and nausea. These effects may have evolved because the symptoms encourage the individualto rest and prevent them from spreading the infection to others. Cytokines also increase the core body temperature, causinga fever, which causes the liver to withhold iron from the blood. Without iron, certain pathogens, such as some bacteria, areunable to replicate; this is called nutritional immunity.
Natural Killer CellsLymphocytes are leukocytes that are histologically identifiable by their large, darkly staining nuclei; they are small cellswith very little cytoplasm, as shown in Figure 42.6. Infected cells are identified and destroyed by natural killer (NK) cells,lymphocytes that can kill cells infected with viruses or tumor cells (abnormal cells that uncontrollably divide and invadeother tissue). T cells and B cells of the adaptive immune system also are classified as lymphocytes. T cells are lymphocytesthat mature in the thymus gland, and B cells are lymphocytes that mature in the bone marrow. NK cells identify intracellularinfections, especially from viruses, by the altered expression of major histocompatibility class (MHC) I molecules onthe surface of infected cells. MHC I molecules are proteins on the surfaces of all nucleated cells, thus they are scarce onred blood cells and platelets which are non-nucleated. The function of MHC I molecules is to display fragments of proteinsfrom the infectious agents within the cell to T-cells; healthy cells will be ignored, while “non-self” or foreign proteins willbe attacked by the immune system. MHC II molecules are found mainly on cells containing antigens (“non-self proteins”)and on lymphocytes. MHC II molecules interact with helper T-cells to trigger the appropriate immune response, whichmay include the inflammatory response.
Lymphocytes, such as NK cells, are characterized by their large nuclei that actively absorb Wright stainand therefore appear dark colored under a microscope.An infected cell (or a tumor cell) is usually incapable of synthesizing and displaying MHC I molecules appropriately.The metabolic resources of cells infected by some viruses produce proteins that interfere with MHC I processing and/or trafficking to the cell surface. The reduced MHC I on host cells varies from virus to virus and results from activeinhibitors being produced by the viruses. This process can deplete host MHC I molecules on the cell surface, which NKcells detect as “unhealthy” or “abnormal” while searching for cellular MHC I molecules. Similarly, the dramatically altered gene expression of tumor cells leads to expression of extremely deformed or absent MHC I molecules that also signal“unhealthy” or “abnormal.”NK cells are always active; an interaction with normal, intact MHC I molecules on a healthy cell disables the killingsequence, and the NK cell moves on. After the NK cell detects an infected or tumor cell, its cytoplasm secretes granulescomprised of perforin, a destructive protein that creates a pore in the target cell. Granzymes are released along with theperforin in the immunological synapse. A granzyme is a protease that digests cellular proteins and induces the target cell toundergo programmed cell death, or apoptosis. Phagocytic cells then digest the cell debris left behind. NK cells are constantlypatrolling the body and are an effective mechanism for controlling potential infections and preventing cancer progression.ComplementAn array of approximately 20 types of soluble proteins, called a complement system, functions to destroy extracellularpathogens. Cells of the liver and macrophages synthesize complement proteins continuously; these proteins are abundantin the blood serum and are capable of responding immediately to infecting microorganisms. The complement system is sonamed because it is complementary to the antibody response of the adaptive immune system. Complement proteins bindto the surfaces of microorganisms and are particularly attracted to pathogens that are already bound by antibodies. Bindingof complement proteins occurs in a specific and highly regulated sequence, with each successive protein being activatedby cleavage and/or structural changes induced upon binding of the preceding protein(s). After the first few complementproteins bind, a cascade of sequential binding events follows in which the pathogen rapidly becomes coated in complementproteins.Complement proteins perform several functions. The proteins serve as a marker to indicate the presence of a pathogen tophagocytic cells, such as macrophages and B cells, and enhance engulfment; this process is called opsonization. Certaincomplement proteins can combine to form attack complexes that open pores in microbial cell membranes. These structuresdestroy pathogens by causing their contents to leak, as illustrated in Figure 42.7.
The classic pathway for the complement cascade involves the attachment of several initial complementproteins to an antibody-bound pathogen followed by rapid activation and binding of many more complement proteinsand the creation of destructive pores in the microbial cell envelope and cell wall. The alternate pathway does notinvolve antibody activation. Rather, C3 convertase spontaneously breaks down C3. Endogenous regulatory proteinsprevent the complement complex from binding to host cells. Pathogens lacking these regulatory proteins are lysed.
Adaptive Immune ResponseBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Explain adaptive immunityCompare and contrast adaptive and innate immunityDescribe cell-mediated immune response and humoral immune responseDescribe immune toleranceThe adaptive, or acquired, immune response takes days or even weeks to become established—much longer than theinnate response; however, adaptive immunity is more specific to pathogens and has memory. Adaptive immunity is animmunity that occurs after exposure to an antigen either from a pathogen or a vaccination. This part of the immune systemis activated when the innate immune response is insufficient to control an infection. In fact, without information from theinnate immune system, the adaptive response could not be mobilized. There are two types of adaptive responses: the cellmediatedimmune response, which is carried out by T cells, and the humoral immune response, which is controlled byactivated B cells and antibodies. Activated T cells and B cells that are specific to molecular structures on the pathogenproliferate and attack the invading pathogen. Their attack can kill pathogens directly or secrete antibodies that enhancethe phagocytosis of pathogens and disrupt the infection. Adaptive immunity also involves a memory to provide the hostwith long-term protection from reinfection with the same type of pathogen; on re-exposure, this memory will facilitate anefficient and quick response.Antigen-presenting CellsUnlike NK cells of the innate immune system, B cells (B lymphocytes) are a type of white blood cell that gives rise toantibodies, whereas T cells (T lymphocytes) are a type of white blood cell that plays an important role in the immuneresponse. T cells are a key component in the cell-mediated response—the specific immune response that utilizes T cells toneutralize cells that have been infected with viruses and certain bacteria. There are three types of T cells: cytotoxic, helper,and suppressor T cells. Cytotoxic T cells destroy virus-infected cells in the cell-mediated immune response, and helper Tcells play a part in activating both the antibody and the cell-mediated immune responses. Suppressor T cells deactivate Tcells and B cells when needed, and thus prevent the immune response from becoming too intense.An antigen is a foreign or “non-self” macromolecule that reacts with cells of the immune system. Not all antigens willprovoke a response. For instance, individuals produce innumerable “self” antigens and are constantly exposed to harmlessforeign antigens, such as food proteins, pollen, or dust components. The suppression of immune responses to harmlessmacromolecules is highly regulated and typically prevents processes that could be damaging to the host, known as tolerance.The innate immune system contains cells that detect potentially harmful antigens, and then inform the adaptive immuneresponse about the presence of these antigens. An antigen-presenting cell (APC) is an immune cell that detects, engulfs,and informs the adaptive immune response about an infection. When a pathogen is detected, these APCs will phagocytosethe pathogen and digest it to form many different fragments of the antigen. Antigen fragments will then be transported tothe surface of the APC, where they will serve as an indicator to other immune cells. Dendritic cells are immune cells thatprocess antigen material; they are present in the skin (Langerhans cells) and the lining of the nose, lungs, stomach, andintestines. Sometimes a dendritic cell presents on the surface of other cells to induce an immune response, thus functioningas an antigen-presenting cell. Macrophages also function as APCs. Before activation and differentiation, B cells can alsofunction as APCs.After phagocytosis by APCs, the phagocytic vesicle fuses with an intracellular lysosome forming phagolysosome. Withinthe phagolysosome, the components are broken down into fragments; the fragments are then loaded onto MHC class I orMHC class II molecules and are transported to the cell surface for antigen presentation, as illustrated in Figure 42.8. Notethat T lymphocytes cannot properly respond to the antigen unless it is processed and embedded in an MHC II molecule.APCs express MHC on their surfaces, and when combined with a foreign antigen, these complexes signal a “non-self”invader. Once the fragment of antigen is embedded in the MHC II molecule, the immune cell can respond. Helper T- cellsare one of the main lymphocytes that respond to antigen-presenting cells. Recall that all other nucleated cells of the bodyexpressed MHC I molecules, which signal “healthy” or “normal.”
An APC, such as a macrophage, engulfs and digests a foreign bacterium. An antigen from the bacteriumis presented on the cell surface in conjunction with an MHC II molecule Lymphocytes of the adaptive immune responseinteract with antigen-embedded MHC II molecules to mature into functional immune cells.
T and B LymphocytesLymphocytes in human circulating blood are approximately 80 to 90 percent T cells, shown in Figure 42.9, and 10 to 20percent B cells. Recall that the T cells are involved in the cell-mediated immune response, whereas B cells are part of thehumoral immune response.T cells encompass a heterogeneous population of cells with extremely diverse functions. Some T cells respond to APCs ofthe innate immune system, and indirectly induce immune responses by releasing cytokines. Other T cells stimulate B cellsto prepare their own response. Another population of T cells detects APC signals and directly kills the infected cells. OtherT cells are involved in suppressing inappropriate immune reactions to harmless or “self” antigens.
This scanning electron micrograph shows a T lymphocyte, which is responsible for the cell-mediatedimmune response. T cells are able to recognize antigens.
T and B cells exhibit a common theme of recognition/binding of specific antigens via a complementary receptor, followedby activation and self-amplification/maturation to specifically bind to the particular antigen of the infecting pathogen. Tand B lymphocytes are also similar in that each cell only expresses one type of antigen receptor. Any individual maypossess a population of T and B cells that together express a near limitless variety of antigen receptors that are capable ofrecognizing virtually any infecting pathogen. T and B cells are activated when they recognize small components of antigens,called epitopes, presented by APCs, illustrated in Figure 42.10. Note that recognition occurs at a specific epitope ratherthan on the entire antigen; for this reason, epitopes are known as “antigenic determinants.” In the absence of informationfrom APCs, T and B cells remain inactive, or naïve, and are unable to prepare an immune response. The requirement forinformation from the APCs of innate immunity to trigger B cell or T cell activation illustrates the essential nature of theinnate immune response to the functioning of the entire immune system.
An antigen is a macromolecule that reacts with components of the immune system. A given antigen maycontain several motifs that are recognized by immune cells. Each motif is an epitope. In this figure, the entire structureis an antigen, and the orange, salmon and green components projecting from it represent potential epitopes.Naïve T cells can express one of two different molecules, CD4 or CD8, on their surface, as shown in Figure 42.11, andare accordingly classified as CD4+ or CD8+ cells. These molecules are important because they regulate how a T cell willinteract with and respond to an APC. Naïve CD4+ cells bind APCs via their antigen-embedded MHC II molecules andare stimulated to become helper T (TH) lymphocytes, cells that go on to stimulate B cells (or cytotoxic T cells) directlyor secrete cytokines to inform more and various target cells about the pathogenic threat. In contrast, CD8+ cells engageantigen-embedded MHC I molecules on APCs and are stimulated to become cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), whichdirectly kill infected cells by apoptosis and emit cytokines to amplify the immune response. The two populations of T cellshave different mechanisms of immune protection, but both bind MHC molecules via their antigen receptors called T cellreceptors (TCRs). The CD4 or CD8 surface molecules differentiate whether the TCR will engage an MHC II or an MHC Imolecule. Because they assist in binding specificity, the CD4 and CD8 molecules are described as coreceptors.
Consider the innumerable possible antigens that an individual will be exposed to during a lifetime. The mammalian adaptiveimmune system is adept in responding appropriately to each antigen. Mammals have an enormous diversity of T cellpopulations, resulting from the diversity of TCRs. Each TCR consists of two polypeptide chains that span the T cellmembrane, as illustrated in Figure 42.12; the chains are linked by a disulfide bridge. Each polypeptide chain is comprised ofa constant domain and a variable domain: a domain, in this sense, is a specific region of a protein that may be regulatory orstructural. The intracellular domain is involved in intracellular signaling. A single T cell will express thousands of identicalcopies of one specific TCR variant on its cell surface. The specificity of the adaptive immune system occurs because itsynthesizes millions of different T cell populations, each expressing a TCR that differs in its variable domain. This TCRdiversity is achieved by the mutation and recombination of genes that encode these receptors in stem cell precursors ofT cells. The binding between an antigen-displaying MHC molecule and a complementary TCR “match” indicates that theadaptive immune system needs to activate and produce that specific T cell because its structure is appropriate to recognizeand destroy the invading pathogen.
A T cell receptor spans the membrane and projects variable binding regions into the extracellular spaceto bind processed antigens via MHC molecules on APCs.Helper T LymphocytesThe TH lymphocytes function indirectly to identify potential pathogens for other cells of the immune system. These cellsare important for extracellular infections, such as those caused by certain bacteria, helminths, and protozoa. TH lymphocytesrecognize specific antigens displayed in the MHC II complexes of APCs. There are two major populations of TH cells:TH1 and TH2. TH1 cells secrete cytokines to enhance the activities of macrophages and other T cells. TH1 cells activatethe action of cyotoxic T cells, as well as macrophages. TH2 cells stimulate naïve B cells to destroy foreign invaders viaantibody secretion. Whether a TH1 or a TH2 immune response develops depends on the specific types of cytokines secretedby cells of the innate immune system, which in turn depends on the nature of the invading pathogen.The TH1-mediated response involves macrophages and is associated with inflammation. Recall the frontline defenses ofmacrophages involved in the innate immune response. Some intracellular bacteria, such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis,have evolved to multiply in macrophages after they have been engulfed. These pathogens evade attempts by macrophages todestroy and digest the pathogen. When M. tuberculosis infection occurs, macrophages can stimulate naïve T cells to becomeTH1 cells. These stimulated T cells secrete specific cytokines that send feedback to the macrophage to stimulate its digestivecapabilities and allow it to destroy the colonizing M. tuberculosis. In the same manner, TH1-activated macrophages alsobecome better suited to ingest and kill tumor cells. In summary; TH1 responses are directed toward intracellular invaderswhile TH2 responses are aimed at those that are extracellular.B LymphocytesWhen stimulated by the TH2 pathway, naïve B cells differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells. A plasma cellis an immune cell that secrets antibodies; these cells arise from B cells that were stimulated by antigens. Similar to Tcells, naïve B cells initially are coated in thousands of B cell receptors (BCRs), which are membrane-bound forms of Ig(immunoglobulin, or an antibody). The B cell receptor has two heavy chains and two light chains connected by disulfidelinkages. Each chain has a constant and a variable region; the latter is involved in antigen binding. Two other membraneproteins, Ig alpha and Ig beta, are involved in signaling. The receptors of any particular B cell, as shown in Figure 42.13are all the same, but the hundreds of millions of different B cells in an individual have distinct recognition domains thatcontribute to extensive diversity in the types of molecular structures to which they can bind. In this state, B cells functionas APCs. They bind and engulf foreign antigens via their BCRs and then display processed antigens in the context of MHCII molecules to TH2 cells. When a TH2 cell detects that a B cell is bound to a relevant antigen, it secretes specific cytokinesthat induce the B cell to proliferate rapidly, which makes thousands of identical (clonal) copies of it, and then it synthesizesand secretes antibodies with the same antigen recognition pattern as the BCRs. The activation of B cells correspondingto one specific BCR variant and the dramatic proliferation of that variant is known as clonal selection. This phenomenondrastically, but briefly, changes the proportions of BCR variants expressed by the immune system, and shifts the balancetoward BCRs specific to the infecting pathogen.
B cell receptors are embedded in the membranes of B cells and bind a variety of antigens through theirvariable regions. The signal transduction region transfers the signal into the cell.T and B cells differ in one fundamental way: whereas T cells bind antigens that have been digested and embedded in MHCmolecules by APCs, B cells function as APCs that bind intact antigens that have not been processed. Although T and Bcells both react with molecules that are termed “antigens,” these lymphocytes actually respond to very different types ofmolecules. B cells must be able to bind intact antigens because they secrete antibodies that must recognize the pathogendirectly, rather than digested remnants of the pathogen. Bacterial carbohydrate and lipid molecules can activate B cellsindependently from the T cells.Cytotoxic T LymphocytesCTLs, a subclass of T cells, function to clear infections directly. The cell-mediated part of the adaptive immune systemconsists of CTLs that attack and destroy infected cells. CTLs are particularly important in protecting against viralinfections; this is because viruses replicate within cells where they are shielded from extracellular contact with circulatingantibodies. When APCs phagocytize pathogens and present MHC I-embedded antigens to naïve CD8+ T cells that expresscomplementary TCRs, the CD8+ T cells become activated to proliferate according to clonal selection. These resulting CTLsthen identify non-APCs displaying the same MHC I-embedded antigens (for example, viral proteins)—for example, theCTLs identify infected host cells.Intracellularly, infected cells typically die after the infecting pathogen replicates to a sufficient concentration and lyses thecell, as many viruses do. CTLs attempt to identify and destroy infected cells before the pathogen can replicate and escape,thereby halting the progression of intracellular infections. CTLs also support NK lymphocytes to destroy early cancers.Cytokines secreted by the TH1 response that stimulates macrophages also stimulate CTLs and enhance their ability toidentify and destroy infected cells and tumors.CTLs sense MHC I-embedded antigens by directly interacting with infected cells via their TCRs. Binding of TCRs withantigens activates CTLs to release perforin and granzyme, degradative enzymes that will induce apoptosis of the infectedcell. Recall that this is a similar destruction mechanism to that used by NK cells. In this process, the CTL does not becomeinfected and is not harmed by the secretion of perforin and granzymes. In fact, the functions of NK cells and CTLs arecomplementary and maximize the removal of infected cells, as illustrated in Figure 42.14. If the NK cell cannot identifythe “missing self” pattern of down-regulated MHC I molecules, then the CTL can identify it by the complex of MHC Iwith foreign antigens, which signals “altered self.” Similarly, if the CTL cannot detect antigen-embedded MHC I becausethe receptors are depleted from the cell surface, NK cells will destroy the cell instead. CTLs also emit cytokines, such asinterferons, that alter surface protein expression in other infected cells, such that the infected cells can be easily identifiedand destroyed. Moreover, these interferons can also prevent virally infected cells from releasing virus particles.
Plasma cells and CTLs are collectively called effector cells: they represent differentiated versions of their naïvecounterparts, and they are involved in bringing about the immune defense of killing pathogens and infected host cells.Mucosal Surfaces and Immune ToleranceThe innate and adaptive immune responses discussed thus far comprise the systemic immune system (affecting thewhole body), which is distinct from the mucosal immune system. Mucosal immunity is formed by mucosa-associatedlymphoid tissue, which functions independently of the systemic immune system, and which has its own innate and adaptivecomponents. Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), illustrated in Figure 42.15, is a collection of lymphatic tissuethat combines with epithelial tissue lining the mucosa throughout the body. This tissue functions as the immune barrier andresponse in areas of the body with direct contact to the external environment. The systemic and mucosal immune systemsuse many of the same cell types. Foreign particles that make their way to MALT are taken up by absorptive epithelial cellscalled M cells and delivered to APCs located directly below the mucosal tissue. M cells function in the transport described,and are located in the Peyer’s patch, a lymphoid nodule. APCs of the mucosal immune system are primarily dendritic cells,with B cells and macrophages having minor roles. Processed antigens displayed on APCs are detected by T cells in theMALT and at various mucosal induction sites, such as the tonsils, adenoids, appendix, or the mesenteric lymph nodes of theintestine. Activated T cells then migrate through the lymphatic system and into the circulatory system to mucosal sites ofinfection.
The topology and function of intestinal MALT is shown. Pathogens are taken up by M cells in the intestinalepithelium and excreted into a pocket formed by the inner surface of the cell. The pocket contains antigen-presentingcells such as dendritic cells, which engulf the antigens, then present them with MHC II molecules on the cell surface.The dendritic cells migrate to an underlying tissue called a Peyer’s patch. Antigen-presenting cells, T cells, and B cellsaggregate within the Peyer’s patch, forming organized lymphoid follicles. There, some T cells and B cells are activated.Other antigen-loaded dendritic cells migrate through the lymphatic system where they activate B cells, T cells, andplasma cells in the lymph nodes. The activated cells then return to MALT tissue effector sites. IgA and other antibodiesare secreted into the intestinal lumen.MALT is a crucial component of a functional immune system because mucosal surfaces, such as the nasal passages, are thefirst tissues onto which inhaled or ingested pathogens are deposited. The mucosal tissue includes the mouth, pharynx, andesophagus, and the gastrointestinal, respiratory, and urogenital tracts.The immune system has to be regulated to prevent wasteful, unnecessary responses to harmless substances, and moreimportantly so that it does not attack “self.” The acquired ability to prevent an unnecessary or harmful immune responseto a detected foreign substance known not to cause disease is described as immune tolerance. Immune tolerance is crucialfor maintaining mucosal homeostasis given the tremendous number of foreign substances (such as food proteins) that APCsof the oral cavity, pharynx, and gastrointestinal mucosa encounter. Immune tolerance is brought about by specialized APCsin the liver, lymph nodes, small intestine, and lung that present harmless antigens to an exceptionally diverse population ofregulatory T (Treg) cells, specialized lymphocytes that suppress local inflammation and inhibit the secretion of stimulatoryimmune factors. The combined result of Treg cells is to prevent immunologic activation and inflammation in undesiredtissue compartments and to allow the immune system to focus on pathogens instead. In addition to promoting immunetolerance of harmless antigens, other subsets of Treg cells are involved in the prevention of the autoimmune response,which is an inappropriate immune response to host cells or self-antigens. Another Treg class suppresses immune responsesto harmful pathogens after the infection has cleared to minimize host cell damage induced by inflammation and cell lysis.
Immunological MemoryThe adaptive immune system possesses a memory component that allows for an efficient and dramatic response uponreinvasion of the same pathogen. Memory is handled by the adaptive immune system with little reliance on cues from theinnate response. During the adaptive immune response to a pathogen that has not been encountered before, called a primaryresponse, plasma cells secreting antibodies and differentiated T cells increase, then plateau over time. As B and T cellsmature into effector cells, a subset of the naïve populations differentiates into B and T memory cells with the same antigenspecificities, as illustrated in Figure 42.16.A memory cell is an antigen-specific B or T lymphocyte that does not differentiate into effector cells during the primaryimmune response, but that can immediately become effector cells upon re-exposure to the same pathogen. During theprimary immune response, memory cells do not respond to antigens and do not contribute to host defenses. As the infectionis cleared and pathogenic stimuli subside, the effectors are no longer needed, and they undergo apoptosis. In contrast, thememory cells persist in the circulation.
If the pathogen is never encountered again during the individual’s lifetime, B and T memory cells will circulate for a fewyears or even several decades and will gradually die off, having never functioned as effector cells. However, if the host isre-exposed to the same pathogen type, circulating memory cells will immediately differentiate into plasma cells and CTLswithout input from APCs or TH cells. One reason the adaptive immune response is delayed is because it takes time for naïveB and T cells with the appropriate antigen specificities to be identified and activated. Upon reinfection, this step is skipped,and the result is a more rapid production of immune defenses. Memory B cells that differentiate into plasma cells output tensto hundreds-fold greater antibody amounts than were secreted during the primary response, as the graph in Figure 42.17illustrates. This rapid and dramatic antibody response may stop the infection before it can even become established, and theindividual may not realize they had been exposed.
In the primary response to infection, antibodies are secreted first from plasma cells. Upon re-exposureto the same pathogen, memory cells differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells that output a greater amount ofantibody for a longer period of time.Vaccination is based on the knowledge that exposure to noninfectious antigens, derived from known pathogens, generatesa mild primary immune response. The immune response to vaccination may not be perceived by the host as illness but stillconfers immune memory. When exposed to the corresponding pathogen to which an individual was vaccinated, the reactionis similar to a secondary exposure. Because each reinfection generates more memory cells and increased resistance to thepathogen, and because some memory cells die, certain vaccine courses involve one or more booster vaccinations to mimicrepeat exposures: for instance, tetanus boosters are necessary every ten years because the memory cells only live that long.Mucosal Immune MemoryA subset of T and B cells of the mucosal immune system differentiates into memory cells just as in the systemic immunesystem. Upon reinvasion of the same pathogen type, a pronounced immune response occurs at the mucosal site where theoriginal pathogen deposited, but a collective defense is also organized within interconnected or adjacent mucosal tissue. Forinstance, the immune memory of an infection in the oral cavity would also elicit a response in the pharynx if the oral cavitywas exposed to the same pathogen.
Primary Centers of the Immune SystemAlthough the immune system is characterized by circulating cells throughout the body, the regulation, maturation, andintercommunication of immune factors occur at specific sites. The blood circulates immune cells, proteins, and other factorsthrough the body. Approximately 0.1 percent of all cells in the blood are leukocytes, which encompass monocytes (theprecursor of macrophages) and lymphocytes. The majority of cells in the blood are erythrocytes (red blood cells). Lymph isa watery fluid that bathes tissues and organs with protective white blood cells and does not contain erythrocytes. Cells of theimmune system can travel between the distinct lymphatic and blood circulatory systems, which are separated by interstitialspace, by a process called extravasation (passing through to surrounding tissue).The cells of the immune system originate from hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow. Cytokines stimulate thesestem cells to differentiate into immune cells. B cell maturation occurs in the bone marrow, whereas naïve T cells transitfrom the bone marrow to the thymus for maturation. In the thymus, immature T cells that express TCRs complementary toself-antigens are destroyed. This process helps prevent autoimmune responses.On maturation, T and B lymphocytes circulate to various destinations. Lymph nodes scattered throughout the body, asillustrated in Figure 42.20, house large populations of T and B cells, dendritic cells, and macrophages. Lymph gathersantigens as it drains from tissues. These antigens then are filtered through lymph nodes before the lymph is returnedto circulation. APCs in the lymph nodes capture and process antigens and inform nearby lymphocytes about potentialpathogens.
(a) Lymphatic vessels carry a clear fluid called lymph throughout the body. The liquid enters (b) lymphnodes through afferent vessels. Lymph nodes are filled with lymphocytes that purge infecting cells. The lymph thenexits through efferent vessels.
The spleen houses B and T cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, and NK cells. The spleen, shown in Figure 42.21, is the sitewhere APCs that have trapped foreign particles in the blood can communicate with lymphocytes. Antibodies are synthesizedand secreted by activated plasma cells in the spleen, and the spleen filters foreign substances and antibody-complexedpathogens from the blood. Functionally, the spleen is to the blood as lymph nodes are to the lymph.
The spleen is similar to a lymph node but is much larger and filters blood instead of lymph. Blood entersthe spleen through arteries and exits through veins. The spleen contains two types of tissue: red pulp and whitepulp. Red pulp consists of cavities that store blood. Within the red pulp, damaged red blood cells are removed andreplaced by new ones. White pulp is rich in lymphocytes that remove antigen-coated bacteria from the blood.
AntibodiesBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Explain cross-reactivityDescribe the structure and function of antibodiesDiscuss antibody productionAn antibody, also known as an immunoglobulin (Ig), is a protein that is produced by plasma cells after stimulation byan antigen. Antibodies are the functional basis of humoral immunity. Antibodies occur in the blood, in gastric and mucussecretions, and in breast milk. Antibodies in these bodily fluids can bind pathogens and mark them for destruction byphagocytes before they can infect cells.Antibody StructureAn antibody molecule is comprised of four polypeptides: two identical heavy chains (large peptide units) that are partiallybound to each other in a “Y” formation, which are flanked by two identical light chains (small peptide units), as illustrated inFigure 42.22. Bonds between the cysteine amino acids in the antibody molecule attach the polypeptides to each other. Theareas where the antigen is recognized on the antibody are variable domains and the antibody base is composed of constantdomains.In germ-line B cells, the variable region of the light chain gene has 40 variable (V) and five joining (J) segments. An enzymecalled DNA recombinase randomly excises most of these segments out of the gene, and splices one V segment to one Jsegment. During RNA processing, all but one V and J segment are spliced out. Recombination and splicing may result inover 106 possible VJ combinations. As a result, each differentiated B cell in the human body typically has a unique variablechain. The constant domain, which does not bind antibody, is the same for all antibodies.
(a) As a germ-line B cell matures, an enzyme called DNA recombinase randomly excises V and Jsegments from the light chain gene. Splicing at the mRNA level results in further gene rearrangement. As a result, (b)each antibody has a unique variable region capable of binding a different antigen.Similar to TCRs and BCRs, antibody diversity is produced by the mutation and recombination of approximately 300different gene segments encoding the light and heavy chain variable domains in precursor cells that are destined to becomeB cells. The variable domains from the heavy and light chains interact to form the binding site through which an antibodycan bind a specific epitope on an antigen. The numbers of repeated constant domains in Ig classes are the same for allantibodies corresponding to a specific class. Antibodies are structurally similar to the extracellular component of the BCRs,and B cell maturation to plasma cells can be visualized in simple terms as the cell acquires the ability to secrete theextracellular portion of its BCR in large quantities.Antibody ClassesAntibodies can be divided into five classes—IgM, IgG, IgA, IgD, IgE—based on their physiochemical, structural, andimmunological properties. IgGs, which make up about 80 percent of all antibodies, have heavy chains that consist of onevariable domain and three identical constant domains. IgA and IgD also have three constant domains per heavy chain,whereas IgM and IgE each have four constant domains per heavy chain. The variable domain determines binding specificityand the constant domain of the heavy chain determines the immunological mechanism of action of the correspondingantibody class. It is possible for two antibodies to have the same binding specificities but be in different classes and,therefore, to be involved in different functions.
After an adaptive defense is produced against a pathogen, typically plasma cells first secrete IgM into the blood. BCRs onnaïve B cells are of the IgM class and occasionally IgD class. IgM molecules make up approximately ten percent of allantibodies. Prior to antibody secretion, plasma cells assemble IgM molecules into pentamers (five individual antibodies)linked by a joining (J) chain, as shown in Figure 42.23. The pentamer arrangement means that these macromolecules canbind ten identical antigens. However, IgM molecules released early in the adaptive immune response do not bind to antigensas stably as IgGs, which are one of the possible types of antibodies secreted in large quantities upon re-exposure to the samepathogen. Figure 42.23 summarizes the properties of immunoglobulins and illustrates their basic structures.
Immunoglobulins have different functions, but all are composed of light and heavy chains that form aY-shaped structure.IgAs populate the saliva, tears, breast milk, and mucus secretions of the gastrointestinal, respiratory, and genitourinarytracts. Collectively, these bodily fluids coat and protect the extensive mucosa (4000 square feet in humans). The totalnumber of IgA molecules in these bodily secretions is greater than the number of IgG molecules in the blood serum. A smallamount of IgA is also secreted into the serum in monomeric form. Conversely, some IgM is secreted into bodily fluids ofthe mucosa. Similar to IgM, IgA molecules are secreted as polymeric structures linked with a J chain. However, IgAs aresecreted mostly as dimeric molecules, not pentamers.IgE is present in the serum in small quantities and is best characterized in its role as an allergy mediator. IgD is also presentin small quantities. Similar to IgM, BCRs of the IgD class are found on the surface of naïve B cells. This class supportsantigen recognition and maturation of B cells to plasma cells.Antibody FunctionsDifferentiated plasma cells are crucial players in the humoral response, and the antibodies they secrete are particularlysignificant against extracellular pathogens and toxins. Antibodies circulate freely and act independently of plasma cells.Antibodies can be transferred from one individual to another to temporarily protect against infectious disease. For instance,a person who has recently produced a successful immune response against a particular disease agent can donate blood toa nonimmune recipient and confer temporary immunity through antibodies in the donor’s blood serum. This phenomenonis called passive immunity; it also occurs naturally during breastfeeding, which makes breastfed infants highly resistant toinfections during the first few months of life.Antibodies coat extracellular pathogens and neutralize them, as illustrated in Figure 42.24, by blocking key sites on thepathogen that enhance their infectivity (such as receptors that “dock” pathogens on host cells). Antibody neutralization canprevent pathogens from entering and infecting host cells, as opposed to the CTL-mediated approach of killing cells that arealready infected to prevent progression of an established infection. The neutralized antibody-coated pathogens can then befiltered by the spleen and eliminated in urine or feces.
Antibodies may inhibit infection by (a) preventing the antigen from binding its target, (b) tagging apathogen for destruction by macrophages or neutrophils, or (c) activating the complement cascade.Antibodies also mark pathogens for destruction by phagocytic cells, such as macrophages or neutrophils, becausephagocytic cells are highly attracted to macromolecules complexed with antibodies. Phagocytic enhancement by antibodiesis called opsonization. In a process called complement fixation, IgM and IgG in serum bind to antigens and provide dockingsites onto which sequential complement proteins can bind. The combination of antibodies and complement enhancesopsonization even further and promotes rapid clearing of pathogens.Affinity, Avidity, and Cross ReactivityNot all antibodies bind with the same strength, specificity, and stability. In fact, antibodies exhibit different affinities(attraction) depending on the molecular complementarity between antigen and antibody molecules, as illustrated in Figure42.25. An antibody with a higher affinity for a particular antigen would bind more strongly and stably, and thus would beexpected to present a more challenging defense against the pathogen corresponding to the specific antigen.
(a) Affinity refers to the strength of single interaction between antigen and antibody, while avidity refersto the strength of all interactions combined. (b) An antibody may cross react with different epitopes.The term avidity describes binding by antibody classes that are secreted as joined, multivalent structures (such as IgMand IgA). Although avidity measures the strength of binding, just as affinity does, the avidity is not simply the sum of theaffinities of the antibodies in a multimeric structure. The avidity depends on the number of identical binding sites on theantigen being detected, as well as other physical and chemical factors. Typically, multimeric antibodies, such as pentamericIgM, are classified as having lower affinity than monomeric antibodies, but high avidity. Essentially, the fact that multimericantibodies can bind many antigens simultaneously balances their slightly lower binding strength for each antibody/antigeninteraction.Antibodies secreted after binding to one epitope on an antigen may exhibit cross reactivity for the same or similar epitopeson different antigens. Because an epitope corresponds to such a small region (the surface area of about four to six aminoacids), it is possible for different macromolecules to exhibit the same molecular identities and orientations over shortregions. Cross reactivity describes when an antibody binds not to the antigen that elicited its synthesis and secretion, butto a different antigen.Cross reactivity can be beneficial if an individual develops immunity to several related pathogens despite having only beenexposed to or vaccinated against one of them. For instance, antibody cross reactivity may occur against the similar surfacestructures of various Gram-negative bacteria. Conversely, antibodies raised against pathogenic molecular components thatresemble self molecules may incorrectly mark host cells for destruction and cause autoimmune damage. Patients whodevelop systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) commonly exhibit antibodies that react with their own DNA. These antibodiesmay have been initially raised against the nucleic acid of microorganisms but later cross-reacted with self-antigens. Thisphenomenon is also called molecular mimicry.
Antibodies of the Mucosal Immune SystemAntibodies synthesized by the mucosal immune system include IgA and IgM. Activated B cells differentiate into mucosalplasma cells that synthesize and secrete dimeric IgA, and to a lesser extent, pentameric IgM. Secreted IgA is abundant intears, saliva, breast milk, and in secretions of the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts. Antibody secretion results in a localhumoral response at epithelial surfaces and prevents infection of the mucosa by binding and neutralizing pathogens.Disruptions in the Immune SystemBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Describe hypersensitivityDefine autoimmunityA functioning immune system is essential for survival, but even the sophisticated cellular and molecular defenses of themammalian immune response can be defeated by pathogens at virtually every step. In the competition between immuneprotection and pathogen evasion, pathogens have the advantage of more rapid evolution because of their shorter generationtime and other characteristics. For instance, Streptococcus pneumoniae (bacterium that cause pneumonia and meningitis)surrounds itself with a capsule that inhibits phagocytes from engulfing it and displaying antigens to the adaptive immunesystem. Staphylococcus aureus (bacterium that can cause skin infections, abscesses, and meningitis) synthesizes a toxincalled leukocidin that kills phagocytes after they engulf the bacterium. Other pathogens can also hinder the adaptive immunesystem. HIV infects TH cells via their CD4 surface molecules, gradually depleting the number of TH cells in the body;this inhibits the adaptive immune system’s capacity to generate sufficient responses to infection or tumors. As a result,HIV-infected individuals often suffer from infections that would not cause illness in people with healthy immune systemsbut which can cause devastating illness to immune-compromised individuals. Maladaptive responses of immune cells andmolecules themselves can also disrupt the proper functioning of the entire system, leading to host cell damage that couldbecome fatal.ImmunodeficiencyFailures, insufficiencies, or delays at any level of the immune response can allow pathogens or tumor cells to gain a footholdand replicate or proliferate to high enough levels that the immune system becomes overwhelmed. Immunodeficiencyis the failure, insufficiency, or delay in the response of the immune system, which may be acquired or inherited.Immunodeficiency can be acquired as a result of infection with certain pathogens (such as HIV), chemical exposure(including certain medical treatments), malnutrition, or possibly by extreme stress. For instance, radiation exposurecan destroy populations of lymphocytes and elevate an individual’s susceptibility to infections and cancer. Dozens ofgenetic disorders result in immunodeficiencies, including Severe Combined Immunodeficiency (SCID), Bare lymphocytesyndrome, and MHC II deficiencies. Rarely, primary immunodeficiencies that are present from birth may occur.Neutropenia is one form in which the immune system produces a below-average number of neutrophils, the body’s mostabundant phagocytes. As a result, bacterial infections may go unrestricted in the blood, causing serious complications.HypersensitivitiesMaladaptive immune responses toward harmless foreign substances or self antigens that occur after tissue sensitizationare termed hypersensitivities. The types of hypersensitivities include immediate, delayed, and autoimmunity. A largeproportion of the population is affected by one or more types of hypersensitivity.AllergiesThe immune reaction that results from immediate hypersensitivities in which an antibody-mediated immune responseoccurs within minutes of exposure to a harmless antigen is called an allergy. In the United States, 20 percent of thepopulation exhibits symptoms of allergy or asthma, whereas 55 percent test positive against one or more allergens. Uponinitial exposure to a potential allergen, an allergic individual synthesizes antibodies of the IgE class via the typical process ofAPCs presenting processed antigen to TH cells that stimulate B cells to produce IgE. This class of antibodies also mediatesthe immune response to parasitic worms. The constant domain of the IgE molecules interact with mast cells embeddedin connective tissues. This process primes, or sensitizes, the tissue. Upon subsequent exposure to the same allergen, IgEmolecules on mast cells bind the antigen via their variable domains and stimulate the mast cell to release the modified aminoacids histamine and serotonin; these chemical mediators then recruit eosinophils which mediate allergic responses. Figure42.26 shows an example of an allergic response to ragweed pollen. The effects of an allergic reaction range from mild symptoms like sneezing and itchy, watery eyes to more severe or even life-threatening reactions involving intensely itchywelts or hives, airway contraction with severe respiratory distress, and plummeting blood pressure. This extreme reactionis known as anaphylactic shock. If not treated with epinephrine to counter the blood pressure and breathing effects, thiscondition can be fatal.
On first exposure to an allergen, an IgE antibody is synthesized by plasma cells in response to aharmless antigen. The IgE molecules bind to mast cells, and on secondary exposure, the mast cells release histaminesand other modulators that affect the symptoms of allergy.
Delayed hypersensitivity is a cell-mediated immune response that takes approximately one to two days after secondaryexposure for a maximal reaction to be observed. This type of hypersensitivity involves the TH1 cytokine-mediatedinflammatory response and may manifest as local tissue lesions or contact dermatitis (rash or skin irritation). Delayedhypersensitivity occurs in some individuals in response to contact with certain types of jewelry or cosmetics. Delayedhypersensitivity facilitates the immune response to poison ivy and is also the reason why the skin test for tuberculosis resultsin a small region of inflammation on individuals who were previously exposed to Mycobacterium tuberculosis. That is alsowhy cortisone is used to treat such responses: it will inhibit cytokine production.AutoimmunityAutoimmunity is a type of hypersensitivity to self antigens that affects approximately five percent of the population. Mosttypes of autoimmunity involve the humoral immune response. Antibodies that inappropriately mark self components asforeign are termed autoantibodies. In patients with the autoimmune disease myasthenia gravis, muscle cell receptors thatinduce contraction in response to acetylcholine are targeted by antibodies. The result is muscle weakness that may include marked difficultly with fine and/or gross motor functions. In systemic lupus erythematosus, a diffuse autoantibody responseto the individual’s own DNA and proteins results in various systemic diseases. As illustrated in Figure 42.27, systemiclupus erythematosus may affect the heart, joints, lungs, skin, kidneys, central nervous system, or other tissues, causing tissuedamage via antibody binding, complement recruitment, lysis, and inflammation.
Systemic lupus erythematosus is characterized by autoimmunity to the individual’s own DNA and/orproteins, which leads to varied dysfunction of the organs. Autoimmunity can develop with time, and its causes may be rooted in molecular mimicry. Antibodies and TCRs may bindself antigens that are structurally similar to pathogen antigens, which the immune receptors first raised. As an example,infection with Streptococcus pyogenes (bacterium that causes strep throat) may generate antibodies or T cells that reactwith heart muscle, which has a similar structure to the surface of S. pyogenes. These antibodies can damage heart musclewith autoimmune attacks, leading to rheumatic fever. Insulin-dependent (Type 1) diabetes mellitus arises from a destructiveinflammatory TH1 response against insulin-producing cells of the pancreas. Patients with this autoimmunity must beinjected with insulin that originates from other sources.