The (a) deer tick carries the bacterium that produces Lyme disease in humans, often evident in (b) asymptomatic bull’s eye rash. The (c) white-footed mouse is one well-known host to deer ticks carrying the Lymedisease bacterium. 
Why study ecology? Perhaps you are interested in learning about the natural world and how living things have adapted tothe physical conditions of their environment. Or, perhaps you’re a future physician seeking to understand the connectionbetween human health and ecology.Humans are a part of the ecological landscape, and human health is one important part of human interaction with ourphysical and living environment. Lyme disease, for instance, serves as one modern-day example of the connection betweenour health and the natural world (Figure 44.1). More formally known as Lyme borreliosis, Lyme disease is a bacterialinfection that can be transmitted to humans when they are bitten by the deer tick (Ixodes scapularis), which is the primaryvector for this disease. However, not all deer ticks carry the bacteria that will cause Lyme disease in humans, and I.scapularis can have other hosts besides deer. In fact, it turns out that the probability of infection depends on the type of hostupon which the tick develops: a higher proportion of ticks that live on white-footed mice carry the bacterium than do ticksthat live on deer. Knowledge about the environments and population densities in which the host species is abundant wouldhelp a physician or an epidemiologist better understand how Lyme disease is transmitted and how its incidence could bereduced.
he Scope of EcologyBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Define ecology and the four levels of ecological researchDescribe examples of the ways in which ecology requires the integration of different scientific disciplinesDistinguish between abiotic and biotic components of the environmentRecognize the relationship between abiotic and biotic components of the environmentEcology is the study of the interactions of living organisms with their environment. One core goal of ecology is tounderstand the distribution and abundance of living things in the physical environment. Attainment of this goal requires theintegration of scientific disciplines inside and outside of biology, such as biochemistry, physiology, evolution, biodiversity,molecular biology, geology, and climatology. Some ecological research also applies aspects of chemistry and physics, andit frequently uses mathematical models.
Levels of Ecological StudyWhen a discipline such as biology is studied, it is often helpful to subdivide it into smaller, related areas. For instance, cellbiologists interested in cell signaling need to understand the chemistry of the signal molecules (which are usually proteins)as well as the result of cell signaling. Ecologists interested in the factors that influence the survival of an endangered speciesmight use mathematical models to predict how current conservation efforts affect endangered organisms. To produce asound set of management options, a conservation biologist needs to collect accurate data, including current population size,factors affecting reproduction (like physiology and behavior), habitat requirements (such as plants and soils), and potentialhuman influences on the endangered population and its habitat (which might be derived through studies in sociologyand urban ecology). Within the discipline of ecology, researchers work at four specific levels, sometimes discretely andsometimes with overlap: organism, population, community, and ecosystem.
Ecologists study within several biological levels of organization.
Organismal EcologyResearchers studying ecology at the organismal level are interested in the adaptations that enable individuals to live inspecific habitats. These adaptations can be morphological, physiological, and behavioral. For instance, the Karner bluebutterfly (Lycaeides melissa samuelis) (Figure 44.3) is considered a specialist because the females preferentially oviposit(that is, lay eggs) on wild lupine. This preferential adaptation means that the Karner blue butterfly is highly dependent onthe presence of wild lupine plants for its continued survival.
The Karner blue butterfly (Lycaeides melissa samuelis) is a rare butterfly that lives only in open areaswith few trees or shrubs, such as pine barrens and oak savannas. It can only lay its eggs on lupine plants.
After hatching, the larval caterpillars emerge and spend four to six weeks feeding solely on wild lupine (Figure 44.4). Thecaterpillars pupate (undergo metamorphosis) and emerge as butterflies after about four weeks. The adult butterflies feedon the nectar of flowers of wild lupine and other plant species. A researcher interested in studying Karner blue butterfliesat the organismal level might, in addition to asking questions about egg laying, ask questions about the butterflies’preferred temperature (a physiological question) or the behavior of the caterpillars when they are at different larval stages(a behavioral question).
The wild lupine (Lupinus perennis) is the host plant for the Karner blue butterfly.
Population EcologyA population is a group of interbreeding organisms that are members of the same species living in the same area at thesame time. (Organisms that are all members of the same species are called conspecifics.) A population is identified, inpart, by where it lives, and its area of population may have natural or artificial boundaries: natural boundaries might berivers, mountains, or deserts, while examples of artificial boundaries include mowed grass, manmade structures, or roads.The study of population ecology focuses on the number of individuals in an area and how and why population size changesover time. Population ecologists are particularly interested in counting the Karner blue butterfly, for example, becauseit is classified as federally endangered. However, the distribution and density of this species is highly influenced by thedistribution and abundance of wild lupine. Researchers might ask questions about the factors leading to the decline ofwild lupine and how these affect Karner blue butterflies. For example, ecologists know that wild lupine thrives in openareas where trees and shrubs are largely absent. In natural settings, intermittent wildfires regularly remove trees and shrubs,helping to maintain the open areas that wild lupine requires. Mathematical models can be used to understand how wildfiresuppression by humans has led to the decline of this important plant for the Karner blue butterfly.Community EcologyA biological community consists of the different species within an area, typically a three-dimensional space, and theinteractions within and among these species. Community ecologists are interested in the processes driving these interactionsand their consequences. Questions about conspecific interactions often focus on competition among members of the samespecies for a limited resource. Ecologists also study interactions among various species; members of different species arecalled heterospecifics. Examples of heterospecific interactions include predation, parasitism, herbivory, competition, andpollination. These interactions can have regulating effects on population sizes and can impact ecological and evolutionaryprocesses affecting diversity.For example, Karner blue butterfly larvae form mutualistic relationships with ants. Mutualism is a form of a longtermrelationship that has coevolved between two species and from which each species benefits. For mutualism toexist between individual organisms, each species must receive some benefit from the other as a consequence of therelationship. Researchers have shown that there is an increase in the probability of survival when Karner blue butterflylarvae (caterpillars) are tended by ants. This might be because the larvae spend less time in each life stage when tendedby ants, which provides an advantage for the larvae. Meanwhile, the Karner blue butterfly larvae secrete a carbohydraterichsubstance that is an important energy source for the ants. Both the Karner blue larvae and the ants benefit from theirinteraction.
Ecosystem EcologyEcosystem ecology is an extension of organismal, population, and community ecology. The ecosystem is composed of allthe biotic components (living things) in an area along with the abiotic components (non-living things) of that area. Someof the abiotic components include air, water, and soil. Ecosystem biologists ask questions about how nutrients and energyare stored and how they move among organisms and the surrounding atmosphere, soil, and water.The Karner blue butterflies and the wild lupine live in an oak-pine barren habitat. This habitat is characterized by naturaldisturbance and nutrient-poor soils that are low in nitrogen. The availability of nutrients is an important factor in thedistribution of the plants that live in this habitat. Researchers interested in ecosystem ecology could ask questions about theimportance of limited resources and the movement of resources, such as nutrients, though the biotic and abiotic portions ofthe ecosystem.
BiogeographyBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Define biogeographyList and describe abiotic factors that affect the global distribution of plant and animal speciesCompare the impact of abiotic forces on aquatic and terrestrial environmentsSummarize the affect of abiotic factors on net primary productivityMany forces influence the communities of living organisms present in different parts of the biosphere (all of the parts ofEarth inhabited by life). The biosphere extends into the atmosphere (several kilometers above Earth) and into the depthsof the oceans. Despite its apparent vastness to an individual human, the biosphere occupies only a minute space whencompared to the known universe. Many abiotic forces influence where life can exist and the types of organisms found indifferent parts of the biosphere. The abiotic factors influence the distribution of biomes: large areas of land with similarclimate, flora, and fauna.BiogeographyBiogeography is the study of the geographic distribution of living things and the abiotic factors that affect their distribution.Abiotic factors such as temperature and rainfall vary based mainly on latitude and elevation. As these abiotic factors change,the composition of plant and animal communities also changes. For example, if you were to begin a journey at the equatorand walk north, you would notice gradual changes in plant communities. At the beginning of your journey, you would seetropical wet forests with broad-leaved evergreen trees, which are characteristic of plant communities found near the equator.As you continued to travel north, you would see these broad-leaved evergreen plants eventually give rise to seasonally dryforests with scattered trees. You would also begin to notice changes in temperature and moisture. At about 30 degrees north,these forests would give way to deserts, which are characterized by low precipitation.Moving farther north, you would see that deserts are replaced by grasslands or prairies. Eventually, grasslands are replacedby deciduous temperate forests. These deciduous forests give way to the boreal forests found in the subarctic, the area southof the Arctic Circle. Finally, you would reach the Arctic tundra, which is found at the most northern latitudes. This trek northreveals gradual changes in both climate and the types of organisms that have adapted to environmental factors associatedwith ecosystems found at different latitudes. However, different ecosystems exist at the same latitude due in part to abioticfactors such as jet streams, the Gulf Stream, and ocean currents. If you were to hike up a mountain, the changes you wouldsee in the vegetation would parallel those as you move to higher latitudes.Ecologists who study biogeography examine patterns of species distribution. No species exists everywhere; for example,the Venus flytrap is endemic to a small area in North and South Carolina. An endemic species is one which is naturallyfound only in a specific geographic area that is usually restricted in size. Other species are generalists: species which live ina wide variety of geographic areas; the raccoon, for example, is native to most of North and Central America.Species distribution patterns are based on biotic and abiotic factors and their influences during the very long periods of timerequired for species evolution; therefore, early studies of biogeography were closely linked to the emergence of evolutionarythinking in the eighteenth century. Some of the most distinctive assemblages of plants and animals occur in regions thathave been physically separated for millions of years by geographic barriers. Biologists estimate that Australia, for example,has between 600,000 and 700,000 species of plants and animals. Approximately 3/4 of living plant and mammal species areendemic species found solely in Australia (Figure 44.6ab).
Australia is home to many endemic species. The (a) wallaby (Wallabia bicolor), a medium-sized memberof the kangaroo family, is a pouched mammal, or marsupial. The (b) echidna (Tachyglossus aculeatus) is an egg-layingmammal.
Sometimes ecologists discover unique patterns of species distribution by determining where species are not found. Hawaii,for example, has no native land species of reptiles or amphibians, and has only one native terrestrial mammal, the hoary bat.Most of New Guinea, as another example, lacks placental mammals.
Plants can be endemic or generalists: endemic plants are found only on specific regions of the Earth, while generalistsare found on many regions. Isolated land masses—such as Australia, Hawaii, and Madagascar—often have large numbersof endemic plant species. Some of these plants are endangered due to human activity. The forest gardenia (Gardeniabrighamii), for instance, is endemic to Hawaii; only an estimated 15–20 trees are thought to exist.
Listed as federally endangered, the forest gardenia is a small tree with distinctive flowers. It is found onlyin five of the Hawaiian Islands in small populations consisting of a few individual specimens.
Energy SourcesEnergy from the sun is captured by green plants, algae, cyanobacteria, and photosynthetic protists. These organisms convertsolar energy into the chemical energy needed by all living things. Light availability can be an important force directlyaffecting the evolution of adaptations in photosynthesizers. For instance, plants in the understory of a temperate forest areshaded when the trees above them in the canopy completely leaf out in the late spring. Not surprisingly, understory plantshave adaptations to successfully capture available light. One such adaptation is the rapid growth of spring ephemeral plantssuch as the spring beauty (Figure 44.8). These spring flowers achieve much of their growth and finish their life cycle(reproduce) early in the season before the trees in the canopy develop leaves.
The spring beauty is an ephemeral spring plant that flowers early in the spring to avoid competing withlarger forest trees for sunlight.
In aquatic ecosystems, the availability of light may be limited because sunlight is absorbed by water, plants, suspendedparticles, and resident microorganisms. Toward the bottom of a lake, pond, or ocean, there is a zone that light cannotreach. Photosynthesis cannot take place there and, as a result, a number of adaptations have evolved that enable livingthings to survive without light. For instance, aquatic plants have photosynthetic tissue near the surface of the water; forexample, think of the broad, floating leaves of a water lily—water lilies cannot survive without light. In environments suchas hydrothermal vents, some bacteria extract energy from inorganic chemicals because there is no light for photosynthesis.The availability of nutrients in aquatic systems is also an important aspect of energy or photosynthesis. Many organismssink to the bottom of the ocean when they die in the open water; when this occurs, the energy found in that living organismis sequestered for some time unless ocean upwelling occurs. Ocean upwelling is the rising of deep ocean waters thatoccurs when prevailing winds blow along surface waters near a coastline (Figure 44.9). As the wind pushes ocean waters offshore, water from the bottom of the ocean moves up to replace this water. As a result, the nutrients once contained indead organisms become available for reuse by other living organisms.
Ocean upwelling is an important process that recycles nutrients and energy in the ocean. As wind (greenarrows) pushes offshore, it causes water from the ocean bottom (red arrows) to move to the surface, bringing upnutrients from the ocean depths.In freshwater systems, the recycling of nutrients occurs in response to air temperature changes. The nutrients at the bottomof lakes are recycled twice each year: in the spring and fall turnover. The spring and fall turnover is a seasonal process thatrecycles nutrients and oxygen from the bottom of a freshwater ecosystem to the top of a body of water (Figure 44.10). Theseturnovers are caused by the formation of a thermocline: a layer of water with a temperature that is significantly differentfrom that of the surrounding layers. In wintertime, the surface of lakes found in many northern regions is frozen. However,the water under the ice is slightly warmer, and the water at the bottom of the lake is warmer yet at 4 °C to 5 °C (39.2 °F to41 °F). Water is densest at 4 °C; therefore, the deepest water is also the densest. The deepest water is oxygen poor becausethe decomposition of organic material at the bottom of the lake uses up available oxygen that cannot be replaced by meansof oxygen diffusion into the water due to the surface ice layer.
In springtime, air temperatures increase and surface ice melts. When the temperature of the surface water begins to reach 4°C, the water becomes heavier and sinks to the bottom. The water at the bottom of the lake is then displaced by the heaviersurface water and, thus, rises to the top. As that water rises to the top, the sediments and nutrients from the lake bottom arebrought along with it. During the summer months, the lake water stratifies, or forms layers, with the warmest water at thelake surface.As air temperatures drop in the fall, the temperature of the lake water cools to 4 °C; therefore, this causes fall turnover as theheavy cold water sinks and displaces the water at the bottom. The oxygen-rich water at the surface of the lake then movesto the bottom of the lake, while the nutrients at the bottom of the lake rise to the surface (Figure 44.10). During the winter,the oxygen at the bottom of the lake is used by decomposers and other organisms requiring oxygen, such as fish.TemperatureTemperature affects the physiology of living things as well as the density and state of water. Temperature exerts animportant influence on living things because few living things can survive at temperatures below 0 °C (32 °F) due tometabolic constraints. It is also rare for living things to survive at temperatures exceeding 45 °C (113 °F); this is areflection of evolutionary response to typical temperatures. Enzymes are most efficient within a narrow and specific rangeof temperatures; enzyme degradation can occur at higher temperatures. Therefore, organisms either must maintain aninternal temperature or they must inhabit an environment that will keep the body within a temperature range that supportsmetabolism. Some animals have adapted to enable their bodies to survive significant temperature fluctuations, such as seenin hibernation or reptilian torpor. Similarly, some bacteria are adapted to surviving in extremely hot temperatures such asgeysers. Such bacteria are examples of extremophiles: organisms that thrive in extreme environments.Temperature can limit the distribution of living things. Animals faced with temperature fluctuations may respond withadaptations, such as migration, in order to survive. Migration, the movement from one place to another, is an adaptationfound in many animals, including many that inhabit seasonally cold climates. Migration solves problems related totemperature, locating food, and finding a mate. In migration, for instance, the Arctic Tern (Sterna paradisaea) makes a40,000 km (24,000 mi) round trip flight each year between its feeding grounds in the southern hemisphere and its breedinggrounds in the Arctic Ocean. Monarch butterflies (Danaus plexippus) live in the eastern United States in the warmer monthsand migrate to Mexico and the southern United States in the wintertime. Some species of mammals also make migratoryforays. Reindeer (Rangifer tarandus) travel about 5,000 km (3,100 mi) each year to find food. Amphibians and reptilesare more limited in their distribution because they lack migratory ability. Not all animals that can migrate do so: migrationcarries risk and comes at a high energy cost.
Some animals hibernate or estivate to survive hostile temperatures. Hibernation enables animals to survive cold conditions,and estivation allows animals to survive the hostile conditions of a hot, dry climate. Animals that hibernate or estivateenter a state known as torpor: a condition in which their metabolic rate is significantly lowered. This enables the animal towait until its environment better supports its survival. Some amphibians, such as the wood frog (Rana sylvatica), have anantifreeze-like chemical in their cells, which retains the cells’ integrity and prevents them from bursting.WaterWater is required by all living things because it is critical for cellular processes. Since terrestrial organisms lose water to theenvironment by simple diffusion, they have evolved many adaptations to retain water.• Plants have a number of interesting features on their leaves, such as leaf hairs and a waxy cuticle, that serve to decreasethe rate of water loss via transpiration.• Freshwater organisms are surrounded by water and are constantly in danger of having water rush into their cellsbecause of osmosis. Many adaptations of organisms living in freshwater environments have evolved to ensure thatsolute concentrations in their bodies remain within appropriate levels. One such adaptation is the excretion of diluteurine.• Marine organisms are surrounded by water with a higher solute concentration than the organism and, thus, are indanger of losing water to the environment because of osmosis. These organisms have morphological and physiologicaladaptations to retain water and release solutes into the environment. For example, Marine iguanas (Amblyrhynchuscristatus), sneeze out water vapor that is high in salt in order to maintain solute concentrations within an acceptablerange while swimming in the ocean and eating marine plants.Inorganic Nutrients and SoilInorganic nutrients, such as nitrogen and phosphorus, are important in the distribution and the abundance of living things.Plants obtain these inorganic nutrients from the soil when water moves into the plant through the roots. Therefore, soilstructure (particle size of soil components), soil pH, and soil nutrient content play an important role in the distribution ofplants. Animals obtain inorganic nutrients from the food they consume. Therefore, animal distributions are related to thedistribution of what they eat. In some cases, animals will follow their food resource as it moves through the environment.Other Aquatic FactorsSome abiotic factors, such as oxygen, are important in aquatic ecosystems as well as terrestrial environments. Terrestrialanimals obtain oxygen from the air they breathe. Oxygen availability can be an issue for organisms living at very highelevations, however, where there are fewer molecules of oxygen in the air. In aquatic systems, the concentration of dissolvedoxygen is related to water temperature and the speed at which the water moves. Cold water has more dissolved oxygen thanwarmer water. In addition, salinity, current, and tide can be important abiotic factors in aquatic ecosystems.Other Terrestrial FactorsWind can be an important abiotic factor because it influences the rate of evaporation and transpiration. The physical forceof wind is also important because it can move soil, water, or other abiotic factors, as well as an ecosystem’s organisms.Fire is another terrestrial factor that can be an important agent of disturbance in terrestrial ecosystems. Some organisms areadapted to fire and, thus, require the high heat associated with fire to complete a part of their life cycle. For example, thejack pine—a coniferous tree—requires heat from fire for its seed cones to open (Figure 44.11). Through the burning of pineneedles, fire adds nitrogen to the soil and limits competition by destroying undergrowth.
The mature cones of the jack pine (Pinus banksiana) open only when exposed to high temperatures,such as during a forest fire. A fire is likely to kill most vegetation, so a seedling that germinates after a fire is more likelyto receive ample sunlight than one that germinates under normal conditions.
Abiotic Factors Influencing Plant GrowthTemperature and moisture are important influences on plant production (primary productivity) and the amount of organicmatter available as food (net primary productivity). Net primary productivity is an estimation of all of the organicmatter available as food; it is calculated as the total amount of carbon fixed per year minus the amount that is oxidizedduring cellular respiration. In terrestrial environments, net primary productivity is estimated by measuring the abovegroundbiomass per unit area, which is the total mass of living plants, excluding roots. This means that a large percentage of plantbiomass which exists underground is not included in this measurement. Net primary productivity is an important variablewhen considering differences in biomes. Very productive biomes have a high level of aboveground biomass.Annual biomass production is directly related to the abiotic components of the environment. Environments with the greatestamount of biomass have conditions in which photosynthesis, plant growth, and the resulting net primary productivity areoptimized. The climate of these areas is warm and wet. Photosynthesis can proceed at a high rate, enzymes can workmost efficiently, and stomata can remain open without the risk of excessive transpiration; together, these factors lead to themaximal amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) moving into the plant, resulting in high biomass production. The abovegroundbiomass produces several important resources for other living things, including habitat and food. Conversely, dry and coldenvironments have lower photosynthetic rates and therefore less biomass. The animal communities living there will also beaffected by the decrease in available food.Terrestrial BiomesBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Identify the two major abiotic factors that determine terrestrial biomesRecognize distinguishing characteristics of each of the eight major terrestrial biomesThe Earth’s biomes are categorized into two major groups: terrestrial and aquatic. Terrestrial biomes are based on land,while aquatic biomes include both ocean and freshwater biomes. The eight major terrestrial biomes on Earth are eachdistinguished by characteristic temperatures and amount of precipitation. Comparing the annual totals of precipitationand fluctuations in precipitation from one biome to another provides clues as to the importance of abiotic factors in thedistribution of biomes. Temperature variation on a daily and seasonal basis is also important for predicting the geographicdistribution of the biome and the vegetation type in the biome. The distribution of these biomes shows that the same biomecan occur in geographically distinct areas with similar climates.
Tropical Wet ForestTropical wet forests are also referred to as tropical rainforests. This biome is found in equatorial regions (Figure 44.12).The vegetation is characterized by plants with broad leaves that fall off throughout the year. Unlike the trees of deciduousforests, the trees in this biome do not have a seasonal loss of leaves associated with variations in temperature and sunlight;these forests are “evergreen” year-round.The temperature and sunlight profiles of tropical wet forests are very stable in comparison to that of other terrestrial biomes,with the temperatures ranging from 20 °C to 34 °C (68 °F to 93 °F). When one compares the annual temperature variationof tropical wet forests with that of other forest biomes, the lack of seasonal temperature variation in the tropical wet forestbecomes apparent. This lack of seasonality leads to year-round plant growth, rather than the seasonal (spring, summer, andfall) growth seen in other biomes. In contrast to other ecosystems, tropical ecosystems do not have long days and shortdays during the yearly cycle. Instead, a constant daily amount of sunlight (11–12 hrs per day) provides more solar radiation,thereby, a longer period of time for plant growth.The annual rainfall in tropical wet forests ranges from 125 to 660 cm (50–200 in) with some monthly variation. Whilesunlight and temperature remain fairly consistent, annual rainfall is highly variable. Tropical wet forests have wet months inwhich there can be more than 30 cm (11–12 in) of precipitation, as well as dry months in which there are fewer than 10 cm(3.5 in) of rainfall. However, the driest month of a tropical wet forest still exceeds the annual rainfall of some other biomes,such as deserts.Tropical wet forests have high net primary productivity because the annual temperatures and precipitation values inthese areas are ideal for plant growth. Therefore, the extensive biomass present in the tropical wet forest leads to plantcommunities with very high species diversities (Figure 44.13). Tropical wet forests have more species of trees than anyother biome; on average between 100 and 300 species of trees are present in a single hectare (2.5 acres) of South America.One way to visualize this is to compare the distinctive horizontal layers within the tropical wet forest biome. On the forestfloor is a sparse layer of plants and decaying plant matter. Above that is an understory of short shrubby foliage. A layer oftrees rises above this understory and is topped by a closed upper canopy—the uppermost overhead layer of branches andleaves. Some additional trees emerge through this closed upper canopy. These layers provide diverse and complex habitatsfor the variety of plants, fungi, animals, and other organisms within the tropical wet forests. For instance, epiphytes are plants that grow on other plants, which typically are not harmed. Epiphytes are found throughout tropical wet forest biomes.Many species of animals use the variety of plants and the complex structure of the tropical wet forests for food and shelter.Some organisms live several meters above ground and have adapted to this arboreal lifestyle.
Tropical wet forests, such as these forests of Madre de Dios, Peru, near the Amazon River, have highspecies diversity.
SavannasSavannas are grasslands with scattered trees, and they are located in Africa, South America, and northern Australia (Figure44.12). Savannas are hot, tropical areas with temperatures averaging from 24 °C to 29 °C (75 °F to 84 °F) and an annualrainfall of 10–40 cm (3.9–15.7 in). Savannas have an extensive dry season; for this reason, forest trees do not grow aswell as they do in the tropical wet forest (or other forest biomes). As a result, within the grasses and forbs (herbaceousflowering plants) that dominate the savanna, there are relatively few trees (Figure 44.14). Since fire is an important sourceof disturbance in this biome, plants have evolved well-developed root systems that allow them to quickly re-sprout after afire.
Savannas, like this one in Taita Hills Wildlife Sanctuary in Kenya, are dominated by grasses.
Subtropical DesertsSubtropical deserts exist between 15 ° and 30 ° north and south latitude and are centered on the Tropics of Cancer andCapricorn (Figure 44.12). This biome is very dry; in some years, evaporation exceeds precipitation. Subtropical hot desertscan have daytime soil surface temperatures above 60 °C (140 °F) and nighttime temperatures approaching 0 °C (32 °F). Incold deserts, temperatures can be as high as 25 °C and can drop below -30 °C (-22 °F). Subtropical deserts are characterizedby low annual precipitation of fewer than 30 cm (12 in) with little monthly variation and lack of predictability in rainfall.In some cases, the annual rainfall can be as low as 2 cm (0.8 in) in subtropical deserts located in central Australia (“theOutback”) and northern Africa.
The vegetation and low animal diversity of this biome is closely related to this low and unpredictable precipitation. Very drydeserts lack perennial vegetation that lives from one year to the next; instead, many plants are annuals that grow quickly andreproduce when rainfall does occur, then they die. Many other plants in these areas are characterized by having a number ofadaptations that conserve water, such as deep roots, reduced foliage, and water-storing stems (Figure 44.15). Seed plants inthe desert produce seeds that can be in dormancy for extended periods between rains. Adaptations in desert animals includenocturnal behavior and burrowing.
To reduce water loss, many desert plants have tiny leaves or no leaves at all. The leaves of ocotillo(Fouquieria splendens), shown here in the Sonora Desert near Gila Bend, Arizona, appear only after rainfall, and thenare shed.ChaparralThe chaparral is also called the scrub forest and is found in California, along the Mediterranean Sea, and along the southerncoast of Australia (Figure 44.12). The annual rainfall in this biome ranges from 65 cm to 75 cm (25.6–29.5 in), and themajority of the rain falls in the winter. Summers are very dry and many chaparral plants are dormant during the summertime.The chaparral vegetation, shown in Figure 44.16, is dominated by shrubs and is adapted to periodic fires, with some plantsproducing seeds that only germinate after a hot fire. The ashes left behind after a fire are rich in nutrients like nitrogen thatfertilize the soil and promote plant regrowth.
The chaparral is dominated by shrubs.
Temperate GrasslandsTemperate grasslands are found throughout central North America, where they are also known as prairies; they are alsoin Eurasia, where they are known as steppes (Figure 44.12). Temperate grasslands have pronounced annual fluctuationsin temperature with hot summers and cold winters. The annual temperature variation produces specific growing seasonsfor plants. Plant growth is possible when temperatures are warm enough to sustain plant growth and when ample water isavailable, which occurs in the spring, summer, and fall. During much of the winter, temperatures are low, and water, whichis stored in the form of ice, is not available for plant growth.Annual precipitation ranges from 25 cm to 75 cm (9.8–29.5 in). Because of relatively lower annual precipitation intemperate grasslands, there are few trees except for those found growing along rivers or streams. The dominant vegetationtends to consist of grasses and some prairies sustain populations of grazing animals Figure 44.17. The vegetation is verydense and the soils are fertile because the subsurface of the soil is packed with the roots and rhizomes (underground stems)of these grasses. The roots and rhizomes act to anchor plants into the ground and replenish the organic material (humus) inthe soil when they die and decay.
The American bison (Bison bison), more commonly called the buffalo, is a grazing mammal that oncepopulated American prairies in huge numbers.
Fires, mainly caused by lightning, are a natural disturbance in temperate grasslands. When fire is suppressed in temperategrasslands, the vegetation eventually converts to scrub and dense forests. Often, the restoration or management of temperategrasslands requires the use of controlled burns to suppress the growth of trees and maintain the grasses.Temperate ForestsTemperate forests are the most common biome in eastern North America, Western Europe, Eastern Asia, Chile, and NewZealand (Figure 44.12). This biome is found throughout mid-latitude regions. Temperatures range between -30 °C and 30°C (-22 °F to 86 °F) and drop to below freezing on an annual basis. These temperatures mean that temperate forests have defined growing seasons during the spring, summer, and early fall. Precipitation is relatively constant throughout the yearand ranges between 75 cm and 150 cm (29.5–59 in).Because of the moderate annual rainfall and temperatures, deciduous trees are the dominant plant in this biome (Figure44.18). Deciduous trees lose their leaves each fall and remain leafless in the winter. Thus, no photosynthesis occurs in thedeciduous trees during the dormant winter period. Each spring, new leaves appear as the temperature increases. Because ofthe dormant period, the net primary productivity of temperate forests is less than that of tropical wet forests. In addition,temperate forests show less diversity of tree species than tropical wet forest biomes.
Deciduous trees are the dominant plant in the temperate forest.
The trees of the temperate forests leaf out and shade much of the ground; however, this biome is more open than tropicalwet forests because trees in the temperate forests do not grow as tall as the trees in tropical wet forests. The soils of thetemperate forests are rich in inorganic and organic nutrients. This is due to the thick layer of leaf litter on forest floors. Asthis leaf litter decays, nutrients are returned to the soil. The leaf litter also protects soil from erosion, insulates the ground,and provides habitats for invertebrates (such as the pill bug or roly-poly, Armadillidium vulgare) and their predators, suchas the red-backed salamander (Plethodon cinereus).Boreal ForestsThe boreal forest, also known as taiga or coniferous forest, is found south of the Arctic Circle and across most of Canada,Alaska, Russia, and northern Europe (Figure 44.12). This biome has cold, dry winters and short, cool, wet summers. Theannual precipitation is from 40 cm to 100 cm (15.7–39 in) and usually takes the form of snow. Little evaporation occursbecause of the cold temperatures.The long and cold winters in the boreal forest have led to the predominance of cold-tolerant cone-bearing plants. Theseare evergreen coniferous trees like pines, spruce, and fir, which retain their needle-shaped leaves year-round. Evergreentrees can photosynthesize earlier in the spring than deciduous trees because less energy from the sun is required to warm aneedle-like leaf than a broad leaf. This benefits evergreen trees, which grow faster than deciduous trees in the boreal forest.In addition, soils in boreal forest regions tend to be acidic with little available nitrogen. Leaves are a nitrogen-rich structureand deciduous trees must produce a new set of these nitrogen-rich structures each year. Therefore, coniferous trees thatretain nitrogen-rich needles may have a competitive advantage over the broad-leafed deciduous trees.The net primary productivity of boreal forests is lower than that of temperate forests and tropical wet forests. Theaboveground biomass of boreal forests is high because these slow-growing tree species are long lived and accumulatestanding biomass over time. Plant species diversity is less than that seen in temperate forests and tropical wet forests. Borealforests lack the pronounced elements of the layered forest structure seen in tropical wet forests. The structure of a borealforest is often only a tree layer and a ground layer (Figure 44.19). When conifer needles are dropped, they decompose moreslowly than broad leaves; therefore, fewer nutrients are returned to the soil to fuel plant growth.
The boreal forest (taiga) has low lying plants and conifer trees.
Arctic TundraThe Arctic tundra lies north of the subarctic boreal forest and is located throughout the Arctic regions of the northernhemisphere (Figure 44.12). The average winter temperature is -34 °C (-34 °F) and the average summer temperature is from3 °C to 12 °C (37 °F–52 °F). Plants in the arctic tundra have a very short growing season of approximately 10–12 weeks.However, during this time, there are almost 24 hours of daylight and plant growth is rapid. The annual precipitation of theArctic tundra is very low with little annual variation in precipitation. And, as in the boreal forests, there is little evaporationdue to the cold temperatures.Plants in the Arctic tundra are generally low to the ground (Figure 44.20). There is little species diversity, low net primaryproductivity, and low aboveground biomass. The soils of the Arctic tundra may remain in a perennially frozen state referredto as permafrost. The permafrost makes it impossible for roots to penetrate deep into the soil and slows the decay of organicmatter, which inhibits the release of nutrients from organic matter. During the growing season, the ground of the Arctictundra can be completely covered with plants or lichens.
Low-growing plants such as shrub willow dominate the tundra landscape, shown here in the ArcticNational Wildlife Refuge.
Aquatic BiomesBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Describe the effects of abiotic factors on the composition of plant and animal communities in aquatic biomesCompare and contrast the characteristics of the ocean zonesSummarize the characteristics of standing water and flowing water freshwater biomesAbiotic Factors Influencing Aquatic BiomesLike terrestrial biomes, aquatic biomes are influenced by a series of abiotic factors. The aquatic medium—water— hasdifferent physical and chemical properties than air, however. Even if the water in a pond or other body of water is perfectlyclear (there are no suspended particles), water, on its own, absorbs light. As one descends into a deep body of water,there will eventually be a depth which the sunlight cannot reach. While there are some abiotic and biotic factors in aterrestrial ecosystem that might obscure light (like fog, dust, or insect swarms), usually these are not permanent featuresof the environment. The importance of light in aquatic biomes is central to the communities of organisms found in bothfreshwater and marine ecosystems. In freshwater systems, stratification due to differences in density is perhaps the mostcritical abiotic factor and is related to the energy aspects of light. The thermal properties of water (rates of heating andcooling) are significant to the function of marine systems and have major impacts on global climate and weather patterns.Marine systems are also influenced by large-scale physical water movements, such as currents; these are less important inmost freshwater lakes.The ocean is categorized by several areas or zones (Figure 44.21). All of the ocean’s open water is referred to as the pelagicrealm (or zone). The benthic realm (or zone) extends along the ocean bottom from the shoreline to the deepest parts ofthe ocean floor. Within the pelagic realm is the photic zone, which is the portion of the ocean that light can penetrate(approximately 200 m or 650 ft). At depths greater than 200 m, light cannot penetrate; thus, this is referred to as the aphoticzone. The majority of the ocean is aphotic and lacks sufficient light for photosynthesis. The deepest part of the ocean, theChallenger Deep (in the Mariana Trench, located in the western Pacific Ocean), is about 11,000 m (about 6.8 mi) deep. Togive some perspective on the depth of this trench, the ocean is, on average, 4267 m or 14,000 ft deep. These realms andzones are relevant to freshwater lakes as well.
Marine BiomesThe ocean is the largest marine biome. It is a continuous body of salt water that is relatively uniform in chemicalcomposition; it is a weak solution of mineral salts and decayed biological matter. Within the ocean, coral reefs are a secondkind of marine biome. Estuaries, coastal areas where salt water and fresh water mix, form a third unique marine biome.OceanThe physical diversity of the ocean is a significant influence on plants, animals, and other organisms. The ocean iscategorized into different zones based on how far light reaches into the water. Each zone has a distinct group of speciesadapted to the biotic and abiotic conditions particular to that zone.The intertidal zone, which is the zone between high and low tide, is the oceanic region that is closest to land (Figure44.21). Generally, most people think of this portion of the ocean as a sandy beach. In some cases, the intertidal zone isindeed a sandy beach, but it can also be rocky or muddy. The intertidal zone is an extremely variable environment becauseof tides. Organisms are exposed to air and sunlight at low tide and are underwater most of the time, especially during hightide. Therefore, living things that thrive in the intertidal zone are adapted to being dry for long periods of time. The shoreof the intertidal zone is also repeatedly struck by waves, and the organisms found there are adapted to withstand damagefrom the pounding action of the waves (Figure 44.22). The exoskeletons of shoreline crustaceans (such as the shore crab,Carcinus maenas) are tough and protect them from desiccation (drying out) and wave damage. Another consequence of thepounding waves is that few algae and plants establish themselves in the constantly moving rocks, sand, or mud.
Sea urchins, mussel shells, and starfish are often found in the intertidal zone, shown here in KachemakBay, Alaska.
The neritic zone (Figure 44.21) extends from the intertidal zone to depths of about 200 m (or 650 ft) at the edge of thecontinental shelf. Since light can penetrate this depth, photosynthesis can occur in the neritic zone. The water here containssilt and is well-oxygenated, low in pressure, and stable in temperature. Phytoplankton and floating Sargassum (a type offree-floating marine seaweed) provide a habitat for some sea life found in the neritic zone. Zooplankton, protists, smallfishes, and shrimp are found in the neritic zone and are the base of the food chain for most of the world’s fisheries.Beyond the neritic zone is the open ocean area known as the oceanic zone (Figure 44.21). Within the oceanic zone there isthermal stratification where warm and cold waters mix because of ocean currents. Abundant plankton serve as the base ofthe food chain for larger animals such as whales and dolphins. Nutrients are scarce and this is a relatively less productivepart of the marine biome. When photosynthetic organisms and the protists and animals that feed on them die, their bodiesfall to the bottom of the ocean where they remain; unlike freshwater lakes, the open ocean lacks a process for bringing theorganic nutrients back up to the surface. The majority of organisms in the aphotic zone include sea cucumbers (phylumEchinodermata) and other organisms that survive on the nutrients contained in the dead bodies of organisms in the photiczone.Beneath the pelagic zone is the benthic realm, the deepwater region beyond the continental shelf (Figure 44.21). The bottomof the benthic realm is comprised of sand, silt, and dead organisms. Temperature decreases, remaining above freezing, aswater depth increases. This is a nutrient-rich portion of the ocean because of the dead organisms that fall from the upperlayers of the ocean. Because of this high level of nutrients, a diversity of fungi, sponges, sea anemones, marine worms, seastars, fishes, and bacteria exist.The deepest part of the ocean is the abyssal zone, which is at depths of 4000 m or greater. The abyssal zone (Figure 44.21)is very cold and has very high pressure, high oxygen content, and low nutrient content. There are a variety of invertebratesand fishes found in this zone, but the abyssal zone does not have plants because of the lack of light. Hydrothermal vents arefound primarily in the abyssal zone; chemosynthetic bacteria utilize the hydrogen sulfide and other minerals emitted fromthe vents. These chemosynthetic bacteria use the hydrogen sulfide as an energy source and serve as the base of the foodchain found in the abyssal zone.Coral ReefsCoral reefs are ocean ridges formed by marine invertebrates living in warm shallow waters within the photic zone of theocean. They are found within 30˚ north and south of the equator. The Great Barrier Reef is a well-known reef systemlocated several miles off the northeastern coast of Australia. Other coral reef systems are fringing islands, which are directlyadjacent to land, or atolls, which are circular reef systems surrounding a former landmass that is now underwater. The coralorganisms (members of phylum Cnidaria) are colonies of saltwater polyps that secrete a calcium carbonate skeleton. Thesecalcium-rich skeletons slowly accumulate, forming the underwater reef (Figure 44.23). Corals found in shallower waters(at a depth of approximately 60 m or about 200 ft) have a mutualistic relationship with photosynthetic unicellular algae. Therelationship provides corals with the majority of the nutrition and the energy they require. The waters in which these coralslive are nutritionally poor and, without this mutualism, it would not be possible for large corals to grow. Some corals livingin deeper and colder water do not have a mutualistic relationship with algae; these corals attain energy and nutrients usingstinging cells on their tentacles to capture prey.
It is estimated that more than 4,000 fish species inhabit coral reefs. These fishes can feed on coral, the cryptofauna(invertebrates found within the calcium carbonate substrate of the coral reefs), or the seaweed and algae that are associatedwith the coral. In addition, some fish species inhabit the boundaries of a coral reef; these species include predators,herbivores, or planktivores. Predators are animal species that hunt and are carnivores or “flesh eaters.” Herbivores eat plantmaterial, and planktivores eat plankton.
Coral reefs are formed by the calcium carbonate skeletons of coral organisms, which are marineinvertebrates in the phylum Cnidaria.
Estuaries: Where the Ocean Meets Fresh WaterEstuaries are biomes that occur where a source of fresh water, such as a river, meets the ocean. Therefore, both fresh waterand salt water are found in the same vicinity; mixing results in a diluted (brackish) saltwater. Estuaries form protected areaswhere many of the young offspring of crustaceans, mollusks, and fish begin their lives. Salinity is a very important factorthat influences the organisms and the adaptations of the organisms found in estuaries. The salinity of estuaries varies andis based on the rate of flow of its freshwater sources. Once or twice a day, high tides bring salt water into the estuary. Lowtides occurring at the same frequency reverse the current of salt water.The short-term and rapid variation in salinity due to the mixing of fresh water and salt water is a difficult physiologicalchallenge for the plants and animals that inhabit estuaries. Many estuarine plant species are halophytes: plants that cantolerate salty conditions. Halophytic plants are adapted to deal with the salinity resulting from saltwater on their roots orfrom sea spray. In some halophytes, filters in the roots remove the salt from the water that the plant absorbs. Other plants areable to pump oxygen into their roots. Animals, such as mussels and clams (phylum Mollusca), have developed behavioraladaptations that expend a lot of energy to function in this rapidly changing environment. When these animals are exposed tolow salinity, they stop feeding, close their shells, and switch from aerobic respiration (in which they use gills) to anaerobicrespiration (a process that does not require oxygen). When high tide returns to the estuary, the salinity and oxygen contentof the water increases, and these animals open their shells, begin feeding, and return to aerobic respiration.Freshwater BiomesFreshwater biomes include lakes and ponds (standing water) as well as rivers and streams (flowing water). They also includewetlands, which will be discussed later. Humans rely on freshwater biomes to provide aquatic resources for drinking water,crop irrigation, sanitation, and industry. These various roles and human benefits are referred to as ecosystem services. Lakesand ponds are found in terrestrial landscapes and are, therefore, connected with abiotic and biotic factors influencing theseterrestrial biomes.
Lakes and PondsLakes and ponds can range in area from a few square meters to thousands of square kilometers. Temperature is an importantabiotic factor affecting living things found in lakes and ponds. In the summer, thermal stratification of lakes and pondsoccurs when the upper layer of water is warmed by the sun and does not mix with deeper, cooler water. Light canpenetrate within the photic zone of the lake or pond. Phytoplankton (algae and cyanobacteria) are found here and carry outphotosynthesis, providing the base of the food web of lakes and ponds. Zooplankton, such as rotifers and small crustaceans,consume these phytoplankton. At the bottom of lakes and ponds, bacteria in the aphotic zone break down dead organismsthat sink to the bottom.Nitrogen and phosphorus are important limiting nutrients in lakes and ponds. Because of this, they are determining factorsin the amount of phytoplankton growth in lakes and ponds. When there is a large input of nitrogen and phosphorus (fromsewage and runoff from fertilized lawns and farms, for example), the growth of algae skyrockets, resulting in a largeaccumulation of algae called an algal bloom. Algal blooms (Figure 44.24) can become so extensive that they reduce lightpenetration in water. As a result, the lake or pond becomes aphotic and photosynthetic plants cannot survive. When thealgae die and decompose, severe oxygen depletion of the water occurs. Fishes and other organisms that require oxygen arethen more likely to die, and resulting dead zones are found across the globe. Lake Erie and the Gulf of Mexico representfreshwater and marine habitats where phosphorus control and storm water runoff pose significant environmental challenges.
The uncontrolled growth of algae in this lake has resulted in an algal bloom.
Rivers and StreamsRivers and streams are continuously moving bodies of water that carry large amounts of water from the source, orheadwater, to a lake or ocean. The largest rivers include the Nile River in Africa, the Amazon River in South America, andthe Mississippi River in North America.Abiotic features of rivers and streams vary along the length of the river or stream. Streams begin at a point of origin referredto as source water. The source water is usually cold, low in nutrients, and clear. The channel (the width of the river orstream) is narrower than at any other place along the length of the river or stream. Because of this, the current is often fasterhere than at any other point of the river or stream.The fast-moving water results in minimal silt accumulation at the bottom of the river or stream; therefore, the water isclear. Photosynthesis here is mostly attributed to algae that are growing on rocks; the swift current inhibits the growth ofphytoplankton. An additional input of energy can come from leaves or other organic material that falls into the river orstream from trees and other plants that border the water. When the leaves decompose, the organic material and nutrientsin the leaves are returned to the water. Plants and animals have adapted to this fast-moving water. For instance, leeches(phylum Annelida) have elongated bodies and suckers on both ends. These suckers attach to the substrate, keeping the leechanchored in place. Freshwater trout species (phylum Chordata) are an important predator in these fast-moving rivers andstreams.As the river or stream flows away from the source, the width of the channel gradually widens and the current slows. Thisslow-moving water, caused by the gradient decrease and the volume increase as tributaries unite, has more sedimentation.Phytoplankton can also be suspended in slow-moving water. Therefore, the water will not be as clear as it is near the source.The water is also warmer. Worms (phylum Annelida) and insects (phylum Arthropoda) can be found burrowing into themud. The higher order predator vertebrates (phylum Chordata) include waterfowl, frogs, and fishes. These predators mustfind food in these slow moving, sometimes murky, waters and, unlike the trout in the waters at the source, these vertebrates may not be able to use vision as their primary sense to find food. Instead, they are more likely to use taste or chemical cuesto find prey.WetlandsWetlands are environments in which the soil is either permanently or periodically saturated with water. Wetlands aredifferent from lakes because wetlands are shallow bodies of water whereas lakes vary in depth. Emergent vegetationconsists of wetland plants that are rooted in the soil but have portions of leaves, stems, and flowers extending above thewater’s surface. There are several types of wetlands including marshes, swamps, bogs, mudflats, and salt marshes (Figure44.25). The three shared characteristics among these types—what makes them wetlands—are their hydrology, hydrophyticvegetation, and hydric soils.
Located in southern Florida, Everglades National Park is vast array of wetland environments, includingsawgrass marshes, cypress swamps, and estuarine mangrove forests. Here, a great egret walks among cypress trees.
Freshwater marshes and swamps are characterized by slow and steady water flow. Bogs develop in depressions where waterflow is low or nonexistent. Bogs usually occur in areas where there is a clay bottom with poor percolation. Percolation isthe movement of water through the pores in the soil or rocks. The water found in a bog is stagnant and oxygen depletedbecause the oxygen that is used during the decomposition of organic matter is not replaced. As the oxygen in the water isdepleted, decomposition slows. This leads to organic acids and other acids building up and lowering the pH of the water.At a lower pH, nitrogen becomes unavailable to plants. This creates a challenge for plants because nitrogen is an importantlimiting resource. Some types of bog plants (such as sundews, pitcher plants, and Venus flytraps) capture insects and extractthe nitrogen from their bodies. Bogs have low net primary productivity because the water found in bogs has low levels ofnitrogen and oxygen.Climate and the Effects of Global ClimateChangeBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Define global climate changeSummarize the effects of the Industrial Revolution on global atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrationDescribe three natural factors affecting long-term global climateList two or more greenhouse gases and describe their role in the greenhouse effectAll biomes are universally affected by global conditions, such as climate, that ultimately shape each biome’s environment.Scientists who study climate have noted a series of marked changes that have gradually become increasingly evidentduring the last sixty years. Global climate change is the term used to describe altered global weather patterns, including aworldwide increase in temperature, due largely to rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide.
Climate and WeatherA common misconception about global climate change is that a specific weather event occurring in a particular region (forexample, a very cool week in June in central Indiana) is evidence of global climate change. However, a cold week in June isa weather-related event and not a climate-related one. These misconceptions often arise because of confusion over the termsclimate and weather.Climate refers to the long-term, predictable atmospheric conditions of a specific area. The climate of a biome ischaracterized by having consistent temperature and annual rainfall ranges. Climate does not address the amount of rain thatfell on one particular day in a biome or the colder-than-average temperatures that occurred on one day. In contrast, weatherrefers to the conditions of the atmosphere during a short period of time. Weather forecasts are usually made for 48-hourcycles. Long-range weather forecasts are available but can be unreliable.To better understand the difference between climate and weather, imagine that you are planning an outdoor event in northernWisconsin. You would be thinking about climate when you plan the event in the summer rather than the winter becauseyou have long-term knowledge that any given Saturday in the months of May to August would be a better choice for anoutdoor event in Wisconsin than any given Saturday in January. However, you cannot determine the specific day that theevent should be held on because it is difficult to accurately predict the weather on a specific day. Climate can be considered“average” weather.Global Climate ChangeClimate change can be understood by approaching three areas of study:• current and past global climate change• causes of past and present-day global climate change• ancient and current results of climate changeIt is helpful to keep these three different aspects of climate change clearly separated when consuming media reports aboutglobal climate change. It is common for reports and discussions about global climate change to confuse the data showingthat Earth’s climate is changing with the factors that drive this climate change.Evidence for Global Climate ChangeSince scientists cannot go back in time to directly measure climatic variables, such as average temperature and precipitation,they must instead indirectly measure temperature. To do this, scientists rely on historical evidence of Earth’s past climate.Antarctic ice cores are a key example of such evidence. These ice cores are samples of polar ice obtained by means ofdrills that reach thousands of meters into ice sheets or high mountain glaciers. Viewing the ice cores is like travelingbackwards through time; the deeper the sample, the earlier the time period. Trapped within the ice are bubbles of air andother biological evidence that can reveal temperature and carbon dioxide data. Antarctic ice cores have been collectedand analyzed to indirectly estimate the temperature of the Earth over the past 400,000 years (Figure 44.26a). The 0 °Con this graph refers to the long-term average. Temperatures that are greater than 0 °C exceed Earth’s long-term averagetemperature. Conversely, temperatures that are less than 0 °C are less than Earth’s average temperature. This figure showsthat there have been periodic cycles of increasing and decreasing temperature.Before the late 1800s, the Earth has been as much as 9 °C cooler and about 3 °C warmer. Note that the graph in Figure44.26b shows that the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide has also risen and fallen in periodic cycles; note therelationship between carbon dioxide concentration and temperature. Figure 44.26b shows that carbon dioxide levels in theatmosphere have historically cycled between 180 and 300 parts per million (ppm) by volume.
Ice at the Russian Vostok station in East Antarctica was laid down over the course 420,000 years andreached a depth of over 3,000 m. By measuring the amount of CO2 trapped in the ice, scientists have determined pastatmospheric CO2 concentrations. Temperatures relative to modern day were determined from the amount of deuterium(an isotope of hydrogen) present.Figure 44.26a does not show the last 2,000 years with enough detail to compare the changes of Earth’s temperature duringthe last 400,000 years with the temperature change that has occurred in the more recent past. Two significant temperatureanomalies, or irregularities, have occurred in the last 2000 years. These are the Medieval Climate Anomaly (or the MedievalWarm Period) and the Little Ice Age. A third temperature anomaly aligns with the Industrial Era. The Medieval ClimateAnomaly occurred between 900 and 1300 AD. During this time period, many climate scientists think that slightly warmerweather conditions prevailed in many parts of the world; the higher-than-average temperature changes varied between 0.10°C and 0.20 °C above the norm. Although 0.10 °C does not seem large enough to produce any noticeable change, it did freeseas of ice. Because of this warming, the Vikings were able to colonize Greenland.The Little Ice Age was a cold period that occurred between 1550 AD and 1850 AD. During this time, a slight cooling ofa little less than 1 °C was observed in North America, Europe, and possibly other areas of the Earth. This 1 °C change inglobal temperature is a seemingly small deviation in temperature (as was observed during the Medieval Climate Anomaly);however, it also resulted in noticeable changes. Historical accounts reveal a time of exceptionally harsh winters with muchsnow and frost.The Industrial Revolution, which began around 1750, was characterized by changes in much of human society. Advancesin agriculture increased the food supply, which improved the standard of living for people in Europe and the United States.New technologies were invented and provided jobs and cheaper goods. These new technologies were powered using fossilfuels, especially coal. The Industrial Revolution starting in the early nineteenth century ushered in the beginning of theIndustrial Era. When a fossil fuel is burned, carbon dioxide is released.With the beginning of the Industrial Era, atmosphericcarbon dioxide began to rise.
The atmospheric concentration of CO2 has risen steadily since the beginning of industrialization.Current and Past Drivers of Global Climate ChangeSince it is not possible to go back in time to directly observe and measure climate, scientists use indirect evidence todetermine the drivers, or factors, that may be responsible for climate change. The indirect evidence includes data collectedusing ice cores, boreholes (a narrow shaft bored into the ground), tree rings, glacier lengths, pollen remains, and oceansediments. The data shows a correlation between the timing of temperature changes and drivers of climate change: beforethe Industrial Era (pre-1780), there were three drivers of climate change that were not related to human activity oratmospheric gases. The first of these is the Milankovitch cycles. The Milankovitch cycles describe the effects of slightchanges in the Earth’s orbit on Earth’s climate. The length of the Milankovitch cycles ranges between 19,000 and 100,000years. In other words, one could expect to see some predictable changes in the Earth’s climate associated with changes inthe Earth’s orbit at a minimum of every 19,000 years.The variation in the sun’s intensity is the second natural factor responsible for climate change. Solar intensity is the amountof solar power or energy the sun emits in a given amount of time. There is a direct relationship between solar intensity andtemperature. As solar intensity increases (or decreases), the Earth’s temperature correspondingly increases (or decreases).Changes in solar intensity have been proposed as one of several possible explanations for the Little Ice Age.Finally, volcanic eruptions are a third natural driver of climate change. Volcanic eruptions can last a few days, but the solidsand gases released during an eruption can influence the climate over a period of a few years, causing short-term climatechanges. The gases and solids released by volcanic eruptions can include carbon dioxide, water vapor, sulfur dioxide,hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen, and carbon monoxide. Generally, volcanic eruptions cool the climate. This occurred in 1783when volcanos in Iceland erupted and caused the release of large volumes of sulfuric oxide. This led to haze-effect cooling,a global phenomenon that occurs when dust, ash, or other suspended particles block out sunlight and trigger lower globaltemperatures as a result; haze-effect cooling usually extends for one or more years. In Europe and North America, hazeeffectcooling produced some of the lowest average winter temperatures on record in 1783 and 1784.Greenhouse gases are probably the most significant drivers of the climate. When heat energy from the sun strikes the Earth,gases known as greenhouse gases trap the heat in the atmosphere, as do the glass panes of a greenhouse keep heat fromescaping. The greenhouse gases that affect Earth include carbon dioxide, methane, water vapor, nitrous oxide, and ozone.Approximately half of the radiation from the sun passes through these gases in the atmosphere and strikes the Earth. Thisradiation is converted into thermal radiation on the Earth’s surface, and then a portion of that energy is re-radiated backinto the atmosphere. Greenhouse gases, however, reflect much of the thermal energy back to the Earth’s surface. The moregreenhouse gases there are in the atmosphere, the more thermal energy is reflected back to the Earth’s surface. Greenhousegases absorb and emit radiation and are an important factor in the greenhouse effect: the warming of Earth due to carbondioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.Evidence supports the relationship between atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and temperature: as carbondioxide rises, global temperature rises. Since 1950, the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide has increased fromabout 280 ppm to 382 ppm in 2006. In 2011, the atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration was 392 ppm. However, theplanet would not be inhabitable by current life forms if water vapor did not produce its drastic greenhouse warming effect.Scientists look at patterns in data and try to explain differences or deviations from these patterns. The atmospheric carbondioxide data reveal a historical pattern of carbon dioxide increasing and decreasing, cycling between a low of 180 ppm anda high of 300 ppm. Scientists have concluded that it took around 50,000 years for the atmospheric carbon dioxide level to increase from its low minimum concentration to its higher maximum concentration. However, starting recently, atmosphericcarbon dioxide concentrations have increased beyond the historical maximum of 300 ppm. The current increases inatmospheric carbon dioxide have happened very quickly—in a matter of hundreds of years rather than thousands of years.What is the reason for this difference in the rate of change and the amount of increase in carbon dioxide? A key factor thatmust be recognized when comparing the historical data and the current data is the presence of modern human society; noother driver of climate change has yielded changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide levels at this rate or to this magnitude.Human activity releases carbon dioxide and methane, two of the most important greenhouse gases, into the atmosphere inseveral ways. The primary mechanism that releases carbon dioxide is the burning of fossil fuels, such as gasoline, coal, andnatural gas (Figure 44.28). Deforestation, cement manufacture, animal agriculture, the clearing of land, and the burningof forests are other human activities that release carbon dioxide. Methane (CH4) is produced when bacteria break downorganic matter under anaerobic conditions. Anaerobic conditions can happen when organic matter is trapped underwater(such as in rice paddies) or in the intestines of herbivores. Methane can also be released from natural gas fields and thedecomposition that occurs in landfills. Another source of methane is the melting of clathrates. Clathrates are frozen chunksof ice and methane found at the bottom of the ocean. When water warms, these chunks of ice melt and methane is released.As the ocean’s water temperature increases, the rate at which clathrates melt is increasing, releasing even more methane.This leads to increased levels of methane in the atmosphere, which further accelerates the rate of global warming. This isan example of the positive feedback loop that is leading to the rapid rate of increase of global temperatures.
The burning of fossil fuels in industry and by vehicles releases carbon dioxide and other greenhousegases into the atmosphere.
Documented Results of Climate Change: Past and PresentScientists have geological evidence of the consequences of long-ago climate change. Modern-day phenomena such asretreating glaciers and melting polar ice cause a continual rise in sea level. Meanwhile, changes in climate can negativelyaffect organisms.Geological Climate ChangeGlobal warming has been associated with at least one planet-wide extinction event during the geological past. The Permianextinction event occurred about 251 million years ago toward the end of the roughly 50-million-year-long geological timespan known as the Permian period. This geologic time period was one of the three warmest periods in Earth’s geologichistory. Scientists estimate that approximately 70 percent of the terrestrial plant and animal species and 84 percent of marinespecies became extinct, vanishing forever near the end of the Permian period. Organisms that had adapted to wet and warmclimatic conditions, such as annual rainfall of 300–400 cm (118–157 in) and 20 °C–30 °C (68 °F–86 °F) in the tropical wetforest, may not have been able to survive the Permian climate change.
Present Climate ChangeA number of global events have occurred that may be attributed to climate change during our lifetimes. Glacier NationalPark in Montana is undergoing the retreat of many of its glaciers, a phenomenon known as glacier recession. In 1850, thearea contained approximately 150 glaciers. By 2010, however, the park contained only about 24 glaciers greater than 25acres in size. One of these glaciers is the Grinnell Glacier (Figure 44.29) at Mount Gould. Between 1966 and 2005, the sizeof Grinnell Glacier shrank by 40 percent. Similarly, the mass of the ice sheets in Greenland and the Antarctic is decreasing:Greenland lost 150–250 km3 of ice per year between 2002 and 2006. In addition, the size and thickness of the Arctic sea iceis decreasing.
The effect of global warming can be seen in the continuing retreat of Grinnel Glacier. The mean annualtemperature in the park has increased 1.33 °C since 1900. The loss of a glacier results in the loss of summermeltwaters, sharply reducing seasonal water supplies and severely affecting local ecosystems.
This loss of ice is leading to increases in the global sea level. On average, the sea is rising at a rate of 1.8 mm per year.However, between 1993 and 2010 the rate of sea level increase ranged between 2.9 and 3.4 mm per year. A variety offactors affect the volume of water in the ocean, including the temperature of the water (the density of water is related to itstemperature) and the amount of water found in rivers, lakes, glaciers, polar ice caps, and sea ice. As glaciers and polar icecaps melt, there is a significant contribution of liquid water that was previously frozen.In addition to some abiotic conditions changing in response to climate change, many organisms are also being affected bythe changes in temperature. Temperature and precipitation play key roles in determining the geographic distribution andphenology of plants and animals. (Phenology is the study of the effects of climatic conditions on the timing of periodiclifecycle events, such as flowering in plants or migration in birds.) Researchers have shown that 385 plant species in GreatBritain are flowering 4.5 days sooner than was recorded earlier during the previous 40 years. In addition, insect-pollinatedspecies were more likely to flower earlier than wind-pollinated species. The impact of changes in flowering date would bemitigated if the insect pollinators emerged earlier. This mismatched timing of plants and pollinators could result in injuriousecosystem effects because, for continued survival, insect-pollinated plants must flower when their pollinators are present.