A locust leaf consists of leaflets arrayed along a central midrib. Each leaflet is a complex photosyntheticmachine, exquisitely adapted to capture sunlight and carbon dioxide. An intricate vascular system supplies the leafwith water and minerals, and exports the products of photosynthesis.
Plants are as essential to human existence as land, water, and air. Without plants, our day-to-day lives would be impossiblebecause without oxygen from photosynthesis, aerobic life cannot be sustained. From providing food and shelter to servingas a source of medicines, oils, perfumes, and industrial products, plants provide humans with numerous valuable resources.When you think of plants, most of the organisms that come to mind are vascular plants. These plants have tissues thatconduct food and water, and they have seeds. Seed plants are divided into gymnosperms and angiosperms. Gymnospermsinclude the needle-leaved conifers—spruce, fir, and pine—as well as less familiar plants, such as ginkgos and cycads. Theirseeds are not enclosed by a fleshy fruit. Angiosperms, also called flowering plants, constitute the majority of seed plants.They include broadleaved trees (such as maple, oak, and elm), vegetables (such as potatoes, lettuce, and carrots), grasses,and plants known for the beauty of their flowers (roses, irises, and daffodils, for example).While individual plant species are unique, all share a common structure: a plant body consisting of stems, roots, and leaves.They all transport water, minerals, and sugars produced through photosynthesis through the plant body in a similar manner.All plant species also respond to environmental factors, such as light, gravity, competition, temperature, and predation.
The Plant BodyBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Describe the shoot organ system and the root organ systemDistinguish between meristematic tissue and permanent tissueIdentify and describe the three regions where plant growth occursSummarize the roles of dermal tissue, vascular tissue, and ground tissueCompare simple plant tissue with complex plant tissue
Like animals, plants contain cells with organelles in which specific metabolic activities take place. Unlike animals, however,plants use energy from sunlight to form sugars during photosynthesis. In addition, plant cells have cell walls, plastids, anda large central vacuole: structures that are not found in animal cells. Each of these cellular structures plays a specific role inplant structure and function.
Plant Organ SystemsIn plants, just as in animals, similar cells working together form a tissue. When different types of tissues work togetherto perform a unique function, they form an organ; organs working together form organ systems. Vascular plants have twodistinct organ systems: a shoot system, and a root system. The shoot system consists of two portions: the vegetative (nonreproductive)parts of the plant, such as the leaves and the stems, and the reproductive parts of the plant, which includeflowers and fruits. The shoot system generally grows above ground, where it absorbs the light needed for photosynthesis.The root system, which supports the plants and absorbs water and minerals, is usually underground. Figure 30.2 shows theorgan systems of a typical plant.
The shoot system of a plant consists of leaves, stems, flowers, and fruits. The root system anchors theplant while absorbing water and minerals from the soil.Plant TissuesPlants are multicellular eukaryotes with tissue systems made of various cell types that carry out specific functions. Planttissue systems fall into one of two general types: meristematic tissue, and permanent (or non-meristematic) tissue. Cellsof the meristematic tissue are found in meristems, which are plant regions of continuous cell division and growth.Meristematic tissue cells are either undifferentiated or incompletely differentiated, and they continue to divide andcontribute to the growth of the plant. In contrast, permanent tissue consists of plant cells that are no longer activelydividing.Meristematic tissues consist of three types, based on their location in the plant. Apical meristems contain meristematictissue located at the tips of stems and roots, which enable a plant to extend in length. Lateral meristems facilitate growthin thickness or girth in a maturing plant. Intercalary meristems occur only in monocots, at the bases of leaf blades and atnodes (the areas where leaves attach to a stem). This tissue enables the monocot leaf blade to increase in length from theleaf base; for example, it allows lawn grass leaves to elongate even after repeated mowing.Meristems produce cells that quickly differentiate, or specialize, and become permanent tissue. Such cells take on specificroles and lose their ability to divide further. They differentiate into three main types: dermal, vascular, and ground tissue.Dermal tissue covers and protects the plant, and vascular tissue transports water, minerals, and sugars to different parts ofthe plant. Ground tissue serves as a site for photosynthesis, provides a supporting matrix for the vascular tissue, and helpsto store water and sugars.Secondary tissues are either simple (composed of similar cell types) or complex (composed of different cell types). Dermaltissue, for example, is a simple tissue that covers the outer surface of the plant and controls gas exchange. Vascular tissueis an example of a complex tissue, and is made of two specialized conducting tissues: xylem and phloem. Xylem tissuetransports water and nutrients from the roots to different parts of the plant, and includes three different cell types: vesselelements and tracheids (both of which conduct water), and xylem parenchyma. Phloem tissue, which transports organiccompounds from the site of photosynthesis to other parts of the plant, consists of four different cell types: sieve cells (whichconduct photosynthates), companion cells, phloem parenchyma, and phloem fibers. Unlike xylem conducting cells, phloemconducting cells are alive at maturity. The xylem and phloem always lie adjacent to each other (Figure 30.3). In stems, thexylem and the phloem form a structure called a vascular bundle; in roots, this is termed the vascular stele or vascularcylinder.
This light micrograph shows a cross section of a squash (Curcurbita maxima) stem. Each teardrop-shapedvascular bundle consists of large xylem vessels toward the inside and smaller phloem cells toward the outside. Xylemcells, which transport water and nutrients from the roots to the rest of the plant, are dead at functional maturity. Phloemcells, which transport sugars and other organic compounds from photosynthetic tissue to the rest of the plant, areliving. The vascular bundles are encased in ground tissue and surrounded by dermal tissue.
StemsBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Describe the main function and basic structure of stemsCompare and contrast the roles of dermal tissue, vascular tissue, and ground tissueDistinguish between primary growth and secondary growth in stemsSummarize the origin of annual ringsList and describe examples of modified stemsStems are a part of the shoot system of a plant. They may range in length from a few millimeters to hundreds of meters,and also vary in diameter, depending on the plant type. Stems are usually above ground, although the stems of some plants,such as the potato, also grow underground. Stems may be herbaceous (soft) or woody in nature. Their main function is toprovide support to the plant, holding leaves, flowers and buds; in some cases, stems also store food for the plant. A stemmay be unbranched, like that of a palm tree, or it may be highly branched, like that of a magnolia tree. The stem of the plantconnects the roots to the leaves, helping to transport absorbed water and minerals to different parts of the plant. It also helpsto transport the products of photosynthesis, namely sugars, from the leaves to the rest of the plant.Plant stems, whether above or below ground, are characterized by the presence of nodes and internodes (Figure 30.4).Nodes are points of attachment for leaves, aerial roots, and flowers. The stem region between two nodes is called aninternode. The stalk that extends from the stem to the base of the leaf is the petiole. An axillary bud is usually found inthe axil—the area between the base of a leaf and the stem—where it can give rise to a branch or a flower. The apex (tip) ofthe shoot contains the apical meristem within the apical bud.
Leaves are attached to the plant stem at areas called nodes. An internode is the stem region between twonodes. The petiole is the stalk connecting the leaf to the stem. The leaves just above the nodes arose from axillarybuds.Stem AnatomyThe stem and other plant organs arise from the ground tissue, and are primarily made up of simple tissues formed from threetypes of cells: parenchyma, collenchyma, and sclerenchyma cells.Parenchyma cells are the most common plant cells (Figure 30.5). They are found in the stem, the root, the inside of theleaf, and the pulp of the fruit. Parenchyma cells are responsible for metabolic functions, such as photosynthesis, and theyhelp repair and heal wounds. Some parenchyma cells also store starch.
The stem of common St John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum) is shown in cross section in this lightmicrograph. The central pith (greenish-blue, in the center) and peripheral cortex (narrow zone 3–5 cells thick just insidethe epidermis) are composed of parenchyma cells. Vascular tissue composed of xylem (red) and phloem tissue (green,between the xylem and cortex) surrounds the pith.
Collenchyma cells are elongated cells with unevenly thickened walls (Figure 30.6). They provide structural support,mainly to the stem and leaves. These cells are alive at maturity and are usually found below the epidermis. The “strings” ofa celery stalk are an example of collenchyma cells.
Collenchyma cell walls are uneven in thickness, as seen in this light micrograph. They provide support toplant structures.
Sclerenchyma cells also provide support to the plant, but unlike collenchyma cells, many of them are dead at maturity.There are two types of sclerenchyma cells: fibers and sclereids. Both types have secondary cell walls that are thickenedwith deposits of lignin, an organic compound that is a key component of wood. Fibers are long, slender cells; sclereids aresmaller-sized. Sclereids give pears their gritty texture. Humans use sclerenchyma fibers to make linen and rope.
Like the rest of the plant, the stem has three tissue systems: dermal, vascular, and ground tissue. Each is distinguished bycharacteristic cell types that perform specific tasks necessary for the plant’s growth and survival.Dermal TissueThe dermal tissue of the stem consists primarily of epidermis, a single layer of cells covering and protecting the underlyingtissue. Woody plants have a tough, waterproof outer layer of cork cells commonly known as bark, which further protectsthe plant from damage. Epidermal cells are the most numerous and least differentiated of the cells in the epidermis. Theepidermis of a leaf also contains openings known as stomata, through which the exchange of gases takes place (Figure30.8). Two cells, known as guard cells, surround each leaf stoma, controlling its opening and closing and thus regulatingthe uptake of carbon dioxide and the release of oxygen and water vapor. Trichomes are hair-like structures on the epidermalsurface. They help to reduce transpiration (the loss of water by aboveground plant parts), increase solar reflectance, andstore compounds that defend the leaves against predation by herbivores.
Openings called stomata (singular: stoma) allow a plant to take up carbon dioxide and release oxygen andwater vapor. The (a) colorized scanning-electron micrograph shows a closed stoma of a dicot. Each stoma is flankedby two guard cells that regulate its (b) opening and closing. The (c) guard cells sit within the layer of epidermal cells.
Vascular TissueThe xylem and phloem that make up the vascular tissue of the stem are arranged in distinct strands called vascular bundles,which run up and down the length of the stem. When the stem is viewed in cross section, the vascular bundles of dicotstems are arranged in a ring. In plants with stems that live for more than one year, the individual bundles grow togetherand produce the characteristic growth rings. In monocot stems, the vascular bundles are randomly scattered throughout theground tissue.
In (a) dicot stems, vascular bundles are arranged around the periphery of the ground tissue. The xylemtissue is located toward the interior of the vascular bundle, and phloem is located toward the exterior. Sclerenchymafibers cap the vascular bundles. In (b) monocot stems, vascular bundles composed of xylem and phloem tissues arescattered throughout the ground tissue.Xylem tissue has three types of cells: xylem parenchyma, tracheids, and vessel elements. The latter two types conduct waterand are dead at maturity. Tracheids are xylem cells with thick secondary cell walls that are lignified.Water moves from onetracheid to another through regions on the side walls known as pits, where secondary walls are absent. Vessel elements arexylem cells with thinner walls; they are shorter than tracheids. Each vessel element is connected to the next by means of aperforation plate at the end walls of the element. Water moves through the perforation plates to travel up the plant.Phloem tissue is composed of sieve-tube cells, companion cells, phloem parenchyma, and phloem fibers. A series of sievetubecells (also called sieve-tube elements) are arranged end to end to make up a long sieve tube, which transports organic substances such as sugars and amino acids. The sugars flow from one sieve-tube cell to the next through perforated sieveplates, which are found at the end junctions between two cells. Although still alive at maturity, the nucleus and other cellcomponents of the sieve-tube cells have disintegrated. Companion cells are found alongside the sieve-tube cells, providingthem with metabolic support. The companion cells contain more ribosomes and mitochondria than the sieve-tube cells,which lack some cellular organelles.Ground TissueGround tissue is mostly made up of parenchyma cells, but may also contain collenchyma and sclerenchyma cells that helpsupport the stem. The ground tissue towards the interior of the vascular tissue in a stem or root is known as pith, while thelayer of tissue between the vascular tissue and the epidermis is known as the cortex.Growth in StemsGrowth in plants occurs as the stems and roots lengthen. Some plants, especially those that are woody, also increase inthickness during their life span. The increase in length of the shoot and the root is referred to as primary growth, and is theresult of cell division in the shoot apical meristem. Secondary growth is characterized by an increase in thickness or girthof the plant, and is caused by cell division in the lateral meristem. Figure 30.10 shows the areas of primary and secondarygrowth in a plant. Herbaceous plants mostly undergo primary growth, with hardly any secondary growth or increase inthickness. Secondary growth or “wood” is noticeable in woody plants; it occurs in some dicots, but occurs very rarely inmonocots.
In woody plants, primary growth is followed by secondary growth, which allows the plant stem to increasein thickness or girth. Secondary vascular tissue is added as the plant grows, as well as a cork layer. The bark of a treeextends from the vascular cambium to the epidermis.Some plant parts, such as stems and roots, continue to grow throughout a plant’s life: a phenomenon called indeterminategrowth. Other plant parts, such as leaves and flowers, exhibit determinate growth, which ceases when a plant part reaches aparticular size.Primary GrowthMost primary growth occurs at the apices, or tips, of stems and roots. Primary growth is a result of rapidly dividing cells inthe apical meristems at the shoot tip and root tip. Subsequent cell elongation also contributes to primary growth. The growthof shoots and roots during primary growth enables plants to continuously seek water (roots) or sunlight (shoots).The influence of the apical bud on overall plant growth is known as apical dominance, which diminishes the growth ofaxillary buds that form along the sides of branches and stems. Most coniferous trees exhibit strong apical dominance,thus producing the typical conical Christmas tree shape. If the apical bud is removed, then the axillary buds will startforming lateral branches. Gardeners make use of this fact when they prune plants by cutting off the tops of branches, thusencouraging the axillary buds to grow out, giving the plant a bushy shape.
Secondary GrowthThe increase in stem thickness that results from secondary growth is due to the activity of the lateral meristems, which arelacking in herbaceous plants. Lateral meristems include the vascular cambium and, in woody plants, the cork cambium (seeFigure 30.10). The vascular cambium is located just outside the primary xylem and to the interior of the primary phloem.The cells of the vascular cambium divide and form secondary xylem (tracheids and vessel elements) to the inside, andsecondary phloem (sieve elements and companion cells) to the outside. The thickening of the stem that occurs in secondarygrowth is due to the formation of secondary phloem and secondary xylem by the vascular cambium, plus the action ofcork cambium, which forms the tough outermost layer of the stem. The cells of the secondary xylem contain lignin, whichprovides hardiness and strength.In woody plants, cork cambium is the outermost lateral meristem. It produces cork cells (bark) containing a waxy substanceknown as suberin that can repel water. The bark protects the plant against physical damage and helps reduce water loss.The cork cambium also produces a layer of cells known as phelloderm, which grows inward from the cambium. The corkcambium, cork cells, and phelloderm are collectively termed the periderm. The periderm substitutes for the epidermisin mature plants. In some plants, the periderm has many openings, known as lenticels, which allow the interior cells toexchange gases with the outside atmosphere (Figure 30.11). This supplies oxygen to the living and metabolically activecells of the cortex, xylem and phloem.
Lenticels on the bark of this cherry tree enable the woody stem to exchange gases with the surroundingatmosphere.
Annual RingsThe activity of the vascular cambium gives rise to annual growth rings. During the spring growing season, cells of thesecondary xylem have a large internal diameter and their primary cell walls are not extensively thickened. This is knownas early wood, or spring wood. During the fall season, the secondary xylem develops thickened cell walls, forming late wood, or autumn wood, which is denser than early wood. This alternation of early and late wood is due largely to a seasonaldecrease in the number of vessel elements and a seasonal increase in the number of tracheids. It results in the formation ofan annual ring, which can be seen as a circular ring in the cross section of the stem (Figure 30.12). An examination of thenumber of annual rings and their nature (such as their size and cell wall thickness) can reveal the age of the tree and theprevailing climatic conditions during each season.
The rate of wood growth increases in summer and decreases in winter, producing a characteristic ringfor each year of growth. Seasonal changes in weather patterns can also affect the growth rate—note how the ringsvary in thickness.
Stem ModificationsSome plant species have modified stems that are especially suited to a particular habitat and environment (Figure 30.13).A rhizome is a modified stem that grows horizontally underground and has nodes and internodes. Vertical shoots may arisefrom the buds on the rhizome of some plants, such as ginger and ferns. Corms are similar to rhizomes, except they aremore rounded and fleshy (such as in gladiolus). Corms contain stored food that enables some plants to survive the winter.Stolons are stems that run almost parallel to the ground, or just below the surface, and can give rise to new plants at thenodes. Runners are a type of stolon that runs above the ground and produces new clone plants at nodes at varying intervals:strawberries are an example. Tubers are modified stems that may store starch, as seen in the potato (Solanum sp.). Tubersarise as swollen ends of stolons, and contain many adventitious or unusual buds (familiar to us as the “eyes” on potatoes). Abulb, which functions as an underground storage unit, is a modification of a stem that has the appearance of enlarged fleshyleaves emerging from the stem or surrounding the base of the stem, as seen in the iris.
Stem modifications enable plants to thrive in a variety of environments. Shown are (a) ginger (Zingiberofficinale) rhizomes, (b) a carrion flower (Amorphophallus titanum) corm (c) Rhodes grass (Chloris gayana) stolons,(d) strawberry (Fragaria ananassa) runners, (e) potato (Solanum tuberosum) tubers, and (f) red onion (Allium) bulbs.
Some aerial modifications of stems are tendrils and thorns (Figure 30.14). Tendrils are slender, twining strands that enablea plant (like a vine or pumpkin) to seek support by climbing on other surfaces. Thorns are modified branches appearing assharp outgrowths that protect the plant; common examples include roses, Osage orange and devil’s walking stick.
Found in southeastern United States, (a) buckwheat vine (Brunnichia ovata) is a weedy plant that climbswith the aid of tendrils. This one is shown climbing up a wooden stake. (b) Thorns are modified branches.
RootsBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Identify the two types of root systemsDescribe the three zones of the root tip and summarize the role of each zone in root growthDescribe the structure of the rootList and describe examples of modified rootsThe roots of seed plants have three major functions: anchoring the plant to the soil, absorbing water and minerals andtransporting them upwards, and storing the products of photosynthesis. Some roots are modified to absorb moisture andexchange gases. Most roots are underground. Some plants, however, also have adventitious roots, which emerge above theground from the shoot.Types of Root SystemsRoot systems are mainly of two types (Figure 30.15). Dicots have a tap root system, while monocots have a fibrous rootsystem. A tap root system has a main root that grows down vertically, and from which many smaller lateral roots arise.Dandelions are a good example; their tap roots usually break off when trying to pull these weeds, and they can regrowanother shoot from the remaining root). A tap root system penetrates deep into the soil. In contrast, a fibrous root system islocated closer to the soil surface, and forms a dense network of roots that also helps prevent soil erosion (lawn grasses are agood example, as are wheat, rice, and corn). Some plants have a combination of tap roots and fibrous roots. Plants that growin dry areas often have deep root systems, whereas plants growing in areas with abundant water are likely to have shallowerroot systems.
(a) Tap root systems have a main root that grows down, while (b) fibrous root systems consist of manysmall roots.
Root Growth and AnatomyRoot growth begins with seed germination. When the plant embryo emerges from the seed, the radicle of the embryo formsthe root system. The tip of the root is protected by the root cap, a structure exclusive to roots and unlike any other plantstructure. The root cap is continuously replaced because it gets damaged easily as the root pushes through soil. The root tipcan be divided into three zones: a zone of cell division, a zone of elongation, and a zone of maturation and differentiation(Figure 30.16). The zone of cell division is closest to the root tip; it is made up of the actively dividing cells of theroot meristem. The zone of elongation is where the newly formed cells increase in length, thereby lengthening the root.Beginning at the first root hair is the zone of cell maturation where the root cells begin to differentiate into special cell types.All three zones are in the first centimeter or so of the root tip.
A longitudinal view of the root reveals the zones of cell division, elongation, and maturation. Cell divisionoccurs in the apical meristem.The root has an outer layer of cells called the epidermis, which surrounds areas of ground tissue and vascular tissue. Theepidermis provides protection and helps in absorption. Root hairs, which are extensions of root epidermal cells, increasethe surface area of the root, greatly contributing to the absorption of water and minerals.
Inside the root, the ground tissue forms two regions: the cortex and the pith (Figure 30.17). Compared to stems, rootshave lots of cortex and little pith. Both regions include cells that store photosynthetic products. The cortex is between theepidermis and the vascular tissue, whereas the pith lies between the vascular tissue and the center of the root.
Staining reveals different cell types in this light micrograph of a wheat (Triticum) root cross section.Sclerenchyma cells of the exodermis and xylem cells stain red, and phloem cells stain blue. Other cell types stainblack. The stele, or vascular tissue, is the area inside endodermis (indicated by a green ring). Root hairs are visibleoutside the epidermis.
The vascular tissue in the root is arranged in the inner portion of the root, which is called the stele (Figure 30.18). A layerof cells known as the endodermis separates the stele from the ground tissue in the outer portion of the root. The endodermisis exclusive to roots, and serves as a checkpoint for materials entering the root’s vascular system. A waxy substance calledsuberin is present on the walls of the endodermal cells. This waxy region, known as the Casparian strip, forces water andsolutes to cross the plasma membranes of endodermal cells instead of slipping between the cells. This ensures that onlymaterials required by the root pass through the endodermis, while toxic substances and pathogens are generally excluded.The outermost cell layer of the root’s vascular tissue is the pericycle, an area that can give rise to lateral roots. In dicot roots,the xylem and phloem of the stele are arranged alternately in an X shape, whereas in monocot roots, the vascular tissue isarranged in a ring around the pith.
In (left) typical dicots, the vascular tissue forms an X shape in the center of the root. In (right) typicalmonocots, the phloem cells and the larger xylem cells form a characteristic ring around the central pith.
Root ModificationsRoot structures may be modified for specific purposes. For example, some roots are bulbous and store starch. Aerial rootsand prop roots are two forms of aboveground roots that provide additional support to anchor the plant. Tap roots, such ascarrots, turnips, and beets, are examples of roots that are modified for food storage.
Many vegetables are modified roots.Epiphytic roots enable a plant to grow on another plant. For example, the epiphytic roots of orchids develop a spongytissue to absorb moisture. The banyan tree (Ficus sp.) begins as an epiphyte, germinating in the branches of a host tree;aerial roots develop from the branches and eventually reach the ground, providing additional support (Figure 30.20). Inscrewpine (Pandanus sp.), a palm-like tree that grows in sandy tropical soils, aboveground prop roots develop from thenodes to provide additional support.
The (a) banyan tree, also known as the strangler fig, begins life as an epiphyte in a host tree.Aerial roots extend to the ground and support the growing plant, which eventually strangles the host tree. The (b)screwpine develops aboveground roots that help support the plant in sandy soils.
LeavesBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Identify the parts of a typical leafDescribe the internal structure and function of a leafCompare and contrast simple leaves and compound leavesList and describe examples of modified leavesLeaves are the main sites for photosynthesis: the process by which plants synthesize food. Most leaves are usually green,due to the presence of chlorophyll in the leaf cells. However, some leaves may have different colors, caused by other plantpigments that mask the green chlorophyll.The thickness, shape, and size of leaves are adapted to the environment. Each variation helps a plant species maximize itschances of survival in a particular habitat. Usually, the leaves of plants growing in tropical rainforests have larger surfaceareas than those of plants growing in deserts or very cold conditions, which are likely to have a smaller surface area tominimize water loss.
Structure of a Typical LeafEach leaf typically has a leaf blade called the lamina, which is also the widest part of the leaf. Some leaves are attached tothe plant stem by a petiole. Leaves that do not have a petiole and are directly attached to the plant stem are called sessileleaves. Small green appendages usually found at the base of the petiole are known as stipules. Most leaves have a midrib,which travels the length of the leaf and branches to each side to produce veins of vascular tissue. The edge of the leaf iscalled the margin. Figure 30.21 shows the structure of a typical eudicot leaf.
Deceptively simple in appearance, a leaf is a highly efficient structure.Within each leaf, the vascular tissue forms veins. The arrangement of veins in a leaf is called the venation pattern. Monocotsand dicots differ in their patterns of venation (Figure 30.22). Monocots have parallel venation; the veins run in straightlines across the length of the leaf without converging at a point. In dicots, however, the veins of the leaf have a net-likeappearance, forming a pattern known as reticulate venation. One extant plant, the Ginkgo biloba, has dichotomous venationwhere the veins fork.
(a) Tulip (Tulipa), a monocot, has leaves with parallel venation. The netlike venation in this (b) linden(Tilia cordata) leaf distinguishes it as a dicot. The (c) Ginkgo biloba tree has dichotomous venation.
Leaf ArrangementThe arrangement of leaves on a stem is known as phyllotaxy. The number and placement of a plant’s leaves will varydepending on the species, with each species exhibiting a characteristic leaf arrangement. Leaves are classified as eitheralternate, spiral, or opposite. Plants that have only one leaf per node have leaves that are said to be either alternate—meaningthe leaves alternate on each side of the stem in a flat plane—or spiral, meaning the leaves are arrayed in a spiral along thestem. In an opposite leaf arrangement, two leaves arise at the same point, with the leaves connecting opposite each otheralong the branch. If there are three or more leaves connected at a node, the leaf arrangement is classified as whorled.Leaf FormLeaves may be simple or compound (Figure 30.23). In a simple leaf, the blade is either completely undivided—as in thebanana leaf—or it has lobes, but the separation does not reach the midrib, as in the maple leaf. In a compound leaf, theleaf blade is completely divided, forming leaflets, as in the locust tree. Each leaflet may have its own stalk, but is attachedto the rachis. A palmately compound leaf resembles the palm of a hand, with leaflets radiating outwards from one pointExamples include the leaves of poison ivy, the buckeye tree, or the familiar houseplant Schefflera sp. (common name“umbrella plant”). Pinnately compound leaves take their name from their feather-like appearance; the leaflets are arrangedalong the midrib, as in rose leaves (Rosa sp.), or the leaves of hickory, pecan, ash, or walnut trees.Leaves may be simple or compound. In simple leaves, the lamina is continuous. The (a) banana plant(Musa sp.) has simple leaves. In compound leaves, the lamina is separated into leaflets. Compound leaves may bepalmate or pinnate. In (b) palmately compound leaves, such as those of the horse chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum),the leaflets branch from the petiole. In (c) pinnately compound leaves, the leaflets branch from the midrib, as on a scrubhickory (Carya floridana). The (d) honey locust has double compound leaves, in which leaflets branch from the veins.
Leaf Structure and FunctionThe outermost layer of the leaf is the epidermis; it is present on both sides of the leaf and is called the upper and lowerepidermis, respectively. Botanists call the upper side the adaxial surface (or adaxis) and the lower side the abaxial surface(or abaxis). The epidermis helps in the regulation of gas exchange. It contains stomata (Figure 30.24): openings throughwhich the exchange of gases takes place. Two guard cells surround each stoma, regulating its opening and closing.
Visualized at 500x with a scanning electron microscope, several stomata are clearly visible on (a) thesurface of this sumac (Rhus glabra) leaf. At 5,000x magnification, the guard cells of (b) a single stoma from lyre-leavedsand cress (Arabidopsis lyrata) have the appearance of lips that surround the opening. In this (c) light micrographcross-section of an A. lyrata leaf, the guard cell pair is visible along with the large, sub-stomatal air space in the leaf.
The epidermis is usually one cell layer thick; however, in plants that grow in very hot or very cold conditions, the epidermismay be several layers thick to protect against excessive water loss from transpiration. A waxy layer known as the cuticlecovers the leaves of all plant species. The cuticle reduces the rate of water loss from the leaf surface. Other leaves may havesmall hairs (trichomes) on the leaf surface. Trichomes help to deter herbivory by restricting insect movements, or by storingtoxic or bad-tasting compounds; they can also reduce the rate of transpiration by blocking air flow across the leaf surface.
Trichomes give leaves a fuzzy appearance as in this (a) sundew (Drosera sp.). Leaf trichomes include (b)branched trichomes on the leaf of Arabidopsis lyrata and (c) multibranched trichomes on a mature Quercus marilandicaleaf.
Below the epidermis of dicot leaves are layers of cells known as the mesophyll, or “middle leaf.” The mesophyll of mostleaves typically contains two arrangements of parenchyma cells: the palisade parenchyma and spongy parenchyma (Figure30.26). The palisade parenchyma (also called the palisade mesophyll) has column-shaped, tightly packed cells, and maybe present in one, two, or three layers. Below the palisade parenchyma are loosely arranged cells of an irregular shape.These are the cells of the spongy parenchyma (or spongy mesophyll). The air space found between the spongy parenchymacells allows gaseous exchange between the leaf and the outside atmosphere through the stomata. In aquatic plants, theintercellular spaces in the spongy parenchyma help the leaf float. Both layers of the mesophyll contain many chloroplasts.Guard cells are the only epidermal cells to contain chloroplasts.
In the (a) leaf drawing, the central mesophyll is sandwiched between an upper and lower epidermis. Themesophyll has two layers: an upper palisade layer comprised of tightly packed, columnar cells, and a lower spongylayer, comprised of loosely packed, irregularly shaped cells. Stomata on the leaf underside allow gas exchange. Awaxy cuticle covers all aerial surfaces of land plants to minimize water loss. These leaf layers are clearly visible inthe (b) scanning electron micrograph. The numerous small bumps in the palisade parenchyma cells are chloroplasts.Chloroplasts are also present in the spongy parenchyma, but are not as obvious. The bumps protruding from the lowersurface of the leave are glandular trichomes, which differ in structure from the stalked trichomes in Figure 30.25.
Like the stem, the leaf contains vascular bundles composed of xylem and phloem (Figure 30.27). The xylem consists oftracheids and vessels, which transport water and minerals to the leaves. The phloem transports the photosynthetic productsfrom the leaf to the other parts of the plant. A single vascular bundle, no matter how large or small, always contains bothxylem and phloem tissues.
This scanning electron micrograph shows xylem and phloem in the leaf vascular bundle from the lyreleavedsand cress (Arabidopsis lyrata).
Leaf AdaptationsConiferous plant species that thrive in cold environments, like spruce, fir, and pine, have leaves that are reduced in size andneedle-like in appearance. These needle-like leaves have sunken stomata and a smaller surface area: two attributes that aidin reducing water loss. In hot climates, plants such as cacti have leaves that are reduced to spines, which in combinationwith their succulent stems, help to conserve water. Many aquatic plants have leaves with wide lamina that can float on thesurface of the water, and a thick waxy cuticle on the leaf surface that repels water.
Transport of Water and Solutes in PlantsBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Define water potential and explain how it is influenced by solutes, pressure, gravity, and the matric potentialDescribe how water potential, evapotranspiration, and stomatal regulation influence how water is transported inplantsExplain how photosynthates are transported in plantsThe structure of plant roots, stems, and leaves facilitates the transport of water, nutrients, and photosynthates throughout theplant. The phloem and xylem are the main tissues responsible for this movement. Water potential, evapotranspiration, andstomatal regulation influence how water and nutrients are transported in plants. To understand how these processes work,we must first understand the energetics of water potential.Water PotentialPlants are phenomenal hydraulic engineers. Using only the basic laws of physics and the simple manipulation of potentialenergy, plants can move water to the top of a 116-meter-tall tree (Figure 30.31a). Plants can also use hydraulics to generateenough force to split rocks and buckle sidewalks (Figure 30.31b). Plants achieve this because of water potential.
With heights nearing 116 meters, (a) coastal redwoods (Sequoia sempervirens) are the tallest trees in theworld. Plant roots can easily generate enough force to (b) buckle and break concrete sidewalks, much to the dismay ofhomeowners and city maintenance departments.
Water potential is a measure of the potential energy in water. Plant physiologists are not interested in the energy in any oneparticular aqueous system, but are very interested in water movement between two systems. In practical terms, therefore,water potential is the difference in potential energy between a given water sample and pure water (at atmospheric pressureand ambient temperature). Water potential is denoted by the Greek letter ψ (psi) and is expressed in units of pressure(pressure is a form of energy) called megapascals (MPa). The potential of pure water (Ψwpure H2O) is, by convenience ofdefinition, designated a value of zero (even though pure water contains plenty of potential energy, that energy is ignored).Water potential values for the water in a plant root, stem, or leaf are therefore expressed relative to Ψwpure H2O.The water potential in plant solutions is influenced by solute concentration, pressure, gravity, and factors called matrixeffects. Water potential can be broken down into its individual components using the following equation:Ψsystem = Ψtotal = Ψs + Ψp + Ψg + Ψmwhere Ψs, Ψp, Ψg, and Ψm refer to the solute, pressure, gravity, and matric potentials, respectively. “System” can refer tothe water potential of the soil water (Ψsoil), root water (Ψroot), stem water (Ψstem), leaf water (Ψleaf) or the water in theatmosphere (Ψatmosphere): whichever aqueous system is under consideration. As the individual components change, they raise or lower the total water potential of a system. When this happens, water moves to equilibrate, moving from the systemor compartment with a higher water potential to the system or compartment with a lower water potential. This brings thedifference in water potential between the two systems (ΔΨ) back to zero (ΔΨ = 0). Therefore, for water to move throughthe plant from the soil to the air (a process called transpiration), Ψsoil must be > Ψroot > Ψstem > Ψleaf > Ψatmosphere.Water only moves in response to ΔΨ, not in response to the individual components. However, because the individualcomponents influence the total Ψsystem, by manipulating the individual components (especially Ψs), a plant can controlwater movement.Solute PotentialSolute potential (Ψs), also called osmotic potential, is negative in a plant cell and zero in distilled water. Typical values forcell cytoplasm are –0.5 to –1.0 MPa. Solutes reduce water potential (resulting in a negative Ψw) by consuming some of thepotential energy available in the water. Solute molecules can dissolve in water because water molecules can bind to themvia hydrogen bonds; a hydrophobic molecule like oil, which cannot bind to water, cannot go into solution. The energy in thehydrogen bonds between solute molecules and water is no longer available to do work in the system because it is tied up inthe bond. In other words, the amount of available potential energy is reduced when solutes are added to an aqueous system.Thus, Ψs decreases with increasing solute concentration. Because Ψs is one of the four components of Ψsystem or Ψtotal, adecrease in Ψs will cause a decrease in Ψtotal. The internal water potential of a plant cell is more negative than pure waterbecause of the cytoplasm’s high solute content (Figure 30.32). Because of this difference in water potential water will movefrom the soil into a plant’s root cells via the process of osmosis. This is why solute potential is sometimes called osmoticpotential.Plant cells can metabolically manipulate Ψs (and by extension, Ψtotal) by adding or removing solute molecules. Therefore,plants have control over Ψtotal via their ability to exert metabolic control over Ψs.
Pressure PotentialPressure potential (Ψp), also called turgor potential, may be positive or negative (Figure 30.32). Because pressure is anexpression of energy, the higher the pressure, the more potential energy in a system, and vice versa. Therefore, a positiveΨp (compression) increases Ψtotal, and a negative Ψp (tension) decreases Ψtotal. Positive pressure inside cells is containedby the cell wall, producing turgor pressure. Pressure potentials are typically around 0.6–0.8 MPa, but can reach as high as1.5 MPa in a well-watered plant. A Ψp of 1.5 MPa equates to 210 pounds per square inch (1.5 MPa x 140 lb in-2 MPa-1 =210 lb/in-2). As a comparison, most automobile tires are kept at a pressure of 30–34 psi. An example of the effect of turgorpressure is the wilting of leaves and their restoration after the plant has been watered (Figure 30.33). Water is lost from theleaves via transpiration (approaching Ψp = 0 MPa at the wilting point) and restored by uptake via the roots.A plant can manipulate Ψp via its ability to manipulate Ψs and by the process of osmosis. If a plant cell increases thecytoplasmic solute concentration, Ψs will decline, Ψtotal will decline, the ΔΨ between the cell and the surrounding tissuewill decline, water will move into the cell by osmosis, and Ψp will increase. Ψp is also under indirect plant control via theopening and closing of stomata. Stomatal openings allow water to evaporate from the leaf, reducing Ψp and Ψtotal of theleaf and increasing ii between the water in the leaf and the petiole, thereby allowing water to flow from the petiole into theleaf.
When (a) total water potential (Ψtotal) is lower outside the cells than inside, water moves out of the cellsand the plant wilts. When (b) the total water potential is higher outside the plant cells than inside, water moves into thecells, resulting in turgor pressure (Ψp) and keeping the plant erect.
Gravity PotentialGravity potential (Ψg) is always negative to zero in a plant with no height. It always removes or consumes potential energyfrom the system. The force of gravity pulls water downwards to the soil, reducing the total amount of potential energy inthe water in the plant (Ψtotal). The taller the plant, the taller the water column, and the more influential Ψg becomes. Ona cellular scale and in short plants, this effect is negligible and easily ignored. However, over the height of a tall tree likea giant coastal redwood, the gravitational pull of –0.1 MPa m-1 is equivalent to an extra 1 MPa of resistance that must beovercome for water to reach the leaves of the tallest trees. Plants are unable to manipulate Ψg.Matric PotentialMatric potential (Ψm) is always negative to zero. In a dry system, it can be as low as –2 MPa in a dry seed, and it is zero ina water-saturated system. The binding of water to a matrix always removes or consumes potential energy from the system.Ψm is similar to solute potential because it involves tying up the energy in an aqueous system by forming hydrogen bondsbetween the water and some other component. However, in solute potential, the other components are soluble, hydrophilicsolute molecules, whereas in Ψm, the other components are insoluble, hydrophilic molecules of the plant cell wall. Everyplant cell has a cellulosic cell wall and the cellulose in the cell walls is hydrophilic, producing a matrix for adhesion ofwater: hence the name matric potential. Ψm is very large (negative) in dry tissues such as seeds or drought-affected soils.However, it quickly goes to zero as the seed takes up water or the soil hydrates. Ψm cannot be manipulated by the plant andis typically ignored in well-watered roots, stems, and leaves.Movement of Water and Minerals in the XylemSolutes, pressure, gravity, and matric potential are all important for the transport of water in plants. Water moves from anarea of higher total water potential (higher Gibbs free energy) to an area of lower total water potential. Gibbs free energy isthe energy associated with a chemical reaction that can be used to do work. This is expressed as ΔΨ.Transpiration is the loss of water from the plant through evaporation at the leaf surface. It is the main driver of watermovement in the xylem. Transpiration is caused by the evaporation of water at the leaf–atmosphere interface; it createsnegative pressure (tension) equivalent to –2 MPa at the leaf surface. This value varies greatly depending on the vaporpressure deficit, which can be negligible at high relative humidity (RH) and substantial at low RH. Water from the roots ispulled up by this tension. At night, when stomata shut and transpiration stops, the water is held in the stem and leaf by theadhesion of water to the cell walls of the xylem vessels and tracheids, and the cohesion of water molecules to each other.This is called the cohesion–tension theory of sap ascent.Inside the leaf at the cellular level, water on the surface of mesophyll cells saturates the cellulose microfibrils of the primarycell wall. The leaf contains many large intercellular air spaces for the exchange of oxygen for carbon dioxide, which isrequired for photosynthesis. The wet cell wall is exposed to this leaf internal air space, and the water on the surface of thecells evaporates into the air spaces, decreasing the thin film on the surface of the mesophyll cells. This decrease creates agreater tension on the water in the mesophyll cells (Figure 30.34), thereby increasing the pull on the water in the xylemvessels. The xylem vessels and tracheids are structurally adapted to cope with large changes in pressure. Rings in the vesselsmaintain their tubular shape, much like the rings on a vacuum cleaner hose keep the hose open while it is under pressure.Small perforations between vessel elements reduce the number and size of gas bubbles that can form via a process calledcavitation. The formation of gas bubbles in xylem interrupts the continuous stream of water from the base to the top of the plant, causing a break termed an embolism in the flow of xylem sap. The taller the tree, the greater the tension forces neededto pull water, and the more cavitation events. In larger trees, the resulting embolisms can plug xylem vessels, making themnon-functional.
Transpiration—the loss of water vapor to the atmosphere through stomata—is a passive process, meaning that metabolicenergy in the form of ATP is not required for water movement. The energy driving transpiration is the difference in energybetween the water in the soil and the water in the atmosphere. However, transpiration is tightly controlled.Control of TranspirationThe atmosphere to which the leaf is exposed drives transpiration, but also causes massive water loss from the plant. Up to90 percent of the water taken up by roots may be lost through transpiration.Leaves are covered by a waxy cuticle on the outer surface that prevents the loss of water. Regulation of transpiration,therefore, is achieved primarily through the opening and closing of stomata on the leaf surface. Stomata are surrounded bytwo specialized cells called guard cells, which open and close in response to environmental cues such as light intensity andquality, leaf water status, and carbon dioxide concentrations. Stomata must open to allow air containing carbon dioxide andoxygen to diffuse into the leaf for photosynthesis and respiration. When stomata are open, however, water vapor is lost to the external environment, increasing the rate of transpiration. Therefore, plants must maintain a balance between efficientphotosynthesis and water loss.Plants have evolved over time to adapt to their local environment and reduce transpiration(Figure 30.35). Desert plant(xerophytes) and plants that grow on other plants (epiphytes) have limited access to water. Such plants usually have amuch thicker waxy cuticle than those growing in more moderate, well-watered environments (mesophytes). Aquatic plants(hydrophytes) also have their own set of anatomical and morphological leaf adaptations.
Plants are suited to their local environment. (a) Xerophytes, like this prickly pear cactus (Opuntiasp.) and (b) epiphytes such as this tropical Aeschynanthus perrottetii have adapted to very limited water resources.The leaves of a prickly pear are modified into spines, which lowers the surface-to-volume ratio and reduces waterloss. Photosynthesis takes place in the stem, which also stores water. (b) A. perottetii leaves have a waxy cuticlethat prevents water loss. (c) Goldenrod (Solidago sp.) is a mesophyte, well suited for moderate environments. (d)Hydrophytes, like this fragrant water lily (Nymphaea odorata), are adapted to thrive in aquatic environments.
Xerophytes and epiphytes often have a thick covering of trichomes or of stomata that are sunken below the leaf’s surface.Trichomes are specialized hair-like epidermal cells that secrete oils and substances. These adaptations impede air flowacross the stomatal pore and reduce transpiration. Multiple epidermal layers are also commonly found in these types ofplants.Transportation of Photosynthates in the PhloemPlants need an energy source to grow. In seeds and bulbs, food is stored in polymers (such as starch) that are converted bymetabolic processes into sucrose for newly developing plants. Once green shoots and leaves are growing, plants are able to produce their own food by photosynthesizing. The products of photosynthesis are called photosynthates, which are usuallyin the form of simple sugars such as sucrose.Structures that produce photosynthates for the growing plant are referred to as sources. Sugars produced in sources, suchas leaves, need to be delivered to growing parts of the plant via the phloem in a process called translocation. The points ofsugar delivery, such as roots, young shoots, and developing seeds, are called sinks. Seeds, tubers, and bulbs can be either asource or a sink, depending on the plant’s stage of development and the season.The products from the source are usually translocated to the nearest sink through the phloem. For example, the highestleaves will send photosynthates upward to the growing shoot tip, whereas lower leaves will direct photosynthates downwardto the roots. Intermediate leaves will send products in both directions, unlike the flow in the xylem, which is alwaysunidirectional (soil to leaf to atmosphere). The pattern of photosynthate flow changes as the plant grows and develops.Photosynthates are directed primarily to the roots early on, to shoots and leaves during vegetative growth, and to seeds andfruits during reproductive development. They are also directed to tubers for storage.Translocation: Transport from Source to SinkPhotosynthates, such as sucrose, are produced in the mesophyll cells of photosynthesizing leaves. From there they aretranslocated through the phloem to where they are used or stored. Mesophyll cells are connected by cytoplasmic channelscalled plasmodesmata. Photosynthates move through these channels to reach phloem sieve-tube elements (STEs) in thevascular bundles. From the mesophyll cells, the photosynthates are loaded into the phloem STEs. The sucrose is activelytransported against its concentration gradient (a process requiring ATP) into the phloem cells using the electrochemicalpotential of the proton gradient. This is coupled to the uptake of sucrose with a carrier protein called the sucrose-H+symporter.Phloem STEs have reduced cytoplasmic contents, and are connected by a sieve plate with pores that allow for pressuredrivenbulk flow, or translocation, of phloem sap. Companion cells are associated with STEs. They assist with metabolicactivities and produce energy for the STEs.
Phloem is comprised of cells called sieve-tube elements. Phloem sap travels through perforations calledsieve tube plates. Neighboring companion cells carry out metabolic functions for the sieve-tube elements and providethem with energy. Lateral sieve areas connect the sieve-tube elements to the companion cells.Once in the phloem, the photosynthates are translocated to the closest sink. Phloem sap is an aqueous solution that containsup to 30 percent sugar, minerals, amino acids, and plant growth regulators. The high percentage of sugar decreases Ψs,which decreases the total water potential and causes water to move by osmosis from the adjacent xylem into the phloemtubes, thereby increasing pressure. This increase in total water potential causes the bulk flow of phloem from source tosink (Figure 30.37). Sucrose concentration in the sink cells is lower than in the phloem STEs because the sink sucrose hasbeen metabolized for growth, or converted to starch for storage or other polymers, such as cellulose, for structural integrity.Unloading at the sink end of the phloem tube occurs by either diffusion or active transport of sucrose molecules from an area of high concentration to one of low concentration. Water diffuses from the phloem by osmosis and is then transpired orrecycled via the xylem back into the phloem sap.
Sucrose is actively transported from source cells into companion cells and then into the sieve-tubeelements. This reduces the water potential, which causes water to enter the phloem from the xylem. The resultingpositive pressure forces the sucrose-water mixture down toward the roots, where sucrose is unloaded. Transpirationcauses water to return to the leaves through the xylem vessels.
Plant Sensory Systems and ResponsesBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Describe how red and blue light affect plant growth and metabolic activitiesDiscuss gravitropismUnderstand how hormones affect plant growth and developmentDescribe thigmotropism, thigmonastism, and thigmogenesisExplain how plants defend themselves from predators and respond to woundsAnimals can respond to environmental factors by moving to a new location. Plants, however, are rooted in place andmust respond to the surrounding environmental factors. Plants have sophisticated systems to detect and respond to light,gravity, temperature, and physical touch. Receptors sense environmental factors and relay the information to effectorsystems—often through intermediate chemical messengers—to bring about plant responses.Plant Responses to LightPlants have a number of sophisticated uses for light that go far beyond their ability to photosynthesize low-molecularweightsugars using only carbon dioxide, light, and water. Photomorphogenesis is the growth and development of plants inresponse to light. It allows plants to optimize their use of light and space. Photoperiodism is the ability to use light to tracktime. Plants can tell the time of day and time of year by sensing and using various wavelengths of sunlight. Phototropismis a directional response that allows plants to grow towards, or even away from, light.The sensing of light in the environment is important to plants; it can be crucial for competition and survival. The responseof plants to light is mediated by different photoreceptors, which are comprised of a protein covalently bonded to a lightabsorbingpigment called a chromophore. Together, the two are called a chromoprotein.
The red/far-red and violet-blue regions of the visible light spectrum trigger structural development in plants. Sensoryphotoreceptors absorb light in these particular regions of the visible light spectrum because of the quality of light availablein the daylight spectrum. In terrestrial habitats, light absorption by chlorophylls peaks in the blue and red regions of thespectrum. As light filters through the canopy and the blue and red wavelengths are absorbed, the spectrum shifts to the farredend, shifting the plant community to those plants better adapted to respond to far-red light. Blue-light receptors allowplants to gauge the direction and abundance of sunlight, which is rich in blue–green emissions. Water absorbs red light,which makes the detection of blue light essential for algae and aquatic plants.The Phytochrome System and the Red/Far-Red ResponseThe phytochromes are a family of chromoproteins with a linear tetrapyrrole chromophore, similar to the ringed tetrapyrrolelight-absorbing head group of chlorophyll. Phytochromes have two photo-interconvertible forms: Pr and Pfr. Pr absorbs redlight (~667 nm) and is immediately converted to Pfr. Pfr absorbs far-red light (~730 nm) and is quickly converted back toPr. Absorption of red or far-red light causes a massive change to the shape of the chromophore, altering the conformationand activity of the phytochrome protein to which it is bound. Pfr is the physiologically active form of the protein; therefore,exposure to red light yields physiological activity. Exposure to far-red light inhibits phytochrome activity. Together, the twoforms represent the phytochrome system (Figure 30.38).The phytochrome system acts as a biological light switch. It monitors the level, intensity, duration, and color ofenvironmental light. The effect of red light is reversible by immediately shining far-red light on the sample, which convertsthe chromoprotein to the inactive Pr form. Additionally, Pfr can slowly revert to Pr in the dark, or break down over time. Inall instances, the physiological response induced by red light is reversed. The active form of phytochrome (Pfr) can directlyactivate other molecules in the cytoplasm, or it can be trafficked to the nucleus, where it directly activates or repressesspecific gene expression.Once the phytochrome system evolved, plants adapted it to serve a variety of needs. Unfiltered, full sunlight contains muchmore red light than far-red light. Because chlorophyll absorbs strongly in the red region of the visible spectrum, but not inthe far-red region, any plant in the shade of another plant on the forest floor will be exposed to red-depleted, far-red-enrichedlight. The preponderance of far-red light converts phytochrome in the shaded leaves to the Pr (inactive) form, slowinggrowth. The nearest non-shaded (or even less-shaded) areas on the forest floor have more red light; leaves exposed to theseareas sense the red light, which activates the Pfr form and induces growth. In short, plant shoots use the phytochrome systemto grow away from shade and towards light. Because competition for light is so fierce in a dense plant community, theevolutionary advantages of the phytochrome system are obvious.In seeds, the phytochrome system is not used to determine direction and quality of light (shaded versus unshaded). Instead,is it used merely to determine if there is any light at all. This is especially important in species with very small seeds, suchas lettuce. Because of their size, lettuce seeds have few food reserves. Their seedlings cannot grow for long before they runout of fuel. If they germinated even a centimeter under the soil surface, the seedling would never make it into the sunlightand would die. In the dark, phytochrome is in the Pr (inactive form) and the seed will not germinate; it will only germinateif exposed to light at the surface of the soil. Upon exposure to light, Pr is converted to Pfr and germination proceeds.
The biologically inactive form of phytochrome (Pr) is converted to the biologically active form Pfr underillumination with red light. Far-red light and darkness convert the molecule back to the inactive form.Plants also use the phytochrome system to sense the change of season. Photoperiodism is a biological response to the timingand duration of day and night. It controls flowering, setting of winter buds, and vegetative growth. Detection of seasonal changes is crucial to plant survival. Although temperature and light intensity influence plant growth, they are not reliableindicators of season because they may vary from one year to the next. Day length is a better indicator of the time of year.As stated above, unfiltered sunlight is rich in red light but deficient in far-red light. Therefore, at dawn, all the phytochromemolecules in a leaf quickly convert to the active Pfr form, and remain in that form until sunset. In the dark, the Pfr formtakes hours to slowly revert back to the Pr form. If the night is long (as in winter), all of the Pfr form reverts. If the nightis short (as in summer), a considerable amount of Pfr may remain at sunrise. By sensing the Pr/Pfr ratio at dawn, a plantcan determine the length of the day/night cycle. In addition, leaves retain that information for several days, allowing acomparison between the length of the previous night and the preceding several nights. Shorter nights indicate springtimeto the plant; when the nights become longer, autumn is approaching. This information, along with sensing temperature andwater availability, allows plants to determine the time of the year and adjust their physiology accordingly. Short-day (longnight)plants use this information to flower in the late summer and early fall, when nights exceed a critical length (ofteneight or fewer hours). Long-day (short-night) plants flower during the spring, when darkness is less than a critical length(often eight to 15 hours). Not all plants use the phytochrome system in this way. Flowering in day-neutral plants is notregulated by daylength.
The Blue Light ResponsesPhototropism—the directional bending of a plant toward or away from a light source—is a response to blue wavelengthsof light. Positive phototropism is growth towards a light source (Figure 30.39), while negative phototropism (also calledskototropism) is growth away from light.The aptly-named phototropins are protein-based receptors responsible for mediating the phototropic response. Like allplant photoreceptors, phototropins consist of a protein portion and a light-absorbing portion, called the chromophore. Inphototropins, the chromophore is a covalently-bound molecule of flavin; hence, phototropins belong to a class of proteinscalled flavoproteins.Other responses under the control of phototropins are leaf opening and closing, chloroplast movement, and the opening ofstomata. However, of all responses controlled by phototropins, phototropism has been studied the longest and is the bestunderstood.In their 1880 treatise The Power of Movements in Plants, Charles Darwin and his son Francis first described phototropism asthe bending of seedlings toward light. Darwin observed that light was perceived by the tip of the plant (the apical meristem),but that the response (bending) took place in a different part of the plant. They concluded that the signal had to travel fromthe apical meristem to the base of the plant.
Azure bluets (Houstonia caerulea) display a phototropic response by bending toward the light.
In 1913, Peter Boysen-Jensen demonstrated that a chemical signal produced in the plant tip was responsible for the bendingat the base. He cut off the tip of a seedling, covered the cut section with a layer of gelatin, and then replaced the tip. Theseedling bent toward the light when illuminated. However, when impermeable mica flakes were inserted between the tip andthe cut base, the seedling did not bend. A refinement of the experiment showed that the signal traveled on the shaded sideof the seedling. When the mica plate was inserted on the illuminated side, the plant did bend towards the light. Therefore,the chemical signal was a growth stimulant because the phototropic response involved faster cell elongation on the shadedside than on the illuminated side. We now know that as light passes through a plant stem, it is diffracted and generatesphototropin activation across the stem. Most activation occurs on the lit side, causing the plant hormone indole acetic acid(IAA) to accumulate on the shaded side. Stem cells elongate under influence of IAA.Cryptochromes are another class of blue-light absorbing photoreceptors that also contain a flavin-based chromophore.Cryptochromes set the plants 24-hour activity cycle, also know as its circadian rhythem, using blue light cues. There is someevidence that cryptochromes work together with phototropins to mediate the phototropic response.
Plant Responses to GravityWhether or not they germinate in the light or in total darkness, shoots usually sprout up from the ground, and rootsgrow downward into the ground. A plant laid on its side in the dark will send shoots upward when given enough time.Gravitropism ensures that roots grow into the soil and that shoots grow toward sunlight. Growth of the shoot apical tipupward is called negative gravitropism, whereas growth of the roots downward is called positive gravitropism.Amyloplasts (also known as statoliths) are specialized plastids that contain starch granules and settle downward inresponse to gravity. Amyloplasts are found in shoots and in specialized cells of the root cap. When a plant is tilted, thestatoliths drop to the new bottom cell wall. A few hours later, the shoot or root will show growth in the new verticaldirection.The mechanism that mediates gravitropism is reasonably well understood. When amyloplasts settle to the bottom of thegravity-sensing cells in the root or shoot, they physically contact the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), causing the release ofcalcium ions from inside the ER. This calcium signaling in the cells causes polar transport of the plant hormone IAA to the bottom of the cell. In roots, a high concentration of IAA inhibits cell elongation. The effect slows growth on the lowerside of the root, while cells develop normally on the upper side. IAA has the opposite effect in shoots, where a higherconcentration at the lower side of the shoot stimulates cell expansion, causing the shoot to grow up. After the shoot or rootbegin to grow vertically, the amyloplasts return to their normal position. Other hypotheses—involving the entire cell inthe gravitropism effect—have been proposed to explain why some mutants that lack amyloplasts may still exhibit a weakgravitropic response.Growth ResponsesA plant’s sensory response to external stimuli relies on chemical messengers (hormones). Plant hormones affect all aspectsof plant life, from flowering to fruit setting and maturation, and from phototropism to leaf fall. Potentially every cell in aplant can produce plant hormones. They can act in their cell of origin or be transported to other portions of the plant body,with many plant responses involving the synergistic or antagonistic interaction of two or more hormones. In contrast, animalhormones are produced in specific glands and transported to a distant site for action, and they act alone.Plant hormones are a group of unrelated chemical substances that affect plant morphogenesis. Five major plant hormonesare traditionally described: auxins (particularly IAA), cytokinins, gibberellins, ethylene, and abscisic acid. In addition, othernutrients and environmental conditions can be characterized as growth factors.AuxinsThe term auxin is derived from the Greek word auxein, which means "to grow." Auxins are the main hormones responsiblefor cell elongation in phototropism and gravitropism. They also control the differentiation of meristem into vascular tissue,and promote leaf development and arrangement. While many synthetic auxins are used as herbicides, IAA is the onlynaturally occurring auxin that shows physiological activity. Apical dominance—the inhibition of lateral bud formation—istriggered by auxins produced in the apical meristem. Flowering, fruit setting and ripening, and inhibition of abscission (leaffalling) are other plant responses under the direct or indirect control of auxins. Auxins also act as a relay for the effects ofthe blue light and red/far-red responses.Commercial use of auxins is widespread in plant nurseries and for crop production. IAA is used as a rooting hormoneto promote growth of adventitious roots on cuttings and detached leaves. Applying synthetic auxins to tomato plants ingreenhouses promotes normal fruit development. Outdoor application of auxin promotes synchronization of fruit settingand dropping to coordinate the harvesting season. Fruits such as seedless cucumbers can be induced to set fruit by treatingunfertilized plant flowers with auxins.CytokininsThe effect of cytokinins was first reported when it was found that adding the liquid endosperm of coconuts to developingplant embryos in culture stimulated their growth. The stimulating growth factor was found to be cytokinin, a hormone thatpromotes cytokinesis (cell division). Almost 200 naturally occurring or synthetic cytokinins are known to date. Cytokininsare most abundant in growing tissues, such as roots, embryos, and fruits, where cell division is occurring. Cytokinins areknown to delay senescence in leaf tissues, promote mitosis, and stimulate differentiation of the meristem in shoots androots. Many effects on plant development are under the influence of cytokinins, either in conjunction with auxin or anotherhormone. For example, apical dominance seems to result from a balance between auxins that inhibit lateral buds, andcytokinins that promote bushier growth.GibberellinsGibberellins (GAs) are a group of about 125 closely related plant hormones that stimulate shoot elongation, seedgermination, and fruit and flower maturation. GAs are synthesized in the root and stem apical meristems, young leaves,and seed embryos. In urban areas, GA antagonists are sometimes applied to trees under power lines to control growth andreduce the frequency of pruning.GAs break dormancy (a state of inhibited growth and development) in the seeds of plants that require exposure to coldor light to germinate. Abscisic acid is a strong antagonist of GA action. Other effects of GAs include gender expression,seedless fruit development, and the delay of senescence in leaves and fruit. Seedless grapes are obtained through standardbreeding methods and contain inconspicuous seeds that fail to develop. Because GAs are produced by the seeds, andbecause fruit development and stem elongation are under GA control, these varieties of grapes would normally producesmall fruit in compact clusters. Maturing grapes are routinely treated with GA to promote larger fruit size, as well as looserbunches (longer stems), which reduces the instance of mildew infection.
In grapes, application of gibberellic acid increases the size of fruit and loosens clustering.
Abscisic AcidThe plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) was first discovered as the agent that causes the abscission or dropping of cottonbolls. However, more recent studies indicate that ABA plays only a minor role in the abscission process. ABA accumulatesas a response to stressful environmental conditions, such as dehydration, cold temperatures, or shortened day lengths. Itsactivity counters many of the growth-promoting effects of GAs and auxins. ABA inhibits stem elongation and inducesdormancy in lateral buds.ABA induces dormancy in seeds by blocking germination and promoting the synthesis of storage proteins. Plants adaptedto temperate climates require a long period of cold temperature before seeds germinate. This mechanism protects youngplants from sprouting too early during unseasonably warm weather in winter. As the hormone gradually breaks down overwinter, the seed is released from dormancy and germinates when conditions are favorable in spring. Another effect of ABAis to promote the development of winter buds; it mediates the conversion of the apical meristem into a dormant bud. Lowsoil moisture causes an increase in ABA, which causes stomata to close, reducing water loss in winter buds.EthyleneEthylene is associated with fruit ripening, flower wilting, and leaf fall. Ethylene is unusual because it is a volatile gas(C2H4). Hundreds of years ago, when gas street lamps were installed in city streets, trees that grew close to lamp postsdeveloped twisted, thickened trunks and shed their leaves earlier than expected. These effects were caused by ethylenevolatilizing from the lamps.Aging tissues (especially senescing leaves) and nodes of stems produce ethylene. The best-known effect of the hormone,however, is the promotion of fruit ripening. Ethylene stimulates the conversion of starch and acids to sugars. Some peoplestore unripe fruit, such as avocadoes, in a sealed paper bag to accelerate ripening; the gas released by the first fruit tomature will speed up the maturation of the remaining fruit. Ethylene also triggers leaf and fruit abscission, flower fadingand dropping, and promotes germination in some cereals and sprouting of bulbs and potatoes.Ethylene is widely used in agriculture. Commercial fruit growers control the timing of fruit ripening with application ofthe gas. Horticulturalists inhibit leaf dropping in ornamental plants by removing ethylene from greenhouses using fans andventilation.Nontraditional HormonesRecent research has discovered a number of compounds that also influence plant development. Their roles are lessunderstood than the effects of the major hormones described so far.
Jasmonates play a major role in defense responses to herbivory. Their levels increase when a plant is wounded by apredator, resulting in an increase in toxic secondary metabolites. They contribute to the production of volatile compoundsthat attract natural enemies of predators. For example, chewing of tomato plants by caterpillars leads to an increase injasmonic acid levels, which in turn triggers the release of volatile compounds that attract predators of the pest.Oligosaccharins also play a role in plant defense against bacterial and fungal infections. They act locally at the site ofinjury, and can also be transported to other tissues. Strigolactones promote seed germination in some species and inhibitlateral apical development in the absence of auxins. Strigolactones also play a role in the establishment of mycorrhizae, amutualistic association of plant roots and fungi. Brassinosteroids are important to many developmental and physiologicalprocesses. Signals between these compounds and other hormones, notably auxin and GAs, amplifies their physiologicaleffect. Apical dominance, seed germination, gravitropism, and resistance to freezing are all positively influenced byhormones. Root growth and fruit dropping are inhibited by steroids.Plant Responses to Wind and TouchThe shoot of a pea plant winds around a trellis, while a tree grows on an angle in response to strong prevailing winds. Theseare examples of how plants respond to touch or wind.The movement of a plant subjected to constant directional pressure is called thigmotropism, from the Greek words thigmameaning “touch,” and tropism implying “direction.” Tendrils are one example of this. The meristematic region of tendrilsis very touch sensitive; light touch will evoke a quick coiling response. Cells in contact with a support surface contract,whereas cells on the opposite side of the support expand (Figure 30.14). Application of jasmonic acid is sufficient to triggertendril coiling without a mechanical stimulus.A thigmonastic response is a touch response independent of the direction of stimulus Figure 30.24. In the Venus flytrap,two modified leaves are joined at a hinge and lined with thin fork-like tines along the outer edges. Tiny hairs are locatedinside the trap. When an insect brushes against these trigger hairs, touching two or more of them in succession, the leavesclose quickly, trapping the prey. Glands on the leaf surface secrete enzymes that slowly digest the insect. The releasednutrients are absorbed by the leaves, which reopen for the next meal.Thigmomorphogenesis is a slow developmental change in the shape of a plant subjected to continuous mechanical stress.When trees bend in the wind, for example, growth is usually stunted and the trunk thickens. Strengthening tissue, especiallyxylem, is produced to add stiffness to resist the wind’s force. Researchers hypothesize that mechanical strain induces growthand differentiation to strengthen the tissues. Ethylene and jasmonate are likely involved in thigmomorphogenesis.
Defense Responses against Herbivores and PathogensPlants face two types of enemies: herbivores and pathogens. Herbivores both large and small use plants as food, and activelychew them. Pathogens are agents of disease. These infectious microorganisms, such as fungi, bacteria, and nematodes, liveoff of the plant and damage its tissues. Plants have developed a variety of strategies to discourage or kill attackers.The first line of defense in plants is an intact and impenetrable barrier. Bark and the waxy cuticle can protect againstpredators. Other adaptations against herbivory include thorns, which are modified branches, and spines, which are modifiedleaves. They discourage animals by causing physical damage and inducing rashes and allergic reactions. A plant’s exteriorprotection can be compromised by mechanical damage, which may provide an entry point for pathogens. If the first line ofdefense is breached, the plant must resort to a different set of defense mechanisms, such as toxins and enzymes.Secondary metabolites are compounds that are not directly derived from photosynthesis and are not necessary for respirationor plant growth and development. Many metabolites are toxic, and can even be lethal to animals that ingest them. Somemetabolites are alkaloids, which discourage predators with noxious odors (such as the volatile oils of mint and sage) orrepellent tastes (like the bitterness of quinine). Other alkaloids affect herbivores by causing either excessive stimulation (caffeine is one example) or the lethargy associated with opioids. Some compounds become toxic after ingestion; forinstance, glycol cyanide in the cassava root releases cyanide only upon ingestion by the herbivore.Mechanical wounding and predator attacks activate defense and protection mechanisms both in the damaged tissue and atsites farther from the injury location. Some defense reactions occur within minutes: others over several hours. The infectedand surrounding cells may die, thereby stopping the spread of infection.Long-distance signaling elicits a systemic response aimed at deterring the predator. As tissue is damaged, jasmonates maypromote the synthesis of compounds that are toxic to predators. Jasmonates also elicit the synthesis of volatile compoundsthat attract parasitoids, which are insects that spend their developing stages in or on another insect, and eventually kill theirhost. The plant may activate abscission of injured tissue if it is damaged beyond repair.