Close your eyes and picture a brick wall. What is the basic building block of that wall? A single brick, of course. Like a
brick wall, your body is composed of basic building blocks, and the building blocks of your body are cells.
Your body has many kinds of cells, each specialized for a specific purpose. Just as a home is made from a variety of building
materials, the human body is constructed from many cell types. For example, epithelial cells protect the surface of the body
and cover the organs and body cavities within. Bone cells help to support and protect the body. Cells of the immune system
fight invading bacteria. Additionally, blood and blood cells carry nutrients and oxygen throughout the body while removing
carbon dioxide. Each of these cell types plays a vital role during the growth, development, and day-to-day maintenance of
the body. In spite of their enormous variety, however, cells from all organisms—even ones as diverse as bacteria, onion, and
human—share certain fundamental characteristics.
A cell is the smallest unit of a living thing. A living thing, whether made of one cell (like bacteria) or many cells (like a
human), is called an organism. Thus, cells are the basic building blocks of all organisms.
Several cells of one kind that interconnect with each other and perform a shared function form tissues, several tissues
combine to form an organ (your stomach, heart, or brain), and several organs make up an organ system (such as the digestive
system, circulatory system, or nervous system). Several systems that function together form an organism (like a human
being). Here, we will examine the structure and function of cells.
There are many types of cells, all grouped into one of two broad categories: prokaryotic and eukaryotic. For example,
both animal and plant cells are classified as eukaryotic cells, whereas bacterial cells are classified as prokaryotic. Before
discussing the criteria for determining whether a cell is prokaryotic or eukaryotic, let’s first examine how biologists study
cells.
Microscopy
Cells vary in size. With few exceptions, individual cells cannot be seen with the naked eye, so scientists use microscopes
(micro- = “small”; -scope = “to look at”) to study them. A microscope is an instrument that magnifies an object. Most
photographs of cells are taken with a microscope, and these images can also be called micrographs.
The optics of a microscope’s lenses change the orientation of the image that the user sees. A specimen that is right-side
up and facing right on the microscope slide will appear upside-down and facing left when viewed through a microscope,
and vice versa. Similarly, if the slide is moved left while looking through the microscope, it will appear to move right, and
if moved down, it will seem to move up. This occurs because microscopes use two sets of lenses to magnify the image.
Because of the manner by which light travels through the lenses, this system of two lenses produces an inverted image
(binocular, or dissecting microscopes, work in a similar manner, but include an additional magnification system that makes
the final image appear to be upright).
Light Microscopes
To give you a sense of cell size, a typical human red blood cell is about eight millionths of a meter or eight micrometers
(abbreviated as eight μm) in diameter; the head of a pin of is about two thousandths of a meter (two mm) in diameter. That
means about 250 red blood cells could fit on the head of a pin.
Most student microscopes are classified as light microscopes (Figure 4.2a). Visible light passes and is bent through the
lens system to enable the user to see the specimen. Light microscopes are advantageous for viewing living organisms, but
since individual cells are generally transparent, their components are not distinguishable unless they are colored with special
stains. Staining, however, usually kills the cells.
Light microscopes commonly used in the undergraduate college laboratory magnify up to approximately 400 times. Two
parameters that are important in microscopy are magnification and resolving power. Magnification is the process of
enlarging an object in appearance. Resolving power is the ability of a microscope to distinguish two adjacent structures as
separate: the higher the resolution, the better the clarity and detail of the image. When oil immersion lenses are used for the
study of small objects, magnification is usually increased to 1,000 times. In order to gain a better understanding of cellular
structure and function, scientists typically use electron microscopes.
Most light microscopes used in a college biology lab can magnify cells up to approximately 400 times
and have a resolution of about 200 nanometers. (b) Electron microscopes provide a much higher magnification,
100,000x, and a have a resolution of 50 picometers.
Electron Microscopes
In contrast to light microscopes, electron microscopes (Figure 4.2b) use a beam of electrons instead of a beam of light.
Not only does this allow for higher magnification and, thus, more detail (Figure 4.3), it also provides higher resolving
power. The method used to prepare the specimen for viewing with an electron microscope kills the specimen. Electrons
have short wavelengths (shorter than photons) that move best in a vacuum, so living cells cannot be viewed with an electron
microscope.
In a scanning electron microscope, a beam of electrons moves back and forth across a cell’s surface, creating details of cell
surface characteristics. In a transmission electron microscope, the electron beam penetrates the cell and provides details of a
cell’s internal structures. As you might imagine, electron microscopes are significantly more bulky and expensive than light
microscopes.
These Salmonella bacteria appear as tiny purple dots when viewed with a light microscope. (b) This
scanning electron microscope micrograph shows Salmonella bacteria (in red) invading human cells (yellow). Even
though subfigure (b) shows a different Salmonella specimen than subfigure (a), you can still observe the comparative
increase in magnification and detail.
Cell Theory
The microscopes we use today are far more complex than those used in the 1600s by Antony van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch
shopkeeper who had great skill in crafting lenses. Despite the limitations of his now-ancient lenses, van Leeuwenhoek
observed the movements of protista (a type of single-celled organism) and sperm, which he collectively termed
“animalcules.”
In a 1665 publication called Micrographia, experimental scientist Robert Hooke coined the term “cell” for the box-like
structures he observed when viewing cork tissue through a lens. In the 1670s, van Leeuwenhoek discovered bacteria and
protozoa. Later advances in lenses, microscope construction, and staining techniques enabled other scientists to see some
components inside cells.
By the late 1830s, botanist Matthias Schleiden and zoologist Theodor Schwann were studying tissues and proposed the
unified cell theory, which states that all living things are composed of one or more cells, the cell is the basic unit of life,
and new cells arise from existing cells. Rudolf Virchow later made important contributions to this theory.
Cells fall into one of two broad categories: prokaryotic and eukaryotic. Only the predominantly single-celled organisms
of the domains Bacteria and Archaea are classified as prokaryotes (pro- = “before”; -kary- = “nucleus”). Cells of animals,
plants, fungi, and protists are all eukaryotes (ceu- = “true”) and are made up of eukaryotic cells.
Components of Prokaryotic Cells
All cells share four common components: 1) a plasma membrane, an outer covering that separates the cell’s interior from its
surrounding environment; 2) cytoplasm, consisting of a jelly-like cytosol within the cell in which other cellular components are found; 3) DNA, the genetic material of the cell; and 4) ribosomes, which synthesize proteins. However, prokaryotes
differ from eukaryotic cells in several ways.
A prokaryote is a simple, mostly single-celled (unicellular) organism that lacks a nucleus, or any other membrane-bound
organelle.We will shortly come to see that this is significantly different in eukaryotes. Prokaryotic DNA is found in a central
part of the cell: the nucleoid.
This figure shows the generalized structure of a prokaryotic cell. All prokaryotes have chromosomal DNA
localized in a nucleoid, ribosomes, a cell membrane, and a cell wall. The other structures shown are present in some,
but not all, bacteria.
Most prokaryotes have a peptidoglycan cell wall and many have a polysaccharide capsule (Figure 4.5). The cell wall acts
as an extra layer of protection, helps the cell maintain its shape, and prevents dehydration. The capsule enables the cell to
attach to surfaces in its environment. Some prokaryotes have flagella, pili, or fimbriae. Flagella are used for locomotion.
Pili are used to exchange genetic material during a type of reproduction called conjugation. Fimbriae are used by bacteria
to attach to a host cell.
Cell Size
At 0.1 to 5.0 μm in diameter, prokaryotic cells are significantly smaller than eukaryotic cells, which have diameters ranging
from 10 to 100 μm (Figure 4.6). The small size of prokaryotes allows ions and organic molecules that enter them to quickly
diffuse to other parts of the cell. Similarly, any wastes produced within a prokaryotic cell can quickly diffuse out. This is
not the case in eukaryotic cells, which have developed different structural adaptations to enhance intracellular transport.
This figure shows relative sizes of microbes on a logarithmic scale (recall that each unit of increase in a
logarithmic scale represents a 10-fold increase in the quantity being measured).
Small size, in general, is necessary for all cells, whether prokaryotic or eukaryotic. Let’s examine why that is so. First, we’ll
consider the area and volume of a typical cell. Not all cells are spherical in shape, but most tend to approximate a sphere.
You may remember from your high school geometry course that the formula for the surface area of a sphere is 4πr2, while
the formula for its volume is 4πr3/3. Thus, as the radius of a cell increases, its surface area increases as the square of its
radius, but its volume increases as the cube of its radius (much more rapidly). Therefore, as a cell increases in size, its
surface area-to-volume ratio decreases. This same principle would apply if the cell had the shape of a cube (Figure 4.7). If
the cell grows too large, the plasma membrane will not have sufficient surface area to support the rate of diffusion required
for the increased volume. In other words, as a cell grows, it becomes less efficient. One way to become more efficient is to
divide; another way is to develop organelles that perform specific tasks. These adaptations lead to the development of more
sophisticated cells called eukaryotic cells.
Have you ever heard the phrase “form follows function?” It’s a philosophy practiced in many industries. In architecture,
this means that buildings should be constructed to support the activities that will be carried out inside them. For example,
a skyscraper should be built with several elevator banks; a hospital should be built so that its emergency room is easily
accessible.
Our natural world also utilizes the principle of form following function, especially in cell biology, and this will become clear
as we explore eukaryotic cells ( Figure 4.8). Unlike prokaryotic cells, eukaryotic cells have: 1) a membrane-bound nucleus;
2) numerous membrane-bound organelles such as the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, chloroplasts, mitochondria,
and others; and 3) several, rod-shaped chromosomes. Because a eukaryotic cell’s nucleus is surrounded by a membrane, it is
often said to have a “true nucleus.” The word “organelle” means “little organ,” and, as already mentioned, organelles have
specialized cellular functions, just as the organs of your body have specialized functions.
At this point, it should be clear to you that eukaryotic cells have a more complex structure than prokaryotic cells. Organelles
allow different functions to be compartmentalized in different areas of the cell. Before turning to organelles, let’s first
examine two important components of the cell: the plasma membrane and the cytoplasm.
The Plasma Membrane
Like prokaryotes, eukaryotic cells have a plasma membrane ( Figure 4.9), a phospholipid bilayer with embedded proteins
that separates the internal contents of the cell from its surrounding environment. A phospholipid is a lipid molecule with two fatty acid chains and a phosphate-containing group. The plasma membrane controls the passage of organic molecules,
ions, water, and oxygen into and out of the cell.Wastes (such as carbon dioxide and ammonia) also leave the cell by passing
through the plasma membrane.
The eukaryotic plasma membrane is a phospholipid bilayer with proteins and cholesterol embedded in it.
The plasma membranes of cells that specialize in absorption are folded into fingerlike projections called microvilli (singular
= microvillus); ( Figure 4.10). Such cells are typically found lining the small intestine, the organ that absorbs nutrients
from digested food. This is an excellent example of form following function. People with celiac disease have an immune
response to gluten, which is a protein found in wheat, barley, and rye. The immune response damages microvilli, and thus,
afflicted individuals cannot absorb nutrients. This leads to malnutrition, cramping, and diarrhea. Patients suffering from
celiac disease must follow a gluten-free diet.
Microvilli, shown here as they appear on cells lining the small intestine, increase the surface area available
for absorption. These microvilli are only found on the area of the plasma membrane that faces the cavity from which
substances will be absorbed.
The Cytoplasm
The cytoplasm is the entire region of a cell between the plasma membrane and the nuclear envelope (a structure to be
discussed shortly). It is made up of organelles suspended in the gel-like cytosol, the cytoskeleton, and various chemicals (
Figure 4.8). Even though the cytoplasm consists of 70 to 80 percent water, it has a semi-solid consistency, which comes
from the proteins within it. However, proteins are not the only organic molecules found in the cytoplasm. Glucose and other
simple sugars, polysaccharides, amino acids, nucleic acids, fatty acids, and derivatives of glycerol are found there, too. Ions
of sodium, potassium, calcium, and many other elements are also dissolved in the cytoplasm. Many metabolic reactions,
including protein synthesis, take place in the cytoplasm.
The Nucleus
Typically, the nucleus is the most prominent organelle in a cell ( Figure 4.8). The nucleus (plural = nuclei) houses the cell’s
DNA and directs the synthesis of ribosomes and proteins. Let’s look at it in more detail ( Figure 4.11).
The nucleus stores chromatin (DNA plus proteins) in a gel-like substance called the nucleoplasm. The
nucleolus is a condensed region of chromatin where ribosome synthesis occurs. The boundary of the nucleus is
called the nuclear envelope. It consists of two phospholipid bilayers: an outer membrane and an inner membrane. The
nuclear membrane is continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum. Nuclear pores allow substances to enter and exit the
nucleus.
The Nuclear Envelope
The nuclear envelope is a double-membrane structure that constitutes the outermost portion of the nucleus ( Figure 4.11).
Both the inner and outer membranes of the nuclear envelope are phospholipid bilayers.
The nuclear envelope is punctuated with pores that control the passage of ions, molecules, and RNA between the
nucleoplasm and cytoplasm. The nucleoplasm is the semi-solid fluid inside the nucleus, where we find the chromatin and
the nucleolus.
Chromatin and Chromosomes
To understand chromatin, it is helpful to first consider chromosomes. Chromosomes are structures within the nucleus that
are made up of DNA, the hereditary material. You may remember that in prokaryotes, DNA is organized into a single
circular chromosome. In eukaryotes, chromosomes are linear structures. Every eukaryotic species has a specific number of
chromosomes in the nuclei of its body’s cells. For example, in humans, the chromosome number is 46, while in fruit flies, it
is eight. Chromosomes are only visible and distinguishable from one another when the cell is getting ready to divide. When
the cell is in the growth and maintenance phases of its life cycle, proteins are attached to chromosomes, and they resemble
an unwound, jumbled bunch of threads. These unwound protein-chromosome complexes are called chromatin ( Figure
4.12); chromatin describes the material that makes up the chromosomes both when condensed and decondensed.
This image shows various levels of the organization of chromatin (DNA and protein). (b) This image
shows paired chromosomes.
The Nucleolus
We already know that the nucleus directs the synthesis of ribosomes, but how does it do this? Some chromosomes have
sections of DNA that encode ribosomal RNA. A darkly staining area within the nucleus called the nucleolus (plural
= nucleoli) aggregates the ribosomal RNA with associated proteins to assemble the ribosomal subunits that are then
transported out through the pores in the nuclear envelope to the cytoplasm.
Ribosomes
Ribosomes are the cellular structures responsible for protein synthesis. When viewed through an electron microscope,
ribosomes appear either as clusters (polyribosomes) or single, tiny dots that float freely in the cytoplasm. They may be
attached to the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane or the cytoplasmic side of the endoplasmic reticulum and the
outer membrane of the nuclear envelope ( Figure 4.8). Electron microscopy has shown us that ribosomes, which are large
complexes of protein and RNA, consist of two subunits, aptly called large and small ( Figure 4.13). Ribosomes receive their
“orders” for protein synthesis from the nucleus where the DNA is transcribed into messenger RNA (mRNA). The mRNA
travels to the ribosomes, which translate the code provided by the sequence of the nitrogenous bases in the mRNA into a
specific order of amino acids in a protein. Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins.
Ribosomes are made up of a large subunit (top) and a small subunit (bottom). During protein synthesis,
ribosomes assemble amino acids into proteins.
Because proteins synthesis is an essential function of all cells (including enzymes, hormones, antibodies, pigments,
structural components, and surface receptors), ribosomes are found in practically every cell. Ribosomes are particularly
abundant in cells that synthesize large amounts of protein. For example, the pancreas is responsible for creating several
digestive enzymes and the cells that produce these enzymes contain many ribosomes. Thus, we see another example of form
following function.
Mitochondria
Mitochondria (singular = mitochondrion) are often called the “powerhouses” or “energy factories” of a cell because they
are responsible for making adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the cell’s main energy-carrying molecule. ATP represents the
short-term stored energy of the cell. Cellular respiration is the process of making ATP using the chemical energy found in
glucose and other nutrients. In mitochondria, this process uses oxygen and produces carbon dioxide as a waste product. In
fact, the carbon dioxide that you exhale with every breath comes from the cellular reactions that produce carbon dioxide as
a byproduct.
In keeping with our theme of form following function, it is important to point out that muscle cells have a very high
concentration of mitochondria that produce ATP. Your muscle cells need a lot of energy to keep your body moving. When
your cells don’t get enough oxygen, they do not make a lot of ATP. Instead, the small amount of ATP they make in the
absence of oxygen is accompanied by the production of lactic acid.
Mitochondria are oval-shaped, double membrane organelles ( Figure 4.14) that have their own ribosomes and DNA. Each
membrane is a phospholipid bilayer embedded with proteins. The inner layer has folds called cristae. The area surrounded
by the folds is called the mitochondrial matrix. The cristae and the matrix have different roles in cellular respiration.
This electron micrograph shows a mitochondrion as viewed with a transmission electron microscope. This
organelle has an outer membrane and an inner membrane. The inner membrane contains folds, called cristae, which
increase its surface area. The space between the two membranes is called the intermembrane space, and the space
inside the inner membrane is called the mitochondrial matrix. ATP synthesis takes place on the inner membrane.
(credit: modification of work by Matthew Britton; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Peroxisomes
Peroxisomes are small, round organelles enclosed by single membranes. They carry out oxidation reactions that break
down fatty acids and amino acids. They also detoxify many poisons that may enter the body. (Many of these oxidation
reactions release hydrogen peroxide, H2O2, which would be damaging to cells; however, when these reactions are confined
to peroxisomes, enzymes safely break down the H2O2 into oxygen and water.) For example, alcohol is detoxified by
peroxisomes in liver cells. Glyoxysomes, which are specialized peroxisomes in plants, are responsible for converting stored
fats into sugars.
Vesicles and Vacuoles
Vesicles and vacuoles are membrane-bound sacs that function in storage and transport. Other than the fact that vacuoles are
somewhat larger than vesicles, there is a very subtle distinction between them: The membranes of vesicles can fuse with
either the plasma membrane or other membrane systems within the cell. Additionally, some agents such as enzymes within
plant vacuoles break down macromolecules. The membrane of a vacuole does not fuse with the membranes of other cellular
components.
Animal Cells versus Plant Cells
At this point, you know that each eukaryotic cell has a plasma membrane, cytoplasm, a nucleus, ribosomes, mitochondria,
peroxisomes, and in some, vacuoles, but there are some striking differences between animal and plant cells. While both
animal and plant cells have microtubule organizing centers (MTOCs), animal cells also have centrioles associated with the
MTOC: a complex called the centrosome. Animal cells each have a centrosome and lysosomes, whereas plant cells do not.
Plant cells have a cell wall, chloroplasts and other specialized plastids, and a large central vacuole, whereas animal cells do
not.
The Centrosome
The centrosome is a microtubule-organizing center found near the nuclei of animal cells. It contains a pair of centrioles, two
structures that lie perpendicular to each other ( Figure 4.15). Each centriole is a cylinder of nine triplets of microtubules.
The centrosome consists of two centrioles that lie at right angles to each other. Each centriole is a cylinder
made up of nine triplets of microtubules. Nontubulin proteins (indicated by the green lines) hold the microtubule triplets
together.
The centrosome (the organelle where all microtubules originate) replicates itself before a cell divides, and the centrioles
appear to have some role in pulling the duplicated chromosomes to opposite ends of the dividing cell. However, the exact
function of the centrioles in cell division isn’t clear, because cells that have had the centrosome removed can still divide,
and plant cells, which lack centrosomes, are capable of cell division.
Lysosomes
Animal cells have another set of organelles not found in plant cells: lysosomes. The lysosomes are the cell’s “garbage
disposal.” In plant cells, the digestive processes take place in vacuoles. Enzymes within the lysosomes aid the breakdown of
proteins, polysaccharides, lipids, nucleic acids, and even worn-out organelles. These enzymes are active at a much lower pH
than that of the cytoplasm. Therefore, the pH within lysosomes is more acidic than the pH of the cytoplasm. Many reactions
that take place in the cytoplasm could not occur at a low pH, so again, the advantage of compartmentalizing the eukaryotic
cell into organelles is apparent.
The Cell Wall
If you examine Figure 4.8b, the diagram of a plant cell, you will see a structure external to the plasma membrane called
the cell wall. The cell wall is a rigid covering that protects the cell, provides structural support, and gives shape to the cell.
Fungal and protistan cells also have cell walls. While the chief component of prokaryotic cell walls is peptidoglycan, the
major organic molecule in the plant cell wall is cellulose ( Figure 4.16), a polysaccharide made up of glucose units. Have
you ever noticed that when you bite into a raw vegetable, like celery, it crunches? That’s because you are tearing the rigid
cell walls of the celery cells with your teeth.
Cellulose is a long chain of β-glucose molecules connected by a 1-4 linkage. The dashed lines at each
end of the figure indicate a series of many more glucose units. The size of the page makes it impossible to portray an
entire cellulose molecule.
Chloroplasts
Like the mitochondria, chloroplasts have their own DNA and ribosomes, but chloroplasts have an entirely different function.
Chloroplasts are plant cell organelles that carry out photosynthesis. Photosynthesis is the series of reactions that use carbon
dioxide, water, and light energy to make glucose and oxygen. This is a major difference between plants and animals; plants
(autotrophs) are able to make their own food, like sugars, while animals (heterotrophs) must ingest their food.
Like mitochondria, chloroplasts have outer and inner membranes, but within the space enclosed by a chloroplast’s inner
membrane is a set of interconnected and stacked fluid-filled membrane sacs called thylakoids ( Figure 4.17). Each stack of
thylakoids is called a granum (plural = grana). The fluid enclosed by the inner membrane that surrounds the grana is called
the stroma.
The chloroplast has an outer membrane, an inner membrane, and membrane structures called thylakoids
that are stacked into grana. The space inside the thylakoid membranes is called the thylakoid space. The light
harvesting reactions take place in the thylakoid membranes, and the synthesis of sugar takes place in the fluid inside
the inner membrane, which is called the stroma. Chloroplasts also have their own genome, which is contained on a
single circular chromosome.
The chloroplasts contain a green pigment called chlorophyll, which captures the light energy that drives the reactions of
photosynthesis. Like plant cells, photosynthetic protists also have chloroplasts. Some bacteria perform photosynthesis, but
their chlorophyll is not relegated to an organelle.
Previously, we mentioned vacuoles as essential components of plant cells. If you look at Figure 4.8b, you will see that plant
cells each have a large central vacuole that occupies most of the area of the cell. The central vacuole plays a key role in
regulating the cell’s concentration of water in changing environmental conditions. Have you ever noticed that if you forget
to water a plant for a few days, it wilts? That’s because as the water concentration in the soil becomes lower than the water
concentration in the plant, water moves out of the central vacuoles and cytoplasm. As the central vacuole shrinks, it leaves
the cell wall unsupported. This loss of support to the cell walls of plant cells results in the wilted appearance of the plant.
The central vacuole also supports the expansion of the cell. When the central vacuole holds more water, the cell gets larger
without having to invest a lot of energy in synthesizing new cytoplasm.
The endomembrane system (endo = “within”) is a group of membranes and organelles (Figure 4.18) in eukaryotic cells
that works together to modify, package, and transport lipids and proteins. It includes the nuclear envelope, lysosomes, and
vesicles, which we’ve already mentioned, and the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus, which we will cover shortly.
Although not technically within the cell, the plasma membrane is included in the endomembrane system because, as you will
see, it interacts with the other endomembranous organelles. The endomembrane system does not include the membranes of
either mitochondria or chloroplasts.
The Endoplasmic Reticulum
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Figure 4.18) is a series of interconnected membranous sacs and tubules that collectively
modifies proteins and synthesizes lipids. However, these two functions are performed in separate areas of the ER: the rough
ER and the smooth ER, respectively.
The hollow portion of the ER tubules is called the lumen or cisternal space. The membrane of the ER, which is a
phospholipid bilayer embedded with proteins, is continuous with the nuclear envelope.
Rough ER
The rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) is so named because the ribosomes attached to its cytoplasmic surface give it a
studded appearance when viewed through an electron microscope.
This transmission electron micrograph shows the rough endoplasmic reticulum and other organelles in a pancreatic cell.
Ribosomes transfer their newly synthesized proteins into the lumen of the RER where they undergo structural modifications,
such as folding or the acquisition of side chains. These modified proteins will be incorporated into cellular membranes—the
membrane of the ER or those of other organelles—or secreted from the cell (such as protein hormones, enzymes). The RER
also makes phospholipids for cellular membranes.
If the phospholipids or modified proteins are not destined to stay in the RER, they will reach their destinations via transport
vesicles that bud from the RER’s membrane (Figure 4.18).
Since the RER is engaged in modifying proteins (such as enzymes, for example) that will be secreted from the cell, you
would be correct in assuming that the RER is abundant in cells that secrete proteins. This is the case with cells of the liver,
for example.
Smooth ER
The smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) is continuous with the RER but has few or no ribosomes on its cytoplasmic
surface (Figure 4.18). Functions of the SER include synthesis of carbohydrates, lipids, and steroid hormones; detoxification
of medications and poisons; and storage of calcium ions.
In muscle cells, a specialized SER called the sarcoplasmic reticulum is responsible for storage of the calcium ions that are
needed to trigger the coordinated contractions of the muscle cells.
The Golgi Apparatus
We have already mentioned that vesicles can bud from the ER and transport their contents elsewhere, but where do the
vesicles go? Before reaching their final destination, the lipids or proteins within the transport vesicles still need to be sorted,
packaged, and tagged so that they wind up in the right place. Sorting, tagging, packaging, and distribution of lipids and
proteins takes place in the Golgi apparatus (also called the Golgi body), a series of flattened membranes.
The Golgi apparatus in this white blood cell is visible as a stack of semicircular, flattened rings in the lower
portion of the image. Several vesicles can be seen near the Golgi apparatus. (credit: modification of work by Louisa
Howard)
The receiving side of the Golgi apparatus is called the cis face. The opposite side is called the trans face. The transport
vesicles that formed from the ER travel to the cis face, fuse with it, and empty their contents into the lumen of the Golgi
apparatus. As the proteins and lipids travel through the Golgi, they undergo further modifications that allow them to be
sorted. The most frequent modification is the addition of short chains of sugar molecules. These newly modified proteins
and lipids are then tagged with phosphate groups or other small molecules so that they can be routed to their proper
destinations.
Finally, the modified and tagged proteins are packaged into secretory vesicles that bud from the trans face of the Golgi.
While some of these vesicles deposit their contents into other parts of the cell where they will be used, other secretory
vesicles fuse with the plasma membrane and release their contents outside the cell.
In another example of form following function, cells that engage in a great deal of secretory activity (such as cells of the
salivary glands that secrete digestive enzymes or cells of the immune system that secrete antibodies) have an abundance of
Golgi.
In plant cells, the Golgi apparatus has the additional role of synthesizing polysaccharides, some of which are incorporated
into the cell wall and some of which are used in other parts of the cell.
Lysosomes
In addition to their role as the digestive component and organelle-recycling facility of animal cells, lysosomes are
considered to be parts of the endomembrane system. Lysosomes also use their hydrolytic enzymes to destroy pathogens
(disease-causing organisms) that might enter the cell. A good example of this occurs in a group of white blood cells called
macrophages, which are part of your body’s immune system. In a process known as phagocytosis or endocytosis, a section
of the plasma membrane of the macrophage invaginates (folds in) and engulfs a pathogen. The invaginated section, with
the pathogen inside, then pinches itself off from the plasma membrane and becomes a vesicle. The vesicle fuses with a
lysosome. The lysosome’s hydrolytic enzymes then destroy the pathogen.
A macrophage has engulfed (phagocytized) a potentially pathogenic bacterium and then fuses with a
lysosomes within the cell to destroy the pathogen. Other organelles are present in the cell but for simplicity are not
shown.
If you were to remove all the organelles from a cell, would the plasma membrane and the cytoplasm be the only components
left? No. Within the cytoplasm, there would still be ions and organic molecules, plus a network of protein fibers that help
maintain the shape of the cell, secure some organelles in specific positions, allow cytoplasm and vesicles to move within
the cell, and enable cells within multicellular organisms to move. Collectively, this network of protein fibers is known
as the cytoskeleton. There are three types of fibers within the cytoskeleton: microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and
microtubules (Figure 4.22). Here, we will examine each.
Microfilaments thicken the cortex around the inner edge of a cell; like rubber bands, they resist tension.
Microtubules are found in the interior of the cell where they maintain cell shape by resisting compressive forces.
Intermediate filaments are found throughout the cell and hold organelles in place.
Microfilaments
Of the three types of protein fibers in the cytoskeleton, microfilaments are the narrowest. They function in cellular
movement, have a diameter of about 7 nm, and are made of two intertwined strands of a globular protein called actin (Figure
4.23). For this reason, microfilaments are also known as actin filaments.
Actin is powered by ATP to assemble its filamentous form, which serves as a track for the movement of a motor protein
called myosin. This enables actin to engage in cellular events requiring motion, such as cell division in animal cells and
cytoplasmic streaming, which is the circular movement of the cell cytoplasm in plant cells. Actin and myosin are plentiful
in muscle cells. When your actin and myosin filaments slide past each other, your muscles contract.
Microfilaments also provide some rigidity and shape to the cell. They can depolymerize (disassemble) and reform quickly,
thus enabling a cell to change its shape and move. White blood cells (your body’s infection-fighting cells) make good use
of this ability. They can move to the site of an infection and phagocytize the pathogen.
Intermediate Filaments
Intermediate filaments are made of several strands of fibrous proteins that are wound together (Figure 4.24). These elements
of the cytoskeleton get their name from the fact that their diameter, 8 to 10 nm, is between those of microfilaments and
microtubules.
Intermediate filaments consist of several intertwined strands of fibrous proteins.
Intermediate filaments have no role in cell movement. Their function is purely structural. They bear tension, thus
maintaining the shape of the cell, and anchor the nucleus and other organelles in place. Figure 4.22 shows how intermediate
filaments create a supportive scaffolding inside the cell.
The intermediate filaments are the most diverse group of cytoskeletal elements. Several types of fibrous proteins are found
in the intermediate filaments. You are probably most familiar with keratin, the fibrous protein that strengthens your hair,
nails, and the epidermis of the skin.
Microtubules
As their name implies, microtubules are small hollow tubes. The walls of the microtubule are made of polymerized dimers
of α-tubulin and β-tubulin, two globular proteins (Figure 4.25). With a diameter of about 25 nm, microtubules are the
widest components of the cytoskeleton. They help the cell resist compression, provide a track along which vesicles move
through the cell, and pull replicated chromosomes to opposite ends of a dividing cell. Like microfilaments, microtubules
can dissolve and reform quickly.
Microtubules are hollow. Their walls consist of 13 polymerized dimers of α-tubulin and β-tubulin (right
image). The left image shows the molecular structure of the tube.
Microtubules are also the structural elements of flagella, cilia, and centrioles (the latter are the two perpendicular bodies of
the centrosome). In fact, in animal cells, the centrosome is the microtubule-organizing center. In eukaryotic cells, flagella
and cilia are quite different structurally from their counterparts in prokaryotes, as discussed below.
Flagella and Cilia
To refresh your memory, flagella (singular = flagellum) are long, hair-like structures that extend from the plasma membrane
and are used to move an entire cell (for example, sperm, Euglena). When present, the cell has just one flagellum or a few
flagella. When cilia (singular = cilium) are present, however, many of them extend along the entire surface of the plasma
membrane. They are short, hair-like structures that are used to move entire cells (such as paramecia) or substances along
the outer surface of the cell (for example, the cilia of cells lining the Fallopian tubes that move the ovum toward the uterus,
or cilia lining the cells of the respiratory tract that trap particulate matter and move it toward your nostrils.)
Despite their differences in length and number, flagella and cilia share a common structural arrangement of microtubules
called a “9 + 2 array.” This is an appropriate name because a single flagellum or cilium is made of a ring of nine microtubule
doublets, surrounding a single microtubule doublet in the center (Figure 4.26).
You already know that a group of similar cells working together is called a tissue. As you might expect, if cells are to work
together, they must communicate with each other, just as you need to communicate with others if you work on a group
project. Let’s take a look at how cells communicate with each other.
Extracellular Matrix of Animal Cells
Most animal cells release materials into the extracellular space. The primary components of these materials are proteins,
and the most abundant protein is collagen. Collagen fibers are interwoven with carbohydrate-containing protein molecules
called proteoglycans. Collectively, these materials are called the extracellular matrix (Figure 4.27). Not only does the
extracellular matrix hold the cells together to form a tissue, but it also allows the cells within the tissue to communicate with
each other. How can this happen?
The extracellular matrix consists of a network of proteins and carbohydrates.
Cells have protein receptors on the extracellular surfaces of their plasma membranes. When a molecule within the matrix
binds to the receptor, it changes the molecular structure of the receptor. The receptor, in turn, changes the conformation
of the microfilaments positioned just inside the plasma membrane. These conformational changes induce chemical signals
inside the cell that reach the nucleus and turn “on” or “off” the transcription of specific sections of DNA, which affects the
production of associated proteins, thus changing the activities within the cell.
Blood clotting provides an example of the role of the extracellular matrix in cell communication. When the cells lining a
blood vessel are damaged, they display a protein receptor called tissue factor. When tissue factor binds with another factor
in the extracellular matrix, it causes platelets to adhere to the wall of the damaged blood vessel, stimulates the adjacent
smooth muscle cells in the blood vessel to contract (thus constricting the blood vessel), and initiates a series of steps that
stimulate the platelets to produce clotting factors.
Intercellular Junctions
Cells can also communicate with each other via direct contact, referred to as intercellular junctions. There are some
differences in the ways that plant and animal cells do this. Plasmodesmata are junctions between plant cells, whereas animal
cell contacts include tight junctions, gap junctions, and desmosomes.
Plasmodesmata
In general, long stretches of the plasma membranes of neighboring plant cells cannot touch one another because they are
separated by the cell wall that surrounds each cell (Figure 4.8b). How then, can a plant transfer water and other soil nutrients
from its roots, through its stems, and to its leaves? Such transport uses the vascular tissues (xylem and phloem) primarily.
There also exist structural modifications called plasmodesmata (singular = plasmodesma), numerous channels that pass
between cell walls of adjacent plant cells, connect their cytoplasm, and enable materials to be transported from cell to cell,
and thus throughout the plant.
A plasmodesma is a channel between the cell walls of two adjacent plant cells. Plasmodesmata allow
materials to pass from the cytoplasm of one plant cell to the cytoplasm of an adjacent cell.
Tight Junctions
A tight junction is a watertight seal between two adjacent animal cells (Figure 4.29). The cells are held tightly against each
other by proteins (predominantly two proteins called claudins and occludins).
Tight junctions form watertight connections between adjacent animal cells. Proteins create tight junction
adherence. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
This tight adherence prevents materials from leaking between the cells; tight junctions are typically found in epithelial
tissues that line internal organs and cavities, and comprise most of the skin. For example, the tight junctions of the epithelial
cells lining your urinary bladder prevent urine from leaking out into the extracellular space.
Desmosomes
Also found only in animal cells are desmosomes, which act like spot welds between adjacent epithelial cells (Figure 4.30).
Short proteins called cadherins in the plasma membrane connect to intermediate filaments to create desmosomes. The
cadherins join two adjacent cells together and maintain the cells in a sheet-like formation in organs and tissues that stretch,
like the skin, heart, and muscles.
A desmosome forms a very strong spot weld between cells. It is created by the linkage of cadherins and
intermediate filaments. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Gap Junctions
Gap junctions in animal cells are like plasmodesmata in plant cells in that they are channels between adjacent cells that
allow for the transport of ions, nutrients, and other substances that enable cells to communicate (Figure 4.31). Structurally,
however, gap junctions and plasmodesmata differ.
A gap junction is a protein-lined pore that allows water and small molecules to pass between adjacent
animal cells. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Gap junctions develop when a set of six proteins (called connexins) in the plasma membrane arrange themselves in an
elongated donut-like configuration called a connexon. When the pores (“doughnut holes”) of connexons in adjacent animal
cells align, a channel between the two cells forms. Gap junctions are particularly important in cardiac muscle: The electrical
signal for the muscle to contract is passed efficiently through gap junctions, allowing the heart muscle cells to contract in
tandem.
Introduction
The plasma membrane, which is also called the cell membrane, has many functions, but the most basic one is to define
the borders of the cell and keep the cell functional. The plasma membrane is selectively permeable. This means that the
membrane allows some materials to freely enter or leave the cell, while other materials cannot move freely, but require the
use of a specialized structure, and occasionally, even energy investment for crossing.
A cell’s plasma membrane defines the cell, outlines its borders, and determines the nature of its interaction with its
environment (see Table 5.1 for a summary). Cells exclude some substances, take in others, and excrete still others, all in
controlled quantities. The plasma membrane must be very flexible to allow certain cells, such as red blood cells and white
blood cells, to change shape as they pass through narrow capillaries. These are the more obvious functions of a plasma
membrane. In addition, the surface of the plasma membrane carries markers that allow cells to recognize one another, which
is vital for tissue and organ formation during early development, and which later plays a role in the “self” versus “non-self”
distinction of the immune response.
Among the most sophisticated functions of the plasma membrane is the ability to transmit signals by means of complex,
integral proteins known as receptors. These proteins act both as receivers of extracellular inputs and as activators of
intracellular processes. These membrane receptors provide extracellular attachment sites for effectors like hormones and
growth factors, and they activate intracellular response cascades when their effectors are bound. Occasionally, receptors
are hijacked by viruses (HIV, human immunodeficiency virus, is one example) that use them to gain entry into cells, and
at times, the genes encoding receptors become mutated, causing the process of signal transduction to malfunction with
disastrous consequences.
Fluid Mosaic Model
The existence of the plasma membrane was identified in the 1890s, and its chemical components were identified in
1915. The principal components identified at that time were lipids and proteins. The first widely accepted model of the
plasma membrane’s structure was proposed in 1935 by Hugh Davson and James Danielli; it was based on the “railroad
track” appearance of the plasma membrane in early electron micrographs. They theorized that the structure of the plasma
membrane resembles a sandwich, with protein being analogous to the bread, and lipids being analogous to the filling. In
the 1950s, advances in microscopy, notably transmission electron microscopy (TEM), allowed researchers to see that the
core of the plasma membrane consisted of a double, rather than a single, layer. A new model that better explains both the
microscopic observations and the function of that plasma membrane was proposed by S.J. Singer and Garth L. Nicolson in
1972.
The explanation proposed by Singer and Nicolson is called the fluid mosaic model. The model has evolved somewhat over
time, but it still best accounts for the structure and functions of the plasma membrane as we now understand them. The
fluid mosaic model describes the structure of the plasma membrane as a mosaic of components—including phospholipids,
cholesterol, proteins, and carbohydrates—that gives the membrane a fluid character. Plasma membranes range from 5 to
10 nm in thickness. For comparison, human red blood cells, visible via light microscopy, are approximately 8 μm wide, or
approximately 1,000 times wider than a plasma membrane. The membrane does look a bit like a sandwich.
The fluid mosaic model of the plasma membrane describes the plasma membrane as a fluid combination of
phospholipids, cholesterol, and proteins. Carbohydrates attached to lipids (glycolipids) and to proteins (glycoproteins)
extend from the outward-facing surface of the membrane.
The principal components of a plasma membrane are lipids (phospholipids and cholesterol), proteins, and carbohydrates
attached to some of the lipids and some of the proteins. A phospholipid is a molecule consisting of glycerol, two fatty acids,
and a phosphate-linked head group. Cholesterol, another lipid composed of four fused carbon rings, is found alongside the
phospholipids in the core of the membrane. The proportions of proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates in the plasma membrane
vary with cell type, but for a typical human cell, protein accounts for about 50 percent of the composition by mass, lipids
(of all types) account for about 40 percent of the composition by mass, with the remaining 10 percent of the composition
by mass being carbohydrates. However, the concentration of proteins and lipids varies with different cell membranes. For
example, myelin, an outgrowth of the membrane of specialized cells that insulates the axons of the peripheral nerves,
contains only 18 percent protein and 76 percent lipid. The mitochondrial inner membrane contains 76 percent protein and
only 24 percent lipid. The plasma membrane of human red blood cells is 30 percent lipid. Carbohydrates are present only
on the exterior surface of the plasma membrane and are attached to proteins, forming glycoproteins, or attached to lipids,
forming glycolipids.
Phospholipids
The main fabric of the membrane is composed of amphiphilic, phospholipid molecules. The hydrophilic or “water-loving”
areas of these molecules (which look like a collection of balls in an artist’s rendition of the model) (Figure 5.2) are in contact
with the aqueous fluid both inside and outside the cell. Hydrophobic, or water-hating molecules, tend to be non-polar.
They interact with other non-polar molecules in chemical reactions, but generally do not interact with polar molecules.
When placed in water, hydrophobic molecules tend to form a ball or cluster. The hydrophilic regions of the phospholipids
tend to form hydrogen bonds with water and other polar molecules on both the exterior and interior of the cell. Thus, the
membrane surfaces that face the interior and exterior of the cell are hydrophilic. In contrast, the interior of the cell membrane
is hydrophobic and will not interact with water. Therefore, phospholipids form an excellent two-layer cell membrane that
separates fluid within the cell from the fluid outside of the cell.
A phospholipid molecule (Figure 5.3) consists of a three-carbon glycerol backbone with two fatty acid molecules attached
to carbons 1 and 2, and a phosphate-containing group attached to the third carbon. This arrangement gives the overall
molecule an area described as its head (the phosphate-containing group), which has a polar character or negative charge,
and an area called the tail (the fatty acids), which has no charge. The head can form hydrogen bonds, but the tail cannot. A
molecule with this arrangement of a positively or negatively charged area and an uncharged, or non-polar, area is referred
to as amphiphilic or “dual-loving.”
This phospholipid molecule is composed of a hydrophilic head and two hydrophobic tails. The hydrophilic
head group consists of a phosphate-containing group attached to a glycerol molecule. The hydrophobic tails, each
containing either a saturated or an unsaturated fatty acid, are long hydrocarbon chains.
This characteristic is vital to the structure of a plasma membrane because, in water, phospholipids tend to become arranged
with their hydrophobic tails facing each other and their hydrophilic heads facing out. In this way, they form a lipid
bilayer—a barrier composed of a double layer of phospholipids that separates the water and other materials on one side of
the barrier from the water and other materials on the other side. In fact, phospholipids heated in an aqueous solution tend
to spontaneously form small spheres or droplets (called micelles or liposomes), with their hydrophilic heads forming the
exterior and their hydrophobic tails on the inside.
In an aqueous solution, phospholipids tend to arrange themselves with their polar heads facing outward
and their hydrophobic tails facing inward. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Proteins
Proteins make up the second major component of plasma membranes. Integral proteins (some specialized types are called
integrins) are, as their name suggests, integrated completely into the membrane structure, and their hydrophobic membranespanning
regions interact with the hydrophobic region of the the phospholipid bilayer (Figure 5.2). Single-pass integral
membrane proteins usually have a hydrophobic transmembrane segment that consists of 20–25 amino acids. Some span
only part of the membrane—associating with a single layer—while others stretch from one side of the membrane to the
other, and are exposed on either side. Some complex proteins are composed of up to 12 segments of a single protein, which
are extensively folded and embedded in the membrane (Figure 5.5). This type of protein has a hydrophilic region or regions,
and one or several mildly hydrophobic regions. This arrangement of regions of the protein tends to orient the protein
alongside the phospholipids, with the hydrophobic region of the protein adjacent to the tails of the phospholipids and the
hydrophilic region or regions of the protein protruding from the membrane and in contact with the cytosol or extracellular
fluid.
Integral membranes proteins may have one or more alpha-helices that span the membrane (examples 1
and 2), or they may have beta-sheets that span the membrane (example 3). (credit: “Foobar”/Wikimedia Commons)
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 139
Peripheral proteins are found on the exterior and interior surfaces of membranes, attached either to integral proteins or
to phospholipids. Peripheral proteins, along with integral proteins, may serve as enzymes, as structural attachments for
the fibers of the cytoskeleton, or as part of the cell’s recognition sites. These are sometimes referred to as “cell-specific”
proteins. The body recognizes its own proteins and attacks foreign proteins associated with invasive pathogens.
Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are the third major component of plasma membranes. They are always found on the exterior surface of cells
and are bound either to proteins (forming glycoproteins) or to lipids (forming glycolipids) (Figure 5.2). These carbohydrate
chains may consist of 2–60 monosaccharide units and can be either straight or branched. Along with peripheral proteins,
carbohydrates form specialized sites on the cell surface that allow cells to recognize each other. These sites have unique
patterns that allow the cell to be recognized, much the way that the facial features unique to each person allow him or her to
be recognized. This recognition function is very important to cells, as it allows the immune system to differentiate between
body cells (called “self”) and foreign cells or tissues (called “non-self”). Similar types of glycoproteins and glycolipids are
found on the surfaces of viruses and may change frequently, preventing immune cells from recognizing and attacking them.
These carbohydrates on the exterior surface of the cell—the carbohydrate components of both glycoproteins and
glycolipids—are collectively referred to as the glycocalyx (meaning “sugar coating”). The glycocalyx is highly hydrophilic
and attracts large amounts of water to the surface of the cell. This aids in the interaction of the cell with its watery
environment and in the cell’s ability to obtain substances dissolved in the water. As discussed above, the glycocalyx is
also important for cell identification, self/non-self determination, and embryonic development, and is used in cell-cell
attachments to form tissues.
Membrane Fluidity
The mosaic characteristic of the membrane, described in the fluid mosaic model, helps to illustrate its nature. The
integral proteins and lipids exist in the membrane as separate but loosely attached molecules. These resemble the separate,
multicolored tiles of a mosaic picture, and they float, moving somewhat with respect to one another. The membrane is not
like a balloon, however, that can expand and contract; rather, it is fairly rigid and can burst if penetrated or if a cell takes in too much water. However, because of its mosaic nature, a very fine needle can easily penetrate a plasma membrane without
causing it to burst, and the membrane will flow and self-seal when the needle is extracted.
The mosaic characteristics of the membrane explain some but not all of its fluidity. There are two other factors that help
maintain this fluid characteristic. One factor is the nature of the phospholipids themselves. In their saturated form, the fatty
acids in phospholipid tails are saturated with bound hydrogen atoms. There are no double bonds between adjacent carbon
atoms. This results in tails that are relatively straight. In contrast, unsaturated fatty acids do not contain a maximal number
of hydrogen atoms, but they do contain some double bonds between adjacent carbon atoms; a double bond results in a bend
in the string of carbons of approximately 30 degrees (Figure 5.3).
Thus, if saturated fatty acids, with their straight tails, are compressed by decreasing temperatures, they press in on each
other, making a dense and fairly rigid membrane. If unsaturated fatty acids are compressed, the “kinks” in their tails
elbow adjacent phospholipid molecules away, maintaining some space between the phospholipid molecules. This “elbow
room” helps to maintain fluidity in the membrane at temperatures at which membranes with saturated fatty acid tails in
their phospholipids would “freeze” or solidify. The relative fluidity of the membrane is particularly important in a cold
environment. A cold environment tends to compress membranes composed largely of saturated fatty acids, making them
less fluid and more susceptible to rupturing. Many organisms (fish are one example) are capable of adapting to cold
environments by changing the proportion of unsaturated fatty acids in their membranes in response to the lowering of the
temperature.
Animals have an additional membrane constituent that assists in maintaining fluidity. Cholesterol, which lies alongside the
phospholipids in the membrane, tends to dampen the effects of temperature on the membrane. Thus, this lipid functions
as a buffer, preventing lower temperatures from inhibiting fluidity and preventing increased temperatures from increasing
fluidity too much. Thus, cholesterol extends, in both directions, the range of temperature in which the membrane is
appropriately fluid and consequently functional. Cholesterol also serves other functions, such as organizing clusters of
transmembrane proteins into lipid rafts.
Plasma membranes must allow certain substances to enter and leave a cell, and prevent some harmful materials from
entering and some essential materials from leaving. In other words, plasma membranes are selectively permeable—they
allow some substances to pass through, but not others. If they were to lose this selectivity, the cell would no longer be able
to sustain itself, and it would be destroyed. Some cells require larger amounts of specific substances than do other cells;
they must have a way of obtaining these materials from extracellular fluids. This may happen passively, as certain materials
move back and forth, or the cell may have special mechanisms that facilitate transport. Some materials are so important to a
cell that it spends some of its energy, hydrolyzing adenosine triphosphate (ATP), to obtain these materials. Red blood cells
use some of their energy doing just that. All cells spend the majority of their energy to maintain an imbalance of sodium
and potassium ions between the interior and exterior of the cell.
The most direct forms of membrane transport are passive. Passive transport is a naturally occurring phenomenon and does
not require the cell to exert any of its energy to accomplish the movement. In passive transport, substances move from an
area of higher concentration to an area of lower concentration. A physical space in which there is a range of concentrations
of a single substance is said to have a concentration gradient.
Selective Permeability
Plasma membranes are asymmetric: the interior of the membrane is not identical to the exterior of the membrane. In fact,
there is a considerable difference between the array of phospholipids and proteins between the two leaflets that form a
membrane. On the interior of the membrane, some proteins serve to anchor the membrane to fibers of the cytoskeleton.
There are peripheral proteins on the exterior of the membrane that bind elements of the extracellular matrix. Carbohydrates, attached to lipids or proteins, are also found on the exterior surface of the plasma membrane. These carbohydrate complexes
help the cell bind substances that the cell needs in the extracellular fluid. This adds considerably to the selective nature of
plasma membranes.
The exterior surface of the plasma membrane is not identical to the interior surface of the same membrane.
Recall that plasma membranes are amphiphilic: They have hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions. This characteristic helps
the movement of some materials through the membrane and hinders the movement of others. Lipid-soluble material with a
low molecular weight can easily slip through the hydrophobic lipid core of the membrane. Substances such as the fat-soluble
vitamins A, D, E, and K readily pass through the plasma membranes in the digestive tract and other tissues. Fat-soluble
drugs and hormones also gain easy entry into cells and are readily transported into the body’s tissues and organs. Molecules
of oxygen and carbon dioxide have no charge and so pass through membranes by simple diffusion.
Polar substances present problems for the membrane. While some polar molecules connect easily with the outside of a
cell, they cannot readily pass through the lipid core of the plasma membrane. Additionally, while small ions could easily
slip through the spaces in the mosaic of the membrane, their charge prevents them from doing so. Ions such as sodium,
potassium, calcium, and chloride must have special means of penetrating plasma membranes. Simple sugars and amino
acids also need help with transport across plasma membranes, achieved by various transmembrane proteins (channels).
Diffusion
Diffusion is a passive process of transport. A single substance tends to move from an area of high concentration to an area
of low concentration until the concentration is equal across a space. You are familiar with diffusion of substances through
the air. For example, think about someone opening a bottle of ammonia in a room filled with people. The ammonia gas is at
its highest concentration in the bottle; its lowest concentration is at the edges of the room. The ammonia vapor will diffuse,
or spread away, from the bottle, and gradually, more and more people will smell the ammonia as it spreads. Materials move
within the cell’s cytosol by diffusion, and certain materials move through the plasma membrane by diffusion (Figure 5.8).
Diffusion expends no energy. On the contrary, concentration gradients are a form of potential energy, dissipated as the
gradient is eliminated.
Diffusion through a permeable membrane moves a substance from an area of high concentration
(extracellular fluid, in this case) down its concentration gradient (into the cytoplasm). (credit: modification of work by
Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Each separate substance in a medium, such as the extracellular fluid, has its own concentration gradient, independent of
the concentration gradients of other materials. In addition, each substance will diffuse according to that gradient. Within a
system, there will be different rates of diffusion of the different substances in the medium.
Factors That Affect Diffusion
Molecules move constantly in a random manner, at a rate that depends on their mass, their environment, and the amount
of thermal energy they possess, which in turn is a function of temperature. This movement accounts for the diffusion of
molecules through whatever medium in which they are localized. A substance will tend to move into any space available
to it until it is evenly distributed throughout it. After a substance has diffused completely through a space, removing its
concentration gradient, molecules will still move around in the space, but there will be no net movement of the number of
molecules from one area to another. This lack of a concentration gradient in which there is no net movement of a substance
is known as dynamic equilibrium. While diffusion will go forward in the presence of a concentration gradient of a substance,
several factors affect the rate of diffusion.
• Extent of the concentration gradient: The greater the difference in concentration, the more rapid the diffusion. The
closer the distribution of the material gets to equilibrium, the slower the rate of diffusion becomes.
• Mass of the molecules diffusing: Heavier molecules move more slowly; therefore, they diffuse more slowly. The
reverse is true for lighter molecules.
• Temperature: Higher temperatures increase the energy and therefore the movement of the molecules, increasing the
rate of diffusion. Lower temperatures decrease the energy of the molecules, thus decreasing the rate of diffusion.
• Solvent density: As the density of a solvent increases, the rate of diffusion decreases. The molecules slow down
because they have a more difficult time getting through the denser medium. If the medium is less dense, diffusion
increases. Because cells primarily use diffusion to move materials within the cytoplasm, any increase in the
cytoplasm’s density will inhibit the movement of the materials. An example of this is a person experiencing
dehydration. As the body’s cells lose water, the rate of diffusion decreases in the cytoplasm, and the cells’ functions
deteriorate. Neurons tend to be very sensitive to this effect. Dehydration frequently leads to unconsciousness and
possibly coma because of the decrease in diffusion rate within the cells.
• Solubility: As discussed earlier, nonpolar or lipid-soluble materials pass through plasma membranes more easily than
polar materials, allowing a faster rate of diffusion.
• Surface area and thickness of the plasma membrane: Increased surface area increases the rate of diffusion, whereas a
thicker membrane reduces it.
• Distance travelled: The greater the distance that a substance must travel, the slower the rate of diffusion. This places
an upper limitation on cell size. A large, spherical cell will die because nutrients or waste cannot reach or leave the
center of the cell, respectively. Therefore, cells must either be small in size, as in the case of many prokaryotes, or be
flattened, as with many single-celled eukaryotes.
A variation of diffusion is the process of filtration. In filtration, material moves according to its concentration gradient
through a membrane; sometimes the rate of diffusion is enhanced by pressure, causing the substances to filter more rapidly.
This occurs in the kidney, where blood pressure forces large amounts of water and accompanying dissolved substances, or
solutes, out of the blood and into the renal tubules. The rate of diffusion in this instance is almost totally dependent on
pressure. One of the effects of high blood pressure is the appearance of protein in the urine, which is “squeezed through” by
the abnormally high pressure.
Facilitated transport
In facilitated transport, also called facilitated diffusion, materials diffuse across the plasma membrane with the help
of membrane proteins. A concentration gradient exists that would allow these materials to diffuse into the cell without
expending cellular energy. However, these materials are ions are polar molecules that are repelled by the hydrophobic
parts of the cell membrane. Facilitated transport proteins shield these materials from the repulsive force of the membrane,
allowing them to diffuse into the cell.
The material being transported is first attached to protein or glycoprotein receptors on the exterior surface of the plasma
membrane. This allows the material that is needed by the cell to be removed from the extracellular fluid. The substances are
then passed to specific integral proteins that facilitate their passage. Some of these integral proteins are collections of beta
pleated sheets that form a pore or channel through the phospholipid bilayer. Others are carrier proteins which bind with the
substance and aid its diffusion through the membrane.
Channels
The integral proteins involved in facilitated transport are collectively referred to as transport proteins, and they function
as either channels for the material or carriers. In both cases, they are transmembrane proteins. Channels are specific
for the substance that is being transported. Channel proteins have hydrophilic domains exposed to the intracellular and
extracellular fluids; they additionally have a hydrophilic channel through their core that provides a hydrated opening
through the membrane layers (Figure 5.9). Passage through the channel allows polar compounds to avoid the nonpolar
central layer of the plasma membrane that would otherwise slow or prevent their entry into the cell. Aquaporins are channel
proteins that allow water to pass through the membrane at a very high rate.
Facilitated transport moves substances down their concentration gradients. They may cross the plasma
membrane with the aid of channel proteins. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Channel proteins are either open at all times or they are “gated,” which controls the opening of the channel. The attachment
of a particular ion to the channel protein may control the opening, or other mechanisms or substances may be involved.
In some tissues, sodium and chloride ions pass freely through open channels, whereas in other tissues a gate must be
opened to allow passage. An example of this occurs in the kidney, where both forms of channels are found in different
parts of the renal tubules. Cells involved in the transmission of electrical impulses, such as nerve and muscle cells, have
gated channels for sodium, potassium, and calcium in their membranes. Opening and closing of these channels changes
the relative concentrations on opposing sides of the membrane of these ions, resulting in the facilitation of electrical
transmission along membranes (in the case of nerve cells) or in muscle contraction (in the case of muscle cells).
Carrier Proteins
Another type of protein embedded in the plasma membrane is a carrier protein. This aptly named protein binds a substance
and, in doing so, triggers a change of its own shape, moving the bound molecule from the outside of the cell to its interior
(Figure 5.10); depending on the gradient, the material may move in the opposite direction. Carrier proteins are typically
specific for a single substance. This selectivity adds to the overall selectivity of the plasma membrane. The exact mechanism
for the change of shape is poorly understood. Proteins can change shape when their hydrogen bonds are affected, but this
may not fully explain this mechanism. Each carrier protein is specific to one substance, and there are a finite number of
these proteins in any membrane. This can cause problems in transporting enough of the material for the cell to function
properly. When all of the proteins are bound to their ligands, they are saturated and the rate of transport is at its maximum.
Increasing the concentration gradient at this point will not result in an increased rate of transport.
Some substances are able to move down their concentration gradient across the plasma membrane with
the aid of carrier proteins. Carrier proteins change shape as they move molecules across the membrane. (credit:
modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
An example of this process occurs in the kidney. Glucose, water, salts, ions, and amino acids needed by the body are filtered
in one part of the kidney. This filtrate, which includes glucose, is then reabsorbed in another part of the kidney. Because
there are only a finite number of carrier proteins for glucose, if more glucose is present than the proteins can handle, the
excess is not transported and it is excreted from the body in the urine. In a diabetic individual, this is described as “spilling
glucose into the urine.” A different group of carrier proteins called glucose transport proteins, or GLUTs, are involved in
transporting glucose and other hexose sugars through plasma membranes within the body.
Channel and carrier proteins transport material at different rates. Channel proteins transport much more quickly than do
carrier proteins. Channel proteins facilitate diffusion at a rate of tens of millions of molecules per second, whereas carrier
proteins work at a rate of a thousand to a million molecules per second.
Osmosis
Osmosis is the movement of water through a semipermeable membrane according to the concentration gradient of water
across the membrane, which is inversely proportional to the concentration of solutes. While diffusion transports material
across membranes and within cells, osmosis transports only water across a membrane and the membrane limits the diffusion
of solutes in the water. Not surprisingly, the aquaporins that facilitate water movement play a large role in osmosis, most
prominently in red blood cells and the membranes of kidney tubules.
Mechanism
Osmosis is a special case of diffusion. Water, like other substances, moves from an area of high concentration to one of low
concentration. An obvious question is what makes water move at all? Imagine a beaker with a semipermeable membrane
separating the two sides or halves (Figure 5.11). On both sides of the membrane the water level is the same, but there are
different concentrations of a dissolved substance, or solute, that cannot cross the membrane (otherwise the concentrations
on each side would be balanced by the solute crossing the membrane). If the volume of the solution on both sides of the
membrane is the same, but the concentrations of solute are different, then there are different amounts of water, the solvent,
on either side of the membrane.
In osmosis, water always moves from an area of higher water concentration to one of lower concentration.
In the diagram shown, the solute cannot pass through the selectively permeable membrane, but the water can.
To illustrate this, imagine two full glasses of water. One has a single teaspoon of sugar in it, whereas the second one contains
one-quarter cup of sugar. If the total volume of the solutions in both cups is the same, which cup contains more water?
Because the large amount of sugar in the second cup takes up much more space than the teaspoon of sugar in the first cup,
the first cup has more water in it.
Returning to the beaker example, recall that it has a mixture of solutes on either side of the membrane. A principle of
diffusion is that the molecules move around and will spread evenly throughout the medium if they can. However, only the
material capable of getting through the membrane will diffuse through it. In this example, the solute cannot diffuse through
the membrane, but the water can. Water has a concentration gradient in this system. Thus, water will diffuse down its
concentration gradient, crossing the membrane to the side where it is less concentrated. This diffusion of water through the
membrane—osmosis—will continue until the concentration gradient of water goes to zero or until the hydrostatic pressure
of the water balances the osmotic pressure. Osmosis proceeds constantly in living systems.
Tonicity
Tonicity describes how an extracellular solution can change the volume of a cell by affecting osmosis. A solution's tonicity
often directly correlates with the osmolarity of the solution. Osmolarity describes the total solute concentration of the
solution. A solution with low osmolarity has a greater number of water molecules relative to the number of solute particles;
a solution with high osmolarity has fewer water molecules with respect to solute particles. In a situation in which solutions
of two different osmolarities are separated by a membrane permeable to water, though not to the solute, water will move
from the side of the membrane with lower osmolarity (and more water) to the side with higher osmolarity (and less water).
This effect makes sense if you remember that the solute cannot move across the membrane, and thus the only component in
the system that can move—the water—moves along its own concentration gradient. An important distinction that concerns
living systems is that osmolarity measures the number of particles (which may be molecules) in a solution. Therefore, a
solution that is cloudy with cells may have a lower osmolarity than a solution that is clear, if the second solution contains
more dissolved molecules than there are cells.
Hypotonic Solutions
Three terms—hypotonic, isotonic, and hypertonic—are used to relate the osmolarity of a cell to the osmolarity of the
extracellular fluid that contains the cells. In a hypotonic situation, the extracellular fluid has lower osmolarity than the
fluid inside the cell, and water enters the cell. (In living systems, the point of reference is always the cytoplasm, so the
prefix hypo- means that the extracellular fluid has a lower concentration of solutes, or a lower osmolarity, than the cell
cytoplasm.) It also means that the extracellular fluid has a higher concentration of water in the solution than does the cell.
In this situation, water will follow its concentration gradient and enter the cell.
Hypertonic Solutions
As for a hypertonic solution, the prefix hyper- refers to the extracellular fluid having a higher osmolarity than the cell’s
cytoplasm; therefore, the fluid contains less water than the cell does. Because the cell has a relatively higher concentration
of water, water will leave the cell.
Isotonic Solutions
In an isotonic solution, the extracellular fluid has the same osmolarity as the cell. If the osmolarity of the cell matches that
of the extracellular fluid, there will be no net movement of water into or out of the cell, although water will still move in and
out. Blood cells and plant cells in hypertonic, isotonic, and hypotonic solutions take on characteristic appearances.
Tonicity in Living Systems
In a hypotonic environment, water enters a cell, and the cell swells. In an isotonic condition, the relative concentrations of
solute and solvent are equal on both sides of the membrane. There is no net water movement; therefore, there is no change
in the size of the cell. In a hypertonic solution, water leaves a cell and the cell shrinks. If either the hypo- or hyper- condition
goes to excess, the cell’s functions become compromised, and the cell may be destroyed.
A red blood cell will burst, or lyse, when it swells beyond the plasma membrane’s capability to expand. Remember, the
membrane resembles a mosaic, with discrete spaces between the molecules composing it. If the cell swells, and the spaces
between the lipids and proteins become too large, the cell will break apart.
In contrast, when excessive amounts of water leave a red blood cell, the cell shrinks, or crenates. This has the effect of
concentrating the solutes left in the cell, making the cytosol denser and interfering with diffusion within the cell. The cell’s
ability to function will be compromised and may also result in the death of the cell.
Various living things have ways of controlling the effects of osmosis—a mechanism called osmoregulation. Some
organisms, such as plants, fungi, bacteria, and some protists, have cell walls that surround the plasma membrane and prevent
cell lysis in a hypotonic solution. The plasma membrane can only expand to the limit of the cell wall, so the cell will not
lyse. In fact, the cytoplasm in plants is always slightly hypertonic to the cellular environment, and water will always enter
a cell if water is available. This inflow of water produces turgor pressure, which stiffens the cell walls of the plant (Figure
5.13). In nonwoody plants, turgor pressure supports the plant. Conversly, if the plant is not watered, the extracellular fluid
will become hypertonic, causing water to leave the cell. In this condition, the cell does not shrink because the cell wall is
not flexible. However, the cell membrane detaches from the wall and constricts the cytoplasm. This is called plasmolysis.
Plants lose turgor pressure in this condition and wilt (Figure 5.14).
The turgor pressure within a plant cell depends on the tonicity of the solution that it is bathed in.
Without adequate water, the plant on the left has lost turgor pressure, visible in its wilting; the turgor
pressure is restored by watering it (right). (credit: Victor M. Vicente Selvas)
Tonicity is a concern for all living things. For example, paramecia and amoebas, which are protists that lack cell walls, have
contractile vacuoles. This vesicle collects excess water from the cell and pumps it out, keeping the cell from lysing as it
takes on water from its environment.
A paramecium’s contractile vacuole, here visualized using bright field light microscopy at 480x
magnification, continuously pumps water out of the organism’s body to keep it from bursting in a hypotonic medium.
(credit: modification of work by NIH; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Many marine invertebrates have internal salt levels matched to their environments, making them isotonic with the water
in which they live. Fish, however, must spend approximately five percent of their metabolic energy maintaining osmotic
homeostasis. Freshwater fish live in an environment that is hypotonic to their cells. These fish actively take in salt through
their gills and excrete diluted urine to rid themselves of excess water. Saltwater fish live in the reverse environment, which
is hypertonic to their cells, and they secrete salt through their gills and excrete highly concentrated urine.
In vertebrates, the kidneys regulate the amount of water in the body. Osmoreceptors are specialized cells in the brain
that monitor the concentration of solutes in the blood. If the levels of solutes increase beyond a certain range, a hormone
is released that retards water loss through the kidney and dilutes the blood to safer levels. Animals also have high
concentrations of albumin, which is produced by the liver, in their blood. This protein is too large to pass easily through
plasma membranes and is a major factor in controlling the osmotic pressures applied to tissues.
Active transport mechanisms require the use of the cell’s energy, usually in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). If
a substance must move into the cell against its concentration gradient—that is, if the concentration of the substance inside
the cell is greater than its concentration in the extracellular fluid (and vice versa)—the cell must use energy to move the
substance. Some active transport mechanisms move small-molecular weight materials, such as ions, through the membrane.
Other mechanisms transport much larger molecules.
Electrochemical Gradient
We have discussed simple concentration gradients—differential concentrations of a substance across a space or a
membrane—but in living systems, gradients are more complex. Because ions move into and out of cells and because
cells contain proteins that do not move across the membrane and are mostly negatively charged, there is also an electrical
gradient, a difference of charge, across the plasma membrane. The interior of living cells is electrically negative with respect
to the extracellular fluid in which they are bathed, and at the same time, cells have higher concentrations of potassium (K+)
and lower concentrations of sodium (Na+) than does the extracellular fluid. So in a living cell, the concentration gradient
of Na+ tends to drive it into the cell, and the electrical gradient of Na+ (a positive ion) also tends to drive it inward to the
negatively charged interior. The situation is more complex, however, for other elements such as potassium. The electrical
gradient of K+, a positive ion, also tends to drive it into the cell, but the concentration gradient of K+ tends to drive K+
out of the cell (Figure 5.16). The combined gradient of concentration and electrical charge that affects an ion is called its
electrochemical gradient.
Moving Against a Gradient
To move substances against a concentration or electrochemical gradient, the cell must use energy. This energy is harvested
from ATP generated through the cell’s metabolism. Active transport mechanisms, collectively called pumps, work against
electrochemical gradients. Small substances constantly pass through plasma membranes. Active transport maintains
concentrations of ions and other substances needed by living cells in the face of these passive movements. Much of a cell’s
supply of metabolic energy may be spent maintaining these processes. (Most of a red blood cell’s metabolic energy is used
to maintain the imbalance between exterior and interior sodium and potassium levels required by the cell.) Because active
transport mechanisms depend on a cell’s metabolism for energy, they are sensitive to many metabolic poisons that interfere
with the supply of ATP.
Two mechanisms exist for the transport of small-molecular weight material and small molecules. Primary active transport
moves ions across a membrane and creates a difference in charge across that membrane, which is directly dependent on ATP.
Secondary active transport describes the movement of material that is due to the electrochemical gradient established by
primary active transport that does not directly require ATP.
Carrier Proteins for Active Transport
An important membrane adaption for active transport is the presence of specific carrier proteins or pumps to facilitate
movement: there are three types of these proteins or transporters (Figure 5.17). A uniporter carries one specific ion or
molecule. A symporter carries two different ions or molecules, both in the same direction. An antiporter also carries two
different ions or molecules, but in different directions. All of these transporters can also transport small, uncharged organic
molecules like glucose. These three types of carrier proteins are also found in facilitated diffusion, but they do not require
ATP to work in that process. Some examples of pumps for active transport are Na+-K+ ATPase, which carries sodium
and potassium ions, and H+-K+ ATPase, which carries hydrogen and potassium ions. Both of these are antiporter carrier proteins. Two other carrier proteins are Ca2+ ATPase and H+ ATPase, which carry only calcium and only hydrogen ions,
respectively. Both are pumps.
A uniporter carries one molecule or ion. A symporter carries two different molecules or ions, both in the
same direction. An antiporter also carries two different molecules or ions, but in different directions. (credit: modification
of work by “Lupask”/Wikimedia Commons)
Primary Active Transport
The primary active transport that functions with the active transport of sodium and potassium allows secondary active
transport to occur. The second transport method is still considered active because it depends on the use of energy as does
primary transport (Figure 5.18).
Primary active transport moves ions across a membrane, creating an electrochemical gradient
(electrogenic transport). (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
One of the most important pumps in animals cells is the sodium-potassium pump (Na+-K+ ATPase), which maintains the
electrochemical gradient (and the correct concentrations of Na+ and K+) in living cells. The sodium-potassium pump moves
K+ into the cell while moving Na+ out at the same time, at a ratio of three Na+ for every two K+ ions moved in. The Na+-
K+ ATPase exists in two forms, depending on its orientation to the interior or exterior of the cell and its affinity for either
sodium or potassium ions. The process consists of the following six steps.
1. With the enzyme oriented towards the interior of the cell, the carrier has a high affinity for sodium ions. Three ions
bind to the protein.
2. ATP is hydrolyzed by the protein carrier and a low-energy phosphate group attaches to it.
3. As a result, the carrier changes shape and re-orients itself towards the exterior of the membrane. The protein’s affinity
for sodium decreases and the three sodium ions leave the carrier.
4. The shape change increases the carrier’s affinity for potassium ions, and two such ions attach to the protein.
Subsequently, the low-energy phosphate group detaches from the carrier.
5. With the phosphate group removed and potassium ions attached, the carrier protein repositions itself towards the
interior of the cell.
The carrier protein, in its new configuration, has a decreased affinity for potassium, and the two ions are released into
the cytoplasm. The protein now has a higher affinity for sodium ions, and the process starts again.
Several things have happened as a result of this process. At this point, there are more sodium ions outside of the cell than
inside and more potassium ions inside than out. For every three ions of sodium that move out, two ions of potassium move
in. This results in the interior being slightly more negative relative to the exterior. This difference in charge is important
in creating the conditions necessary for the secondary process. The sodium-potassium pump is, therefore, an electrogenic
pump (a pump that creates a charge imbalance), creating an electrical imbalance across the membrane and contributing to
the membrane potential.
Secondary Active Transport (Co-transport)
Secondary active transport brings sodium ions, and possibly other compounds, into the cell. As sodium ion concentrations
build outside of the plasma membrane because of the action of the primary active transport process, an electrochemical
gradient is created. If a channel protein exists and is open, the sodium ions will be pulled through the membrane. This
movement is used to transport other substances that can attach themselves to the transport protein through the membrane
(Figure 5.19). Many amino acids, as well as glucose, enter a cell this way. This secondary process is also used to store
high-energy hydrogen ions in the mitochondria of plant and animal cells for the production of ATP. The potential energy
that accumulates in the stored hydrogen ions is translated into kinetic energy as the ions surge through the channel protein
ATP synthase, and that energy is used to convert ADP into ATP.
In addition to moving small ions and molecules through the membrane, cells also need to remove and take in larger
molecules and particles (see Table 5.2 for examples). Some cells are even capable of engulfing entire unicellular
microorganisms. You might have correctly hypothesized that the uptake and release of large particles by the cell requires
energy. A large particle, however, cannot pass through the membrane, even with energy supplied by the cell.
Endocytosis
Endocytosis is a type of active transport that moves particles, such as large molecules, parts of cells, and even whole cells,
into a cell. There are different variations of endocytosis, but all share a common characteristic: The plasma membrane of the
cell invaginates, forming a pocket around the target particle. The pocket pinches off, resulting in the particle being contained
in a newly created intracellular vesicle formed from the plasma membrane.
Phagocytosis
Phagocytosis (the condition of “cell eating”) is the process by which large particles, such as cells or relatively large particles,
are taken in by a cell. For example, when microorganisms invade the human body, a type of white blood cell called a
neutrophil will remove the invaders through this process, surrounding and engulfing the microorganism, which is then
destroyed by the neutrophil (Figure 5.20).
In phagocytosis, the cell membrane surrounds the particle and engulfs it. (credit: Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
In preparation for phagocytosis, a portion of the inward-facing surface of the plasma membrane becomes coated with a
protein called clathrin, which stabilizes this section of the membrane. The coated portion of the membrane then extends
from the body of the cell and surrounds the particle, eventually enclosing it. Once the vesicle containing the particle
is enclosed within the cell, the clathrin disengages from the membrane and the vesicle merges with a lysosome for the
breakdown of the material in the newly formed compartment (endosome). When accessible nutrients from the degradation
of the vesicular contents have been extracted, the newly formed endosome merges with the plasma membrane and releases
its contents into the extracellular fluid. The endosomal membrane again becomes part of the plasma membrane.
Pinocytosis
A variation of endocytosis is called pinocytosis. This literally means “cell drinking” and was named at a time when the
assumption was that the cell was purposefully taking in extracellular fluid. In reality, this is a process that takes in molecules,
including water, which the cell needs from the extracellular fluid. Pinocytosis results in a much smaller vesicle than does
phagocytosis, and the vesicle does not need to merge with a lysosome.
In pinocytosis, the cell membrane invaginates, surrounds a small volume of fluid, and pinches off. (credit:
Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
A variation of pinocytosis is called potocytosis. This process uses a coating protein, called caveolin, on the cytoplasmic
side of the plasma membrane, which performs a similar function to clathrin. The cavities in the plasma membrane that form
the vacuoles have membrane receptors and lipid rafts in addition to caveolin. The vacuoles or vesicles formed in caveolae
(singular caveola) are smaller than those in pinocytosis. Potocytosis is used to bring small molecules into the cell and to
transport these molecules through the cell for their release on the other side of the cell, a process called transcytosis.
Receptor-mediated Endocytosis
A targeted variation of endocytosis employs receptor proteins in the plasma membrane that have a specific binding affinity
for certain substances.
In receptor-mediated endocytosis, uptake of substances by the cell is targeted to a single type of
substance that binds to the receptor on the external surface of the cell membrane. (credit: modification of work by
Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
In receptor-mediated endocytosis, as in phagocytosis, clathrin is attached to the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane.
If uptake of a compound is dependent on receptor-mediated endocytosis and the process is ineffective, the material will
not be removed from the tissue fluids or blood. Instead, it will stay in those fluids and increase in concentration. Some
human diseases are caused by the failure of receptor-mediated endocytosis. For example, the form of cholesterol termed
low-density lipoprotein or LDL (also referred to as “bad” cholesterol) is removed from the blood by receptor-mediated
endocytosis. In the human genetic disease familial hypercholesterolemia, the LDL receptors are defective or missing
entirely. People with this condition have life-threatening levels of cholesterol in their blood, because their cells cannot clear
LDL particles from their blood.
Although receptor-mediated endocytosis is designed to bring specific substances that are normally found in the extracellular
fluid into the cell, other substances may gain entry into the cell at the same site. Flu viruses, diphtheria, and cholera toxin
all have sites that cross-react with normal receptor-binding sites and gain entry into cells.
Exocytosis
The reverse process of moving material into a cell is the process of exocytosis. Exocytosis is the opposite of the processes
discussed above in that its purpose is to expel material from the cell into the extracellular fluid. Waste material is enveloped
in a membrane and fuses with the interior of the plasma membrane. This fusion opens the membranous envelope on
158 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11448/1.10
the exterior of the cell, and the waste material is expelled into the extracellular space (Figure 5.23). Other examples
of cells releasing molecules via exocytosis include the secretion of proteins of the extracellular matrix and secretion of
neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft by synaptic vesicles.
Introduction
Virtually every task performed by living organisms requires energy. Energy is needed to perform heavy labor and exercise,
but humans also use a great deal of energy while thinking, and even during sleep. In fact, the living cells of every organism
constantly use energy. Nutrients and other molecules are imported, metabolized (broken down) and possibly synthesized
into new molecules, modified if needed, transported around the cell, and may be distributed to the entire organism. For
example, the large proteins that make up muscles are actively built from smaller molecules. Complex carbohydrates are
broken down into simple sugars that the cell uses for energy. Just as energy is required to both build and demolish a building,
energy is required for both the synthesis and breakdown of molecules. Additionally, signaling molecules such as hormones
and neurotransmitters are transported between cells. Pathogenic bacteria and viruses are ingested and broken down by cells.
Cells must also export waste and toxins to stay healthy, and many cells must swim or move surrounding materials via the
beating motion of cellular appendages like cilia and flagella.
The cellular processes listed above require a steady supply of energy. From where, and in what form, does this energy
come? How do living cells obtain energy, and how do they use it? This chapter will discuss different forms of energy and
the physical laws that govern energy transfer. This chapter will also describe how cells use energy and replenish it, and how
chemical reactions in the cell are performed with great efficiency.
Scientists use the term bioenergetics to discuss the concept of energy flow (Figure 6.2) through living systems, such as
cells. Cellular processes such as the building and breaking down of complex molecules occur through stepwise chemical
reactions. Some of these chemical reactions are spontaneous and release energy, whereas others require energy to proceed.
Just as living things must continually consume food to replenish what has been used, cells must continually produce more
energy to replenish that used by the many energy-requiring chemical reactions that constantly take place. All of the chemical
reactions that take place inside cells, including those that use energy and those that release energy, are the cell’s metabolism.
Most life forms on earth get their energy from the sun. Plants use photosynthesis to capture sunlight, and
herbivores eat those plants to obtain energy. Carnivores eat the herbivores, and decomposers digest plant and animal
matter.
During the chemical reactions of photosynthesis, energy is provided in the form of a very high-energy molecule called ATP,
or adenosine triphosphate, which is the primary energy currency of all cells. Just as the dollar is used as currency to buy
goods, cells use molecules of ATP as energy currency to perform immediate work. The sugar (glucose) is stored as starch
or glycogen. Energy-storing polymers like these are broken down into glucose to supply molecules of ATP.
Solar energy is required to synthesize a molecule of glucose during the reactions of photosynthesis. In photosynthesis, light
energy from the sun is initially transformed into chemical energy that is temporally stored in the energy carrier molecules
ATP and NADPH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate). The stored energy in ATP and NADPH is then used
later in photosynthesis to build one molecule of glucose from six molecules of CO2. This process is analogous to eating
breakfast in the morning to acquire energy for your body that can be used later in the day. Under ideal conditions, energy
from 18 molecules of ATP is required to synthesize one molecule of glucose during the reactions of photosynthesis. Glucose
molecules can also be combined with and converted into other types of sugars. When sugars are consumed, molecules of
glucose eventually make their way into each living cell of the organism. Inside the cell, each sugar molecule is broken down
through a complex series of chemical reactions. The goal of these reactions is to harvest the energy stored inside the sugar
molecules. The harvested energy is used to make high-energy ATP molecules, which can be used to perform work, powering
many chemical reactions in the cell. The amount of energy needed to make one molecule of glucose from six molecules of
carbon dioxide is 18 molecules of ATP and 12 molecules of NADPH (each one of which is energetically equivalent to three
molecules of ATP), or a total of 54 molecule equivalents required for the synthesis of one molecule of glucose. This process
is a fundamental and efficient way for cells to generate the molecular energy that they require.
Plants, like this oak tree and acorn, use energy from sunlight to make sugar and other organic molecules.
Both plants and animals (like this squirrel) use cellular respiration to derive energy from the organic molecules originally
produced by plants.
Metabolic Pathways
The processes of making and breaking down sugar molecules illustrate two types of metabolic pathways. A metabolic
pathway is a series of interconnected biochemical reactions that convert a substrate molecule or molecules, step-by-step,
through a series of metabolic intermediates, eventually yielding a final product or products. In the case of sugar metabolism,
the first metabolic pathway synthesized sugar from smaller molecules, and the other pathway broke sugar down into smaller
molecules. These two opposite processes—the first requiring energy and the second producing energy—are referred to
as anabolic (building) and catabolic (breaking down) pathways, respectively. Consequently, metabolism is composed of
building (anabolism) and degradation (catabolism).
There is more to the complexity of metabolism than understanding the metabolic pathways alone. Metabolic
complexity varies from organism to organism. Photosynthesis is the primary pathway in which
photosynthetic organisms like plants (the majority of global synthesis is done by planktonic algae) harvest
the sun’s energy and convert it into carbohydrates. The by-product of photosynthesis is oxygen, required
by some cells to carry out cellular respiration. During cellular respiration, oxygen aids in the catabolic
breakdown of carbon compounds, like carbohydrates. Among the products of this catabolism are CO2 and
ATP. In addition, some eukaryotes perform catabolic processes without oxygen (fermentation); that is, they
perform or use anaerobic metabolism.
Organisms probably evolved anaerobic metabolism to survive (living organisms came into existence about
3.8 billion years ago, when the atmosphere lacked oxygen). Despite the differences between organisms
and the complexity of metabolism, researchers have found that all branches of life share some of the
same metabolic pathways, suggesting that all organisms evolved from the same ancient common ancestor
(Figure 6.4). Evidence indicates that over time, the pathways diverged, adding specialized enzymes to
allow organisms to better adapt to their environment, thus increasing their chance to survive. However, the
underlying principle remains that all organisms must harvest energy from their environment and convert it
to ATP to carry out cellular functions.
Anabolic and Catabolic Pathways
Anabolic pathways require an input of energy to synthesize complex molecules from simpler ones. Synthesizing sugar from
CO2 is one example. Other examples are the synthesis of large proteins from amino acid building blocks, and the synthesis
of new DNA strands from nucleic acid building blocks. These biosynthetic processes are critical to the life of the cell, take
place constantly, and demand energy provided by ATP and other high-energy molecules like NADH (nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide) and NADPH (Figure 6.5).
ATP is an important molecule for cells to have in sufficient supply at all times. The breakdown of sugars illustrates how a
single molecule of glucose can store enough energy to make a great deal of ATP, 36 to 38 molecules. This is a catabolic
pathway. Catabolic pathways involve the degradation (or breakdown) of complex molecules into simpler ones. Molecular
energy stored in the bonds of complex molecules is released in catabolic pathways and harvested in such a way that it can be
used to produce ATP. Other energy-storing molecules, such as fats, are also broken down through similar catabolic reactions
to release energy and make ATP (Figure 6.5).
It is important to know that the chemical reactions of metabolic pathways don’t take place spontaneously. Each reaction
step is facilitated, or catalyzed, by a protein called an enzyme. Enzymes are important for catalyzing all types of biological
reactions—those that require energy as well as those that release energy.
Anabolic pathways are those that require energy to synthesize larger molecules. Catabolic pathways are
those that generate energy by breaking down larger molecules. Both types of pathways are required for maintaining
the cell’s energy balance.
Energy is defined as the ability to do work. As you’ve learned, energy exists in different forms. For example, electrical
energy, light energy, and heat energy are all different types of energy. While these are all familiar types of energy that one
can see or feel, there is another type of energy that is much less tangible. This energy is associated with something as simple
as an object held above the ground. In order to appreciate the way energy flows into and out of biological systems, it is
important to understand more about the different types of energy that exist in the physical world.
Types of Energy
When an object is in motion, there is energy associated with that object. In the example of an airplane in flight, there is a
great deal of energy associated with the motion of the airplane. This is because moving objects are capable of enacting a
change, or doing work. Think of a wrecking ball. Even a slow-moving wrecking ball can do a great deal of damage to other
objects. However, a wrecking ball that is not in motion is incapable of performing work. Energy associated with objects in
motion is called kinetic energy. A speeding bullet, a walking person, the rapid movement of molecules in the air (which
produces heat), and electromagnetic radiation like light all have kinetic energy.
Now what if that same motionless wrecking ball is lifted two stories above a car with a crane? If the suspended wrecking
ball is unmoving, is there energy associated with it? The answer is yes. The suspended wrecking ball has energy associated
with it that is fundamentally different from the kinetic energy of objects in motion. This form of energy results from the
fact that there is the potential for the wrecking ball to do work. If it is released, indeed it would do work. Because this type
of energy refers to the potential to do work, it is called potential energy. Objects transfer their energy between kinetic and
potential in the following way: As the wrecking ball hangs motionless, it has 0 kinetic and 100 percent potential energy.
Once it is released, its kinetic energy begins to increase because it builds speed due to gravity. At the same time, as it nears
the ground, it loses potential energy. Somewhere mid-fall it has 50 percent kinetic and 50 percent potential energy. Just
before it hits the ground, the ball has nearly lost its potential energy and has near-maximal kinetic energy. Other examples of
potential energy include the energy of water held behind a dam (Figure 6.6), or a person about to skydive out of an airplane.
Water behind a dam has potential energy. Moving water, such as in a waterfall or a rapidly flowing river, has
kinetic energy.
Potential energy is not only associated with the location of matter (such as a child sitting on a tree branch), but also with the
structure of matter. A spring on the ground has potential energy if it is compressed; so does a rubber band that is pulled taut.
The very existence of living cells relies heavily on structural potential energy. On a chemical level, the bonds that hold the
atoms of molecules together have potential energy. Remember that anabolic cellular pathways require energy to synthesize
complex molecules from simpler ones, and catabolic pathways release energy when complex molecules are broken down.
The fact that energy can be released by the breakdown of certain chemical bonds implies that those bonds have potential
energy. In fact, there is potential energy stored within the bonds of all the food molecules we eat, which is eventually
harnessed for use. This is because these bonds can release energy when broken. The type of potential energy that exists
within chemical bonds, and is released when those bonds are broken, is called chemical energy (Figure 6.7). Chemical
energy is responsible for providing living cells with energy from food. The release of energy is brought about by breaking
the molecular bonds within fuel molecules.
The molecules in gasoline (octane, the chemical formula shown) contain chemical energy within the
chemical bonds. This energy is transformed into kinetic energy that allows a car to race on a racetrack.
Free Energy
After learning that chemical reactions release energy when energy-storing bonds are broken, an important next question
is how is the energy associated with chemical reactions quantified and expressed? How can the energy released from
one reaction be compared to that of another reaction? A measurement of free energy is used to quantitate these energy
transfers. Free energy is called Gibbs free energy (abbreviated with the letter G) after Josiah Willard Gibbs, the scientist
who developed the measurement. Recall that according to the second law of thermodynamics, all energy transfers involve
the loss of some amount of energy in an unusable form such as heat, resulting in entropy. Gibbs free energy specifically
refers to the energy associated with a chemical reaction that is available after entropy is accounted for. In other words, Gibbs
free energy is usable energy, or energy that is available to do work.
Every chemical reaction involves a change in free energy, called delta G (ΔG). The change in free energy can be calculated
for any system that undergoes such a change, such as a chemical reaction. To calculate ΔG, subtract the amount of energy
lost to entropy (denoted as ΔS) from the total energy change of the system. This total energy change in the system is called
enthalpy and is denoted as ΔH . The formula for calculating ΔG is as follows, where the symbol T refers to absolute
temperature in Kelvin (degrees Celsius + 273):
ΔG = ΔH − TΔS
The standard free energy change of a chemical reaction is expressed as an amount of energy per mole of the reaction product
(either in kilojoules or kilocalories, kJ/mol or kcal/mol; 1 kJ = 0.239 kcal) under standard pH, temperature, and pressure
conditions. Standard pH, temperature, and pressure conditions are generally calculated at pH 7.0 in biological systems,
25 degrees Celsius, and 100 kilopascals (1 atm pressure), respectively. It is important to note that cellular conditions vary
considerably from these standard conditions, and so standard calculated ΔG values for biological reactions will be different
inside the cell.
Endergonic Reactions and Exergonic Reactions
If energy is released during a chemical reaction, then the resulting value from the above equation will be a negative number.
In other words, reactions that release energy have a ΔG < 0. A negative ΔG also means that the products of the reaction
have less free energy than the reactants, because they gave off some free energy during the reaction. Reactions that have a
negative ΔG and consequently release free energy are called exergonic reactions. Think: exergonic means energy is exiting
the system. These reactions are also referred to as spontaneous reactions, because they can occur without the addition of
energy into the system. Understanding which chemical reactions are spontaneous and release free energy is extremely useful
for biologists, because these reactions can be harnessed to perform work inside the cell. An important distinction must be
drawn between the term spontaneous and the idea of a chemical reaction that occurs immediately. Contrary to the everyday
use of the term, a spontaneous reaction is not one that suddenly or quickly occurs. The rusting of iron is an example of a
spontaneous reaction that occurs slowly, little by little, over time.
If a chemical reaction requires an input of energy rather than releasing energy, then the ΔG for that reaction will be a
positive value. In this case, the products have more free energy than the reactants. Thus, the products of these reactions can
be thought of as energy-storing molecules. These chemical reactions are called endergonic reactions, and they are nonspontaneous.
An endergonic reaction will not take place on its own without the addition of free energy.
Let’s revisit the example of the synthesis and breakdown of the food molecule, glucose. Remember that the building of
complex molecules, such as sugars, from simpler ones is an anabolic process and requires energy. Therefore, the chemical
reactions involved in anabolic processes are endergonic reactions. On the other hand, the catabolic process of breaking
sugar down into simpler molecules releases energy in a series of exergonic reactions. Like the example of rust above, the
breakdown of sugar involves spontaneous reactions, but these reactions don’t occur instantaneously. Figure 6.8 shows some other examples of endergonic and exergonic reactions. Later sections will provide more information about what else is
required to make even spontaneous reactions happen more efficiently.
An important concept in the study of metabolism and energy is that of chemical equilibrium. Most chemical reactions are
reversible. They can proceed in both directions, releasing energy into their environment in one direction, and absorbing
it from the environment in the other direction (Figure 6.9). The same is true for the chemical reactions involved in cell
metabolism, such as the breaking down and building up of proteins into and from individual amino acids, respectively.
Reactants within a closed system will undergo chemical reactions in both directions until a state of equilibrium is reached.
This state of equilibrium is one of the lowest possible free energy and a state of maximal entropy. Energy must be put
into the system to push the reactants and products away from a state of equilibrium. Either reactants or products must
be added, removed, or changed. If a cell were a closed system, its chemical reactions would reach equilibrium, and it
would die because there would be insufficient free energy left to perform the work needed to maintain life. In a living
cell, chemical reactions are constantly moving towards equilibrium, but never reach it. This is because a living cell is an
open system. Materials pass in and out, the cell recycles the products of certain chemical reactions into other reactions, and
chemical equilibrium is never reached. In this way, living organisms are in a constant energy-requiring, uphill battle against
equilibrium and entropy. This constant supply of energy ultimately comes from sunlight, which is used to produce nutrients
in the process of photosynthesis.
Exergonic and endergonic reactions result in changes in Gibbs free energy. Exergonic reactions release
energy; endergonic reactions require energy to proceed.
Activation Energy
There is another important concept that must be considered regarding endergonic and exergonic reactions. Even exergonic
reactions require a small amount of energy input to get going before they can proceed with their energy-releasing steps.
These reactions have a net release of energy, but still require some energy in the beginning. This small amount of energy
input necessary for all chemical reactions to occur is called the activation energy (or free energy of activation) and is
abbreviated EA (Figure 6.10).
Why would an energy-releasing, negative ΔG reaction actually require some energy to proceed? The reason lies in the
steps that take place during a chemical reaction. During chemical reactions, certain chemical bonds are broken and new
ones are formed. For example, when a glucose molecule is broken down, bonds between the carbon atoms of the molecule
are broken. Since these are energy-storing bonds, they release energy when broken. However, to get them into a state that
allows the bonds to break, the molecule must be somewhat contorted. A small energy input is required to achieve this
contorted state. This contorted state is called the transition state, and it is a high-energy, unstable state. For this reason,
reactant molecules don’t last long in their transition state, but very quickly proceed to the next steps of the chemical reaction.
Free energy diagrams illustrate the energy profiles for a given reaction. Whether the reaction is exergonic or endergonic
determines whether the products in the diagram will exist at a lower or higher energy state than both the reactants and the
products. However, regardless of this measure, the transition state of the reaction exists at a higher energy state than the
reactants, and thus, EA is always positive.
Where does the activation energy required by chemical reactants come from? The source of the activation energy needed
to push reactions forward is typically heat energy from the surroundings. Heat energy (the total bond energy of reactants
or products in a chemical reaction) speeds up the motion of molecules, increasing the frequency and force with which they
collide; it also moves atoms and bonds within the molecule slightly, helping them reach their transition state. For this reason,
heating up a system will cause chemical reactants within that system to react more frequently. Increasing the pressure on a
system has the same effect. Once reactants have absorbed enough heat energy from their surroundings to reach the transition
state, the reaction will proceed.
The activation energy of a particular reaction determines the rate at which it will proceed. The higher the activation energy,
the slower the chemical reaction will be. The example of iron rusting illustrates an inherently slow reaction. This reaction
occurs slowly over time because of its high EA. Additionally, the burning of many fuels, which is strongly exergonic, will
take place at a negligible rate unless their activation energy is overcome by sufficient heat from a spark. Once they begin to burn, however, the chemical reactions release enough heat to continue the burning process, supplying the activation energy
for surrounding fuel molecules. Like these reactions outside of cells, the activation energy for most cellular reactions is
too high for heat energy to overcome at efficient rates. In other words, in order for important cellular reactions to occur
at appreciable rates (number of reactions per unit time), their activation energies must be lowered (Figure 6.10); this is
referred to as catalysis. This is a very good thing as far as living cells are concerned. Important macromolecules, such
as proteins, DNA, and RNA, store considerable energy, and their breakdown is exergonic. If cellular temperatures alone
provided enough heat energy for these exergonic reactions to overcome their activation barriers, the essential components
of a cell would disintegrate.
Thermodynamics refers to the study of energy and energy transfer involving physical matter. The matter and its
environment relevant to a particular case of energy transfer are classified as a system, and everything outside of that system
is called the surroundings. For instance, when heating a pot of water on the stove, the system includes the stove, the pot, and
the water. Energy is transferred within the system (between the stove, pot, and water). There are two types of systems: open
and closed. An open system is one in which energy can be transferred between the system and its surroundings. The stovetop
system is open because heat can be lost into the air. A closed system is one that cannot transfer energy to its surroundings.
Biological organisms are open systems. Energy is exchanged between them and their surroundings, as they consume energystoring
molecules and release energy to the environment by doing work. Like all things in the physical world, energy is
subject to the laws of physics. The laws of thermodynamics govern the transfer of energy in and among all systems in the
universe.
The First Law of Thermodynamics
The first law of thermodynamics deals with the total amount of energy in the universe. It states that this total amount
of energy is constant. In other words, there has always been, and always will be, exactly the same amount of energy
in the universe. Energy exists in many different forms. According to the first law of thermodynamics, energy may be
transferred from place to place or transformed into different forms, but it cannot be created or destroyed. The transfers and
transformations of energy take place around us all the time. Light bulbs transform electrical energy into light energy. Gas
stoves transform chemical energy from natural gas into heat energy. Plants perform one of the most biologically useful
energy transformations on earth: that of converting the energy of sunlight into the chemical energy stored within organic
molecules (Figure 6.2). Some examples of energy transformations are shown in Figure 6.11.
The challenge for all living organisms is to obtain energy from their surroundings in forms that they can transfer or
transform into usable energy to do work. Living cells have evolved to meet this challenge very well. Chemical energy stored
within organic molecules such as sugars and fats is transformed through a series of cellular chemical reactions into energy
within molecules of ATP. Energy in ATP molecules is easily accessible to do work. Examples of the types of work that cells
need to do include building complex molecules, transporting materials, powering the beating motion of cilia or flagella,
contracting muscle fibers to create movement, and reproduction.
Shown are two examples of energy being transferred from one system to another and transformed from
one form to another. Humans can convert the chemical energy in food, like this ice cream cone, into kinetic energy
(the energy of movement to ride a bicycle). Plants can convert electromagnetic radiation (light energy) from the sun
into chemical energy.
The Second Law of Thermodynamics
A living cell’s primary tasks of obtaining, transforming, and using energy to do work may seem simple. However,
the second law of thermodynamics explains why these tasks are harder than they appear. None of the energy transfers
we’ve discussed, along with all energy transfers and transformations in the universe, is completely efficient. In every
energy transfer, some amount of energy is lost in a form that is unusable. In most cases, this form is heat energy.
Thermodynamically, heat energy is defined as the energy transferred from one system to another that is not doing work.
For example, when an airplane flies through the air, some of the energy of the flying plane is lost as heat energy due to
friction with the surrounding air. This friction actually heats the air by temporarily increasing the speed of air molecules.
Likewise, some energy is lost as heat energy during cellular metabolic reactions. This is good for warm-blooded creatures
like us, because heat energy helps to maintain our body temperature. Strictly speaking, no energy transfer is completely
efficient, because some energy is lost in an unusable form.
An important concept in physical systems is that of order and disorder (also known as randomness). The more energy that
is lost by a system to its surroundings, the less ordered and more random the system is. Scientists refer to the measure of
randomness or disorder within a system as entropy. High entropy means high disorder and low energy (Figure 6.12). To
better understand entropy, think of a student’s bedroom. If no energy or work were put into it, the room would quickly
become messy. It would exist in a very disordered state, one of high entropy. Energy must be put into the system, in the form
of the student doing work and putting everything away, in order to bring the room back to a state of cleanliness and order.
This state is one of low entropy. Similarly, a car or house must be constantly maintained with work in order to keep it in an
ordered state. Left alone, the entropy of the house or car gradually increases through rust and degradation. Molecules and
chemical reactions have varying amounts of entropy as well. For example, as chemical reactions reach a state of equilibrium,
entropy increases, and as molecules at a high concentration in one place diffuse and spread out, entropy also increases.
All physical systems can be thought of in this way: Living things are highly ordered, requiring constant energy input to
be maintained in a state of low entropy. As living systems take in energy-storing molecules and transform them through
chemical reactions, they lose some amount of usable energy in the process, because no reaction is completely efficient. They
also produce waste and by-products that aren’t useful energy sources. This process increases the entropy of the system’s
surroundings. Since all energy transfers result in the loss of some usable energy, the second law of thermodynamics states
that every energy transfer or transformation increases the entropy of the universe. Even though living things are highly
ordered and maintain a state of low entropy, the entropy of the universe in total is constantly increasing due to the loss of
usable energy with each energy transfer that occurs. Essentially, living things are in a continuous uphill battle against this
constant increase in universal entropy.
Entropy is a measure of randomness or disorder in a system. Gases have higher entropy than liquids, and
liquids have higher entropy than solids.
Even exergonic, energy-releasing reactions require a small amount of activation energy in order to proceed. However,
consider endergonic reactions, which require much more energy input, because their products have more free energy than
their reactants. Within the cell, where does energy to power such reactions come from? The answer lies with an energysupplying
molecule called adenosine triphosphate, or ATP. ATP is a small, relatively simple molecule (Figure 6.13), but
within some of its bonds, it contains the potential for a quick burst of energy that can be harnessed to perform cellular work.
This molecule can be thought of as the primary energy currency of cells in much the same way that money is the currency
that people exchange for things they need. ATP is used to power the majority of energy-requiring cellular reactions.
ATP is the primary energy currency of the cell. It has an adenosine backbone with three phosphate groups
attached.
As its name suggests, adenosine triphosphate is comprised of adenosine bound to three phosphate groups (Figure 6.13).
Adenosine is a nucleoside consisting of the nitrogenous base adenine and a five-carbon sugar, ribose. The three phosphate
groups, in order of closest to furthest from the ribose sugar, are labeled alpha, beta, and gamma. Together, these chemical
groups constitute an energy powerhouse. However, not all bonds within this molecule exist in a particularly high-energy
state. Both bonds that link the phosphates are equally high-energy bonds ( phosphoanhydride bonds) that, when broken, release sufficient energy to power a variety of cellular reactions and processes. These high-energy bonds are the bonds
between the second and third (or beta and gamma) phosphate groups and between the first and second phosphate groups.
The reason that these bonds are considered “high-energy” is because the products of such bond breaking—adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) and one inorganic phosphate group (Pi)—have considerably lower free energy than the reactants: ATP
and a water molecule. Because this reaction takes place with the use of a water molecule, it is considered a hydrolysis
reaction. In other words, ATP is hydrolyzed into ADP in the following reaction:
ATP + H2O → ADP + Pi + free energy
Like most chemical reactions, the hydrolysis of ATP to ADP is reversible. The reverse reaction regenerates ATP from ADP
+ Pi. Indeed, cells rely on the regeneration of ATP just as people rely on the regeneration of spent money through some sort
of income. Since ATP hydrolysis releases energy, ATP regeneration must require an input of free energy. The formation of
ATP is expressed in this equation:
ADP + Pi + free energy → ATP + H2O
Two prominent questions remain with regard to the use of ATP as an energy source. Exactly how much free energy is
released with the hydrolysis of ATP, and how is that free energy used to do cellular work? The calculated ΔG for the
hydrolysis of one mole of ATP into ADP and Pi is −7.3 kcal/mole (−30.5 kJ/mol). Since this calculation is true under
standard conditions, it would be expected that a different value exists under cellular conditions. In fact, the ΔG for the
hydrolysis of one mole of ATP in a living cell is almost double the value at standard conditions: 14 kcal/mol (−57 kJ/mol).
ATP is a highly unstable molecule. Unless quickly used to perform work, ATP spontaneously dissociates into ADP + Pi, and
the free energy released during this process is lost as heat. The second question posed above, that is, how the energy released
by ATP hydrolysis is used to perform work inside the cell, depends on a strategy called energy coupling. Cells couple the
exergonic reaction of ATP hydrolysis with endergonic reactions, allowing them to proceed. One example of energy coupling
using ATP involves a transmembrane ion pump that is extremely important for cellular function. This sodium-potassium
pump (Na+/K+ pump) drives sodium out of the cell and potassium into the cell (Figure 6.14). A large percentage of a cell’s
ATP is spent powering this pump, because cellular processes bring a great deal of sodium into the cell and potassium out
of the cell. The pump works constantly to stabilize cellular concentrations of sodium and potassium. In order for the pump
to turn one cycle (exporting three Na+ ions and importing two K+ ions), one molecule of ATP must be hydrolyzed. When
ATP is hydrolyzed, its gamma phosphate doesn’t simply float away, but is actually transferred onto the pump protein. This
process of a phosphate group binding to a molecule is called phosphorylation. As with most cases of ATP hydrolysis, a
phosphate from ATP is transferred onto another molecule. In a phosphorylated state, the Na+/K+ pump has more free energy
and is triggered to undergo a conformational change. This change allows it to release Na+ to the outside of the cell. It
then binds extracellular K+, which, through another conformational change, causes the phosphate to detach from the pump.
This release of phosphate triggers the K+ to be released to the inside of the cell. Essentially, the energy released from the
hydrolysis of ATP is coupled with the energy required to power the pump and transport Na+ and K+ ions. ATP performs
cellular work using this basic form of energy coupling through phosphorylation.
Often during cellular metabolic reactions, such as the synthesis and breakdown of nutrients, certain molecules must
be altered slightly in their conformation to become substrates for the next step in the reaction series. One example is
during the very first steps of cellular respiration, when a molecule of the sugar glucose is broken down in the process
of glycolysis. In the first step of this process, ATP is required for the phosphorylation of glucose, creating a high-energy
but unstable intermediate. This phosphorylation reaction powers a conformational change that allows the phosphorylated
glucose molecule to be converted to the phosphorylated sugar fructose. Fructose is a necessary intermediate for glycolysis to
move forward. Here, the exergonic reaction of ATP hydrolysis is coupled with the endergonic reaction of converting glucose
into a phosphorylated intermediate in the pathway. Once again, the energy released by breaking a phosphate bond within
ATP was used for the phosphorylation of another molecule, creating an unstable intermediate and powering an important
conformational change.
A substance that helps a chemical reaction to occur is a catalyst, and the special molecules that catalyze biochemical
reactions are called enzymes. Almost all enzymes are proteins, made up of chains of amino acids, and they perform the
critical task of lowering the activation energies of chemical reactions inside the cell. Enzymes do this by binding to the
reactant molecules, and holding them in such a way as to make the chemical bond-breaking and bond-forming processes
take place more readily. It is important to remember that enzymes don’t change the ΔG of a reaction. In other words, they
don’t change whether a reaction is exergonic (spontaneous) or endergonic. This is because they don’t change the free energy
of the reactants or products. They only reduce the activation energy required to reach the transition state.
Enzyme Active Site and Substrate Specificity
The chemical reactants to which an enzyme binds are the enzyme’s substrates. There may be one or more substrates,
depending on the particular chemical reaction. In some reactions, a single-reactant substrate is broken down into multiple
products. In others, two substrates may come together to create one larger molecule. Two reactants might also enter a
reaction, both become modified, and leave the reaction as two products. The location within the enzyme where the substrate
binds is called the enzyme’s active site. The active site is where the “action” happens, so to speak. Since enzymes are
proteins, there is a unique combination of amino acid residues (also called side chains, or R groups) within the active site.
Each residue is characterized by different properties. Residues can be large or small, weakly acidic or basic, hydrophilic or
hydrophobic, positively or negatively charged, or neutral. The unique combination of amino acid residues, their positions,
sequences, structures, and properties, creates a very specific chemical environment within the active site. This specific
environment is suited to bind, albeit briefly, to a specific chemical substrate (or substrates). Due to this jigsaw puzzle-like
match between an enzyme and its substrates (which adapts to find the best fit between the transition state and the active
site), enzymes are known for their specificity. The “best fit” results from the shape and the amino acid functional group’s
attraction to the substrate. There is a specifically matched enzyme for each substrate and, thus, for each chemical reaction;
however, there is flexibility as well.
The fact that active sites are so perfectly suited to provide specific environmental conditions also means that they are subject
to influences by the local environment. It is true that increasing the environmental temperature generally increases reaction
rates, enzyme-catalyzed or otherwise. However, increasing or decreasing the temperature outside of an optimal range can
affect chemical bonds within the active site in such a way that they are less well suited to bind substrates. High temperatures
will eventually cause enzymes, like other biological molecules, to denature, a process that changes the natural properties of a substance. Likewise, the pH of the local environment can also affect enzyme function. Active site amino acid residues
have their own acidic or basic properties that are optimal for catalysis. These residues are sensitive to changes in pH that
can impair the way substrate molecules bind. Enzymes are suited to function best within a certain pH range, and, as with
temperature, extreme pH values (acidic or basic) of the environment can cause enzymes to denature.
Induced Fit and Enzyme Function
For many years, scientists thought that enzyme-substrate binding took place in a simple “lock-and-key” fashion. This model
asserted that the enzyme and substrate fit together perfectly in one instantaneous step. However, current research supports
a more refined view called induced fit (Figure 6.16). The induced-fit model expands upon the lock-and-key model by
describing a more dynamic interaction between enzyme and substrate. As the enzyme and substrate come together, their
interaction causes a mild shift in the enzyme’s structure that confirms an ideal binding arrangement between the enzyme
and the transition state of the substrate. This ideal binding maximizes the enzyme’s ability to catalyze its reaction.
When an enzyme binds its substrate, an enzyme-substrate complex is formed. This complex lowers the activation energy
of the reaction and promotes its rapid progression in one of many ways. On a basic level, enzymes promote chemical
reactions that involve more than one substrate by bringing the substrates together in an optimal orientation. The appropriate
region (atoms and bonds) of one molecule is juxtaposed to the appropriate region of the other molecule with which it must
react. Another way in which enzymes promote the reaction of their substrates is by creating an optimal environment within
the active site for the reaction to occur. Certain chemical reactions might proceed best in a slightly acidic or non-polar
environment. The chemical properties that emerge from the particular arrangement of amino acid residues within an active
site create the perfect environment for an enzyme’s specific substrates to react.
You’ve learned that the activation energy required for many reactions includes the energy involved in manipulating or
slightly contorting chemical bonds so that they can easily break and allow others to reform. Enzymatic action can aid this
process. The enzyme-substrate complex can lower the activation energy by contorting substrate molecules in such a way
as to facilitate bond-breaking, helping to reach the transition state. Finally, enzymes can also lower activation energies by
taking part in the chemical reaction itself. The amino acid residues can provide certain ions or chemical groups that actually
form covalent bonds with substrate molecules as a necessary step of the reaction process. In these cases, it is important to
remember that the enzyme will always return to its original state at the completion of the reaction. One of the hallmark
properties of enzymes is that they remain ultimately unchanged by the reactions they catalyze. After an enzyme is done
catalyzing a reaction, it releases its product(s).
According to the induced-fit model, both enzyme and substrate undergo dynamic conformational changes
upon binding. The enzyme contorts the substrate into its transition state, thereby increasing the rate of the reaction.
Control of Metabolism Through Enzyme Regulation
It would seem ideal to have a scenario in which all of the enzymes encoded in an organism’s genome existed in abundant
supply and functioned optimally under all cellular conditions, in all cells, at all times. In reality, this is far from the case.
A variety of mechanisms ensure that this does not happen. Cellular needs and conditions vary from cell to cell, and change
within individual cells over time. The required enzymes and energetic demands of stomach cells are different from those
of fat storage cells, skin cells, blood cells, and nerve cells. Furthermore, a digestive cell works much harder to process and
break down nutrients during the time that closely follows a meal compared with many hours after a meal. As these cellular
demands and conditions vary, so do the amounts and functionality of different enzymes.
Since the rates of biochemical reactions are controlled by activation energy, and enzymes lower and determine activation
energies for chemical reactions, the relative amounts and functioning of the variety of enzymes within a cell ultimately
determine which reactions will proceed and at which rates. This determination is tightly controlled. In certain cellular
environments, enzyme activity is partly controlled by environmental factors, like pH and temperature. There are other
mechanisms through which cells control the activity of enzymes and determine the rates at which various biochemical
reactions will occur.
Regulation of Enzymes by Molecules
Enzymes can be regulated in ways that either promote or reduce their activity. There are many different kinds of molecules
that inhibit or promote enzyme function, and various mechanisms exist for doing so. In some cases of enzyme inhibition,
for example, an inhibitor molecule is similar enough to a substrate that it can bind to the active site and simply block the
substrate from binding. When this happens, the enzyme is inhibited through competitive inhibition, because an inhibitor
molecule competes with the substrate for active site binding (Figure 6.17). On the other hand, in noncompetitive inhibition,
an inhibitor molecule binds to the enzyme in a location other than an allosteric site and still manages to block substrate
binding to the active site.
Competitive and noncompetitive inhibition affect the rate of reaction differently. Competitive inhibitors
affect the initial rate but do not affect the maximal rate, whereas noncompetitive inhibitors affect the maximal rate.
Some inhibitor molecules bind to enzymes in a location where their binding induces a conformational change that reduces
the affinity of the enzyme for its substrate. This type of inhibition is called allosteric inhibition (Figure 6.18). Most
allosterically regulated enzymes are made up of more than one polypeptide, meaning that they have more than one protein
subunit. When an allosteric inhibitor binds to an enzyme, all active sites on the protein subunits are changed slightly such
that they bind their substrates with less efficiency. There are allosteric activators as well as inhibitors. Allosteric activators
bind to locations on an enzyme away from the active site, inducing a conformational change that increases the affinity of
the enzyme’s active site(s) for its substrate(s).
Allosteric inhibitors modify the active site of the enzyme so that substrate binding is reduced or prevented.
In contrast, allosteric activators modify the active site of the enzyme so that the affinity for the substrate increases.
Many enzymes don’t work optimally, or even at all, unless bound to other specific non-protein helper molecules, either
temporarily through ionic or hydrogen bonds or permanently through stronger covalent bonds. Two types of helper
molecules are cofactors and coenzymes. Binding to these molecules promotes optimal conformation and function for their
respective enzymes. Cofactors are inorganic ions such as iron (Fe++) and magnesium (Mg++). One example of an enzyme
that requires a metal ion as a cofactor is the enzyme that builds DNA molecules, DNA polymerase, which requires bound
zinc ion (Zn++) to function. Coenzymes are organic helper molecules, with a basic atomic structure made up of carbon and
hydrogen, which are required for enzyme action. The most common sources of coenzymes are dietary vitamins (Figure
6.20). Some vitamins are precursors to coenzymes and others act directly as coenzymes. Vitamin C is a coenzyme for
multiple enzymes that take part in building the important connective tissue component, collagen. An important step in the
breakdown of glucose to yield energy is catalysis by a multi-enzyme complex called pyruvate dehydrogenase. Pyruvate
dehydrogenase is a complex of several enzymes that actually requires one cofactor (a magnesium ion) and five different
organic coenzymes to catalyze its specific chemical reaction. Therefore, enzyme function is, in part, regulated by an
abundance of various cofactors and coenzymes, which are supplied primarily by the diets of most organisms.
Vitamins are important coenzymes or precursors of coenzymes, and are required for enzymes to function
properly. Multivitamin capsules usually contain mixtures of all the vitamins at different percentages.
Enzyme Compartmentalization
In eukaryotic cells, molecules such as enzymes are usually compartmentalized into different organelles. This allows for yet
another level of regulation of enzyme activity. Enzymes required only for certain cellular processes can be housed separately
along with their substrates, allowing for more efficient chemical reactions. Examples of this sort of enzyme regulation
based on location and proximity include the enzymes involved in the latter stages of cellular respiration, which take place
exclusively in the mitochondria, and the enzymes involved in the digestion of cellular debris and foreign materials, located
within lysosomes.
Feedback Inhibition in Metabolic Pathways
Molecules can regulate enzyme function in many ways. A major question remains, however: What are these molecules
and where do they come from? Some are cofactors and coenzymes, ions, and organic molecules, as you’ve learned. What
other molecules in the cell provide enzymatic regulation, such as allosteric modulation, and competitive and noncompetitive
inhibition? The answer is that a wide variety of molecules can perform these roles. Some of these molecules include
pharmaceutical and non-pharmaceutical drugs, toxins, and poisons from the environment. Perhaps the most relevant sources
of enzyme regulatory molecules, with respect to cellular metabolism, are the products of the cellular metabolic reactions
themselves. In a most efficient and elegant way, cells have evolved to use the products of their own reactions for feedback
inhibition of enzyme activity. Feedback inhibition involves the use of a reaction product to regulate its own further
production (Figure 6.21). The cell responds to the abundance of specific products by slowing down production during
anabolic or catabolic reactions. Such reaction products may inhibit the enzymes that catalyzed their production through the
mechanisms described above.
Metabolic pathways are a series of reactions catalyzed by multiple enzymes. Feedback inhibition, where
the end product of the pathway inhibits an upstream step, is an important regulatory mechanism in cells.
The production of both amino acids and nucleotides is controlled through feedback inhibition. Additionally, ATP is an
allosteric regulator of some of the enzymes involved in the catabolic breakdown of sugar, the process that produces ATP.
In this way, when ATP is abundant, the cell can prevent its further production. Remember that ATP is an unstable molecule
that can spontaneously dissociate into ADP. If too much ATP were present in a cell, much of it would go to waste. On the
other hand, ADP serves as a positive allosteric regulator (an allosteric activator) for some of the same enzymes that are
inhibited by ATP. Thus, when relative levels of ADP are high compared to ATP, the cell is triggered to produce more ATP
through the catabolism of sugar.
The electrical energy plant in Figure 7.1 converts energy from one form to another form that can be more easily used.
This type of generating plant starts with underground thermal energy (heat) and transforms it into electrical energy that
will be transported to homes and factories. Like a generating plant, plants and animals also must take in energy from
the environment and convert it into a form that their cells can use. Energy enters an organism’s body in one form and is
converted into another form that can fuel the organism’s life functions. In the process of photosynthesis, plants and other
photosynthetic producers take in energy in the form of light (solar energy) and convert it into chemical energy, glucose,
which stores this energy in its chemical bonds. Then, a series of metabolic pathways, collectively called cellular respiration,
extracts the energy from the bonds in glucose and converts it into a form that all living things can use—both producers,
such as plants, and consumers, such as animals.
Energy production within a cell involves many coordinated chemical pathways. Most of these pathways are combinations of
oxidation and reduction reactions. Oxidation and reduction occur in tandem. An oxidation reaction strips an electron from
an atom in a compound, and the addition of this electron to another compound is a reduction reaction. Because oxidation
and reduction usually occur together, these pairs of reactions are called oxidation reduction reactions, or redox reactions.
Electrons and Energy
The removal of an electron from a molecule, oxidizing it, results in a decrease in potential energy in the oxidized compound.
The electron (sometimes as part of a hydrogen atom), does not remain unbonded, however, in the cytoplasm of a cell.
Rather, the electron is shifted to a second compound, reducing the second compound. The shift of an electron from one
compound to another removes some potential energy from the first compound (the oxidized compound) and increases the
potential energy of the second compound (the reduced compound). The transfer of electrons between molecules is important
because most of the energy stored in atoms and used to fuel cell functions is in the form of high-energy electrons. The
transfer of energy in the form of electrons allows the cell to transfer and use energy in an incremental fashion—in small
packages rather than in a single, destructive burst. This chapter focuses on the extraction of energy from food; you will see
that as you track the path of the transfers, you are tracking the path of electrons moving through metabolic pathways.
Electron Carriers
In living systems, a small class of compounds functions as electron shuttles: They bind and carry high-energy electrons
between compounds in pathways. The principal electron carriers we will consider are derived from the B vitamin group
and are derivatives of nucleotides. These compounds can be easily reduced (that is, they accept electrons) or oxidized (they
lose electrons). Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) (Figure 7.2) is derived from vitamin B3, niacin. NAD+ is the
oxidized form of the molecule; NADH is the reduced form of the molecule after it has accepted two electrons and a proton
(which together are the equivalent of a hydrogen atom with an extra electron).
NAD+ can accept electrons from an organic molecule according to the general equation:
RH
Reducing
agent
+
NAD+
Oxidizing
agent
→ NADH
Reduced + R
Oxidized
When electrons are added to a compound, they are reduced. A compound that reduces another is called a reducing agent. In
the above equation, RH is a reducing agent, and NAD+ is reduced to NADH. When electrons are removed from compound,
it oxidized. A compound that oxidizes another is called an oxidizing agent. In the above equation, NAD+ is an oxidizing
agent, and RH is oxidized to R.
Similarly, flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD+) is derived from vitamin B2, also called riboflavin. Its reduced form is FADH2.
A second variation of NAD, NADP, contains an extra phosphate group. Both NAD+ and FAD+ are extensively used in
energy extraction from sugars, and NADP plays an important role in anabolic reactions and photosynthesis.
The oxidized form of the electron carrier (NAD+) is shown on the left and the reduced form (NADH) is shown
on the right. The nitrogenous base in NADH has one more hydrogen ion and two more electrons than in NAD+.
ATP in Living Systems
A living cell cannot store significant amounts of free energy. Excess free energy would result in an increase of heat in the
cell, which would result in excessive thermal motion that could damage and then destroy the cell. Rather, a cell must be able
to handle that energy in a way that enables the cell to store energy safely and release it for use only as needed. Living cells
accomplish this by using the compound adenosine triphosphate (ATP). ATP is often called the “energy currency” of the cell,
and, like currency, this versatile compound can be used to fill any energy need of the cell. How? It functions similarly to a
rechargeable battery.
When ATP is broken down, usually by the removal of its terminal phosphate group, energy is released. The energy is
used to do work by the cell, usually by the released phosphate binding to another molecule, activating it. For example, in
the mechanical work of muscle contraction, ATP supplies the energy to move the contractile muscle proteins. Recall the
active transport work of the sodium-potassium pump in cell membranes. ATP alters the structure of the integral protein that
functions as the pump, changing its affinity for sodium and potassium. In this way, the cell performs work, pumping ions
against their electrochemical gradients.
ATP Structure and Function
At the heart of ATP is a molecule of adenosine monophosphate (AMP), which is composed of an adenine molecule bonded
to a ribose molecule and to a single phosphate group (Figure 7.3). Ribose is a five-carbon sugar found in RNA, and AMP
is one of the nucleotides in RNA. The addition of a second phosphate group to this core molecule results in the formation
of adenosine diphosphate (ADP); the addition of a third phosphate group forms adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
ATP (adenosine triphosphate) has three phosphate groups that can be removed by hydrolysis to form ADP
(adenosine diphosphate) or AMP (adenosine monophosphate).The negative charges on the phosphate group naturally
repel each other, requiring energy to bond them together and releasing energy when these bonds are broken.
The addition of a phosphate group to a molecule requires energy. Phosphate groups are negatively charged and thus repel
one another when they are arranged in series, as they are in ADP and ATP. This repulsion makes the ADP and ATP
molecules inherently unstable. The release of one or two phosphate groups from ATP, a process called dephosphorylation,
releases energy.
Energy from ATP
Hydrolysis is the process of breaking complex macromolecules apart. During hydrolysis, water is split, or lysed, and the
resulting hydrogen atom (H+) and a hydroxyl group (OH-) are added to the larger molecule. The hydrolysis of ATP produces
ADP, together with an inorganic phosphate ion (Pi), and the release of free energy. To carry out life processes, ATP is
continuously broken down into ADP, and like a rechargeable battery, ADP is continuously regenerated into ATP by the
reattachment of a third phosphate group. Water, which was broken down into its hydrogen atom and hydroxyl group during
ATP hydrolysis, is regenerated when a third phosphate is added to the ADP molecule, reforming ATP.
Obviously, energy must be infused into the system to regenerate ATP. Where does this energy come from? In nearly every
living thing on earth, the energy comes from the metabolism of glucose. In this way, ATP is a direct link between the limited
set of exergonic pathways of glucose catabolism and the multitude of endergonic pathways that power living cells.
Phosphorylation
Recall that, in some chemical reactions, enzymes may bind to several substrates that react with each other on the enzyme,
forming an intermediate complex. An intermediate complex is a temporary structure, and it allows one of the substrates
(such as ATP) and reactants to more readily react with each other; in reactions involving ATP, ATP is one of the substrates
and ADP is a product. During an endergonic chemical reaction, ATP forms an intermediate complex with the substrate and
enzyme in the reaction. This intermediate complex allows the ATP to transfer its third phosphate group, with its energy,
to the substrate, a process called phosphorylation. Phosphorylation refers to the addition of the phosphate (~P). This is
illustrated by the following generic reaction:
A + enzyme + ATP → ⎡
⎣A − enzyme − ∼ P⎤⎦
→ B + enzyme + ADP + phosphate ion
When the intermediate complex breaks apart, the energy is used to modify the substrate and convert it into a product of the
reaction. The ADP molecule and a free phosphate ion are released into the medium and are available for recycling through
cell metabolism.
Substrate Phosphorylation
ATP is generated through two mechanisms during the breakdown of glucose. A few ATP molecules are generated (that
is, regenerated from ADP) as a direct result of the chemical reactions that occur in the catabolic pathways. A phosphate
group is removed from an intermediate reactant in the pathway, and the free energy of the reaction is used to add the third
phosphate to an available ADP molecule, producing ATP (Figure 7.4). This very direct method of phosphorylation is called
substrate-level phosphorylation.
In phosphorylation reactions, the gamma phosphate of ATP is attached to a protein.
Oxidative Phosphorylation
Most of the ATP generated during glucose catabolism, however, is derived from a much more complex process,
chemiosmosis, which takes place in mitochondria (Figure 7.5) within a eukaryotic cell or the plasma membrane of a
prokaryotic cell. Chemiosmosis, a process of ATP production in cellular metabolism, is used to generate 90 percent of the
ATP made during glucose catabolism and is also the method used in the light reactions of photosynthesis to harness the
energy of sunlight. The production of ATP using the process of chemiosmosis is called oxidative phosphorylation because
of the involvement of oxygen in the process.
In eukaryotes, oxidative phosphorylation takes place in mitochondria. In prokaryotes, this process takes
place in the plasma membrane.
You have read that nearly all of the energy used by living cells comes to them in the bonds of the sugar, glucose. Glycolysis
is the first step in the breakdown of glucose to extract energy for cellular metabolism. Nearly all living organisms carry
out glycolysis as part of their metabolism. The process does not use oxygen and is therefore anaerobic. Glycolysis takes
place in the cytoplasm of both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Glucose enters heterotrophic cells in two ways. One method
is through secondary active transport in which the transport takes place against the glucose concentration gradient. The
other mechanism uses a group of integral proteins called GLUT proteins, also known as glucose transporter proteins. These
transporters assist in the facilitated diffusion of glucose.
Glycolysis begins with the six carbon ring-shaped structure of a single glucose molecule and ends with two molecules of
a three-carbon sugar called pyruvate. Glycolysis consists of two distinct phases. The first part of the glycolysis pathway
traps the glucose molecule in the cell and uses energy to modify it so that the six-carbon sugar molecule can be split evenly
into the two three-carbon molecules. The second part of glycolysis extracts energy from the molecules and stores it in the
form of ATP and NADH, the reduced form of NAD.
First Half of Glycolysis (Energy-Requiring Steps)
Step 1. The first step in glycolysis (Figure 7.6) is catalyzed by hexokinase, an enzyme with broad specificity that catalyzes
the phosphorylation of six-carbon sugars. Hexokinase phosphorylates glucose using ATP as the source of the phosphate,
producing glucose-6-phosphate, a more reactive form of glucose. This reaction prevents the phosphorylated glucose
molecule from continuing to interact with the GLUT proteins, and it can no longer leave the cell because the negatively
charged phosphate will not allow it to cross the hydrophobic interior of the plasma membrane.
Step 2. In the second step of glycolysis, an isomerase converts glucose-6-phosphate into one of its isomers,
fructose-6-phosphate. An isomerase is an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of a molecule into one of its isomers. (This
change from phosphoglucose to phosphofructose allows the eventual split of the sugar into two three-carbon molecules.).
Step 3. The third step is the phosphorylation of fructose-6-phosphate, catalyzed by the enzyme phosphofructokinase. A
second ATP molecule donates a high-energy phosphate to fructose-6-phosphate, producing fructose-1,6-bisphosphate. In
this pathway, phosphofructokinase is a rate-limiting enzyme. It is active when the concentration of ADP is high; it is less
active when ADP levels are low and the concentration of ATP is high. Thus, if there is “sufficient” ATP in the system, the
pathway slows down. This is a type of end product inhibition, since ATP is the end product of glucose catabolism.
Step 4. The newly added high-energy phosphates further destabilize fructose-1,6-bisphosphate. The fourth step in glycolysis
employs an enzyme, aldolase, to cleave 1,6-bisphosphate into two three-carbon isomers: dihydroxyacetone-phosphate and
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.
Step 5. In the fifth step, an isomerase transforms the dihydroxyacetone-phosphate into its isomer,
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. Thus, the pathway will continue with two molecules of a single isomer. At this point in the
pathway, there is a net investment of energy from two ATP molecules in the breakdown of one glucose molecule.
The first half of glycolysis uses two ATP molecules in the phosphorylation of glucose, which is then split
into two three-carbon molecules.
Second Half of Glycolysis (Energy-Releasing Steps)
So far, glycolysis has cost the cell two ATP molecules and produced two small, three-carbon sugar molecules. Both of these
molecules will proceed through the second half of the pathway, and sufficient energy will be extracted to pay back the two
ATP molecules used as an initial investment and produce a profit for the cell of two additional ATP molecules and two even
higher-energy NADH molecules.
Step 6. The sixth step in glycolysis (Figure 7.7) oxidizes the sugar (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate), extracting high-energy
electrons, which are picked up by the electron carrier NAD+, producing NADH. The sugar is then phosphorylated by the
addition of a second phosphate group, producing 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. Note that the second phosphate group does not
require another ATP molecule.
The second half of glycolysis involves phosphorylation without ATP investment (step 6) and produces two
NADH and four ATP molecules per glucose.
Here again is a potential limiting factor for this pathway. The continuation of the reaction depends upon the availability of
the oxidized form of the electron carrier, NAD+. Thus, NADH must be continuously oxidized back into NAD+ in order to
keep this step going. If NAD+ is not available, the second half of glycolysis slows down or stops. If oxygen is available in
the system, the NADH will be oxidized readily, though indirectly, and the high-energy electrons from the hydrogen released
in this process will be used to produce ATP. In an environment without oxygen, an alternate pathway (fermentation) can
provide the oxidation of NADH to NAD+.
Step 7. In the seventh step, catalyzed by phosphoglycerate kinase (an enzyme named for the reverse reaction),
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate donates a high-energy phosphate to ADP, forming one molecule of ATP. (This is an example of
substrate-level phosphorylation.) A carbonyl group on the 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate is oxidized to a carboxyl group, and
3-phosphoglycerate is formed.
Step 8. In the eighth step, the remaining phosphate group in 3-phosphoglycerate moves from the third carbon to the second
carbon, producing 2-phosphoglycerate (an isomer of 3-phosphoglycerate). The enzyme catalyzing this step is a mutase
(isomerase).
Step 9. Enolase catalyzes the ninth step. This enzyme causes 2-phosphoglycerate to lose water from its structure; this is
a dehydration reaction, resulting in the formation of a double bond that increases the potential energy in the remaining
phosphate bond and produces phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP).
Step 10. The last step in glycolysis is catalyzed by the enzyme pyruvate kinase (the enzyme in this case is named for the
reverse reaction of pyruvate’s conversion into PEP) and results in the production of a second ATP molecule by substratelevel
phosphorylation and the compound pyruvic acid (or its salt form, pyruvate). Many enzymes in enzymatic pathways
are named for the reverse reactions, since the enzyme can catalyze both forward and reverse reactions (these may have been
described initially by the reverse reaction that takes place in vitro, under non-physiological conditions).
Outcomes of Glycolysis
Glycolysis starts with glucose and ends with two pyruvate molecules, a total of four ATP molecules and two molecules of
NADH. Two ATP molecules were used in the first half of the pathway to prepare the six-carbon ring for cleavage, so the cell
has a net gain of two ATP molecules and 2 NADH molecules for its use. If the cell cannot catabolize the pyruvate molecules
further, it will harvest only two ATP molecules from one molecule of glucose. Mature mammalian red blood cells are not
capable of aerobic respiration—the process in which organisms convert energy in the presence of oxygen—and glycolysis
is their sole source of ATP. If glycolysis is interrupted, these cells lose their ability to maintain their sodium-potassium
pumps, and eventually, they die.
The last step in glycolysis will not occur if pyruvate kinase, the enzyme that catalyzes the formation of pyruvate, is not
available in sufficient quantities. In this situation, the entire glycolysis pathway will proceed, but only two ATP molecules
will be made in the second half. Thus, pyruvate kinase is a rate-limiting enzyme for glycolysis.
If oxygen is available, aerobic respiration will go forward. In eukaryotic cells, the pyruvate molecules produced at the end of
glycolysis are transported into mitochondria, which are the sites of cellular respiration. There, pyruvate will be transformed
into an acetyl group that will be picked up and activated by a carrier compound called coenzyme A (CoA). The resulting
compound is called acetyl CoA. CoA is made from vitamin B5, pantothenic acid. Acetyl CoA can be used in a variety of
ways by the cell, but its major function is to deliver the acetyl group derived from pyruvate to the next stage of the pathway
in glucose catabolism.
Breakdown of Pyruvate
In order for pyruvate, the product of glycolysis, to enter the next pathway, it must undergo several changes. The conversion
is a three-step process (Figure 7.8).
Step 1. A carboxyl group is removed from pyruvate, releasing a molecule of carbon dioxide into the surrounding medium.
The result of this step is a two-carbon hydroxyethyl group bound to the enzyme (pyruvate dehydrogenase). This is the first
of the six carbons from the original glucose molecule to be removed. This step proceeds twice (remember: there are two
pyruvate molecules produced at the end of glycolsis) for every molecule of glucose metabolized; thus, two of the six carbons
will have been removed at the end of both steps.
Step 2. The hydroxyethyl group is oxidized to an acetyl group, and the electrons are picked up by NAD+, forming NADH.
The high-energy electrons from NADH will be used later to generate ATP.
Step 3. The enzyme-bound acetyl group is transferred to CoA, producing a molecule of acetyl CoA.
Upon entering the mitochondrial matrix, a multi-enzyme complex converts pyruvate into acetyl CoA. In the
process, carbon dioxide is released and one molecule of NADH is formed.
Note that during the second stage of glucose metabolism, whenever a carbon atom is removed, it is bound to two oxygen
atoms, producing carbon dioxide, one of the major end products of cellular respiration.
Acetyl CoA to CO2
In the presence of oxygen, acetyl CoA delivers its acetyl group to a four-carbon molecule, oxaloacetate, to form citrate,
a six-carbon molecule with three carboxyl groups; this pathway will harvest the remainder of the extractable energy from
what began as a glucose molecule. This single pathway is called by different names: the citric acid cycle (for the first
intermediate formed—citric acid, or citrate—when acetate joins to the oxaloacetate), the TCA cycle (since citric acid or
citrate and isocitrate are tricarboxylic acids), and the Krebs cycle, after Hans Krebs, who first identified the steps in the
pathway in the 1930s in pigeon flight muscles.
Citric Acid Cycle
Like the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl CoA, the citric acid cycle takes place in the matrix of mitochondria. Almost
all of the enzymes of the citric acid cycle are soluble, with the single exception of the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase,
which is embedded in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion. Unlike glycolysis, the citric acid cycle is a closed loop:
The last part of the pathway regenerates the compound used in the first step. The eight steps of the cycle are a series of
redox, dehydration, hydration, and decarboxylation reactions that produce two carbon dioxide molecules, one GTP/ATP,
and reduced forms of NADH and FADH2 (Figure 7.9). This is considered an aerobic pathway because the NADH and
FADH2 produced must transfer their electrons to the next pathway in the system, which will use oxygen. If this transfer
does not occur, the oxidation steps of the citric acid cycle also do not occur. Note that the citric acid cycle produces very
little ATP directly and does not directly consume oxygen.
In the citric acid cycle, the acetyl group from acetyl CoA is attached to a four-carbon oxaloacetate molecule
to form a six-carbon citrate molecule. Through a series of steps, citrate is oxidized, releasing two carbon dioxide
molecules for each acetyl group fed into the cycle. In the process, three NAD+ molecules are reduced to NADH, one
FAD molecule is reduced to FADH2, and one ATP or GTP (depending on the cell type) is produced (by substrate-level
phosphorylation). Because the final product of the citric acid cycle is also the first reactant, the cycle runs continuously
in the presence of sufficient reactants. (credit: modification of work by “Yikrazuul”/Wikimedia Commons)
Steps in the Citric Acid Cycle
Step 1. Prior to the start of the first step, a transitional phase occurs during which pyruvic acid is converted to acetyl CoA.
Then, the first step of the cycle begins: This is a condensation step, combining the two-carbon acetyl group with a fourcarbon
oxaloacetate molecule to form a six-carbon molecule of citrate. CoA is bound to a sulfhydryl group (-SH) and
diffuses away to eventually combine with another acetyl group. This step is irreversible because it is highly exergonic. The
rate of this reaction is controlled by negative feedback and the amount of ATP available. If ATP levels increase, the rate of
this reaction decreases. If ATP is in short supply, the rate increases.
Step 2. In step two, citrate loses one water molecule and gains another as citrate is converted into its isomer, isocitrate.
Step 3. In step three, isocitrate is oxidized, producing a five-carbon molecule, α-ketoglutarate, together with a molecule of
CO2 and two electrons, which reduce NAD+ to NADH. This step is also regulated by negative feedback from ATP and
NADH, and a positive effect of ADP.
Steps 3 and 4. Steps three and four are both oxidation and decarboxylation steps, which release electrons that reduce NAD+
to NADH and release carboxyl groups that form CO2 molecules. α-Ketoglutarate is the product of step three, and a succinyl group is the product of step four. CoA binds the succinyl group to form succinyl CoA. The enzyme that catalyzes step four
is regulated by feedback inhibition of ATP, succinyl CoA, and NADH.
Step 5. In step five, a phosphate group is substituted for coenzyme A, and a high-energy bond is formed. This energy is
used in substrate-level phosphorylation (during the conversion of the succinyl group to succinate) to form either guanine
triphosphate (GTP) or ATP. There are two forms of the enzyme, called isoenzymes, for this step, depending upon the type
of animal tissue in which they are found. One form is found in tissues that use large amounts of ATP, such as heart and
skeletal muscle. This form produces ATP. The second form of the enzyme is found in tissues that have a high number of
anabolic pathways, such as liver. This form produces GTP. GTP is energetically equivalent to ATP; however, its use is more
restricted. In particular, protein synthesis primarily uses GTP.
Step 6. Step six is a dehydration process that converts succinate into fumarate. Two hydrogen atoms are transferred to
FAD, producing FADH2. The energy contained in the electrons of these atoms is insufficient to reduce NAD+ but adequate
to reduce FAD. Unlike NADH, this carrier remains attached to the enzyme and transfers the electrons to the electron
transport chain directly. This process is made possible by the localization of the enzyme catalyzing this step inside the inner
membrane of the mitochondrion.
Step 7. Water is added to fumarate during step seven, and malate is produced. The last step in the citric acid cycle
regenerates oxaloacetate by oxidizing malate. Another molecule of NADH is produced in the process.
Products of the Citric Acid Cycle
Two carbon atoms come into the citric acid cycle from each acetyl group, representing four out of the six carbons of one
glucose molecule. Two carbon dioxide molecules are released on each turn of the cycle; however, these do not necessarily
contain the most recently added carbon atoms. The two acetyl carbon atoms will eventually be released on later turns of the
cycle; thus, all six carbon atoms from the original glucose molecule are eventually incorporated into carbon dioxide. Each
turn of the cycle forms three NADH molecules and one FADH2 molecule. These carriers will connect with the last portion
of aerobic respiration to produce ATP molecules. One GTP or ATP is also made in each cycle. Several of the intermediate
compounds in the citric acid cycle can be used in synthesizing non-essential amino acids; therefore, the cycle is amphibolic
(both catabolic and anabolic).
You have just read about two pathways in glucose catabolism—glycolysis and the citric acid cycle—that generate ATP.
Most of the ATP generated during the aerobic catabolism of glucose, however, is not generated directly from these
pathways. Rather, it is derived from a process that begins with moving electrons through a series of electron transporters
that undergo redox reactions. This causes hydrogen ions to accumulate within the matrix space. Therefore, a concentration
gradient forms in which hydrogen ions diffuse out of the matrix space by passing through ATP synthase. The current of
hydrogen ions powers the catalytic action of ATP synthase, which phosphorylates ADP, producing ATP.
Electron Transport Chain
The electron transport chain (Figure 7.10) is the last component of aerobic respiration and is the only part of glucose
metabolism that uses atmospheric oxygen. Oxygen continuously diffuses into plants; in animals, it enters the body through
the respiratory system. Electron transport is a series of redox reactions that resemble a relay race or bucket brigade in
that electrons are passed rapidly from one component to the next, to the endpoint of the chain where the electrons reduce
molecular oxygen, producing water. There are four complexes composed of proteins, labeled I through IV in Figure 7.10,
and the aggregation of these four complexes, together with associated mobile, accessory electron carriers, is called the
electron transport chain. The electron transport chain is present in multiple copies in the inner mitochondrial membrane of
eukaryotes and the plasma membrane of prokaryotes.
The electron transport chain is a series of electron transporters embedded in the inner mitochondrial
membrane that shuttles electrons from NADH and FADH2 to molecular oxygen. In the process, protons are pumped
from the mitochondrial matrix to the intermembrane space, and oxygen is reduced to form water.
Complex I
To start, two electrons are carried to the first complex aboard NADH. This complex, labeled I, is composed of flavin
mononucleotide (FMN) and an iron-sulfur (Fe-S)-containing protein. FMN, which is derived from vitamin B2, also called
riboflavin, is one of several prosthetic groups or co-factors in the electron transport chain. A prosthetic group is a nonprotein
molecule required for the activity of a protein. Prosthetic groups are organic or inorganic, non-peptide molecules
bound to a protein that facilitate its function; prosthetic groups include co-enzymes, which are the prosthetic groups of
enzymes. The enzyme in complex I is NADH dehydrogenase and is a very large protein, containing 45 amino acid chains.
Complex I can pump four hydrogen ions across the membrane from the matrix into the intermembrane space, and it is in
this way that the hydrogen ion gradient is established and maintained between the two compartments separated by the inner
mitochondrial membrane.
Q and Complex II
Complex II directly receives FADH2, which does not pass through complex I. The compound connecting the first and
second complexes to the third is ubiquinone (Q). The Q molecule is lipid soluble and freely moves through the hydrophobic
core of the membrane. Once it is reduced, (QH2), ubiquinone delivers its electrons to the next complex in the electron
transport chain. Q receives the electrons derived from NADH from complex I and the electrons derived from FADH2 from
complex II, including succinate dehydrogenase. This enzyme and FADH2 form a small complex that delivers electrons
directly to the electron transport chain, bypassing the first complex. Since these electrons bypass and thus do not energize
the proton pump in the first complex, fewer ATP molecules are made from the FADH2 electrons. The number of ATP
molecules ultimately obtained is directly proportional to the number of protons pumped across the inner mitochondrial
membrane.
Complex III
The third complex is composed of cytochrome b, another Fe-S protein, Rieske center (2Fe-2S center), and cytochrome c
proteins; this complex is also called cytochrome oxidoreductase. Cytochrome proteins have a prosthetic group of heme.
The heme molecule is similar to the heme in hemoglobin, but it carries electrons, not oxygen. As a result, the iron ion at its core is reduced and oxidized as it passes the electrons, fluctuating between different oxidation states: Fe++ (reduced)
and Fe+++ (oxidized). The heme molecules in the cytochromes have slightly different characteristics due to the effects of
the different proteins binding them, giving slightly different characteristics to each complex. Complex III pumps protons
through the membrane and passes its electrons to cytochrome c for transport to the fourth complex of proteins and enzymes
(cytochrome c is the acceptor of electrons from Q; however, whereas Q carries pairs of electrons, cytochrome c can accept
only one at a time).
Complex IV
The fourth complex is composed of cytochrome proteins c, a, and a3. This complex contains two heme groups (one in each
of the two cytochromes, a, and a3) and three copper ions (a pair of CuA and one CuB in cytochrome a3). The cytochromes
hold an oxygen molecule very tightly between the iron and copper ions until the oxygen is completely reduced. The reduced
oxygen then picks up two hydrogen ions from the surrounding medium to make water (H2O). The removal of the hydrogen
ions from the system contributes to the ion gradient used in the process of chemiosmosis.
Chemiosmosis
In chemiosmosis, the free energy from the series of redox reactions just described is used to pump hydrogen ions (protons)
across the membrane. The uneven distribution of H+ ions across the membrane establishes both concentration and electrical
gradients (thus, an electrochemical gradient), owing to the hydrogen ions’ positive charge and their aggregation on one side
of the membrane.
If the membrane were open to diffusion by the hydrogen ions, the ions would tend to diffuse back across into the matrix,
driven by their electrochemical gradient. Recall that many ions cannot diffuse through the nonpolar regions of phospholipid
membranes without the aid of ion channels. Similarly, hydrogen ions in the matrix space can only pass through the inner
mitochondrial membrane through an integral membrane protein called ATP synthase (Figure 7.11). This complex protein
acts as a tiny generator, turned by the force of the hydrogen ions diffusing through it, down their electrochemical gradient.
The turning of parts of this molecular machine facilitates the addition of a phosphate to ADP, forming ATP, using the
potential energy of the hydrogen ion gradient.
Chemiosmosis (Figure 7.12) is used to generate 90 percent of the ATP made during aerobic glucose catabolism; it
is also the method used in the light reactions of photosynthesis to harness the energy of sunlight in the process of
photophosphorylation. Recall that the production of ATP using the process of chemiosmosis in mitochondria is called
oxidative phosphorylation. The overall result of these reactions is the production of ATP from the energy of the electrons
removed from hydrogen atoms. These atoms were originally part of a glucose molecule. At the end of the pathway, the
electrons are used to reduce an oxygen molecule to oxygen ions. The extra electrons on the oxygen attract hydrogen ions
(protons) from the surrounding medium, and water is formed.
ATP Yield
The number of ATP molecules generated from the catabolism of glucose varies. For example, the number of hydrogen
ions that the electron transport chain complexes can pump through the membrane varies between species. Another source
of variance stems from the shuttle of electrons across the membranes of the mitochondria. (The NADH generated from
glycolysis cannot easily enter mitochondria.) Thus, electrons are picked up on the inside of mitochondria by either NAD+
or FAD+. As you have learned earlier, these FAD+ molecules can transport fewer ions; consequently, fewer ATP molecules
are generated when FAD+ acts as a carrier. NAD+ is used as the electron transporter in the liver and FAD+ acts in the brain.
Another factor that affects the yield of ATP molecules generated from glucose is the fact that intermediate compounds in
these pathways are used for other purposes. Glucose catabolism connects with the pathways that build or break down all
other biochemical compounds in cells, and the result is somewhat messier than the ideal situations described thus far. For
example, sugars other than glucose are fed into the glycolytic pathway for energy extraction. Moreover, the five-carbon
sugars that form nucleic acids are made from intermediates in glycolysis. Certain nonessential amino acids can be made
from intermediates of both glycolysis and the citric acid cycle. Lipids, such as cholesterol and triglycerides, are also made
from intermediates in these pathways, and both amino acids and triglycerides are broken down for energy through these
pathways. Overall, in living systems, these pathways of glucose catabolism extract about 34 percent of the energy contained
in glucose.
In aerobic respiration, the final electron acceptor is an oxygen molecule, O2. If aerobic respiration occurs, then ATP will be
produced using the energy of high-energy electrons carried by NADH or FADH2 to the electron transport chain. If aerobic
respiration does not occur, NADH must be reoxidized to NAD+ for reuse as an electron carrier for the glycolytic pathway to
continue. How is this done? Some living systems use an organic molecule as the final electron acceptor. Processes that use
an organic molecule to regenerate NAD+ from NADH are collectively referred to as fermentation. In contrast, some living
systems use an inorganic molecule as a final electron acceptor. Both methods are called anaerobic cellular respiration in
which organisms convert energy for their use in the absence of oxygen.
Anaerobic Cellular Respiration
Certain prokaryotes, including some species of bacteria and Archaea, use anaerobic respiration. For example, the group of
Archaea called methanogens reduces carbon dioxide to methane to oxidize NADH. These microorganisms are found in soil
and in the digestive tracts of ruminants, such as cows and sheep. Similarly, sulfate-reducing bacteria and Archaea, most of
which are anaerobic ( Figure 7.13), reduce sulfate to hydrogen sulfide to regenerate NAD+ from NADH.
The green color seen in these coastal waters is from an eruption of hydrogen sulfide-producing bacteria.
These anaerobic, sulfate-reducing bacteria release hydrogen sulfide gas as they decompose algae in the water.
The enzyme used in this reaction is lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). The reaction can proceed in either direction, but the
reaction from left to right is inhibited by acidic conditions. Such lactic acid accumulation was once believed to cause
muscle stiffness, fatigue, and soreness, although more recent research disputes this hypothesis. Once the lactic acid has been
removed from the muscle and circulated to the liver, it can be reconverted into pyruvic acid and further catabolized for
energy.
Alcohol Fermentation
Another familiar fermentation process is alcohol fermentation ( Figure 7.15) that produces ethanol, an alcohol. The first
chemical reaction of alcohol fermentation is the following (CO2 does not participate in the second reaction):
Pyruvic acid → CO2 + acetaldehyde + NADH → ethanol + NAD+
The first reaction is catalyzed by pyruvate decarboxylase, a cytoplasmic enzyme, with a coenzyme of thiamine
pyrophosphate (TPP, derived from vitamin B1 and also called thiamine). A carboxyl group is removed from pyruvic
acid, releasing carbon dioxide as a gas. The loss of carbon dioxide reduces the size of the molecule by one carbon,
making acetaldehyde. The second reaction is catalyzed by alcohol dehydrogenase to oxidize NADH to NAD+ and reduce
acetaldehyde to ethanol. The fermentation of pyruvic acid by yeast produces the ethanol found in alcoholic beverages.
Ethanol tolerance of yeast is variable, ranging from about 5 percent to 21 percent, depending on the yeast strain and
environmental conditions.
Fermentation of grape juice into wine produces CO2 as a byproduct. Fermentation tanks have valves so
that the pressure inside the tanks created by the carbon dioxide produced can be released.
Other Types of Fermentation
Other fermentation methods occur in bacteria. Many prokaryotes are facultatively anaerobic. This means that they can
switch between aerobic respiration and fermentation, depending on the availability of oxygen. Certain prokaryotes, like
Clostridia, are obligate anaerobes. Obligate anaerobes live and grow in the absence of molecular oxygen. Oxygen is a
poison to these microorganisms and kills them on exposure. It should be noted that all forms of fermentation, except lactic
acid fermentation, produce gas. The production of particular types of gas is used as an indicator of the fermentation of
specific carbohydrates, which plays a role in the laboratory identification of the bacteria. Various methods of fermentation
are used by assorted organisms to ensure an adequate supply of NAD+ for the sixth step in glycolysis. Without these
pathways, that step would not occur and no ATP would be harvested from the breakdown of glucose.
You have learned about the catabolism of glucose, which provides energy to living cells. But living things consume more
than glucose for food. How does a turkey sandwich end up as ATP in your cells? This happens because all of the catabolic
pathways for carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids eventually connect into glycolysis and the citric acid cycle pathways (see
Figure 7.17). Metabolic pathways should be thought of as porous—that is, substances enter from other pathways, and
intermediates leave for other pathways. These pathways are not closed systems. Many of the substrates, intermediates, and
products in a particular pathway are reactants in other pathways.
Connections of Other Sugars to Glucose Metabolism
Glycogen, a polymer of glucose, is an energy storage molecule in animals. When there is adequate ATP present, excess
glucose is shunted into glycogen for storage. Glycogen is made and stored in both liver and muscle. The glycogen will be
hydrolyzed into glucose monomers (G-1-P) if blood sugar levels drop. The presence of glycogen as a source of glucose
allows ATP to be produced for a longer period of time during exercise. Glycogen is broken down into G-1-P and converted
into G-6-P in both muscle and liver cells, and this product enters the glycolytic pathway.
Sucrose is a disaccharide with a molecule of glucose and a molecule of fructose bonded together with a glycosidic linkage.
Fructose is one of the three dietary monosaccharides, along with glucose and galactose (which is part of the milk sugar, the
disaccharide lactose), which are absorbed directly into the bloodstream during digestion. The catabolism of both fructose
and galactose produces the same number of ATP molecules as glucose.
Connections of Proteins to Glucose Metabolism
Proteins are hydrolyzed by a variety of enzymes in cells. Most of the time, the amino acids are recycled into the synthesis
of new proteins. If there are excess amino acids, however, or if the body is in a state of starvation, some amino acids will be
shunted into the pathways of glucose catabolism (Figure 7.16). Each amino acid must have its amino group removed prior
to entry into these pathways. The amino group is converted into ammonia. In mammals, the liver synthesizes urea from two
ammonia molecules and a carbon dioxide molecule. Thus, urea is the principal waste product in mammals produced from
the nitrogen originating in amino acids, and it leaves the body in urine.
The carbon skeletons of certain amino acids (indicated in boxes) derived from proteins can feed into the
citric acid cycle.
Connections of Lipid and Glucose Metabolisms
The lipids that are connected to the glucose pathways are cholesterol and triglycerides. Cholesterol is a lipid that contributes
to cell membrane flexibility and is a precursor of steroid hormones. The synthesis of cholesterol starts with acetyl groups
and proceeds in only one direction. The process cannot be reversed.
Triglycerides are a form of long-term energy storage in animals. Triglycerides are made of glycerol and three fatty acids.
Animals can make most of the fatty acids they need. Triglycerides can be both made and broken down through parts of the
glucose catabolism pathways. Glycerol can be phosphorylated to glycerol-3-phosphate, which continues through glycolysis.
Fatty acids are catabolized in a process called beta-oxidation that takes place in the matrix of the mitochondria and converts
their fatty acid chains into two carbon units of acetyl groups. The acetyl groups are picked up by CoA to form acetyl CoA
that proceeds into the citric acid cycle.
Glycogen from the liver and muscles, hydrolyzed into glucose-1-phosphate, together with fats and
proteins, can feed into the catabolic pathways for carbohydrates.
Cellular respiration must be regulated in order to provide balanced amounts of energy in the form of ATP. The cell also must
generate a number of intermediate compounds that are used in the anabolism and catabolism of macromolecules. Without controls, metabolic reactions would quickly come to a stand still as the forward and backward reactions reached a state of
equilibrium. Resources would be used inappropriately. A cell does not need the maximum amount of ATP that it can make
all the time: At times, the cell needs to shunt some of the intermediates to pathways for amino acid, protein, glycogen, lipid,
and nucleic acid production. In short, the cell needs to control its metabolism.
Regulatory Mechanisms
A variety of mechanisms is used to control cellular respiration. Some type of control exists at each stage of glucose
metabolism. Access of glucose to the cell can be regulated using the GLUT proteins that transport glucose (Figure 7.18).
Different forms of the GLUT protein control passage of glucose into the cells of specific tissues.
GLUT4 is a glucose transporter that is stored in vesicles. A cascade of events that occurs upon insulin
binding to a receptor in the plasma membrane causes GLUT4-containing vesicles to fuse with the plasma membrane
so that glucose may be transported into the cell.
Some reactions are controlled by having two different enzymes—one each for the two directions of a reversible reaction.
Reactions that are catalyzed by only one enzyme can go to equilibrium, stalling the reaction. In contrast, if two different
enzymes (each specific for a given direction) are necessary for a reversible reaction, the opportunity to control the rate of
the reaction increases, and equilibrium is not reached.
A number of enzymes involved in each of the pathways—in particular, the enzyme catalyzing the first committed reaction
of the pathway—are controlled by attachment of a molecule to an allosteric site on the protein. The molecules most
commonly used in this capacity are the nucleotides ATP, ADP, AMP, NAD+, and NADH. These regulators, allosteric
effectors, may increase or decrease enzyme activity, depending on the prevailing conditions. The allosteric effector alters
the steric structure of the enzyme, usually affecting the configuration of the active site. This alteration of the protein’s (the
enzyme’s) structure either increases or decreases its affinity for its substrate, with the effect of increasing or decreasing the
rate of the reaction. The attachment signals to the enzyme. This binding can increase or decrease the enzyme’s activity,
providing feedback. This feedback type of control is effective as long as the chemical affecting it is attached to the enzyme.
Once the overall concentration of the chemical decreases, it will diffuse away from the protein, and the control is relaxed.
Control of Catabolic Pathways
Enzymes, proteins, electron carriers, and pumps that play roles in glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and the electron transport
chain tend to catalyze non-reversible reactions. In other words, if the initial reaction takes place, the pathway is committed
to proceeding with the remaining reactions. Whether a particular enzyme activity is released depends upon the energy needs
of the cell (as reflected by the levels of ATP, ADP, and AMP).
Glycolysis
The control of glycolysis begins with the first enzyme in the pathway, hexokinase (Figure 7.19). This enzyme catalyzes
the phosphorylation of glucose, which helps to prepare the compound for cleavage in a later step. The presence of the
negatively charged phosphate in the molecule also prevents the sugar from leaving the cell. When hexokinase is inhibited,
glucose diffuses out of the cell and does not become a substrate for the respiration pathways in that tissue. The product of
the hexokinase reaction is glucose-6-phosphate, which accumulates when a later enzyme, phosphofructokinase, is inhibited.
The glycolysis pathway is primarily regulated at the three key enzymatic steps (1, 2, and 7) as indicated.
Note that the first two steps that are regulated occur early in the pathway and involve hydrolysis of ATP.
Phosphofructokinase is the main enzyme controlled in glycolysis. High levels of ATP, citrate, or a lower, more acidic pH
decrease the enzyme’s activity. An increase in citrate concentration can occur because of a blockage in the citric acid cycle.
Fermentation, with its production of organic acids like lactic acid, frequently accounts for the increased acidity in a cell;
however, the products of fermentation do not typically accumulate in cells.
The last step in glycolysis is catalyzed by pyruvate kinase. The pyruvate produced can proceed to be catabolized or
converted into the amino acid alanine. If no more energy is needed and alanine is in adequate supply, the enzyme
is inhibited. The enzyme’s activity is increased when fructose-1,6-bisphosphate levels increase. (Recall that
fructose-1,6-bisphosphate is an intermediate in the first half of glycolysis.) The regulation of pyruvate kinase involves
phosphorylation by a kinase (pyruvate kinase kinase), resulting in a less-active enzyme. Dephosphorylation by a
phosphatase reactivates it. Pyruvate kinase is also regulated by ATP (a negative allosteric effect).
If more energy is needed, more pyruvate will be converted into acetyl CoA through the action of pyruvate dehydrogenase. If
either acetyl groups or NADH accumulate, there is less need for the reaction and the rate decreases. Pyruvate dehydrogenase
is also regulated by phosphorylation: A kinase phosphorylates it to form an inactive enzyme, and a phosphatase reactivates
it. The kinase and the phosphatase are also regulated.
Citric Acid Cycle
The citric acid cycle is controlled through the enzymes that catalyze the reactions that make the first two molecules of
NADH (Figure 7.9). These enzymes are isocitrate dehydrogenase and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. When adequate ATP
and NADH levels are available, the rates of these reactions decrease. When more ATP is needed, as reflected in rising ADP
levels, the rate increases. α-Ketoglutarate dehydrogenase will also be affected by the levels of succinyl CoA—a subsequent
intermediate in the cycle—causing a decrease in activity. A decrease in the rate of operation of the pathway at this point is
not necessarily negative, as the increased levels of the α-ketoglutarate not used by the citric acid cycle can be used by the
cell for amino acid (glutamate) synthesis.
Electron Transport Chain
Specific enzymes of the electron transport chain are unaffected by feedback inhibition, but the rate of electron transport
through the pathway is affected by the levels of ADP and ATP. Greater ATP consumption by a cell is indicated by a buildup
of ADP. As ATP usage decreases, the concentration of ADP decreases, and now, ATP begins to build up in the cell. This
change is the relative concentration of ADP to ATP triggers the cell to slow down the electron transport chain.
This world map shows Earth’s distribution of photosynthesis as seen via chlorophyll a concentrations. On
land, this is evident via terrestrial plants, and in oceanic zones, via phytoplankton.
The processes in all organisms—from bacteria to humans—require energy. To get this energy, many organisms access stored
energy by eating, that is, by ingesting other organisms. But where does the stored energy in food originate? All of this
energy can be traced back to photosynthesis.
Photosynthesis is essential to all life on earth; both plants and animals depend on it. It is the only biological process that
can capture energy that originates in outer space (sunlight) and convert it into chemical compounds (carbohydrates) that every organism uses to power its metabolism. In brief, the energy of sunlight is captured and used to energize electrons,
which are then stored in the covalent bonds of sugar molecules. How long lasting and stable are those covalent bonds? The
energy extracted today by the burning of coal and petroleum products represents sunlight energy captured and stored by
photosynthesis almost 200 million years ago.
Plants, algae, and a group of bacteria called cyanobacteria are the only organisms capable of performing photosynthesis
(Figure 8.2). Because they use light to manufacture their own food, they are called photoautotrophs (literally, “self-feeders
using light”). Other organisms, such as animals, fungi, and most other bacteria, are termed heterotrophs (“other feeders”),
because they must rely on the sugars produced by photosynthetic organisms for their energy needs. A third very interesting
group of bacteria synthesize sugars, not by using sunlight’s energy, but by extracting energy from inorganic chemical
compounds; hence, they are referred to as chemoautotrophs.
Photoautotrophs including (a) plants, (b) algae, and (c) cyanobacteria synthesize their organic compounds
via photosynthesis using sunlight as an energy source. Cyanobacteria and planktonic algae can grow over enormous
areas in water, at times completely covering the surface. In a (d) deep sea vent, chemoautotrophs, such as these
(e) thermophilic bacteria, capture energy from inorganic compounds to produce organic compounds. The ecosystem
surrounding the vents has a diverse array of animals, such as tubeworms, crustaceans, and octopi that derive
energy from the bacteria.
The importance of photosynthesis is not just that it can capture sunlight’s energy. A lizard sunning itself on a cold day can
use the sun’s energy to warm up. Photosynthesis is vital because it evolved as a way to store the energy in solar radiation
(the “photo-” part) as high-energy electrons in the carbon-carbon bonds of carbohydrate molecules (the “-synthesis” part).
Those carbohydrates are the energy source that heterotrophs use to power the synthesis of ATP via respiration. Therefore,
photosynthesis powers 99 percent of Earth’s ecosystems. When a top predator, such as a wolf, preys on a deer (Figure 8.3),
the wolf is at the end of an energy path that went from nuclear reactions on the surface of the sun, to light, to photosynthesis,
to vegetation, to deer, and finally to wolf.
The energy stored in carbohydrate molecules from photosynthesis passes through the food chain. The
predator that eats these deer receives a portion of the energy that originated in the photosynthetic vegetation that the
deer consumed. (credit: modification of work by Steve VanRiper, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)
Main Structures and Summary of Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis is a multi-step process that requires sunlight, carbon dioxide (which is low in energy), and water as
substrates (Figure 8.4). After the process is complete, it releases oxygen and produces glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GA3P),
simple carbohydrate molecules (which are high in energy) that can subsequently be converted into glucose, sucrose, or any
of dozens of other sugar molecules. These sugar molecules contain energy and the energized carbon that all living things
need to survive.
Photosynthesis uses solar energy, carbon dioxide, and water to produce energy-storing carbohydrates.
Oxygen is generated as a waste product of photosynthesis.
Photosynthesis uses solar energy, carbon dioxide, and water to produce energy-storing carbohydrates.
Oxygen is generated as a waste product of photosynthesis.
The basic equation for photosynthesis is deceptively simple. In reality, the process takes place in many
steps involving intermediate reactants and products. Glucose, the primary energy source in cells, is made from two
three-carbon GA3Ps.
Although the equation looks simple, the many steps that take place during photosynthesis are actually quite complex. Before
learning the details of how photoautotrophs turn sunlight into food, it is important to become familiar with the structures
involved.
In plants, photosynthesis generally takes place in leaves, which consist of several layers of cells. The process of
photosynthesis occurs in a middle layer called the mesophyll. The gas exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen occurs
through small, regulated openings called stomata (singular: stoma), which also play roles in the regulation of gas exchange
and water balance. The stomata are typically located on the underside of the leaf, which helps to minimize water loss. Each
stoma is flanked by guard cells that regulate the opening and closing of the stomata by swelling or shrinking in response to
osmotic changes.
In all autotrophic eukaryotes, photosynthesis takes place inside an organelle called a chloroplast. For plants, chloroplastcontaining
cells exist in the mesophyll. Chloroplasts have a double membrane envelope (composed of an outer membrane
and an inner membrane). Within the chloroplast are stacked, disc-shaped structures called thylakoids. Embedded in the
thylakoid membrane is chlorophyll, a pigment (molecule that absorbs light) responsible for the initial interaction between
light and plant material, and numerous proteins that make up the electron transport chain. The thylakoid membrane encloses
an internal space called the thylakoid lumen. As shown in Figure 8.6, a stack of thylakoids is called a granum, and the
liquid-filled space surrounding the granum is called stroma or “bed” (not to be confused with stoma or “mouth,” an opening
on the leaf epidermis).
The Two Parts of Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis takes place in two sequential stages: the light-dependent reactions and the light independent-reactions. In
the light-dependent reactions, energy from sunlight is absorbed by chlorophyll and that energy is converted into stored
chemical energy. In the light-independent reactions, the chemical energy harvested during the light-dependent reactions drive the assembly of sugar molecules from carbon dioxide. Therefore, although the light-independent reactions do not use
light as a reactant, they require the products of the light-dependent reactions to function. In addition, several enzymes of
the light-independent reactions are activated by light. The light-dependent reactions utilize certain molecules to temporarily
store the energy: These are referred to as energy carriers. The energy carriers that move energy from light-dependent
reactions to light-independent reactions can be thought of as “full” because they are rich in energy. After the energy is
released, the “empty” energy carriers return to the light-dependent reaction to obtain more energy. Figure 8.7 illustrates the
components inside the chloroplast where the light-dependent and light-independent reactions take place.
Photosynthesis takes place in two stages: light dependent reactions and the Calvin cycle. Light-dependent
reactions, which take place in the thylakoid membrane, use light energy to make ATP and NADPH. The Calvin cycle,
which takes place in the stroma, uses energy derived from these compounds to make GA3P from CO2.
How can light be used to make food? When a person turns on a lamp, electrical energy becomes light energy. Like all
other forms of kinetic energy, light can travel, change form, and be harnessed to do work. In the case of photosynthesis,
light energy is converted into chemical energy, which photoautotrophs use to build carbohydrate molecules (Figure 8.9).
However, autotrophs only use a few specific components of sunlight.
What Is Light Energy?
The sun emits an enormous amount of electromagnetic radiation (solar energy). Humans can see only a fraction of this
energy, which portion is therefore referred to as “visible light.” The manner in which solar energy travels is described
as waves. Scientists can determine the amount of energy of a wave by measuring its wavelength, the distance between
consecutive points of a wave. A single wave is measured from two consecutive points, such as from crest to crest or from
trough to trough.
The wavelength of a single wave is the distance between two consecutive points of similar position (two
crests or two troughs) along the wave.
Visible light constitutes only one of many types of electromagnetic radiation emitted from the sun and other stars. Scientists
differentiate the various types of radiant energy from the sun within the electromagnetic spectrum. The electromagnetic
spectrum is the range of all possible frequencies of radiation (Figure 8.11). The difference between wavelengths relates to
the amount of energy carried by them.
The sun emits energy in the form of electromagnetic radiation. This radiation exists at different
wavelengths, each of which has its own characteristic energy. All electromagnetic radiation, including visible light, is
characterized by its wavelength.
Each type of electromagnetic radiation travels at a particular wavelength. The longer the wavelength (or the more stretched
out it appears in the diagram), the less energy is carried. Short, tight waves carry the most energy. This may seem illogical,
but think of it in terms of a piece of moving a heavy rope. It takes little effort by a person to move a rope in long, wide
waves. To make a rope move in short, tight waves, a person would need to apply significantly more energy.
The electromagnetic spectrum (Figure 8.11) shows several types of electromagnetic radiation originating from the sun,
including X-rays and ultraviolet (UV) rays. The higher-energy waves can penetrate tissues and damage cells and DNA,
explaining why both X-rays and UV rays can be harmful to living organisms.
Absorption of Light
Light energy initiates the process of photosynthesis when pigments absorb the light. Organic pigments, whether in the
human retina or the chloroplast thylakoid, have a narrow range of energy levels that they can absorb. Energy levels lower
than those represented by red light are insufficient to raise an orbital electron to a populatable, excited (quantum) state.
Energy levels higher than those in blue light will physically tear the molecules apart, called bleaching. So retinal pigments
can only “see” (absorb) 700 nm to 400 nm light, which is therefore called visible light. For the same reasons, plants pigment
molecules absorb only light in the wavelength range of 700 nm to 400 nm; plant physiologists refer to this range for plants
as photosynthetically active radiation.
The visible light seen by humans as white light actually exists in a rainbow of colors. Certain objects, such as a prism or
a drop of water, disperse white light to reveal the colors to the human eye. The visible light portion of the electromagnetic
spectrum shows the rainbow of colors, with violet and blue having shorter wavelengths, and therefore higher energy. At the
other end of the spectrum toward red, the wavelengths are longer and have lower energy.
The colors of visible light do not carry the same amount of energy. Violet has the shortest wavelength and
therefore carries the most energy, whereas red has the longest wavelength and carries the least amount of energy.
(credit: modification of work by NASA)
Understanding Pigments
Different kinds of pigments exist, and each has evolved to absorb only certain wavelengths (colors) of visible light.
Pigments reflect or transmit the wavelengths they cannot absorb, making them appear in the corresponding color.
Chlorophylls and carotenoids are the two major classes of photosynthetic pigments found in plants and algae; each class
has multiple types of pigment molecules. There are five major chlorophylls: a, b, c and d and a related molecule found in
prokaryotes called bacteriochlorophyll. Chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b are found in higher plant chloroplasts and will be
the focus of the following discussion.
With dozens of different forms, carotenoids are a much larger group of pigments. The carotenoids found in fruit—such as
the red of tomato (lycopene), the yellow of corn seeds (zeaxanthin), or the orange of an orange peel (β-carotene)—are used
as advertisements to attract seed dispersers. In photosynthesis, carotenoids function as photosynthetic pigments that are
very efficient molecules for the disposal of excess energy. When a leaf is exposed to full sun, the light-dependent reactions
are required to process an enormous amount of energy; if that energy is not handled properly, it can do significant damage.
Therefore, many carotenoids reside in the thylakoid membrane, absorb excess energy, and safely dissipate that energy as
heat.
Each type of pigment can be identified by the specific pattern of wavelengths it absorbs from visible light, which is the
absorption spectrum. The graph in Figure 8.13 shows the absorption spectra for chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b, and a type
of carotenoid pigment called β-carotene (which absorbs blue and green light). Notice how each pigment has a distinct set
of peaks and troughs, revealing a highly specific pattern of absorption. Chlorophyll a absorbs wavelengths from either end
of the visible spectrum (blue and red), but not green. Because green is reflected or transmitted, chlorophyll appears green.
Carotenoids absorb in the short-wavelength blue region, and reflect the longer yellow, red, and orange wavelengths.
Chlorophyll a, (b) chlorophyll b, and (c) β-carotene are hydrophobic organic pigments found in
the thylakoid membrane. Chlorophyll a and b, which are identical except for the part indicated in the red box, are
responsible for the green color of leaves. β-carotene is responsible for the orange color in carrots. Each pigment has
(d) a unique absorbance spectrum.
Many photosynthetic organisms have a mixture of pigments; using them, the organism can absorb energy from a wider
range of wavelengths. Not all photosynthetic organisms have full access to sunlight. Some organisms grow underwater
where light intensity and quality decrease and change with depth. Other organisms grow in competition for light. Plants on
the rainforest floor must be able to absorb any bit of light that comes through, because the taller trees absorb most of the
sunlight and scatter the remaining solar radiation.
Plants that commonly grow in the shade have adapted to low levels of light by changing the relative
concentrations of their chlorophyll pigments. (credit: Jason Hollinger)
When studying a photosynthetic organism, scientists can determine the types of pigments present by generating absorption
spectra. An instrument called a spectrophotometer can differentiate which wavelengths of light a substance can absorb.
Spectrophotometers measure transmitted light and compute from it the absorption. By extracting pigments from leaves
and placing these samples into a spectrophotometer, scientists can identify which wavelengths of light an organism can
absorb. Additional methods for the identification of plant pigments include various types of chromatography that separate
the pigments by their relative affinities to solid and mobile phases.
How Light-Dependent Reactions Work
The overall function of light-dependent reactions is to convert solar energy into chemical energy in the form of NADPH
and ATP. This chemical energy supports the light-independent reactions and fuels the assembly of sugar molecules. The
light-dependent reactions are depicted in Figure 8.15. Protein complexes and pigment molecules work together to produce
NADPH and ATP. A photosystem consists of a light-harvesting complex and a reaction center. Pigments in the lightharvesting
complex pass light energy to two special chlorophyll a molecules in the reaction center. The light excites
an electron from the chlorophyll a pair, which passes to the primary electron acceptor. The excited electron must then
be replaced. In (a) photosystem II, the electron comes from the splitting of water, which releases oxygen as a waste
product. In (b) photosystem I, the electron comes from the chloroplast electron transport chain discussed below.
The actual step that converts light energy into chemical energy takes place in a multiprotein complex called a photosystem,
two types of which are found embedded in the thylakoid membrane, photosystem II (PSII) and photosystem I (PSI)
(Figure 8.16). The two complexes differ on the basis of what they oxidize (that is, the source of the low-energy electron
supply) and what they reduce (the place to which they deliver their energized electrons).
Both photosystems have the same basic structure; a number of antenna proteins to which the chlorophyll molecules are
bound surround the reaction center where the photochemistry takes place. Each photosystem is serviced by the lightharvesting
complex, which passes energy from sunlight to the reaction center; it consists of multiple antenna proteins that
contain a mixture of 300–400 chlorophyll a and b molecules as well as other pigments like carotenoids. The absorption of
a single photon or distinct quantity or “packet” of light by any of the chlorophylls pushes that molecule into an excited
state. In short, the light energy has now been captured by biological molecules but is not stored in any useful form yet. The
energy is transferred from chlorophyll to chlorophyll until eventually (after about a millionth of a second), it is delivered to
the reaction center. Up to this point, only energy has been transferred between molecules, not electrons.
The reaction center contains a pair of chlorophyll a molecules with a special property. Those two chlorophylls can undergo
oxidation upon excitation; they can actually give up an electron in a process called a photoact. It is at this step in the reaction
center, this step in photosynthesis, that light energy is converted into an excited electron. All of the subsequent steps involve
getting that electron onto the energy carrier NADPH for delivery to the Calvin cycle where the electron is deposited onto
carbon for long-term storage in the form of a carbohydrate.PSII and PSI are two major components of the photosynthetic
electron transport chain, which also includes the cytochrome complex. The cytochrome complex, an enzyme composed
of two protein complexes, transfers the electrons from the carrier molecule plastoquinone (Pq) to the protein plastocyanin
(Pc), thus enabling both the transfer of protons across the thylakoid membrane and the transfer of electrons from PSII to
PSI.
The reaction center of PSII (called P680) delivers its high-energy electrons, one at the time, to the primary electron
acceptor, and through the electron transport chain (Pq to cytochrome complex to plastocyanine) to PSI. P680’s missing
electron is replaced by extracting a low-energy electron from water; thus, water is split and PSII is re-reduced after every
photoact. Splitting one H2O molecule releases two electrons, two hydrogen atoms, and one atom of oxygen. Splitting two
molecules is required to form one molecule of diatomic O2 gas. About 10 percent of the oxygen is used by mitochondria
in the leaf to support oxidative phosphorylation. The remainder escapes to the atmosphere where it is used by aerobic
organisms to support respiration.
As electrons move through the proteins that reside between PSII and PSI, they lose energy. That energy is used to move
hydrogen atoms from the stromal side of the membrane to the thylakoid lumen. Those hydrogen atoms, plus the ones
produced by splitting water, accumulate in the thylakoid lumen and will be used synthesize ATP in a later step. Because the
electrons have lost energy prior to their arrival at PSI, they must be re-energized by PSI, hence, another photon is absorbed
by the PSI antenna. That energy is relayed to the PSI reaction center (called P700). P700 is oxidized and sends a highenergy
electron to NADP+ to form NADPH. Thus, PSII captures the energy to create proton gradients to make ATP, and PSI
captures the energy to reduce NADP+ into NADPH. The two photosystems work in concert, in part, to guarantee that the
production of NADPH will roughly equal the production of ATP. Other mechanisms exist to fine tune that ratio to exactly
match the chloroplast’s constantly changing energy needs.
Generating an Energy Carrier: ATP
As in the intermembrane space of the mitochondria during cellular respiration, the buildup of hydrogen ions inside the
thylakoid lumen creates a concentration gradient. The passive diffusion of hydrogen ions from high concentration (in the
thylakoid lumen) to low concentration (in the stroma) is harnessed to create ATP, just as in the electron transport chain of
cellular respiration. The ions build up energy because of diffusion and because they all have the same electrical charge,
repelling each other.
To release this energy, hydrogen ions will rush through any opening, similar to water jetting through a hole in a dam. In the
thylakoid, that opening is a passage through a specialized protein channel called the ATP synthase. The energy released by
the hydrogen ion stream allows ATP synthase to attach a third phosphate group to ADP, which forms a molecule of ATP
(Figure 8.16). The flow of hydrogen ions through ATP synthase is called chemiosmosis because the ions move from an
area of high to an area of low concentration through a semi-permeable structure.
After the energy from the sun is converted into chemical energy and temporarily stored in ATP and NADPH molecules, the
cell has the fuel needed to build carbohydrate molecules for long-term energy storage. The products of the light-dependent
reactions, ATP and NADPH, have lifespans in the range of millionths of seconds, whereas the products of the lightindependent
reactions (carbohydrates and other forms of reduced carbon) can survive for hundreds of millions of years. The
carbohydrate molecules made will have a backbone of carbon atoms. Where does the carbon come from? It comes from
carbon dioxide, the gas that is a waste product of respiration in microbes, fungi, plants, and animals.
The Calvin Cycle
In plants, carbon dioxide (CO2) enters the leaves through stomata, where it diffuses over short distances through
intercellular spaces until it reaches the mesophyll cells. Once in the mesophyll cells, CO2 diffuses into the stroma of
the chloroplast—the site of light-independent reactions of photosynthesis. These reactions actually have several names
associated with them. Another term, the Calvin cycle, is named for the man who discovered it, and because these reactions function as a cycle. Others call it the Calvin-Benson cycle to include the name of another scientist involved in its discovery.
The most outdated name is dark reactions, because light is not directly required (Figure 8.17). However, the term dark
reaction can be misleading because it implies incorrectly that the reaction only occurs at night or is independent of light,
which is why most scientists and instructors no longer use it.
Light reactions harness energy from the sun to produce chemical bonds, ATP, and NADPH. These energycarrying
molecules are made in the stroma where carbon fixation takes place.
The light-independent reactions of the Calvin cycle can be organized into three basic stages: fixation, reduction, and
regeneration.
Stage 1: Fixation
In the stroma, in addition to CO2, two other components are present to initiate the light-independent reactions: an enzyme
called ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO), and three molecules of ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP),
as shown in Figure 8.18. RuBP has five atoms of carbon, flanked by two phosphates. RuBisCO catalyzes a reaction between CO2 and RuBP. For each CO2 molecule that reacts with one RuBP, two molecules
of another compound (3-PGA) form. PGA has three carbons and one phosphate. Each turn of the cycle involves only one
RuBP and one carbon dioxide and forms two molecules of 3-PGA. The number of carbon atoms remains the same, as the
atoms move to form new bonds during the reactions (3 atoms from 3CO2 + 15 atoms from 3RuBP = 18 atoms in 3 atoms of
3-PGA). This process is called carbon fixation, because CO2 is “fixed” from an inorganic form into organic molecules.
Stage 2: Reduction
ATP and NADPH are used to convert the six molecules of 3-PGA into six molecules of a chemical called glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate (G3P). That is a reduction reaction because it involves the gain of electrons by 3-PGA. Recall that a reduction
is the gain of an electron by an atom or molecule. Six molecules of both ATP and NADPH are used. For ATP, energy is
released with the loss of the terminal phosphate atom, converting it into ADP; for NADPH, both energy and a hydrogen
atom are lost, converting it into NADP+. Both of these molecules return to the nearby light-dependent reactions to be reused
and reenergized.
Stage 3: Regeneration
Interestingly, at this point, only one of the G3P molecules leaves the Calvin cycle and is sent to the cytoplasm to contribute
to the formation of other compounds needed by the plant. Because the G3P exported from the chloroplast has three carbon
atoms, it takes three “turns” of the Calvin cycle to fix enough net carbon to export one G3P. But each turn makes two G3Ps,
thus three turns make six G3Ps. One is exported while the remaining five G3P molecules remain in the cycle and are used
to regenerate RuBP, which enables the system to prepare for more CO2 to be fixed. Three more molecules of ATP are used
in these regeneration reactions.
The harsh conditions of the desert have led plants like these cacti to evolve variations of the lightindependent
reactions of photosynthesis. These variations increase the efficiency of water usage, helping to conserve
water and energy. (credit: Piotr Wojtkowski)
The Energy Cycle
Whether the organism is a bacterium, plant, or animal, all living things access energy by breaking down carbohydrate
molecules. But if plants make carbohydrate molecules, why would they need to break them down, especially when it has
been shown that the gas organisms release as a “waste product” (CO2) acts as a substrate for the formation of more food in
photosynthesis? Remember, living things need energy to perform life functions. In addition, an organism can either make
its own food or eat another organism—either way, the food still needs to be broken down. Finally, in the process of breaking
down food, called cellular respiration, heterotrophs release needed energy and produce “waste” in the form of CO2 gas.
In nature, there is no such thing as waste. Every single atom of matter and energy is conserved, recycling over and
over infinitely. Substances change form or move from one type of molecule to another, but their constituent atoms never
disappear (Figure 8.20).
CO2 is no more a form of waste than oxygen is wasteful to photosynthesis. Both are byproducts of reactions that move
on to other reactions. Photosynthesis absorbs light energy to build carbohydrates in chloroplasts, and aerobic cellular
respiration releases energy by using oxygen to metabolize carbohydrates in the cytoplasm and mitochondria. Both processes
use electron transport chains to capture the energy necessary to drive other reactions. These two powerhouse processes,
photosynthesis and cellular respiration, function in biological, cyclical harmony to allow organisms to access life-sustaining
energy that originates millions of miles away in a burning star humans call the sun.
Photosynthesis consumes carbon dioxide and produces oxygen. Aerobic respiration consumes oxygen
and produces carbon dioxide. These two processes play an important role in the carbon cycle.
Have you ever become separated from a friend while in a crowd? If so, you know the challenge of searching for someone when surrounded by thousands of other people. If you and your friend have cell phones, your chances of finding each other are good. A cell phone’s ability to send and receive messages makes it an ideal communication device.
Introduction
Imagine what life would be like if you and the people around you could not communicate. You would not be able to express your wishes to others, nor could you ask questions to find out more about your environment. Social organization is dependent on communication between the individuals that comprise that society; without communication, society would fall apart.
As with people, it is vital for individual cells to be able to interact with their environment. This is true whether a cell is growing by itself in a pond or is one of many cells that form a larger organism. In order to properly respond to external stimuli, cells have developed complex mechanisms of communication that can receive a message, transfer the information across the plasma membrane, and then produce changes within the cell in response to the message.
In multicellular organisms, cells send and receive chemical messages constantly to coordinate the actions of distant organs, tissues, and cells. The ability to send messages quickly and efficiently enables cells to coordinate and fine-tune their functions.
While the necessity for cellular communication in larger organisms seems obvious, even single-celled organisms communicate with each other. Yeast cells signal each other to aid mating. Some forms of bacteria coordinate their actions
in order to form large complexes called biofilms or to organize the production of toxins to remove competing organisms. The ability of cells to communicate through chemical signals originated in single cells and was essential for the evolution of multicellular organisms. The efficient and error-free function of communication systems is vital for all life as we know it.
There are two kinds of communication in the world of living cells. Communication between cells is called intercellular signaling, and communication within a cell is called intracellular signaling. An easy way to remember the distinction is by understanding the Latin origin of the prefixes: inter- means "between" (for example, intersecting lines are those that cross each other) and intra- means "inside" (like intravenous).
Chemical signals are released by signaling cells in the form of small, usually volatile or soluble molecules called ligands. A ligand is a molecule that binds another specific molecule, in some cases, delivering a signal in the process. Ligands can thus be thought of as signaling molecules. Ligands interact with proteins in target cells, which are cells that are affected by chemical signals; these proteins are also called receptors. Ligands and receptors exist in several varieties; however, a specific ligand will have a specific receptor that typically binds only that ligand.
Forms of Signaling
There are four categories of chemical signaling found in multicellular organisms: paracrine signaling, endocrine signaling, autocrine signaling, and direct signaling across gap junctions (Figure 9.2). The main difference between the different categories of signaling is the distance that the signal travels through the organism to reach the target cell. Not all cells are affected by the same signals.
In chemical signaling, a cell may target itself (autocrine signaling), a cell connected by gap junctions, a nearby cell (paracrine signaling), or a distant cell (endocrine signaling). Paracrine signaling acts on nearby cells, endocrine signaling uses the circulatory system to transport ligands, and autocrine signaling acts on the signaling cell. Signaling via gap junctions involves signaling molecules moving directly between adjacent cells.Paracrine Signaling
Signals that act locally between cells that are close together are called paracrine signals. Paracrine signals move by diffusion through the extracellular matrix. These types of signals usually elicit quick responses that last only a short amount of time. In order to keep the response localized, paracrine ligand molecules are normally quickly degraded by enzymes or removed by neighboring cells. Removing the signals will reestablish the concentration gradient for the signal, allowing them to quickly diffuse through the intracellular space if released again.
One example of paracrine signaling is the transfer of signals across synapses between nerve cells. A nerve cell consists of a cell body, several short, branched extensions called dendrites that receive stimuli, and a long extension called an axon, which transmits signals to other nerve cells or muscle cells. The junction between nerve cells where signal transmission occurs is called a synapse. A synaptic signal is a chemical signal that travels between nerve cells. Signals within the nerve cells are propagated by fast-moving electrical impulses. When these impulses reach the end of the axon, the signal continues on to a dendrite of the next cell by the release of chemical ligands called neurotransmitters by the presynaptic cell (the cell emitting the signal). The neurotransmitters are transported across the very small distances between nerve cells, which are called chemical synapses (Figure 9.3). The small distance between nerve cells allows the signal to travel quickly; this enables an immediate response, such as, Take your hand off the stove!
When the neurotransmitter binds the receptor on the surface of the postsynaptic cell, the electrochemical potential of the target cell changes, and the next electrical impulse is launched. The neurotransmitters that are released into the chemical synapse are degraded quickly or get reabsorbed by the presynaptic cell so that the recipient nerve cell can recover quickly and be prepared to respond rapidly to the next synaptic signal.
The distance between the presynaptic cell and the postsynaptic cell—called the synaptic gap—is very small and allows for rapid diffusion of the neurotransmitter. Enzymes in the synapatic cleft degrade some types of neurotransmitters to terminate the signal.
Endocrine Signaling
Signals from distant cells are called endocrine signals, and they originate from endocrine cells. (In the body, many endocrine cells are located in endocrine glands, such as the thyroid gland, the hypothalamus, and the pituitary gland.) These types of signals usually produce a slower response but have a longer-lasting effect. The ligands released in endocrine signaling are called hormones, signaling molecules that are produced in one part of the body but affect other body regions some distance away.
Hormones travel the large distances between endocrine cells and their target cells via the bloodstream, which is a relatively slow way to move throughout the body. Because of their form of transport, hormones get diluted and are present in low concentrations when they act on their target cells. This is different from paracrine signaling, in which local concentrations of ligands can be very high.
Autocrine Signaling
Autocrine signals are produced by signaling cells that can also bind to the ligand that is released. This means the signaling cell and the target cell can be the same or a similar cell (the prefix auto- means self, a reminder that the signaling cell sends a signal to itself). This type of signaling often occurs during the early development of an organism to ensure that cells develop into the correct tissues and take on the proper function. Autocrine signaling also regulates pain sensation and inflammatory responses. Further, if a cell is infected with a virus, the cell can signal itself to undergo programmed cell death, killing the virus in the process. In some cases, neighboring cells of the same type are also influenced by the released ligand. In embryological development, this process of stimulating a group of neighboring cells may help to direct the differentiation of identical cells into the same cell type, thus ensuring the proper developmental outcome.
Direct Signaling Across Gap Junctions
Gap junctions in animals and plasmodesmata in plants are connections between the plasma membranes of neighboring cells. These water-filled channels allow small signaling molecules, called intracellular mediators, to diffuse between the two
cells. Small molecules, such as calcium ions (Ca2+), are able to move between cells, but large molecules like proteins and DNA cannot fit through the channels. The specificity of the channels ensures that the cells remain independent but can quickly and easily transmit signals. The transfer of signaling molecules communicates the current state of the cell that is directly next to the target cell; this allows a group of cells to coordinate their response to a signal that only one of them may have received. In plants, plasmodesmata are ubiquitous, making the entire plant into a giant, communication network.
Types of Receptors
Receptors are protein molecules in the target cell or on its surface that bind ligand. There are two types of receptors, internal receptors and cell-surface receptors.
Internal receptors
Internal receptors, also known as intracellular or cytoplasmic receptors, are found in the cytoplasm of the cell and respond to hydrophobic ligand molecules that are able to travel across the plasma membrane. Once inside the cell, many of these molecules bind to proteins that act as regulators of mRNA synthesis (transcription) to mediate gene expression. Gene expression is the cellular process of transforming the information in a cell's DNA into a sequence of amino acids, which ultimately forms a protein. When the ligand binds to the internal receptor, a conformational change is triggered that exposes a DNA-binding site on the protein. The ligand-receptor complex moves into the nucleus, then binds to specific regulatory regions of the chromosomal DNA and promotes the initiation of transcription (Figure 9.4). Transcription is the process of copying the information in a cells DNA into a special form of RNA called messenger RNA (mRNA); the cell uses information in the mRNA (which moves out into the cytoplasm and associates with ribosomes) to link specific amino acids in the correct order, producing a protein. Internal receptors can directly influence gene expression without having to pass the signal on to other receptors or messengers.
Hydrophobic signaling molecules typically diffuse across the plasma membrane and interact with intracellular receptors in the cytoplasm. Many intracellular receptors are transcription factors that interact with DNA in the nucleus and regulate gene expression.
Cell-Surface Receptors
Cell-surface receptors, also known as transmembrane receptors, are cell surface, membrane-anchored (integral) proteins that bind to external ligand molecules. This type of receptor spans the plasma membrane and performs signal transduction, in which an extracellular signal is converted into an intercellular signal. Ligands that interact with cell-surface receptors do not have to enter the cell that they affect. Cell-surface receptors are also called cell-specific proteins or markers because they are specific to individual cell types.
Because cell-surface receptor proteins are fundamental to normal cell functioning, it should come as no surprise that a malfunction in any one of these proteins could have severe consequences. Errors in the protein structures of certain receptor molecules have been shown to play a role in hypertension (high blood pressure), asthma, heart disease, and cancer.
Each cell-surface receptor has three main components: an external ligand-binding domain, a hydrophobic membrane- spanning region, and an intracellular domain inside the cell. The ligand-binding domain is also called the extracellular domain. The size and extent of each of these domains vary widely, depending on the type of receptor.
Cell-surface receptors are involved in most of the signaling in multicellular organisms. There are three general categories of cell-surface receptors: ion channel-linked receptors, G-protein-linked receptors, and enzyme-linked receptors.
Ion channel-linked receptors bind a ligand and open a channel through the membrane that allows specific ions to pass through. To form a channel, this type of cell-surface receptor has an extensive membrane-spanning region. In order to interact with the phospholipid fatty acid tails that form the center of the plasma membrane, many of the amino acids in the membrane-spanning region are hydrophobic in nature. Conversely, the amino acids that line the inside of the channel are hydrophilic to allow for the passage of water or ions. When a ligand binds to the extracellular region of the channel, there is a conformational change in the proteins structure that allows ions such as sodium, calcium, magnesium, and hydrogen to pass through 
Gated ion channels form a pore through the plasma membrane that opens when the signaling molecule binds. The open pore then allows ions to flow into or out of the cell.
G-protein-linked receptors bind a ligand and activate a membrane protein called a G-protein. The activated G-protein then interacts with either an ion channel or an enzyme in the membrane (Figure 9.6). All G-protein-linked receptors have seven transmembrane domains, but each receptor has its own specific extracellular domain and G-protein-binding site.
Cell signaling using G-protein-linked receptors occurs as a cyclic series of events. Before the ligand binds, the inactive G- protein can bind to a newly revealed site on the receptor specific for its binding. Once the G-protein binds to the receptor, the resultant shape change activates the G-protein, which releases GDP and picks up GTP. The subunits of the G-protein then split into the α subunit and the βγ subunit. One or both of these G-protein fragments may be able to activate other proteins as a result. After awhile, the GTP on the active α subunit of the G-protein is hydrolyzed to GDP and the βγ subunit is deactivated. The subunits reassociate to form the inactive G-protein and the cycle begins anew.
Heterotrimeric G proteins have three subunits: α, β, and γ. When a signaling molecule binds to a G-protein- coupled receptor in the plasma membrane, a GDP molecule associated with the α subunit is exchanged for GTP. The β and γ subunits dissociate from the α subunit, and a cellular response is triggered either by the α subunit or the dissociated βγ pair. Hydrolysis of GTP to GDP terminates the signal.
G-protein-linked receptors have been extensively studied and much has been learned about their roles in maintaining health. Bacteria that are pathogenic to humans can release poisons that interrupt specific G-protein-linked receptor function, leading to illnesses such as pertussis, botulism, and cholera. In cholera (Figure 9.7), for example, the water-borne bacterium Vibrio cholerae produces a toxin, choleragen, that binds to cells lining the small intestine. The toxin then enters these intestinal cells, where it modifies a G-protein that controls the opening of a chloride channel and causes it to remain continuously active, resulting in large losses of fluids from the body and potentially fatal dehydration as a result.
Transmitted primarily through contaminated drinking water, cholera is a major cause of death in the developing world and in areas where natural disasters interrupt the availability of clean water. The cholera bacterium, Vibrio cholerae, creates a toxin that modifies G-protein-mediated cell signaling pathways in the intestines. Modern sanitation eliminates the threat of cholera outbreaks, such as the one that swept through New York City in 1866. This poster from that era shows how, at that time, the way that the disease was transmitted was not understood.
Enzyme-linked receptors are cell-surface receptors with intracellular domains that are associated with an enzyme. In some cases, the intracellular domain of the receptor itself is an enzyme. Other enzyme-linked receptors have a small intracellular domain that interacts directly with an enzyme. The enzyme-linked receptors normally have large extracellular and intracellular domains, but the membrane-spanning region consists of a single alpha-helical region of the peptide strand. When a ligand binds to the extracellular domain, a signal is transferred through the membrane, activating the enzyme. Activation of the enzyme sets off a chain of events within the cell that eventually leads to a response. One example of this type of enzyme-linked receptor is the tyrosine kinase receptor (Figure 9.8). A kinase is an enzyme that transfers phosphate groups from ATP to another protein. The tyrosine kinase receptor transfers phosphate groups to tyrosine molecules (tyrosine residues). First, signaling molecules bind to the extracellular domain of two nearby tyrosine kinase receptors. The two neighboring receptors then bond together, or dimerize. Phosphates are then added to tyrosine residues on the intracellular domain of the receptors (phosphorylation). The phosphorylated residues can then transmit the signal to the next messenger within the cytoplasm.
Signaling Molecules
Produced by signaling cells and the subsequent binding to receptors in target cells, ligands act as chemical signals that travel to the target cells to coordinate responses. The types of molecules that serve as ligands are incredibly varied and range from
small proteins to small ions like calcium (Ca2+).
Small Hydrophobic Ligands
Small hydrophobic ligands can directly diffuse through the plasma membrane and interact with internal receptors. Important members of this class of ligands are the steroid hormones. Steroids are lipids that have a hydrocarbon skeleton with four fused rings; different steroids have different functional groups attached to the carbon skeleton. Steroid hormones include the female sex hormone, estradiol, which is a type of estrogen; the male sex hormone, testosterone; and cholesterol, which is an important structural component of biological membranes and a precursor of steriod hormones (Figure 9.9). Other hydrophobic hormones include thyroid hormones and vitamin D. In order to be soluble in blood, hydrophobic ligands must bind to carrier proteins while they are being transported through the bloodstream.
Steroid hormones have similar chemical structures to their precursor, cholesterol. Because these molecules are small and hydrophobic, they can diffuse directly across the plasma membrane into the cell, where they interact with internal receptors.
Water-Soluble Ligands
Water-soluble ligands are polar and therefore cannot pass through the plasma membrane unaided; sometimes, they are too large to pass through the membrane at all. Instead, most water-soluble ligands bind to the extracellular domain of cell- surface receptors. This group of ligands is quite diverse and includes small molecules, peptides, and proteins.
Other Ligands
Nitric oxide (NO) is a gas that also acts as a ligand. It is able to diffuse directly across the plasma membrane, and one of its roles is to interact with receptors in smooth muscle and induce relaxation of the tissue. NO has a very short half-life and therefore only functions over short distances. Nitroglycerin, a treatment for heart disease, acts by triggering the release of NO, which causes blood vessels to dilate (expand), thus restoring blood flow to the heart. NO has become better known recently because the pathway that it affects is targeted by prescription medications for erectile dysfunction, such as Viagra (erection involves dilated blood vessels).
Once a ligand binds to a receptor, the signal is transmitted through the membrane and into the cytoplasm. Continuation of a signal in this manner is called signal transduction. Signal transduction only occurs with cell-surface receptors because internal receptors are able to interact directly with DNA in the nucleus to initiate protein synthesis.
When a ligand binds to its receptor, conformational changes occur that affect the receptor’s intracellular domain. Conformational changes of the extracellular domain upon ligand binding can propagate through the membrane region of the receptor and lead to activation of the intracellular domain or its associated proteins. In some cases, binding of the ligand causes dimerization of the receptor, which means that two receptors bind to each other to form a stable complex called a dimer. A dimer is a chemical compound formed when two molecules (often identical) join together. The binding of the receptors in this manner enables their intracellular domains to come into close contact and activate each other.
Binding Initiates a Signaling Pathway
After the ligand binds to the cell-surface receptor, the activation of the receptor’s intracellular components sets off a chain of events that is called a signaling pathway or a signaling cascade. In a signaling pathway, second messengers, enzymes, and activated proteins interact with specific proteins, which are in turn activated in a chain reaction that eventually leads to a change in the cell’s environment (Figure 9.10). The events in the cascade occur in a series, much like a current flows in a river. Interactions that occur before a certain point are defined as upstream events, and events after that point are called downstream events.
Signaling pathways can get very complicated very quickly because most cellular proteins can affect different downstream events, depending on the conditions within the cell. A single pathway can branch off toward different endpoints based on the interplay between two or more signaling pathways, and the same ligands are often used to initiate different signals in different cell types. This variation in response is due to differences in protein expression in different cell types. Another complicating element is signal integration of the pathways, in which signals from two or more different cell-surface receptors merge to activate the same response in the cell. This process can ensure that multiple external requirements are met before a cell commits to a specific response.
The effects of extracellular signals can also be amplified by enzymatic cascades. At the initiation of the signal, a single ligand binds to a single receptor. However, activation of a receptor-linked enzyme can activate many copies of a component of the signaling cascade, which amplifies the signal.
Methods of Intracellular Signaling
The induction of a signaling pathway depends on the modification of a cellular component by an enzyme. There are numerous enzymatic modifications that can occur, and they are recognized in turn by the next component downstream. The following are some of the more common events in intracellular signaling.
Phosphorylation
One of the most common chemical modifications that occurs in signaling pathways is the addition of a phosphate group
(PO4–3) to a molecule such as a protein in a process called phosphorylation. The phosphate can be added to a nucleotide such as GMP to form GDP or GTP. Phosphates are also often added to serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues of proteins, where they replace the hydroxyl group of the amino acid (Figure 9.11). The transfer of the phosphate is catalyzed by an enzyme called a kinase. Various kinases are named for the substrate they phosphorylate. Phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues often activates enzymes. Phosphorylation of tyrosine residues can either affect the activity of an enzyme or create a binding site that interacts with downstream components in the signaling cascade. Phosphorylation may activate or inactivate enzymes, and the reversal of phosphorylation, dephosphorylation by a phosphatase, will reverse the effect.
In protein phosphorylation, a phosphate group (PO4-3 ) is added to residues of the amino acids serine, threonine, and tyrosine.
Second Messengers
Second messengers are small molecules that propagate a signal after it has been initiated by the binding of the signaling molecule to the receptor. These molecules help to spread a signal through the cytoplasm by altering the behavior of certain cellular proteins.
Calcium ion is a widely used second messenger. The free concentration of calcium ions (Ca2+) within a cell is very low because ion pumps in the plasma membrane continuously use adenosine-5'-triphosphate (ATP) to remove it. For signaling
purposes, Ca2+ is stored in cytoplasmic vesicles, such as the endoplasmic reticulum, or accessed from outside the cell. When signaling occurs, ligand-gated calcium ion channels allow the higher levels of Ca2+ that are present outside the cell (or in intracellular storage compartments) to flow into the cytoplasm, which raises the concentration of cytoplasmic Ca2+. The response to the increase in Ca2+ varies, depending on the cell type involved. For example, in the β-cells of the pancreas, Ca2+ signaling leads to the release of insulin, and in muscle cells, an increase in Ca2+ leads to muscle contractions.
Another second messenger utilized in many different cell types is cyclic AMP (cAMP). Cyclic AMP is synthesized by the enzyme adenylyl cyclase from ATP (Figure 9.12). The main role of cAMP in cells is to bind to and activate an enzyme called cAMP-dependent kinase (A-kinase). A-kinase regulates many vital metabolic pathways: It phosphorylates serine and threonine residues of its target proteins, activating them in the process. A-kinase is found in many different types of cells, and the target proteins in each kind of cell are different. Differences give rise to the variation of the responses to cAMP in different cells.
This diagram shows the mechanism for the formation of cyclic AMP (cAMP). cAMP serves as a second messenger to activate or inactivate proteins within the cell. Termination of the signal occurs when an enzyme called phosphodiesterase converts cAMP into AMP.
Present in small concentrations in the plasma membrane, inositol phospholipids are lipids that can also be converted into second messengers. Because these molecules are membrane components, they are located near membrane-bound receptors and can easily interact with them. Phosphatidylinositol (PI) is the main phospholipid that plays a role in cellular signaling. Enzymes known as kinases phosphorylate PI to form PI-phosphate (PIP) and PI-bisphosphate (PIP2).
The enzyme phospholipase C cleaves PIP2 to form diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol triphosphate (IP3) (Figure 9.13). These products of the cleavage of PIP2 serve as second messengers. Diacylglycerol (DAG) remains in the plasma membrane and activates protein kinase C (PKC), which then phosphorylates serine and threonine residues in its target proteins. IP3
diffuses into the cytoplasm and binds to ligand-gated calcium channels in the endoplasmic reticulum to release Ca2+ that continues the signal cascade.
The enzyme phospholipase C breaks down PIP2 into IP3 and DAG, both of which serve as second messengers.
Inside the cell, ligands bind to their internal receptors, allowing them to directly affect the cell’s DNA and protein-producing machinery. Using signal transduction pathways, receptors in the plasma membrane produce a variety of effects on the cell. The results of signaling pathways are extremely varied and depend on the type of cell involved as well as the external and internal conditions. A small sampling of responses is described below.
Gene Expression
Some signal transduction pathways regulate the transcription of RNA. Others regulate the translation of proteins from mRNA. An example of a protein that regulates translation in the nucleus is the MAP kinase ERK. ERK is activated in a phosphorylation cascade when epidermal growth factor (EGF) binds the EGF receptor (see Figure 9.10). Upon phosphorylation, ERK enters the nucleus and activates a protein kinase that, in turn, regulates protein translation (Figure 9.14).
ERK is a MAP kinase that activates translation when it is phosphorylated. ERK phosphorylates MNK1, which in turn phosphorylates eIF-4E, an elongation initiation factor that, with other initiation factors, is associated with mRNA. When eIF-4E becomes phosphorylated, the mRNA unfolds, allowing protein synthesis in the nucleus to begin.
The second kind of protein with which PKC can interact is a protein that acts as an inhibitor. An inhibitor is a molecule that binds to a protein and prevents it from functioning or reduces its function. In this case, the inhibitor is a protein called Iκ-B, which binds to the regulatory protein NF-κB. (The symbol κ represents the Greek letter kappa.) When Iκ-B is bound to NF-κB, the complex cannot enter the nucleus of the cell, but when Iκ-B is phosphorylated by PKC, it can no longer bind NF-κB, and NF-κB (a transcription factor) can enter the nucleus and initiate RNA transcription. In this case, the effect of phosphorylation is to inactivate an inhibitor and thereby activate the process of transcription.
Increase in Cellular Metabolism
The result of another signaling pathway affects muscle cells. The activation of β-adrenergic receptors in muscle cells by adrenaline leads to an increase in cyclic AMP (cAMP) inside the cell. Also known as epinephrine, adrenaline is a hormone (produced by the adrenal gland attached to the kidney) that readies the body for short-term emergencies. Cyclic AMP activates PKA (protein kinase A), which in turn phosphorylates two enzymes. The first enzyme promotes the degradation of glycogen by activating intermediate glycogen phosphorylase kinase (GPK) that in turn activates glycogen phosphorylase (GP) that catabolizes glycogen into glucose. (Recall that your body converts excess glucose to glycogen for short-term storage. When energy is needed, glycogen is quickly reconverted to glucose.) Phosphorylation of the second enzyme, glycogen synthase (GS), inhibits its ability to form glycogen from glucose. In this manner, a muscle cell obtains a ready pool of glucose by activating its formation via glycogen degradation and by inhibiting the use of glucose to form glycogen, thus preventing a futile cycle of glycogen degradation and synthesis. The glucose is then available for use by the muscle cell in response to a sudden surge of adrenaline—the “fight or flight” reflex.
Cell Growth
Cell signaling pathways also play a major role in cell division. Cells do not normally divide unless they are stimulated by signals from other cells. The ligands that promote cell growth are called growth factors. Most growth factors bind to cell-surface receptors that are linked to tyrosine kinases. These cell-surface receptors are called receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). Activation of RTKs initiates a signaling pathway that includes a G-protein called RAS, which activates the MAP kinase pathway described earlier. The enzyme MAP kinase then stimulates the expression of proteins that interact with other cellular components to initiate cell division.
Cell Death
When a cell is damaged, superfluous, or potentially dangerous to an organism, a cell can initiate a mechanism to trigger programmed cell death, or apoptosis. Apoptosis allows a cell to die in a controlled manner that prevents the release of potentially damaging molecules from inside the cell. There are many internal checkpoints that monitor a cell’s health; if abnormalities are observed, a cell can spontaneously initiate the process of apoptosis. However, in some cases, such as a viral infection or uncontrolled cell division due to cancer, the cell’s normal checks and balances fail. External signaling can also initiate apoptosis. For example, most normal animal cells have receptors that interact with the extracellular matrix, a network of glycoproteins that provides structural support for cells in an organism. The binding of cellular receptors to the extracellular matrix initiates a signaling cascade within the cell. However, if the cell moves away from the extracellular matrix, the signaling ceases, and the cell undergoes apoptosis. This system keeps cells from traveling through the body and proliferating out of control, as happens with tumor cells that metastasize.
Another example of external signaling that leads to apoptosis occurs in T-cell development. T-cells are immune cells that bind to foreign macromolecules and particles, and target them for destruction by the immune system. Normally, T-cells do not target “self” proteins (those of their own organism), a process that can lead to autoimmune diseases. In order to develop the ability to discriminate between self and non-self, immature T-cells undergo screening to determine whether they bind to so-called self proteins. If the T-cell receptor binds to self proteins, the cell initiates apoptosis to remove the potentially dangerous cell.
Apoptosis is also essential for normal embryological development. In vertebrates, for example, early stages of development include the formation of web-like tissue between individual fingers and toes (Figure 9.15). During the course of normal development, these unneeded cells must be eliminated, enabling fully separated fingers and toes to form. A cell signaling mechanism triggers apoptosis, which destroys the cells between the developing digits.
The histological section of a foot of a 15-day-old mouse embryo, visualized using light microscopy, reveals areas of tissue between the toes, which apoptosis will eliminate before the mouse reaches its full gestational age at 27 days. (credit: modification of work by Michal Mañas)
Termination of the Signal Cascade
The aberrant signaling often seen in tumor cells is proof that the termination of a signal at the appropriate time can be just as important as the initiation of a signal. One method of stopping a specific signal is to degrade the ligand or remove it so that it can no longer access its receptor. One reason that hydrophobic hormones like estrogen and testosterone trigger long- lasting events is because they bind carrier proteins. These proteins allow the insoluble molecules to be soluble in blood, but they also protect the hormones from degradation by circulating enzymes.
Inside the cell, many different enzymes reverse the cellular modifications that result from signaling cascades. For example, phosphatases are enzymes that remove the phosphate group attached to proteins by kinases in a process called dephosphorylation. Cyclic AMP (cAMP) is degraded into AMP by phosphodiesterase, and the release of calcium stores is
reversed by the Ca2+ pumps that are located in the external and internal membranes of the cell.
Within-cell signaling allows bacteria to respond to environmental cues, such as nutrient levels, some single-celled organisms also release molecules to signal to each other.
Signaling in Yeast
Yeasts are eukaryotes (fungi), and the components and processes found in yeast signals are similar to those of cell-surface receptor signals in multicellular organisms. Budding yeasts (Figure 9.16) are able to participate in a process that is similar to sexual reproduction that entails two haploid cells (cells with one-half the normal number of chromosomes) combining to form a diploid cell (a cell with two sets of each chromosome, which is what normal body cells contain). In order to find another haploid yeast cell that is prepared to mate, budding yeasts secrete a signaling molecule called mating factor. When mating factor binds to cell-surface receptors in other yeast cells that are nearby, they stop their normal growth cycles and initiate a cell signaling cascade that includes protein kinases and GTP-binding proteins that are similar to G-proteins.
Budding Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast cells can communicate by releasing a signaling molecule called mating factor. In this micrograph, they are visualized using differential interference contrast microscopy, a light microscopy technique that enhances the contrast of the sample.
Signaling in Bacteria
Signaling in bacteria enables bacteria to monitor extracellular conditions, ensure that there are sufficient amounts of nutrients, and ensure that hazardous situations are avoided. There are circumstances, however, when bacteria communicate with each other.
The first evidence of bacterial communication was observed in a bacterium that has a symbiotic relationship with Hawaiian bobtail squid. When the population density of the bacteria reaches a certain level, specific gene expression is initiated, and the bacteria produce bioluminescent proteins that emit light. Because the number of cells present in the environment (cell density) is the determining factor for signaling, bacterial signaling was named quorum sensing. In politics and business, a quorum is the minimum number of members required to be present to vote on an issue.
Quorum sensing uses autoinducers as signaling molecules. Autoinducers are signaling molecules secreted by bacteria to communicate with other bacteria of the same kind. The secreted autoinducers can be small, hydrophobic molecules such as acyl-homoserine lactone, (AHL) or larger peptide-based molecules; each type of molecule has a different mode of action. When AHL enters target bacteria, it binds to transcription factors, which then switch gene expression on or off (Figure 9.17). The peptide autoinducers stimulate more complicated signaling pathways that include bacterial kinases. The changes in bacteria following exposure to autoinducers can be quite extensive. The pathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa has 616 different genes that respond to autoinducers.
Some species of bacteria that use quorum sensing form biofilms, complex colonies of bacteria (often containing several species) that exchange chemical signals to coordinate the release of toxins that will attack the host. Bacterial biofilms (Figure 9.18) can sometimes be found on medical equipment; when biofilms invade implants such as hip or knee replacements or heart pacemakers, they can cause life-threatening infections.
Research on the details of quorum sensing has led to advances in growing bacteria for industrial purposes. Recent discoveries suggest that it may be possible to exploit bacterial signaling pathways to control bacterial growth; this process could replace or supplement antibiotics that are no longer effective in certain situations.
Introduction
A human, as well as every sexually reproducing organism, begins life as a fertilized egg (embryo) or zygote. Trillions
of cell divisions subsequently occur in a controlled manner to produce a complex, multicellular human. In other words,
that original single cell is the ancestor of every other cell in the body. Once a being is fully grown, cell reproduction is
still necessary to repair or regenerate tissues. For example, new blood and skin cells are constantly being produced. All
multicellular organisms use cell division for growth and the maintenance and repair of cells and tissues. Cell division is
tightly regulated, and the occasional failure of regulation can have life-threatening consequences. Single-celled organisms
use cell division as their method of reproduction.
The continuity of life from one cell to another has its foundation in the reproduction of cells by way of the cell cycle. The
cell cycle is an orderly sequence of events that describes the stages of a cell’s life from the division of a single parent cell to
the production of two new daughter cells. The mechanisms involved in the cell cycle are highly regulated.
Genomic DNA
Before discussing the steps a cell must undertake to replicate, a deeper understanding of the structure and function of a
cell’s genetic information is necessary. A cell’s DNA, packaged as a double-stranded DNA molecule, is called its genome.
In prokaryotes, the genome is composed of a single, double-stranded DNA molecule in the form of a loop or circle (Figure
10.2). The region in the cell containing this genetic material is called a nucleoid. Some prokaryotes also have smaller loops
of DNA called plasmids that are not essential for normal growth. Bacteria can exchange these plasmids with other bacteria,
sometimes receiving beneficial new genes that the recipient can add to their chromosomal DNA. Antibiotic resistance is
one trait that often spreads through a bacterial colony through plasmid exchange.
Prokaryotes, including bacteria and archaea, have a single, circular chromosome located in a central
region called the nucleoid.
In eukaryotes, the genome consists of several double-stranded linear DNA molecules (Figure 10.3). Each species of
eukaryotes has a characteristic number of chromosomes in the nuclei of its cells. Human body cells have 46 chromosomes,
while human gametes (sperm or eggs) have 23 chromosomes each. A typical body cell, or somatic cell, contains two
matched sets of chromosomes, a configuration known as diploid. The letter n is used to represent a single set of
chromosomes; therefore, a diploid organism is designated 2n. Human cells that contain one set of chromosomes are called
gametes, or sex cells; these are eggs and sperm, and are designated 1n, or haploid.
There are 23 pairs of homologous chromosomes in a female human somatic cell. The condensed
chromosomes are viewed within the nucleus (top), removed from a cell in mitosis and spread out on a slide (right),
and artificially arranged according to length (left); an arrangement like this is called a karyotype. In this image,
the chromosomes were exposed to fluorescent stains for differentiation of the different chromosomes. A method of
staining called “chromosome painting” employs fluorescent dyes that highlight chromosomes in different colors.
Matched pairs of chromosomes in a diploid organism are called homologous (“same knowledge”) chromosomes.
Homologous chromosomes are the same length and have specific nucleotide segments called genes in exactly the same
location, or locus. Genes, the functional units of chromosomes, determine specific characteristics by coding for specific
proteins. Traits are the variations of those characteristics. For example, hair color is a characteristic with traits that are
blonde, brown, or black.
Each copy of a homologous pair of chromosomes originates from a different parent; therefore, the genes themselves are
not identical. The variation of individuals within a species is due to the specific combination of the genes inherited from
both parents. Even a slightly altered sequence of nucleotides within a gene can result in an alternative trait. For example,
there are three possible gene sequences on the human chromosome that code for blood type: sequence A, sequence B, and
sequence O. Because all diploid human cells have two copies of the chromosome that determines blood type, the blood type
(the trait) is determined by which two versions of the marker gene are inherited. It is possible to have two copies of the
same gene sequence on both homologous chromosomes, with one on each (for example, AA, BB, or OO), or two different
sequences, such as AB.
Minor variations of traits, such as blood type, eye color, and handedness, contribute to the natural variation found within
a species. However, if the entire DNA sequence from any pair of human homologous chromosomes is compared, the
difference is less than one percent. The sex chromosomes, X and Y, are the single exception to the rule of homologous
chromosome uniformity: Other than a small amount of homology that is necessary to accurately produce gametes, the genes
found on the X and Y chromosomes are different.
Eukaryotic Chromosomal Structure and Compaction
If the DNA from all 46 chromosomes in a human cell nucleus was laid out end to end, it would measure approximately
two meters; however, its diameter would be only 2 nm. Considering that the size of a typical human cell is about 10 μm
(100,000 cells lined up to equal one meter), DNA must be tightly packaged to fit in the cell’s nucleus. At the same time, it
must also be readily accessible for the genes to be expressed. During some stages of the cell cycle, the long strands of DNA
are condensed into compact chromosomes. There are a number of ways that chromosomes are compacted.
In the first level of compaction, short stretches of the DNA double helix wrap around a core of eight histone proteins at
regular intervals along the entire length of the chromosome (Figure 10.4). The DNA-histone complex is called chromatin.
The beadlike, histone DNA complex is called a nucleosome, and DNA connecting the nucleosomes is called linker DNA.
A DNA molecule in this form is about seven times shorter than the double helix without the histones, and the beads are
about 10 nm in diameter, in contrast with the 2-nm diameter of a DNA double helix. The next level of compaction occurs
as the nucleosomes and the linker DNA between them are coiled into a 30-nm chromatin fiber. This coiling further shortens
the chromosome so that it is now about 50 times shorter than the extended form. In the third level of packing, a variety of
fibrous proteins is used to pack the chromatin. These fibrous proteins also ensure that each chromosome in a non-dividing
cell occupies a particular area of the nucleus that does not overlap with that of any other chromosome.
Double-stranded DNA wraps around histone proteins to form nucleosomes that have the appearance of
“beads on a string.” The nucleosomes are coiled into a 30-nm chromatin fiber. When a cell undergoes mitosis, the
chromosomes condense even further.
DNA replicates in the S phase of interphase. After replication, the chromosomes are composed of two linked sister
chromatids. When fully compact, the pairs of identically packed chromosomes are bound to each other by cohesin proteins.
The connection between the sister chromatids is closest in a region called the centromere. The conjoined sister chromatids,
with a diameter of about 1 μm, are visible under a light microscope. The centromeric region is highly condensed and thus
will appear as a constricted area.
The cell cycle is an ordered series of events involving cell growth and cell division that produces two new daughter cells.
Cells on the path to cell division proceed through a series of precisely timed and carefully regulated stages of growth,
DNA replication, and division that produces two identical (clone) cells. The cell cycle has two major phases: interphase and
the mitotic phase (Figure 10.5). During interphase, the cell grows and DNA is replicated. During the mitotic phase, the
replicated DNA and cytoplasmic contents are separated, and the cell divides.
The cell cycle consists of interphase and the mitotic phase. During interphase, the cell grows and the
nuclear DNA is duplicated. Interphase is followed by the mitotic phase. During the mitotic phase, the duplicated
chromosomes are segregated and distributed into daughter nuclei. The cytoplasm is usually divided as well, resulting
in two daughter cells.
Interphase
During interphase, the cell undergoes normal growth processes while also preparing for cell division. In order for a cell
to move from interphase into the mitotic phase, many internal and external conditions must be met. The three stages of
interphase are called G1, S, and G2.
G1 Phase (First Gap)
The first stage of interphase is called the G1 phase (first gap) because, from a microscopic aspect, little change is visible.
However, during the G1 stage, the cell is quite active at the biochemical level. The cell is accumulating the building blocks
of chromosomal DNA and the associated proteins as well as accumulating sufficient energy reserves to complete the task
of replicating each chromosome in the nucleus.
S Phase (Synthesis of DNA)
Throughout interphase, nuclear DNA remains in a semi-condensed chromatin configuration. In the S phase, DNA
replication can proceed through the mechanisms that result in the formation of identical pairs of DNA molecules—sister
chromatids—that are firmly attached to the centromeric region. The centrosome is duplicated during the S phase. The two
centrosomes will give rise to the mitotic spindle, the apparatus that orchestrates the movement of chromosomes during
mitosis. At the center of each animal cell, the centrosomes of animal cells are associated with a pair of rod-like objects, the
centrioles, which are at right angles to each other. Centrioles help organize cell division. Centrioles are not present in the
centrosomes of other eukaryotic species, such as plants and most fungi.
G2 Phase (Second Gap)
In the G2 phase, the cell replenishes its energy stores and synthesizes proteins necessary for chromosome manipulation.
Some cell organelles are duplicated, and the cytoskeleton is dismantled to provide resources for the mitotic phase. There
may be additional cell growth during G2. The final preparations for the mitotic phase must be completed before the cell is
able to enter the first stage of mitosis.
The Mitotic Phase
The mitotic phase is a multistep process during which the duplicated chromosomes are aligned, separated, and move into
two new, identical daughter cells. The first portion of the mitotic phase is called karyokinesis, or nuclear division. The
second portion of the mitotic phase, called cytokinesis, is the physical separation of the cytoplasmic components into the
two daughter cells.
Karyokinesis (Mitosis)
Karyokinesis, also known as mitosis, is divided into a series of phases—prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase, and
telophase—that result in the division of the cell nucleus (Figure 10.6). Karyokinesis is also called mitosis.
During prophase, the “first phase,” the nuclear envelope starts to dissociate into small vesicles, and the membranous
organelles (such as the Golgi complex or Golgi apparatus, and endoplasmic reticulum), fragment and disperse toward
the periphery of the cell. The nucleolus disappears (disperses). The centrosomes begin to move to opposite poles of the
cell. Microtubules that will form the mitotic spindle extend between the centrosomes, pushing them farther apart as the
microtubule fibers lengthen. The sister chromatids begin to coil more tightly with the aid of condensin proteins and become
visible under a light microscope.
During prometaphase, the “first change phase,” many processes that were begun in prophase continue to advance. The
remnants of the nuclear envelope fragment. The mitotic spindle continues to develop as more microtubules assemble and
stretch across the length of the former nuclear area. Chromosomes become more condensed and discrete. Each sister
chromatid develops a protein structure called a kinetochore in the centromeric region (Figure 10.7). The proteins of
the kinetochore attract and bind mitotic spindle microtubules. As the spindle microtubules extend from the centrosomes,
some of these microtubules come into contact with and firmly bind to the kinetochores. Once a mitotic fiber attaches
to a chromosome, the chromosome will be oriented until the kinetochores of sister chromatids face the opposite poles.
Eventually, all the sister chromatids will be attached via their kinetochores to microtubules from opposing poles. Spindle
microtubules that do not engage the chromosomes are called polar microtubules. These microtubules overlap each other
midway between the two poles and contribute to cell elongation. Astral microtubules are located near the poles, aid in
spindle orientation, and are required for the regulation of mitosis.
During prometaphase, mitotic spindle microtubules from opposite poles attach to each sister chromatid at
the kinetochore. In anaphase, the connection between the sister chromatids breaks down, and the microtubules pull
the chromosomes toward opposite poles.
During metaphase, the “change phase,” all the chromosomes are aligned in a plane called the metaphase plate, or the
equatorial plane, midway between the two poles of the cell. The sister chromatids are still tightly attached to each other by
cohesin proteins. At this time, the chromosomes are maximally condensed.
During anaphase, the “upward phase,” the cohesin proteins degrade, and the sister chromatids separate at the centromere.
Each chromatid, now called a chromosome, is pulled rapidly toward the centrosome to which its microtubule is attached.
The cell becomes visibly elongated (oval shaped) as the polar microtubules slide against each other at the metaphase plate
where they overlap.
During telophase, the “distance phase,” the chromosomes reach the opposite poles and begin to decondense (unravel),
relaxing into a chromatin configuration. The mitotic spindles are depolymerized into tubulin monomers that will be
used to assemble cytoskeletal components for each daughter cell. Nuclear envelopes form around the chromosomes, and
nucleosomes appear within the nuclear area.
Cytokinesis
Cytokinesis, or “cell motion,” is the second main stage of the mitotic phase during which cell division is completed via
the physical separation of the cytoplasmic components into two daughter cells. Division is not complete until the cell
components have been apportioned and completely separated into the two daughter cells. Although the stages of mitosis are
similar for most eukaryotes, the process of cytokinesis is quite different for eukaryotes that have cell walls, such as plant
cells.
In cells such as animal cells that lack cell walls, cytokinesis follows the onset of anaphase. A contractile ring composed of
actin filaments forms just inside the plasma membrane at the former metaphase plate. The actin filaments pull the equator
of the cell inward, forming a fissure. This fissure, or “crack,” is called the cleavage furrow. The furrow deepens as the actin
ring contracts, and eventually the membrane is cleaved in two (Figure 10.8).
In plant cells, a new cell wall must form between the daughter cells. During interphase, the Golgi apparatus accumulates
enzymes, structural proteins, and glucose molecules prior to breaking into vesicles and dispersing throughout the dividing
cell. During telophase, these Golgi vesicles are transported on microtubules to form a phragmoplast (a vesicular structure) at
the metaphase plate. There, the vesicles fuse and coalesce from the center toward the cell walls; this structure is called a cell plate. As more vesicles fuse, the cell plate enlarges until it merges with the cell walls at the periphery of the cell. Enzymes
use the glucose that has accumulated between the membrane layers to build a new cell wall. The Golgi membranes become
parts of the plasma membrane on either side of the new cell wall.
During cytokinesis in animal cells, a ring of actin filaments forms at the metaphase plate. The ring
contracts, forming a cleavage furrow, which divides the cell in two. In plant cells, Golgi vesicles coalesce at the former
metaphase plate, forming a phragmoplast. A cell plate formed by the fusion of the vesicles of the phragmoplast grows
from the center toward the cell walls, and the membranes of the vesicles fuse to form a plasma membrane that divides
the cell in two.
G0 Phase
Not all cells adhere to the classic cell cycle pattern in which a newly formed daughter cell immediately enters the
preparatory phases of interphase, closely followed by the mitotic phase. Cells in G0 phase are not actively preparing to
divide. The cell is in a quiescent (inactive) stage that occurs when cells exit the cell cycle. Some cells enter G0 temporarily
until an external signal triggers the onset of G1. Other cells that never or rarely divide, such as mature cardiac muscle and
nerve cells, remain in G0 permanently.
The length of the cell cycle is highly variable, even within the cells of a single organism. In humans, the frequency of cell
turnover ranges from a few hours in early embryonic development, to an average of two to five days for epithelial cells, and
to an entire human lifetime spent in G0 by specialized cells, such as cortical neurons or cardiac muscle cells. There is also
variation in the time that a cell spends in each phase of the cell cycle. When fast-dividing mammalian cells are grown in culture (outside the body under optimal growing conditions), the length of the cycle is about 24 hours. In rapidly dividing
human cells with a 24-hour cell cycle, the G1 phase lasts approximately nine hours, the S phase lasts 10 hours, the G2 phase
lasts about four and one-half hours, and the M phase lasts approximately one-half hour. In early embryos of fruit flies, the
cell cycle is completed in about eight minutes. The timing of events in the cell cycle is controlled by mechanisms that are
both internal and external to the cell.
Regulation of the Cell Cycle by External Events
Both the initiation and inhibition of cell division are triggered by events external to the cell when it is about to begin the
replication process. An event may be as simple as the death of a nearby cell or as sweeping as the release of growthpromoting
hormones, such as human growth hormone (HGH). A lack of HGH can inhibit cell division, resulting in
dwarfism, whereas too much HGH can result in gigantism. Crowding of cells can also inhibit cell division. Another factor
that can initiate cell division is the size of the cell; as a cell grows, it becomes inefficient due to its decreasing surface-tovolume
ratio. The solution to this problem is to divide.
Whatever the source of the message, the cell receives the signal, and a series of events within the cell allows it to proceed
into interphase. Moving forward from this initiation point, every parameter required during each cell cycle phase must be
met or the cycle cannot progress.
Regulation at Internal Checkpoints
It is essential that the daughter cells produced be exact duplicates of the parent cell. Mistakes in the duplication or
distribution of the chromosomes lead to mutations that may be passed forward to every new cell produced from an abnormal
cell. To prevent a compromised cell from continuing to divide, there are internal control mechanisms that operate at three
main cell cycle checkpoints. A checkpoint is one of several points in the eukaryotic cell cycle at which the progression of
a cell to the next stage in the cycle can be halted until conditions are favorable. These checkpoints occur near the end of G1,
at the G2/M transition, and during metaphase.
The cell cycle is controlled at three checkpoints. The integrity of the DNA is assessed at the G1
checkpoint. Proper chromosome duplication is assessed at the G2 checkpoint. Attachment of each kinetochore to a
spindle fiber is assessed at the M checkpoint.
The G1 Checkpoint
The G1 checkpoint determines whether all conditions are favorable for cell division to proceed. The G1 checkpoint, also
called the restriction point (in yeast), is a point at which the cell irreversibly commits to the cell division process. External
influences, such as growth factors, play a large role in carrying the cell past the G1 checkpoint. In addition to adequate
reserves and cell size, there is a check for genomic DNA damage at the G1 checkpoint. A cell that does not meet all
the requirements will not be allowed to progress into the S phase. The cell can halt the cycle and attempt to remedy the
problematic condition, or the cell can advance into G0 and await further signals when conditions improve.
The G2 Checkpoint
The G2 checkpoint bars entry into the mitotic phase if certain conditions are not met. As at the G1 checkpoint, cell size
and protein reserves are assessed. However, the most important role of the G2 checkpoint is to ensure that all of the
chromosomes have been replicated and that the replicated DNA is not damaged. If the checkpoint mechanisms detect
problems with the DNA, the cell cycle is halted, and the cell attempts to either complete DNA replication or repair the
damaged DNA.
The M Checkpoint
The M checkpoint occurs near the end of the metaphase stage of karyokinesis. The M checkpoint is also known as
the spindle checkpoint, because it determines whether all the sister chromatids are correctly attached to the spindle
microtubules. Because the separation of the sister chromatids during anaphase is an irreversible step, the cycle will not
proceed until the kinetochores of each pair of sister chromatids are firmly anchored to at least two spindle fibers arising
from opposite poles of the cell.
Regulator Molecules of the Cell Cycle
In addition to the internally controlled checkpoints, there are two groups of intracellular molecules that regulate the cell
cycle. These regulatory molecules either promote progress of the cell to the next phase (positive regulation) or halt the cycle
(negative regulation). Regulator molecules may act individually, or they can influence the activity or production of other
regulatory proteins. Therefore, the failure of a single regulator may have almost no effect on the cell cycle, especially if
more than one mechanism controls the same event. Conversely, the effect of a deficient or non-functioning regulator can be
wide-ranging and possibly fatal to the cell if multiple processes are affected.
Positive Regulation of the Cell Cycle
Two groups of proteins, called cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), are responsible for the progress of the cell
through the various checkpoints. The levels of the four cyclin proteins fluctuate throughout the cell cycle in a predictable
pattern (Figure 10.11). Increases in the concentration of cyclin proteins are triggered by both external and internal signals.
After the cell moves to the next stage of the cell cycle, the cyclins that were active in the previous stage are degraded.
The concentrations of cyclin proteins change throughout the cell cycle. There is a direct correlation
between cyclin accumulation and the three major cell cycle checkpoints. Also note the sharp decline of cyclin levels
following each checkpoint (the transition between phases of the cell cycle), as cyclin is degraded by cytoplasmic
enzymes.
Cyclins regulate the cell cycle only when they are tightly bound to Cdks. To be fully active, the Cdk/cyclin complex must
also be phosphorylated in specific locations. Like all kinases, Cdks are enzymes (kinases) that phosphorylate other proteins.
Phosphorylation activates the protein by changing its shape. The proteins phosphorylated by Cdks are involved in advancing
the cell to the next phase. (Figure 10.12). The levels of Cdk proteins are relatively stable throughout the cell cycle; however,
the concentrations of cyclin fluctuate and determine when Cdk/cyclin complexes form. The different cyclins and Cdks bind
at specific points in the cell cycle and thus regulate different checkpoints.
Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) are protein kinases that, when fully activated, can phosphorylate and
thus activate other proteins that advance the cell cycle past a checkpoint. To become fully activated, a Cdk must bind
to a cyclin protein and then be phosphorylated by another kinase.
Since the cyclic fluctuations of cyclin levels are based on the timing of the cell cycle and not on specific events, regulation
of the cell cycle usually occurs by either the Cdk molecules alone or the Cdk/cyclin complexes. Without a specific
concentration of fully activated cyclin/Cdk complexes, the cell cycle cannot proceed through the checkpoints.
Although the cyclins are the main regulatory molecules that determine the forward momentum of the cell cycle, there
are several other mechanisms that fine-tune the progress of the cycle with negative, rather than positive, effects. These
mechanisms essentially block the progression of the cell cycle until problematic conditions are resolved. Molecules that
prevent the full activation of Cdks are called Cdk inhibitors. Many of these inhibitor molecules directly or indirectly monitor
a particular cell cycle event. The block placed on Cdks by inhibitor molecules will not be removed until the specific event
that the inhibitor monitors is completed.
Negative Regulation of the Cell Cycle
The second group of cell cycle regulatory molecules are negative regulators. Negative regulators halt the cell cycle.
Remember that in positive regulation, active molecules cause the cycle to progress.
The best understood negative regulatory molecules are retinoblastoma protein (Rb), p53, and p21. Retinoblastoma
proteins are a group of tumor-suppressor proteins common in many cells. The 53 and 21 designations refer to the functional
molecular masses of the proteins (p) in kilodaltons. Much of what is known about cell cycle regulation comes from research
conducted with cells that have lost regulatory control. All three of these regulatory proteins were discovered to be damaged
or non-functional in cells that had begun to replicate uncontrollably (became cancerous). In each case, the main cause of the
unchecked progress through the cell cycle was a faulty copy of the regulatory protein.
Rb, p53, and p21 act primarily at the G1 checkpoint. p53 is a multi-functional protein that has a major impact on the
commitment of a cell to division because it acts when there is damaged DNA in cells that are undergoing the preparatory
processes during G1. If damaged DNA is detected, p53 halts the cell cycle and recruits enzymes to repair the DNA. If the
DNA cannot be repaired, p53 can trigger apoptosis, or cell suicide, to prevent the duplication of damaged chromosomes.
As p53 levels rise, the production of p21 is triggered. p21 enforces the halt in the cycle dictated by p53 by binding to
and inhibiting the activity of the Cdk/cyclin complexes. As a cell is exposed to more stress, higher levels of p53 and p21
accumulate, making it less likely that the cell will move into the S phase.
Rb exerts its regulatory influence on other positive regulator proteins. Chiefly, Rb monitors cell size. In the active,
dephosphorylated state, Rb binds to proteins called transcription factors, most commonly, E2F (Figure 10.13). Transcription
factors “turn on” specific genes, allowing the production of proteins encoded by that gene. When Rb is bound to E2F,
production of proteins necessary for the G1/S transition is blocked. As the cell increases in size, Rb is slowly phosphorylated
until it becomes inactivated. Rb releases E2F, which can now turn on the gene that produces the transition protein, and this
particular block is removed. For the cell to move past each of the checkpoints, all positive regulators must be “turned on,”
and all negative regulators must be “turned off.”
Cancer comprises many different diseases caused by a common mechanism: uncontrolled cell growth. Despite the
redundancy and overlapping levels of cell cycle control, errors do occur. One of the critical processes monitored by the
cell cycle checkpoint surveillance mechanism is the proper replication of DNA during the S phase. Even when all of
the cell cycle controls are fully functional, a small percentage of replication errors (mutations) will be passed on to the
daughter cells. If changes to the DNA nucleotide sequence occur within a coding portion of a gene and are not corrected,
a gene mutation results. All cancers start when a gene mutation gives rise to a faulty protein that plays a key role in
cell reproduction. The change in the cell that results from the malformed protein may be minor: perhaps a slight delay in
the binding of Cdk to cyclin or an Rb protein that detaches from its target DNA while still phosphorylated. Even minor
mistakes, however, may allow subsequent mistakes to occur more readily. Over and over, small uncorrected errors are
passed from the parent cell to the daughter cells and amplified as each generation produces more non-functional proteins
from uncorrected DNA damage. Eventually, the pace of the cell cycle speeds up as the effectiveness of the control and
repair mechanisms decreases. Uncontrolled growth of the mutated cells outpaces the growth of normal cells in the area, and
a tumor (“-oma”) can result.
Proto-oncogenes
The genes that code for the positive cell cycle regulators are called proto-oncogenes. Proto-oncogenes are normal genes
that, when mutated in certain ways, become oncogenes, genes that cause a cell to become cancerous. Consider what might
happen to the cell cycle in a cell with a recently acquired oncogene. In most instances, the alteration of the DNA sequence
will result in a less functional (or non-functional) protein. The result is detrimental to the cell and will likely prevent the cell
from completing the cell cycle; however, the organism is not harmed because the mutation will not be carried forward. If a
cell cannot reproduce, the mutation is not propagated and the damage is minimal. Occasionally, however, a gene mutation
causes a change that increases the activity of a positive regulator. For example, a mutation that allows Cdk to be activated
without being partnered with cyclin could push the cell cycle past a checkpoint before all of the required conditions are
met. If the resulting daughter cells are too damaged to undergo further cell divisions, the mutation would not be propagated
and no harm would come to the organism. However, if the atypical daughter cells are able to undergo further cell divisions,
subsequent generations of cells will probably accumulate even more mutations, some possibly in additional genes that
regulate the cell cycle.
The Cdk gene in the above example is only one of many genes that are considered proto-oncogenes. In addition to the
cell cycle regulatory proteins, any protein that influences the cycle can be altered in such a way as to override cell cycle
checkpoints. An oncogene is any gene that, when altered, leads to an increase in the rate of cell cycle progression.
Tumor Suppressor Genes
Like proto-oncogenes, many of the negative cell cycle regulatory proteins were discovered in cells that had become
cancerous. Tumor suppressor genes are segments of DNA that code for negative regulator proteins, the type of regulators
that, when activated, can prevent the cell from undergoing uncontrolled division. The collective function of the bestunderstood
tumor suppressor gene proteins, Rb, p53, and p21, is to put up a roadblock to cell cycle progression until certain
events are completed. A cell that carries a mutated form of a negative regulator might not be able to halt the cell cycle if
there is a problem. Tumor suppressors are similar to brakes in a vehicle: Malfunctioning brakes can contribute to a car crash.
Mutated p53 genes have been identified in more than one-half of all human tumor cells. This discovery is not surprising in
light of the multiple roles that the p53 protein plays at the G1 checkpoint. A cell with a faulty p53 may fail to detect errors
present in the genomic DNA (Figure 10.14). Even if a partially functional p53 does identify the mutations, it may no longer
be able to signal the necessary DNA repair enzymes. Either way, damaged DNA will remain uncorrected. At this point, a
functional p53 will deem the cell unsalvageable and trigger programmed cell death (apoptosis). The damaged version of
p53 found in cancer cells, however, cannot trigger apoptosis.
The loss of p53 function has other repercussions for the cell cycle. Mutated p53 might lose its ability to trigger p21
production. Without adequate levels of p21, there is no effective block on Cdk activation. Essentially, without a fully
functional p53, the G1 checkpoint is severely compromised and the cell proceeds directly from G1 to S regardless of internal
and external conditions. At the completion of this shortened cell cycle, two daughter cells are produced that have inherited
the mutated p53 gene. Given the non-optimal conditions under which the parent cell reproduced, it is likely that the daughter
cells will have acquired other mutations in addition to the faulty tumor suppressor gene. Cells such as these daughter cells
quickly accumulate both oncogenes and non-functional tumor suppressor genes. Again, the result is tumor growth.
Prokaryotes, such as bacteria, propagate by binary fission. For unicellular organisms, cell division is the only method to
produce new individuals. In both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, the outcome of cell reproduction is a pair of daughter
cells that are genetically identical to the parent cell. In unicellular organisms, daughter cells are individuals.
To achieve the outcome of cloned offspring, certain steps are essential. The genomic DNA must be replicated and then
allocated into the daughter cells; the cytoplasmic contents must also be divided to give both new cells the machinery to
sustain life. In bacterial cells, the genome consists of a single, circular DNA chromosome; therefore, the process of cell
division is simplified. Karyokinesis is unnecessary because there is no nucleus and thus no need to direct one copy of the
multiple chromosomes into each daughter cell. This type of cell division is called binary (prokaryotic) fission.
Binary Fission
Due to the relative simplicity of the prokaryotes, the cell division process, called binary fission, is a less complicated and
much more rapid process than cell division in eukaryotes. The single, circular DNA chromosome of bacteria is not enclosed
in a nucleus, but instead occupies a specific location, the nucleoid, within the cell (Figure 10.2). Although the DNA of the
nucleoid is associated with proteins that aid in packaging the molecule into a compact size, there are no histone proteins and
thus no nucleosomes in prokaryotes. The packing proteins of bacteria are, however, related to the cohesin and condensin
proteins involved in the chromosome compaction of eukaryotes.
The bacterial chromosome is attached to the plasma membrane at about the midpoint of the cell. The starting point of
replication, the origin, is close to the binding site of the chromosome to the plasma membrane (Figure 10.15). Replication
of the DNA is bidirectional, moving away from the origin on both strands of the loop simultaneously. As the new double
strands are formed, each origin point moves away from the cell wall attachment toward the opposite ends of the cell. As
the cell elongates, the growing membrane aids in the transport of the chromosomes. After the chromosomes have cleared
the midpoint of the elongated cell, cytoplasmic separation begins. The formation of a ring composed of repeating units of
a protein called FtsZ directs the partition between the nucleoids. Formation of the FtsZ ring triggers the accumulation of
other proteins that work together to recruit new membrane and cell wall materials to the site. A septum is formed between
the nucleoids, extending gradually from the periphery toward the center of the cell. When the new cell walls are in place,
the daughter cells separate.
Introduction
The ability to reproduce in kind is a basic characteristic of all living things. In kind means that the offspring of any organism closely resemble their parent or parents. Hippopotamuses give birth to hippopotamus calves, Joshua trees produce seeds from which Joshua tree seedlings emerge, and adult flamingos lay eggs that hatch into flamingo chicks. In kind does not generally mean exactly the same. Whereas many unicellular organisms and a few multicellular organisms can produce genetically identical clones of themselves through cell division, many single-celled organisms and most multicellular organisms reproduce regularly using another method. Sexual reproduction is the production by parents of two haploid cells and the fusion of two haploid cells to form a single, unique diploid cell. In most plants and animals, through tens of rounds of mitotic cell division, this diploid cell will develop into an adult organism. Haploid cells that are part of the sexual reproductive cycle are produced by a type of cell division called meiosis. Sexual reproduction, specifically meiosis and fertilization, introduces variation into offspring that may account for the evolutionary success of sexual reproduction. The vast majority of eukaryotic organisms, both multicellular and unicellular, can or must employ some form of meiosis and fertilization to reproduce.
Sexual reproduction requires fertilization, the union of two cells from two individual organisms. If those two cells each contain one set of chromosomes, then the resulting cell contains two sets of chromosomes. Haploid cells contain one set of chromosomes. Cells containing two sets of chromosomes are called diploid. The number of sets of chromosomes in a cell is called its ploidy level. If the reproductive cycle is to continue, then the diploid cell must somehow reduce its number of chromosome sets before fertilization can occur again, or there will be a continual doubling in the number of chromosome sets in every generation. So, in addition to fertilization, sexual reproduction includes a nuclear division that reduces the number of chromosome sets.
Most animals and plants are diploid, containing two sets of chromosomes. In each somatic cell of the organism (all cells of a multicellular organism except the gametes or reproductive cells), the nucleus contains two copies of each chromosome, called homologous chromosomes. Somatic cells are sometimes referred to as “body” cells. Homologous chromosomes are matched pairs containing the same genes in identical locations along their length. Diploid organisms inherit one copy of each homologous chromosome from each parent; all together, they are considered a full set of chromosomes. Haploid cells, containing a single copy of each homologous chromosome, are found only within structures that give rise to either gametes or spores. Spores are haploid cells that can produce a haploid organism or can fuse with another spore to form a diploid cell. All animals and most plants produce eggs and sperm, or gametes. Some plants and all fungi produce spores.
The nuclear division that forms haploid cells, which is called meiosis, is related to mitosis. As you have learned, mitosis is the part of a cell reproduction cycle that results in identical daughter nuclei that are also genetically identical to the original parent nucleus. In mitosis, both the parent and the daughter nuclei are at the same ploidy level—diploid for most plants and animals. Meiosis employs many of the same mechanisms as mitosis. However, the starting nucleus is always diploid and the nuclei that result at the end of a meiotic cell division are haploid. To achieve this reduction in chromosome number, meiosis consists of one round of chromosome duplication and two rounds of nuclear division. Because the events that occur during each of the division stages are analogous to the events of mitosis, the same stage names are assigned. However, because there are two rounds of division, the major process and the stages are designated with a “I” or a “II.” Thus, meiosis I is the first round of meiotic division and consists of prophase I, prometaphase I, and so on. Meiosis II, in which the second round of meiotic division takes place, includes prophase II, prometaphase II, and so on.
Meiosis I
Meiosis is preceded by an interphase consisting of the G1, S, and G2 phases, which are nearly identical to the phases preceding mitosis. The G1 phase, which is also called the first gap phase, is the first phase of the interphase and is focused on cell growth. The S phase is the second phase of interphase, during which the DNA of the chromosomes is replicated. Finally, the G2 phase, also called the second gap phase, is the third and final phase of interphase; in this phase, the cell undergoes the final preparations for meiosis.
During DNA duplication in the S phase, each chromosome is replicated to produce two identical copies, called sister chromatids, that are held together at the centromere by cohesin proteins. Cohesin holds the chromatids together until anaphase II. The centrosomes, which are the structures that organize the microtubules of the meiotic spindle, also replicate. This prepares the cell to enter prophase I, the first meiotic phase.
Prophase I
Early in prophase I, before the chromosomes can be seen clearly microscopically, the homologous chromosomes are attached at their tips to the nuclear envelope by proteins. As the nuclear envelope begins to break down, the proteins associated with homologous chromosomes bring the pair close to each other. Recall that, in mitosis, homologous chromosomes do not pair together. In mitosis, homologous chromosomes line up end-to-end so that when they divide, each daughter cell receives a sister chromatid from both members of the homologous pair. The synaptonemal complex, a lattice of proteins between the homologous chromosomes, first forms at specific locations and then spreads to cover the entire length of the chromosomes. The tight pairing of the homologous chromosomes is called synapsis. In synapsis, the genes on the chromatids of the homologous chromosomes are aligned precisely with each other. The synaptonemal complex supports the exchange of chromosomal segments between non-sister homologous chromatids, a process called crossing over. Crossing over can be observed visually after the exchange as chiasmata (singular = chiasma) (Figure 11.2).
In species such as humans, even though the X and Y sex chromosomes are not homologous (most of their genes differ), they have a small region of homology that allows the X and Y chromosomes to pair up during prophase I. A partial synaptonemal complex develops only between the regions of homology.
Early in prophase I, homologous chromosomes come together to form a synapse. The chromosomes are bound tightly together and in perfect alignment by a protein lattice called a synaptonemal complex and by cohesin proteins at the centromere.
Located at intervals along the synaptonemal complex are large protein assemblies called recombination nodules. These assemblies mark the points of later chiasmata and mediate the multistep process of crossover—or genetic recombination—between the non-sister chromatids. Near the recombination nodule on each chromatid, the double-stranded DNA is cleaved, the cut ends are modified, and a new connection is made between the non-sister chromatids. As prophase I progresses, the synaptonemal complex begins to break down and the chromosomes begin to condense. When the synaptonemal complex is gone, the homologous chromosomes remain attached to each other at the centromere and at chiasmata. The chiasmata remain until anaphase I. The number of chiasmata varies according to the species and the length of the chromosome. There must be at least one chiasma per chromosome for proper separation of homologous chromosomes during meiosis I, but there may be as many as 25. Following crossover, the synaptonemal complex breaks down and the cohesin connection between homologous pairs is also removed. At the end of prophase I, the pairs are held together only at the chiasmata (Figure 11.3) and are called tetrads because the four sister chromatids of each pair of homologous chromosomes are now visible.
The crossover events are the first source of genetic variation in the nuclei produced by meiosis. A single crossover event between homologous non-sister chromatids leads to a reciprocal exchange of equivalent DNA between a maternal chromosome and a paternal chromosome. Now, when that sister chromatid is moved into a gamete cell it will carry some DNA from one parent of the individual and some DNA from the other parent. The sister recombinant chromatid has a combination of maternal and paternal genes that did not exist before the crossover. Multiple crossovers in an arm of the chromosome have the same effect, exchanging segments of DNA to create recombinant chromosomes.
Crossover occurs between non-sister chromatids of homologous chromosomes. The result is an exchange of genetic material between homologous chromosomes.
Prometaphase I
The key event in prometaphase I is the attachment of the spindle fiber microtubules to the kinetochore proteins at the centromeres. Kinetochore proteins are multiprotein complexes that bind the centromeres of a chromosome to the microtubules of the mitotic spindle. Microtubules grow from centrosomes placed at opposite poles of the cell. The microtubules move toward the middle of the cell and attach to one of the two fused homologous chromosomes. The microtubules attach at each chromosomes' kinetochores. With each member of the homologous pair attached to opposite poles of the cell, in the next phase, the microtubules can pull the homologous pair apart. A spindle fiber that has attached to a kinetochore is called a kinetochore microtubule. At the end of prometaphase I, each tetrad is attached to microtubules from both poles, with one homologous chromosome facing each pole. The homologous chromosomes are still held together at chiasmata. In addition, the nuclear membrane has broken down entirely.
Metaphase I
During metaphase I, the homologous chromosomes are arranged in the center of the cell with the kinetochores facing opposite poles. The homologous pairs orient themselves randomly at the equator. For example, if the two homologous members of chromosome 1 are labeled a and b, then the chromosomes could line up a-b, or b-a. This is important in determining the genes carried by a gamete, as each will only receive one of the two homologous chromosomes. Recall that homologous chromosomes are not identical. They contain slight differences in their genetic information, causing each gamete to have a unique genetic makeup.
This randomness is the physical basis for the creation of the second form of genetic variation in offspring. Consider that the homologous chromosomes of a sexually reproducing organism are originally inherited as two separate sets, one from each parent. Using humans as an example, one set of 23 chromosomes is present in the egg donated by the mother. The father provides the other set of 23 chromosomes in the sperm that fertilizes the egg. Every cell of the multicellular offspring has copies of the original two sets of homologous chromosomes. In prophase I of meiosis, the homologous chromosomes form the tetrads. In metaphase I, these pairs line up at the midway point between the two poles of the cell to form the metaphase plate. Because there is an equal chance that a microtubule fiber will encounter a maternally or paternally inherited chromosome, the arrangement of the tetrads at the metaphase plate is random. Any maternally inherited chromosome may face either pole. Any paternally inherited chromosome may also face either pole. The orientation of each tetrad is independent of the orientation of the other 22 tetrads.
This event—the random (or independent) assortment of homologous chromosomes at the metaphase plate—is the second mechanism that introduces variation into the gametes or spores. In each cell that undergoes meiosis, the arrangement of the tetrads is different. The number of variations is dependent on the number of chromosomes making up a set. There are two possibilities for orientation at the metaphase plate; the possible number of alignments therefore equals 2n, where
n is the number of chromosomes per set. Humans have 23 chromosome pairs, which results in over eight million (223) possible genetically-distinct gametes. This number does not include the variability that was previously created in the sister chromatids by crossover. Given these two mechanisms, it is highly unlikely that any two haploid cells resulting from meiosis will have the same genetic composition (Figure 11.4).
To summarize the genetic consequences of meiosis I, the maternal and paternal genes are recombined by crossover events that occur between each homologous pair during prophase I. In addition, the random assortment of tetrads on the metaphase plate produces a unique combination of maternal and paternal chromosomes that will make their way into the gametes.
Random, independent assortment during metaphase I can be demonstrated by considering a cell with a set of two chromosomes (n = 2). In this case, there are two possible arrangements at the equatorial plane in metaphase I. The total possible number of different gametes is 2n, where n equals the number of chromosomes in a set. In this example, there are four possible genetic combinations for the gametes. With n = 23 in human cells, there are over 8 million possible combinations of paternal and maternal chromosomes.
Anaphase I
In anaphase I, the microtubules pull the linked chromosomes apart. The sister chromatids remain tightly bound together at the centromere. The chiasmata are broken in anaphase I as the microtubules attached to the fused kinetochores pull the homologous chromosomes apart (Figure 11.5).
Telophase I and Cytokinesis
In telophase, the separated chromosomes arrive at opposite poles. The remainder of the typical telophase events may or may not occur, depending on the species. In some organisms, the chromosomes decondense and nuclear envelopes form around the chromatids in telophase I. In other organisms, cytokinesis—the physical separation of the cytoplasmic components into two daughter cells—occurs without reformation of the nuclei. In nearly all species of animals and some fungi, cytokinesis separates the cell contents via a cleavage furrow (constriction of the actin ring that leads to cytoplasmic division). In plants, a cell plate is formed during cell cytokinesis by Golgi vesicles fusing at the metaphase plate. This cell plate will ultimately lead to the formation of cell walls that separate the two daughter cells.
Two haploid cells are the end result of the first meiotic division. The cells are haploid because at each pole, there is just one of each pair of the homologous chromosomes. Therefore, only one full set of the chromosomes is present. This is why the cells are considered haploid—there is only one chromosome set, even though each homolog still consists of two sister chromatids. Recall that sister chromatids are merely duplicates of one of the two homologous chromosomes (except for changes that occurred during crossing over). In meiosis II, these two sister chromatids will separate, creating four haploid daughter cells.
Meiosis II
In some species, cells enter a brief interphase, or interkinesis, before entering meiosis II. Interkinesis lacks an S phase, so chromosomes are not duplicated. The two cells produced in meiosis I go through the events of meiosis II in synchrony. During meiosis II, the sister chromatids within the two daughter cells separate, forming four new haploid gametes. The mechanics of meiosis II is similar to mitosis, except that each dividing cell has only one set of homologous chromosomes. Therefore, each cell has half the number of sister chromatids to separate out as a diploid cell undergoing mitosis.
Prophase II
If the chromosomes decondensed in telophase I, they condense again. If nuclear envelopes were formed, they fragment into vesicles. The centrosomes that were duplicated during interkinesis move away from each other toward opposite poles, and new spindles are formed.
Prometaphase II
The nuclear envelopes are completely broken down, and the spindle is fully formed. Each sister chromatid forms an individual kinetochore that attaches to microtubules from opposite poles.
Metaphase II
The sister chromatids are maximally condensed and aligned at the equator of the cell.
Anaphase II
The sister chromatids are pulled apart by the kinetochore microtubules and move toward opposite poles. Non-kinetochore microtubules elongate the cell.
The process of chromosome alignment differs between meiosis I and meiosis II. In prometaphase I, microtubules attach to the fused kinetochores of homologous chromosomes, and the homologous chromosomes are arranged at the midpoint of the cell in metaphase I. In anaphase I, the homologous chromosomes are separated. In prometaphase II, microtubules attach to the kinetochores of sister chromatids, and the sister chromatids are arranged at the midpoint of the cells in metaphase II. In anaphase II, the sister chromatids are separated.
Telophase II and Cytokinesis
The chromosomes arrive at opposite poles and begin to decondense. Nuclear envelopes form around the chromosomes. Cytokinesis separates the two cells into four unique haploid cells. At this point, the newly formed nuclei are both haploid. The cells produced are genetically unique because of the random assortment of paternal and maternal homologs and because of the recombining of maternal and paternal segments of chromosomes (with their sets of genes) that occurs during crossover. The entire process of meiosis is outlined in Figure 11.6.
An animal cell with a diploid number of four (2n = 4) proceeds through the stages of meiosis to form four haploid daughter cells.
Comparing Meiosis and Mitosis
Mitosis and meiosis are both forms of division of the nucleus in eukaryotic cells. They share some similarities, but also exhibit distinct differences that lead to very different outcomes (Figure 11.7). Mitosis is a single nuclear division that results in two nuclei that are usually partitioned into two new cells. The nuclei resulting from a mitotic division are genetically identical to the original nucleus. They have the same number of sets of chromosomes, one set in the case of haploid cells and two sets in the case of diploid cells. In most plants and all animal species, it is typically diploid cells that undergo mitosis to form new diploid cells. In contrast, meiosis consists of two nuclear divisions resulting in four nuclei that are usually partitioned into four new cells. The nuclei resulting from meiosis are not genetically identical and they contain one chromosome set only. This is half the number of chromosome sets in the original cell, which is diploid.
The main differences between mitosis and meiosis occur in meiosis I, which is a very different nuclear division than mitosis. In meiosis I, the homologous chromosome pairs become associated with each other, are bound together with the synaptonemal complex, develop chiasmata and undergo crossover between sister chromatids, and line up along the metaphase plate in tetrads with kinetochore fibers from opposite spindle poles attached to each kinetochore of a homolog in a tetrad. All of these events occur only in meiosis I.
When the chiasmata resolve and the tetrad is broken up with the homologs moving to one pole or another, the ploidy level—the number of sets of chromosomes in each future nucleus—has been reduced from two to one. For this reason, meiosis I is referred to as a reduction division. There is no such reduction in ploidy level during mitosis.
Meiosis II is much more analogous to a mitotic division. In this case, the duplicated chromosomes (only one set of them) line up on the metaphase plate with divided kinetochores attached to kinetochore fibers from opposite poles. During anaphase II, as in mitotic anaphase, the kinetochores divide and one sister chromatid—now referred to as a chromosome—is pulled to one pole while the other sister chromatid is pulled to the other pole. If it were not for the fact that there had been crossover, the two products of each individual meiosis II division would be identical (like in mitosis). Instead, they are different because there has always been at least one crossover per chromosome. Meiosis II is not a reduction division because although there are fewer copies of the genome in the resulting cells, there is still one set of chromosomes, as there was at the end of meiosis I.
Meiosis and mitosis are both preceded by one round of DNA replication; however, meiosis includes two nuclear divisions. The four daughter cells resulting from meiosis are haploid and genetically distinct. The daughter cells resulting from mitosis are diploid and identical to the parent cell.
Sexual reproduction was an early evolutionary innovation after the appearance of eukaryotic cells. It appears to have been very successful because most eukaryotes are able to reproduce sexually, and in many animals, it is the only mode of reproduction. And yet, scientists recognize some real disadvantages to sexual reproduction. On the surface, creating offspring that are genetic clones of the parent appears to be a better system. If the parent organism is successfully occupying a habitat, offspring with the same traits would be similarly successful. There is also the obvious benefit to an organism that can produce offspring whenever circumstances are favorable by asexual budding, fragmentation, or asexual eggs. These methods of reproduction do not require another organism of the opposite sex. Indeed, some organisms that lead a solitary lifestyle have retained the ability to reproduce asexually. In addition, in asexual populations, every individual is capable of reproduction. In sexual populations, the males are not producing the offspring themselves, so in theory an asexual population could grow twice as fast.
However, multicellular organisms that exclusively depend on asexual reproduction are exceedingly rare. Why is sexuality (and meiosis) so common? This is one of the important unanswered questions in biology and has been the focus of much research beginning in the latter half of the twentieth century. There are several possible explanations, one of which is that the variation that sexual reproduction creates among offspring is very important to the survival and reproduction of the population. Thus, on average, a sexually reproducing population will leave more descendants than an otherwise similar asexually reproducing population. The only source of variation in asexual organisms is mutation. This is the ultimate source of variation in sexual organisms, but in addition, those different mutations are continually reshuffled from one generation to the next when different parents combine their unique genomes and the genes are mixed into different combinations by crossovers during prophase I and random assortment at metaphase I.
Life Cycles of Sexually Reproducing Organisms
Fertilization and meiosis alternate in sexual life cycles. What happens between these two events depends on the organism. The process of meiosis reduces the chromosome number by half. Fertilization, the joining of two haploid gametes, restores the diploid condition. There are three main categories of life cycles in multicellular organisms: diploid-dominant, in which the multicellular diploid stage is the most obvious life stage, such as with most animals including humans; haploid- dominant, in which the multicellular haploid stage is the most obvious life stage, such as with all fungi and some algae; and alternation of generations, in which the two stages are apparent to different degrees depending on the group, as with plants and some algae.
Diploid-Dominant Life Cycle
Nearly all animals employ a diploid-dominant life-cycle strategy in which the only haploid cells produced by the organism are the gametes. Early in the development of the embryo, specialized diploid cells, called germ cells, are produced within the gonads, such as the testes and ovaries. Germ cells are capable of mitosis to perpetuate the cell line and meiosis to produce gametes. Once the haploid gametes are formed, they lose the ability to divide again. There is no multicellular haploid life stage. Fertilization occurs with the fusion of two gametes, usually from different individuals, restoring the diploid state (Figure 11.8).
In animals, sexually reproducing adults form haploid gametes from diploid germ cells. Fusion of the gametes gives rise to a fertilized egg cell, or zygote. The zygote will undergo multiple rounds of mitosis to produce a multicellular offspring. The germ cells are generated early in the development of the zygote.
Haploid-Dominant Life Cycle
Most fungi and algae employ a life-cycle type in which the “body” of the organism—the ecologically important part of the life cycle—is haploid. The haploid cells that make up the tissues of the dominant multicellular stage are formed by mitosis. During sexual reproduction, specialized haploid cells from two individuals, designated the (+) and (−) mating types, join to form a diploid zygote. The zygote immediately undergoes meiosis to form four haploid cells called spores. Although haploid like the “parents,” these spores contain a new genetic combination from two parents. The spores can remain dormant for various time periods. Eventually, when conditions are conducive, the spores form multicellular haploid structures by many rounds of mitosis (Figure 11.9).
Alternation of Generations
The third life-cycle type, employed by some algae and all plants, is a blend of the haploid-dominant and diploid-dominant extremes. Species with alternation of generations have both haploid and diploid multicellular organisms as part of their life cycle. The haploid multicellular plants are called gametophytes, because they produce gametes from specialized cells. Meiosis is not directly involved in the production of gametes in this case, because the organism that produces the gametes is already a haploid. Fertilization between the gametes forms a diploid zygote. The zygote will undergo many rounds of mitosis and give rise to a diploid multicellular plant called a sporophyte. Specialized cells of the sporophyte will undergo meiosis and produce haploid spores. The spores will subsequently develop into the gametophytes (Figure 11.10).
Plants have a life cycle that alternates between a multicellular haploid organism and a multicellular diploid organism. In some plants, such as ferns, both the haploid and diploid plant stages are free-living. The diploid plant is called a sporophyte because it produces haploid spores by meiosis. The spores develop into multicellular, haploid plants called gametophytes because they produce gametes. The gametes of two individuals will fuse to form a diploid zygote that becomes the sporophyte.
Although all plants utilize some version of the alternation of generations, the relative size of the sporophyte and the gametophyte and the relationship between them vary greatly. In plants such as moss, the gametophyte organism is the free-living plant, and the sporophyte is physically dependent on the gametophyte. In other plants, such as ferns, both the gametophyte and sporophyte plants are free-living; however, the sporophyte is much larger. In seed plants, such as magnolia trees and daisies, the gametophyte is composed of only a few cells and, in the case of the female gametophyte, is completely retained within the sporophyte.
Sexual reproduction takes many forms in multicellular organisms. However, at some point in each type of life cycle, meiosis produces haploid cells that will fuse with the haploid cell of another organism. The mechanisms of variation—crossover, random assortment of homologous chromosomes, and random fertilization—are present in all versions of sexual reproduction. The fact that nearly every multicellular organism on Earth employs sexual reproduction is strong evidence for the benefits of producing offspring with unique gene combinations, though there are other possible benefits as well.