PHYLOGENIES ANDTHE HISTORY OF LIFE
The life of a bee is very different from the life of a flower, but the two organisms are related. Bothare members the domain Eukarya and have cells containing many similar organelles, genes, and proteins.
IntroductionThis bee and Echinacea flower (Figure 20.1) could not look more different, yet they are related, as are all living organismson Earth. By following pathways of similarities and changes—both visible and genetic—scientists seek to map theevolutionary past of how life developed from single-celled organisms to the tremendous collection of creatures that havegerminated, crawled, floated, swam, flown, and walked on this planet.
Organizing Life on Earth
In scientific terms, the evolutionary history and relationship of an organism or group of organisms is called its phylogeny.A phylogeny describes the relationships of an organism, such as from which organisms it is thought to have evolved, to
which species it is most closely related, and so forth. Phylogenetic relationships provide information on shared ancestry butnot necessarily on how organisms are similar or different.Phylogenetic TreesScientists use a tool called a phylogenetic tree to show the evolutionary pathways and connections among organisms.A phylogenetic tree is a diagram used to reflect evolutionary relationships among organisms or groups of organisms.Scientists consider phylogenetic trees to be a hypothesis of the evolutionary past since one cannot go back to confirm theproposed relationships. In other words, a “tree of life” can be constructed to illustrate when different organisms evolved andto show the relationships among different organisms (Figure 20.2).Unlike a taxonomic classification diagram, a phylogenetic tree can be read like a map of evolutionary history. Manyphylogenetic trees have a single lineage at the base representing a common ancestor. Scientists call such trees rooted, whichmeans there is a single ancestral lineage (typically drawn from the bottom or left) to which all organisms represented in thediagram relate. Notice in the rooted phylogenetic tree that the three domains— Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya—divergefrom a single point and branch off. The small branch that plants and animals (including humans) occupy in this diagramshows how recent and miniscule these groups are compared with other organisms. Unrooted trees don’t show a commonancestor but do show relationships among species.
Both of these phylogenetic trees shows the relationship of the three domains of life—Bacteria, Archaea,and Eukarya—but the (a) rooted tree attempts to identify when various species diverged from a common ancestorwhile the (b) unrooted tree does not. (credit a: modification of work by Eric Gaba)In a rooted tree, the branching indicates evolutionary relationships (Figure 20.3). The point where a split occurs, calleda branch point, represents where a single lineage evolved into a distinct new one. A lineage that evolved early from theroot and remains unbranched is called basal taxon. When two lineages stem from the same branch point, they are calledsister taxa. A branch with more than two lineages is called a polytomy and serves to illustrate where scientists have notdefinitively determined all of the relationships. It is important to note that although sister taxa and polytomy do share anancestor, it does not mean that the groups of organisms split or evolved from each other. Organisms in two taxa may havesplit apart at a specific branch point, but neither taxa gave rise to the other.
The root of a phylogenetic tree indicates that an ancestral lineage gave rise to all organisms on the tree.A branch point indicates where two lineages diverged. A lineage that evolved early and remains unbranched is a basaltaxon. When two lineages stem from the same branch point, they are sister taxa. A branch with more than two lineagesis a polytomy.
The diagrams above can serve as a pathway to understanding evolutionary history. The pathway can be traced from theorigin of life to any individual species by navigating through the evolutionary branches between the two points. Also, bystarting with a single species and tracing back towards the "trunk" of the tree, one can discover that species' ancestors, aswell as where lineages share a common ancestry. In addition, the tree can be used to study entire groups of organisms.Another point to mention on phylogenetic tree structure is that rotation at branch points does not change the information.For example, if a branch point was rotated and the taxon order changed, this would not alter the information because theevolution of each taxon from the branch point was independent of the other.Many disciplines within the study of biology contribute to understanding how past and present life evolved over time; thesedisciplines together contribute to building, updating, and maintaining the “tree of life.” Information is used to organize andclassify organisms based on evolutionary relationships in a scientific field called systematics. Data may be collected fromfossils, from studying the structure of body parts or molecules used by an organism, and by DNA analysis. By combiningdata from many sources, scientists can put together the phylogeny of an organism; since phylogenetic trees are hypotheses,they will continue to change as new types of life are discovered and new information is learned.Limitations of Phylogenetic TreesIt may be easy to assume that more closely related organisms look more alike, and while this is often the case, it is notalways true. If two closely related lineages evolved under significantly varied surroundings or after the evolution of a majornew adaptation, it is possible for the two groups to appear more different than other groups that are not as closely related.For example, the phylogenetic tree in Figure 20.4 shows that lizards and rabbits both have amniotic eggs, whereas frogs donot; yet lizards and frogs appear more similar than lizards and rabbits.
This ladder-like phylogenetic tree of vertebrates is rooted by an organism that lacked a vertebral column.At each branch point, organisms with different characters are placed in different groups based on the characteristicsthey share.Another aspect of phylogenetic trees is that, unless otherwise indicated, the branches do not account for length of time, onlythe evolutionary order. In other words, the length of a branch does not typically mean more time passed, nor does a shortbranch mean less time passed— unless specified on the diagram. For example, in Figure 20.4, the tree does not indicatehow much time passed between the evolution of amniotic eggs and hair. What the tree does show is the order in whichthings took place. Again using Figure 20.4, the tree shows that the oldest trait is the vertebral column, followed by hingedjaws, and so forth. Remember that any phylogenetic tree is a part of the greater whole, and like a real tree, it does not growin only one direction after a new branch develops. So, for the organisms in Figure 20.4, just because a vertebral columnevolved does not mean that invertebrate evolution ceased, it only means that a new branch formed. Also, groups that are notclosely related, but evolve under similar conditions, may appear more phenotypically similar to each other than to a closerelative.
The Levels of ClassificationTaxonomy (which literally means “arrangement law”) is the science of classifying organisms to construct internationallyshared classification systems with each organism placed into more and more inclusive groupings. Think about how agrocery store is organized. One large space is divided into departments, such as produce, dairy, and meats. Then eachdepartment further divides into aisles, then each aisle into categories and brands, and then finally a single product. Thisorganization from larger to smaller, more specific categories is called a hierarchical system.The taxonomic classification system (also called the Linnaean system after its inventor, Carl Linnaeus, a Swedish botanist,zoologist, and physician) uses a hierarchical model. Moving from the point of origin, the groups become more specific,until one branch ends as a single species. For example, after the common beginning of all life, scientists divide organismsinto three large categories called a domain: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya.Within each domain is a second category calleda kingdom. After kingdoms, the subsequent categories of increasing specificity are: phylum, class, order, family, genus,and species (Figure 20.5).
The taxonomic classification system uses a hierarchical model to organize living organisms intoincreasingly specific categories. The common dog, Canis lupus familiaris, is a subspecies of Canis lupus, which alsoincludes the wolf and dingo. (credit “dog”: modification of work by Janneke Vreugdenhil)The kingdom Animalia stems from the Eukarya domain. For the common dog, the classification levels would be as shownin Figure 20.5. Therefore, the full name of an organism technically has eight terms. For the dog, it is: Eukarya, Animalia,Chordata, Mammalia, Carnivora, Canidae, Canis, and lupus. Notice that each name is capitalized except for species, andthe genus and species names are italicized. Scientists generally refer to an organism only by its genus and species, which isits two-word scientific name, in what is called binomial nomenclature. Therefore, the scientific name of the dog is Canislupus. The name at each level is also called a taxon. In other words, dogs are in order Carnivora. Carnivora is the name ofthe taxon at the order level; Canidae is the taxon at the family level, and so forth. Organisms also have a common namethat people typically use, in this case, dog. Note that the dog is additionally a subspecies: the “familiaris” in Canis lupusfamiliaris. Subspecies are members of the same species that are capable of mating and reproducing viable offspring, butthey are considered separate subspecies due to geographic or behavioral isolation or other factors.Figure 20.6 shows how the levels move toward specificity with other organisms. Notice how the dog shares a domainwith the widest diversity of organisms, including plants and butterflies. At each sublevel, the organisms become more
similar because they are more closely related. Historically, scientists classified organisms using characteristics, but as DNAtechnology developed, more precise phylogenies have been determined.
At each sublevel in the taxonomic classification system, organisms become more similar. Dogsand wolves are the same species because they can breed and produce viable offspring, but they are differentenough to be classified as different subspecies.
Recent genetic analysis and other advancements have found that some earlier phylogenetic classifications do not align withthe evolutionary past; therefore, changes and updates must be made as new discoveries occur. Recall that phylogenetic treesare hypotheses and are modified as data becomes available. In addition, classification historically has focused on groupingorganisms mainly by shared characteristics and does not necessarily illustrate how the various groups relate to each otherfrom an evolutionary perspective. For example, despite the fact that a hippopotamus resembles a pig more than a whale, thehippopotamus may be the closest living relative of the whale.
Determining Evolutionary Relationships
Scientists must collect accurate information that allows them to make evolutionary connections among organisms. Similarto detective work, scientists must use evidence to uncover the facts. In the case of phylogeny, evolutionary investigationsfocus on two types of evidence: morphologic (form and function) and genetic.Two Options for SimilaritiesIn general, organisms that share similar physical features and genomes tend to be more closely related than those that donot. Such features that overlap both morphologically (in form) and genetically are referred to as homologous structures;they stem from developmental similarities that are based on evolution. For example, the bones in the wings of bats and birdshave homologous structures.
Bat and bird wings are homologous structures, indicating that bats and birds share a common evolutionarypast.
Notice it is not simply a single bone, but rather a grouping of several bones arranged in a similar way. The more complexthe feature, the more likely any kind of overlap is due to a common evolutionary past. Imagine two people from differentcountries both inventing a car with all the same parts and in exactly the same arrangement without any previous or sharedknowledge. That outcome would be highly improbable. However, if two people both invented a hammer, it would bereasonable to conclude that both could have the original idea without the help of the other. The same relationship betweencomplexity and shared evolutionary history is true for homologous structures in organisms.Misleading AppearancesSome organisms may be very closely related, even though a minor genetic change caused a major morphological differenceto make them look quite different. Similarly, unrelated organisms may be distantly related, but appear very much alike. Thisusually happens because both organisms were in common adaptations that evolved within similar environmental conditions.When similar characteristics occur because of environmental constraints and not due to a close evolutionary relationship,it is called an analogy or homoplasy. For example, insects use wings to fly like bats and birds, but the wing structure andembryonic origin is completely different. These are called analogous structures (Figure 20.8).Similar traits can be either homologous or analogous. Homologous structures share a similar embryonic origin; analogousorgans have a similar function. For example, the bones in the front flipper of a whale are homologous to the bones in thehuman arm. These structures are not analogous. The wings of a butterfly and the wings of a bird are analogous but nothomologous. Some structures are both analogous and homologous: the wings of a bird and the wings of a bat are bothhomologous and analogous. Scientists must determine which type of similarity a feature exhibits to decipher the phylogenyof the organisms being studied.
The (c) wing of a honeybee is similar in shape to a (b) bird wing and (a) bat wing, and it serves the samefunction. However, the honeybee wing is not composed of bones and has a distinctly different structure and embryonicorigin. These wing types (insect versus bat and bird) illustrate an analogy—similar structures that do not share anevolutionary history.
Molecular ComparisonsWith the advancement of DNA technology, the area of molecular systematics, which describes the use of informationon the molecular level including DNA analysis, has blossomed. New computer programs not only confirm many earlierclassified organisms, but also uncover previously made errors. As with physical characteristics, even the DNA sequence canbe tricky to read in some cases. For some situations, two very closely related organisms can appear unrelated if a mutationoccurred that caused a shift in the genetic code. An insertion or deletion mutation would move each nucleotide base overone place, causing two similar codes to appear unrelated.Sometimes two segments of DNA code in distantly related organisms randomly share a high percentage of bases inthe same locations, causing these organisms to appear closely related when they are not. For both of these situations,computer technologies have been developed to help identify the actual relationships, and, ultimately, the coupled use ofboth morphologic and molecular information is more effective in determining phylogeny.
Why Does Phylogeny Matter?Evolutionary biologists could list many reasons why understanding phylogeny is important to everyday lifein human society. For botanists, phylogeny acts as a guide to discovering new plants that can be used tobenefit people. Think of all the ways humans use plants—food, medicine, and clothing are a few examples.If a plant contains a compound that is effective in treating cancer, scientists might want to examine all of therelatives of that plant for other useful drugs.A research team in China identified a segment of DNA thought to be common to some medicinal plantsin the family Fabaceae (the legume family) and worked to identify which species had this segment(Figure 20.9). After testing plant species in this family, the team found a DNA marker (a known locationon a chromosome that enabled them to identify the species) present. Then, using the DNA to uncoverphylogenetic relationships, the team could identify whether a newly discovered plant was in this family andassess its potential medicinal properties.
Building Phylogenetic TreesHow do scientists construct phylogenetic trees? After the homologous and analogous traits are sorted, scientists oftenorganize the homologous traits using a system called cladistics. This system sorts organisms into clades: groups oforganisms that descended from a single ancestor. For example, in Figure 20.10, all of the organisms in the orange region
evolved from a single ancestor that had amniotic eggs. Consequently, all of these organisms also have amniotic eggs andmake a single clade, also called a monophyletic group. Clades must include all of the descendants from a branch point.
Clades can vary in size depending on which branch point is being referenced. The important factor is that all of theorganisms in the clade or monophyletic group stem from a single point on the tree. This can be remembered becausemonophyletic breaks down into “mono,” meaning one, and “phyletic,” meaning evolutionary relationship. Figure 20.11shows various examples of clades. Notice how each clade comes from a single point, whereas the non-clade groups showbranches that do not share a single point.
All the organisms within a clade stem from a single point on the tree. A clade may contain multiplegroups, as in the case of animals, fungi and plants, or a single group, as in the case of flagellates. Groups thatdiverge at a different branch point, or that do not include all groups in a single branch point, are not consideredclades.
Shared CharacteristicsOrganisms evolve from common ancestors and then diversify. Scientists use the phrase “descent with modification” becauseeven though related organisms have many of the same characteristics and genetic codes, changes occur. This pattern repeatsover and over as one goes through the phylogenetic tree of life:1. A change in the genetic makeup of an organism leads to a new trait which becomes prevalent in the group.2. Many organisms descend from this point and have this trait.3. New variations continue to arise: some are adaptive and persist, leading to new traits.4. With new traits, a new branch point is determined (go back to step 1 and repeat).If a characteristic is found in the ancestor of a group, it is considered a shared ancestral character because all of theorganisms in the taxon or clade have that trait. The vertebrate in Figure 20.10 is a shared ancestral character. Now considerthe amniotic egg characteristic in the same figure. Only some of the organisms in Figure 20.10 have this trait, and to thosethat do, it is called a shared derived character because this trait derived at some point but does not include all of theancestors in the tree.The tricky aspect to shared ancestral and shared derived characters is the fact that these terms are relative. The same traitcan be considered one or the other depending on the particular diagram being used. Returning to Figure 20.10, note that theamniotic egg is a shared ancestral character for the Amniota clade, while having hair is a shared derived character for someorganisms in this group. These terms help scientists distinguish between clades in the building of phylogenetic trees.
Choosing the Right RelationshipsImagine being the person responsible for organizing all of the items in a department store properly—an overwhelming task.Organizing the evolutionary relationships of all life on Earth proves much more difficult: scientists must span enormousblocks of time and work with information from long-extinct organisms. Trying to decipher the proper connections,especially given the presence of homologies and analogies, makes the task of building an accurate tree of life extraordinarilydifficult. Add to that the advancement of DNA technology, which now provides large quantities of genetic sequences to beused and analyzed. Taxonomy is a subjective discipline: many organisms have more than one connection to each other, soeach taxonomist will decide the order of connections.To aid in the tremendous task of describing phylogenies accurately, scientists often use a concept called maximumparsimony, which means that events occurred in the simplest, most obvious way. For example, if a group of people entereda forest preserve to go hiking, based on the principle of maximum parsimony, one could predict that most of the peoplewould hike on established trails rather than forge new ones.For scientists deciphering evolutionary pathways, the same idea is used: the pathway of evolution probably includes thefewest major events that coincide with the evidence at hand. Starting with all of the homologous traits in a group oforganisms, scientists look for the most obvious and simple order of evolutionary events that led to the occurrence of thosetraits.
These tools and concepts are only a few of the strategies scientists use to tackle the task of revealing the evolutionaryhistory of life on Earth. Recently, newer technologies have uncovered surprising discoveries with unexpectedrelationships, such as the fact that people seem to be more closely related to fungi than fungi are to plants. Soundunbelievable? As the information about DNA sequences grows, scientists will become closer to mapping the evolutionaryhistory of all life on Earth.
Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
The concepts of phylogenetic modeling are constantly changing. It is one of the most dynamic fields of study in all ofbiology. Over the last several decades, new research has challenged scientists’ ideas about how organisms are related. Newmodels of these relationships have been proposed for consideration by the scientific community.Many phylogenetic trees have been shown as models of the evolutionary relationship among species. Phylogenetic treesoriginated with Charles Darwin, who sketched the first phylogenetic tree in 1837 (Figure 20.12a), which served as a patternfor subsequent studies for more than a century. The concept of a phylogenetic tree with a single trunk representing acommon ancestor, with the branches representing the divergence of species from this ancestor, fits well with the structureof many common trees, such as the oak (Figure 20.12b). However, evidence from modern DNA sequence analysis and
newly developed computer algorithms has caused skepticism about the validity of the standard tree model in the scientificcommunity.The (a) concept of the “tree of life” goes back to an 1837 sketch by Charles Darwin. Like an (b) oaktree, the “tree of life” has a single trunk and many branches.
Limitations to the Classic ModelClassical thinking about prokaryotic evolution, included in the classic tree model, is that species evolve clonally. That is,they produce offspring themselves with only random mutations causing the descent into the variety of modern-day andextinct species known to science. This view is somewhat complicated in eukaryotes that reproduce sexually, but the laws ofMendelian genetics explain the variation in offspring, again, to be a result of a mutation within the species. The concept ofgenes being transferred between unrelated species was not considered as a possibility until relatively recently. Horizontalgene transfer (HGT), also known as lateral gene transfer, is the transfer of genes between unrelated species. HGT has beenshown to be an ever-present phenomenon, with many evolutionists postulating a major role for this process in evolution,thus complicating the simple tree model. Genes have been shown to be passed between species which are only distantlyrelated using standard phylogeny, thus adding a layer of complexity to the understanding of phylogenetic relationships.The various ways that HGT occurs in prokaryotes is important to understanding phylogenies. Although at present HGTis not viewed as important to eukaryotic evolution, HGT does occur in this domain as well. Finally, as an example of theultimate gene transfer, theories of genome fusion between symbiotic or endosymbiotic organisms have been proposed toexplain an event of great importance—the evolution of the first eukaryotic cell, without which humans could not have comeinto existence.Horizontal Gene TransferHorizontal gene transfer (HGT) is the introduction of genetic material from one species to another species by mechanismsother than the vertical transmission from parent(s) to offspring. These transfers allow even distantly related species to sharegenes, influencing their phenotypes. It is thought that HGT is more prevalent in prokaryotes, but that only about 2% of theprokaryotic genome may be transferred by this process. Some researchers believe such estimates are premature: the actualimportance of HGT to evolutionary processes must be viewed as a work in progress. As the phenomenon is investigatedmore thoroughly, it may be revealed to be more common. Many scientists believe that HGT and mutation appear to be(especially in prokaryotes) a significant source of genetic variation, which is the raw material for the process of naturalselection. These transfers may occur between any two species that share an intimate relationship (Table 20.1).
HGT in ProkaryotesThe mechanism of HGT has been shown to be quite common in the prokaryotic domains of Bacteria and Archaea,significantly changing the way their evolution is viewed. The majority of evolutionary models, such as in the EndosymbiontTheory, propose that eukaryotes descended from multiple prokaryotes, which makes HGT all the more important tounderstanding the phylogenetic relationships of all extant and extinct species.The fact that genes are transferred among common bacteria is well known to microbiology students. These gene transfersbetween species are the major mechanism whereby bacteria acquire resistance to antibiotics. Classically, this type of transferhas been thought to occur by three different mechanisms:1. Transformation: naked DNA is taken up by a bacteria2. Transduction: genes are transferred using a virus3. Conjugation: the use a hollow tube called a pilus to transfer genes between organismsMore recently, a fourth mechanism of gene transfer between prokaryotes has been discovered. Small, virus-like particlescalled gene transfer agents (GTAs) transfer random genomic segments from one species of prokaryote to another. GTAshave been shown to be responsible for genetic changes, sometimes at a very high frequency compared to other evolutionaryprocesses. The first GTA was characterized in 1974 using purple, non-sulfur bacteria. These GTAs, which are thought to bebacteriophages that lost the ability to reproduce on their own, carry random pieces of DNA from one organism to another.The ability of GTAs to act with high frequency has been demonstrated in controlled studies using marine bacteria. Genetransfer events in marine prokaryotes, either by GTAs or by viruses, have been estimated to be as high as 1013 per year inthe Mediterranean Sea alone. GTAs and viruses are thought to be efficient HGT vehicles with a major impact on prokaryoticevolution.As a consequence of this modern DNA analysis, the idea that eukaryotes evolved directly from Archaea has fallen out offavor. While eukaryotes share many features that are absent in bacteria, such as the TATA box (found in the promoter regionof many genes), the discovery that some eukaryotic genes were more homologous with bacterial DNA than Archaea DNAmade this idea less tenable. Furthermore, the fusion of genomes from Archaea and Bacteria by endosymbiosis has beenproposed as the ultimate event in eukaryotic evolution.HGT in EukaryotesAlthough it is easy to see how prokaryotes exchange genetic material by HGT, it was initially thought that this processwas absent in eukaryotes. After all, prokaryotes are but single cells exposed directly to their environment, whereas thesex cells of multicellular organisms are usually sequestered in protected parts of the body. It follows from this idea thatthe gene transfers between multicellular eukaryotes should be more difficult. Indeed, it is thought that this process israrer in eukaryotes and has a much smaller evolutionary impact than in prokaryotes. In spite of this fact, HGT betweendistantly related organisms has been demonstrated in several eukaryotic species, and it is possible that more examples willbe discovered in the future.In plants, gene transfer has been observed in species that cannot cross-pollinate by normal means. Transposons or “jumpinggenes” have been shown to transfer between rice and millet plant species. Furthermore, fungal species feeding on yew trees,from which the anti-cancer drug TAXOL® is derived from the bark, have acquired the ability to make taxol themselves, aclear example of gene transfer.
In animals, a particularly interesting example of HGT occurs within the aphid species (Figure 20.13). Aphids are insectsthat vary in color based on carotenoid content. Carotenoids are pigments made by a variety of plants, fungi, and microbes,and they serve a variety of functions in animals, who obtain these chemicals from their food. Humans require carotenoidsto synthesize vitamin A, and we obtain them by eating orange fruits and vegetables: carrots, apricots, mangoes, and sweetpotatoes. On the other hand, aphids have acquired the ability to make the carotenoids on their own. According to DNAanalysis, this ability is due to the transfer of fungal genes into the insect by HGT, presumably as the insect consumed fungifor food. A carotenoid enzyme called a desaturase is responsible for the red coloration seen in certain aphids, and it hasbeen further shown that when this gene is inactivated by mutation, the aphids revert back to their more common green color(Figure 20.13).
(a) Red aphids get their color from red carotenoid pigment. Genes necessary to make this pigment arepresent in certain fungi, and scientists speculate that aphids acquired these genes through HGT after consuming fungifor food. If genes for making carotenoids are inactivated by mutation, the aphids revert back to (b) their green color.Red coloration makes the aphids a lot more conspicuous to predators, but evidence suggests that red aphids are moreresistant to insecticides than green ones. Thus, red aphids may be more fit to survive in some environments than greenones.
Genome Fusion and the Evolution of EukaryotesScientists believe the ultimate in HGT occurs through genome fusion between different species of prokaryotes when twosymbiotic organisms become endosymbiotic. This occurs when one species is taken inside the cytoplasm of another species,which ultimately results in a genome consisting of genes from both the endosymbiont and the host. This mechanism is anaspect of the Endosymbiont Theory, which is accepted by a majority of biologists as the mechanism whereby eukaryoticcells obtained their mitochondria and chloroplasts. However, the role of endosymbiosis in the development of the nucleus ismore controversial. Nuclear and mitochondrial DNA are thought to be of different (separate) evolutionary origin, with themitochondrial DNA being derived from the circular genomes of bacteria that were engulfed by ancient prokaryotic cells.Mitochondrial DNA can be regarded as the smallest chromosome. Interestingly enough, mitochondrial DNA is inheritedonly from the mother. The mitochondrial DNA degrades in sperm when the sperm degrades in the fertilized egg or in otherinstances when the mitochondria located in the flagellum of the sperm fails to enter the egg.Within the past decade, the process of genome fusion by endosymbiosis has been proposed by James Lake of the UCLA/NASA Astrobiology Institute to be responsible for the evolution of the first eukaryotic cells (Figure 20.14a). UsingDNA analysis and a new mathematical algorithm called conditioned reconstruction (CR), his laboratory proposed thateukaryotic cells developed from an endosymbiotic gene fusion between two species, one an Archaea and the other aBacteria. As mentioned, some eukaryotic genes resemble those of Archaea, whereas others resemble those from Bacteria.An endosymbiotic fusion event, such as Lake has proposed, would clearly explain this observation. On the other hand, thiswork is new and the CR algorithm is relatively unsubstantiated, which causes many scientists to resist this hypothesis.More recent work by Lake (Figure 20.14b) proposes that gram-negative bacteria, which are unique within their domainin that they contain two lipid bilayer membranes, indeed resulted from an endosymbiotic fusion of archaeal and bacterialspecies. The double membrane would be a direct result of the endosymbiosis, with the endosymbiont picking up the secondmembrane from the host as it was internalized. This mechanism has also been used to explain the double membranesfound in mitochondria and chloroplasts. Lake’s work is not without skepticism, and the ideas are still debated within thebiological science community. In addition to Lake’s hypothesis, there are several other competing theories as to the originof eukaryotes. How did the eukaryotic nucleus evolve? One theory is that the prokaryotic cells produced an additionalmembrane that surrounded the bacterial chromosome. Some bacteria have the DNA enclosed by two membranes; however,there is no evidence of a nucleolus or nuclear pores. Other proteobacteria also have membrane-bound chromosomes. If theeukaryotic nucleus evolved this way, we would expect one of the two types of prokaryotes to be more closely related toeukaryotes.
The theory that mitochondria and chloroplasts are endosymbiotic in origin is now widely accepted. Morecontroversial is the proposal that (a) the eukaryotic nucleus resulted from the fusion of archaeal and bacterial genomes,and that (b) Gram-negative bacteria, which have two membranes, resulted from the fusion of Archaea and Grampositivebacteria, each of which has a single membrane.The nucleus-first hypothesis proposes that the nucleus evolved in prokaryotes first (Figure 20.15a), followed by a laterfusion of the new eukaryote with bacteria that became mitochondria. The mitochondria-first hypothesis proposes thatmitochondria were first established in a prokaryotic host (Figure 20.15b), which subsequently acquired a nucleus, by fusionor other mechanisms, to become the first eukaryotic cell. Most interestingly, the eukaryote-first hypothesis proposes thatprokaryotes actually evolved from eukaryotes by losing genes and complexity (Figure 20.15c). All of these hypotheses aretestable. Only time and more experimentation will determine which hypothesis is best supported by data.
Three alternate hypotheses of eukaryotic and prokaryotic evolution are (a) the nucleus-first hypothesis,(b) the mitochondrion-first hypothesis, and (c) the eukaryote-first hypothesis.Web and Network ModelsThe recognition of the importance of HGT, especially in the evolution of prokaryotes, has caused some to proposeabandoning the classic “tree of life” model. In 1999, W. Ford Doolittle proposed a phylogenetic model that resembles aweb or a network more than a tree. The hypothesis is that eukaryotes evolved not from a single prokaryotic ancestor, butfrom a pool of many species that were sharing genes by HGT mechanisms. As shown in Figure 20.16a, some individualprokaryotes were responsible for transferring the bacteria that caused mitochondrial development to the new eukaryotes,whereas other species transferred the bacteria that gave rise to chloroplasts. This model is often called the “ web of life.”In an effort to save the tree analogy, some have proposed using the Ficus tree (Figure 20.16b) with its multiple trunks as aphylogenetic to represent a diminished evolutionary role for HGT.
In the (a) phylogenetic model proposed by W. Ford Doolittle, the “tree of life” arose from a communityof ancestral cells, has multiple trunks, and has connections between branches where horizontal gene transfer hasoccurred. Visually, this concept is better represented by (b) the multi-trunked Ficus than by the single trunk of the oaksimilar to the tree drawn by Darwin Figure 20.12.
Ring of Life ModelsOthers have proposed abandoning any tree-like model of phylogeny in favor of a ring structure, the so-called “ ring oflife” (Figure 20.17); a phylogenetic model where all three domains of life evolved from a pool of primitive prokaryotes.Lake, again using the conditioned reconstruction algorithm, proposes a ring-like model in which species of all threedomains—Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya—evolved from a single pool of gene-swapping prokaryotes. His laboratoryproposes that this structure is the best fit for data from extensive DNA analyses performed in his laboratory, and that thering model is the only one that adequately takes HGT and genomic fusion into account. However, other phylogeneticistsremain highly skeptical of this model.
According to the “ring of life” phylogenetic model, the three domains of life evolved from a pool of primitiveprokaryotes.In summary, the “tree of life” model proposed by Darwin must be modified to include HGT. Does this mean abandoning thetree model completely? Even Lake argues that all attempts should be made to discover some modification of the tree modelto allow it to accurately fit his data, and only the inability to do so will sway people toward his ring proposal.
This doesn’t mean a tree, web, or a ring will correlate completely to an accurate description of phylogenetic relationshipsof life. A consequence of the new thinking about phylogenetic models is the idea that Darwin’s original conception of thephylogenetic tree is too simple, but made sense based on what was known at the time. However, the search for a moreuseful model moves on: each model serving as hypotheses to be tested with the possibility of developing new models. Thisis how science advances. These models are used as visualizations to help construct hypothetical evolutionary relationshipsand understand the massive amount of data being analyzed.
