A brief look at any magazine pertaining to our natural world, such as National Geographic, would show a rich variety ofvertebrates, especially mammals and birds. To most people, these are the animals that attract our attention. Concentrating onvertebrates, however, gives us a rather biased and limited view of biodiversity, because it ignores nearly 97 percent of theanimal kingdom, namely the invertebrates. Invertebrate animals are those without a cranium and defined vertebral columnor spine. In addition to lacking a spine, most invertebrates also lack an endoskeleton. A large number of invertebrates areaquatic animals, and scientific research suggests that many of the world’s species are aquatic invertebrates that have not yetbeen documented.
The invertebrates, or invertebrata, are animals that do not contain bony structures, such as the cranium and vertebrae.The simplest of all the invertebrates are the Parazoans, which include only the phylum Porifera: the sponges (Figure28.2). Parazoans (“beside animals”) do not display tissue-level organization, although they do have specialized cells thatperform specific functions. Sponge larvae are able to swim; however, adults are non-motile and spend their life attached toa substratum. Since water is vital to sponges for excretion, feeding, and gas exchange, their body structure facilitates themovement of water through the sponge. Structures such as canals, chambers, and cavities enable water to move through thesponge to nearly all body cells.
Sponges are members of the Phylum Porifera, which contains the simplest invertebrates.
Morphology of SpongesThe morphology of the simplest sponges takes the shape of a cylinder with a large central cavity, the spongocoel, occupyingthe inside of the cylinder. Water can enter into the spongocoel from numerous pores in the body wall. Water entering thespongocoel is extruded via a large common opening called the osculum. However, sponges exhibit a range of diversity inbody forms, including variations in the size of the spongocoel, the number of osculi, and where the cells that filter foodfrom the water are located.While sponges (excluding the hexactinellids) do not exhibit tissue-layer organization, they do have different cell types thatperform distinct functions. Pinacocytes, which are epithelial-like cells, form the outermost layer of sponges and enclosea jelly-like substance called mesohyl. Mesohyl is an extracellular matrix consisting of a collagen-like gel with suspendedcells that perform various functions. The gel-like consistency of mesohyl acts like an endoskeleton and maintains the tubularmorphology of sponges. In addition to the osculum, sponges have multiple pores called ostia on their bodies that allowwater to enter the sponge. In some sponges, ostia are formed by porocytes, single tube-shaped cells that act as valves toregulate the flow of water into the spongocoel. In other sponges, ostia are formed by folds in the body wall of the sponge.Choanocytes (“collar cells”) are present at various locations, depending on the type of sponge, but they always line theinner portions of some space through which water flows (the spongocoel in simple sponges, canals within the body wall inmore complex sponges, and chambers scattered throughout the body in the most complex sponges). Whereas pinacocytesline the outside of the sponge, choanocytes tend to line certain inner portions of the sponge body that surround the mesohyl.The structure of a choanocyte is critical to its function, which is to generate a water current through the sponge and totrap and ingest food particles by phagocytosis. Note the similarity in appearance between the sponge choanocyte andchoanoflagellates (Protista). This similarity suggests that sponges and choanoflagellates are closely related and likely sharea recent common ancestry. The cell body is embedded in mesohyl and contains all organelles required for normal cellfunction, but protruding into the “open space” inside of the sponge is a mesh-like collar composed of microvilli with a singleflagellum in the center of the column. The cumulative effect of the flagella from all choanocytes aids the movement of waterthrough the sponge: drawing water into the sponge through the numerous ostia, into the spaces lined by choanocytes, andeventually out through the osculum (or osculi). In the meantime, food particles, including waterborne bacteria and algae,are trapped by the sieve-like collar of the choanocytes, slide down into the body of the cell, are ingested by phagocytosis,and become encased in a food vacuole. Lastly, choanocytes will differentiate into sperm for sexual reproduction, where theywill become dislodged from the mesohyl and leave the sponge with expelled water through the osculum.
The second crucial cells in sponges are called amoebocytes (or archaeocytes), named for the fact that they move throughoutthe mesohyl in an amoeba-like fashion. Amoebocytes have a variety of functions: delivering nutrients from choanocytesto other cells within the sponge, giving rise to eggs for sexual reproduction (which remain in the mesohyl), deliveringphagocytized sperm from choanocytes to eggs, and differentiating into more-specific cell types. Some of these morespecificcell types include collencytes and lophocytes, which produce the collagen-like protein to maintain the mesohyl,sclerocytes, which produce spicules in some sponges, and spongocytes, which produce the protein spongin in the majorityof sponges. These cells produce collagen to maintain the consistency of the mesohyl. The different cell types in sponges areshown in Figure 28.3.
In some sponges, sclerocytes secrete small spicules into the mesohyl, which are composed of either calcium carbonateor silica, depending on the type of sponge. These spicules serve to provide additional stiffness to the body of the sponge.
The presence and composition of spicules/spongin are the differentiating characteristics of the three classes of sponges(Figure 28.4): Class Calcarea contains calcium carbonate spicules and no spongin, class Hexactinellida contains six-rayedsiliceous spicules and no spongin, and class Demospongia contains spongin and may or may not have spicules; if present,those spicules are siliceous. Spicules are most conspicuously present in class Hexactinellida, the order consisting of glasssponges. Some of the spicules may attain giant proportions (in relation to the typical size range of glass sponges of 3 to 10mm) as seen in Monorhaphis chuni, which grows up to 3 m long.
Clathrina clathrus belongs to class Calcarea, (b) Staurocalyptus spp. (common name: yellow Picassosponge) belongs to class Hexactinellida, and (c) Acarnus erithacus belongs to class Demospongia.
Physiological Processes in SpongesSponges, despite being simple organisms, regulate their different physiological processes through a variety of mechanisms.These processes regulate their metabolism, reproduction, and locomotion.DigestionSponges lack complex digestive, respiratory, circulatory, reproductive, and nervous systems. Their food is trapped whenwater passes through the ostia and out through the osculum. Bacteria smaller than 0.5 microns in size are trapped bychoanocytes, which are the principal cells engaged in nutrition, and are ingested by phagocytosis. Particles that are largerthan the ostia may be phagocytized by pinacocytes. In some sponges, amoebocytes transport food from cells that have ingested food particles to those that do not. For this type of digestion, in which food particles are digested within individualcells, the sponge draws water through diffusion. The limit of this type of digestion is that food particles must be smallerthan individual cells.All other major body functions in the sponge (gas exchange, circulation, excretion) are performed by diffusion between thecells that line the openings within the sponge and the water that is passing through those openings. All cell types withinthe sponge obtain oxygen from water through diffusion. Likewise, carbon dioxide is released into seawater by diffusion. Inaddition, nitrogenous waste produced as a byproduct of protein metabolism is excreted via diffusion by individual cells intothe water as it passes through the sponge.ReproductionSponges reproduce by sexual as well as asexual methods. The typical means of asexual reproduction is either fragmentation(where a piece of the sponge breaks off, settles on a new substrate, and develops into a new individual) or budding (agenetically identical outgrowth grows from the parent and eventually detaches or remains attached to form a colony). Anatypical type of asexual reproduction is found only in freshwater sponges and occurs through the formation of gemmules.Gemmules are environmentally resistant structures produced by adult sponges wherein the typical sponge morphology isinverted. In gemmules, an inner layer of amoebocytes is surrounded by a layer of collagen (spongin) that may be reinforcedby spicules. The collagen that is normally found in the mesohyl becomes the outer protective layer. In freshwater sponges,gemmules may survive hostile environmental conditions like changes in temperature and serve to recolonize the habitatonce environmental conditions stabilize. Gemmules are capable of attaching to a substratum and generating a new sponge.Since gemmules can withstand harsh environments, are resistant to desiccation, and remain dormant for long periods, theyare an excellent means of colonization for a sessile organism.Sexual reproduction in sponges occurs when gametes are generated. Sponges are monoecious (hermaphroditic), whichmeans that one individual can produce both gametes (eggs and sperm) simultaneously. In some sponges, production ofgametes may occur throughout the year, whereas other sponges may show sexual cycles depending upon water temperature.Sponges may also become sequentially hermaphroditic, producing oocytes first and spermatozoa later. Oocytes arise by thedifferentiation of amoebocytes and are retained within the spongocoel, whereas spermatozoa result from the differentiationof choanocytes and are ejected via the osculum. Ejection of spermatozoa may be a timed and coordinated event, as seen incertain species. Spermatozoa carried along by water currents can fertilize the oocytes borne in the mesohyl of other sponges.Early larval development occurs within the sponge, and free-swimming larvae are then released via the osculum.LocomotionSponges are generally sessile as adults and spend their lives attached to a fixed substratum. They do not show movementover large distances like other free-swimming marine invertebrates. However, sponge cells are capable of creeping alongsubstrata via organizational plasticity. Under experimental conditions, researchers have shown that sponge cells spread ona physical support demonstrate a leading edge for directed movement. It has been speculated that this localized creepingmovement may help sponges adjust to microenvironments near the point of attachment. It must be noted, however, that thispattern of movement has been documented in laboratories, but it remains to be observed in natural sponge habitats.
Phylum Cnidaria includes animals that show radial or biradial symmetry and are diploblastic, that is, they develop fromtwo embryonic layers. Nearly all (about 99 percent) cnidarians are marine species.Cnidarians contain specialized cells known as cnidocytes (“stinging cells”) containing organelles called nematocysts(stingers). These cells are present around the mouth and tentacles, and serve to immobilize prey with toxins contained withinthe cells. Nematocysts contain coiled threads that may bear barbs. The outer wall of the cell has hairlike projections calledcnidocils, which are sensitive to touch. When touched, the cells are known to fire coiled threads that can either penetratethe flesh of the prey or predators of cnidarians (see Figure 28.5) or ensnare it. These coiled threads release toxins into thetarget and can often immobilize prey or scare away predators.
Animals from the phylum Cnidaria have stinging cells called cnidocytes. Cnidocytes contain largeorganelles called (a) nematocysts that store a coiled thread and barb. When hairlike projections on the cell surface aretouched, (b) the thread, barb, and a toxin are fired from the organelle.
Animals in this phylum display two distinct morphological body plans: polyp or “stalk” and medusa or “bell” (Figure28.6). An example of the polyp form is Hydra spp.; perhaps the most well-known medusoid animals are the jellies(jellyfish). Polyp forms are sessile as adults, with a single opening to the digestive system (the mouth) facing up withtentacles surrounding it. Medusa forms are motile, with the mouth and tentacles hanging down from an umbrella-shapedbell.
Cnidarians have two distinct body plans, the medusa (a) and the polyp (b). All cnidarians have twomembrane layers, with a jelly-like mesoglea between them.Some cnidarians are polymorphic, that is, they have two body plans during their life cycle. An example is the colonialhydroid called an Obelia. The sessile polyp form has, in fact, two types of polyps, shown in Figure 28.7. The first isthe gastrozooid, which is adapted for capturing prey and feeding; the other type of polyp is the gonozooid, adapted forthe asexual budding of medusa. When the reproductive buds mature, they break off and become free-swimming medusa,which are either male or female (dioecious). The male medusa makes sperm, whereas the female medusa makes eggs. Afterfertilization, the zygote develops into a blastula, which develops into a planula larva. The larva is free swimming for awhile, but eventually attaches and a new colonial reproductive polyp is formed.
The sessile form of Obelia geniculate has two types of polyps: gastrozooids, which are adapted forcapturing prey, and gonozooids, which bud to produce medusae asexually.
All cnidarians show the presence of two membrane layers in the body that are derived from the endoderm and ectodermof the embryo. The outer layer (from ectoderm) is called the epidermis and lines the outside of the animal, whereas theinner layer (from endoderm) is called the gastrodermis and lines the digestive cavity. Between these two membrane layersis a non-living, jelly-like mesoglea connective layer. In terms of cellular complexity, cnidarians show the presence ofdifferentiated cell types in each tissue layer, such as nerve cells, contractile epithelial cells, enzyme-secreting cells, andnutrient-absorbing cells, as well as the presence of intercellular connections. However, the development of organs or organsystems is not advanced in this phylum.The nervous system is primitive, with nerve cells scattered across the body. This nerve net may show the presence of groupsof cells in the form of nerve plexi (singular plexus) or nerve cords. The nerve cells show mixed characteristics of motor aswell as sensory neurons. The predominant signaling molecules in these primitive nervous systems are chemical peptides,which perform both excitatory and inhibitory functions. Despite the simplicity of the nervous system, it coordinates themovement of tentacles, the drawing of captured prey to the mouth, the digestion of food, and the expulsion of waste.The cnidarians perform extracellular digestion in which the food is taken into the gastrovascular cavity, enzymes aresecreted into the cavity, and the cells lining the cavity absorb nutrients. The gastrovascular cavity has only one openingthat serves as both a mouth and an anus, which is termed an incomplete digestive system. Cnidarian cells exchange oxygenand carbon dioxide by diffusion between cells in the epidermis with water in the environment, and between cells in thegastrodermis with water in the gastrovascular cavity. The lack of a circulatory system to move dissolved gases limits thethickness of the body wall and necessitates a non-living mesoglea between the layers. There is no excretory system ororgans, and nitrogenous wastes simply diffuse from the cells into the water outside the animal or in the gastrovascularcavity. There is also no circulatory system, so nutrients must move from the cells that absorb them in the lining of thegastrovascular cavity through the mesoglea to other cells.The phylum Cnidaria contains about 10,000 described species divided into four classes: Anthozoa, Scyphozoa, Cubozoa,and Hydrozoa. The anthozoans, the sea anemones and corals, are all sessile species, whereas the scyphozoans (jellyfish)and cubozoans (box jellies) are swimming forms. The hydrozoans contain sessile forms and swimming colonial forms likethe Portuguese Man O’ War.Class AnthozoaThe class Anthozoa includes all cnidarians that exhibit a polyp body plan only; in other words, there is no medusa stagewithin their life cycle. Examples include sea anemones (Figure 28.8), sea pens, and corals, with an estimated number of6,100 described species. Sea anemones are usually brightly colored and can attain a size of 1.8 to 10 cm in diameter. Theseanimals are usually cylindrical in shape and are attached to a substrate. A mouth opening is surrounded by tentacles bearingcnidocytes.
The sea anemone is shown (a) photographed and (b) in a diagram illustrating its morphology.
A jelly is shown (a) photographed and (b) in a diagram illustrating its morphology.
In the jellyfish, a mouth opening is present on the underside of the animal, surrounded by tentacles bearing nematocysts.Scyphozoans live most of their life cycle as free-swimming, solitary carnivores. The mouth leads to the gastrovascularcavity, which may be sectioned into four interconnected sacs, called diverticuli. In some species, the digestive system maybe further branched into radial canals. Like the septa in anthozoans, the branched gastrovascular cells serve two functions:to increase the surface area for nutrient absorption and diffusion; thus, more cells are in direct contact with the nutrients inthe gastrovascular cavity.In scyphozoans, nerve cells are scattered all over the body. Neurons may even be present in clusters called rhopalia. Theseanimals possess a ring of muscles lining the dome of the body, which provides the contractile force required to swim throughwater. Scyphozoans are dioecious animals, that is, the sexes are separate. The gonads are formed from the gastrodermis andgametes are expelled through the mouth. Planula larvae are formed by external fertilization; they settle on a substratum ina polypoid form known as scyphistoma. These forms may produce additional polyps by budding or may transform into themedusoid form. The life cycle (Figure 28.10) of these animals can be described as polymorphic, because they exhibit botha medusal and polypoid body plan at some point in their life cycle.The lifecycle of a jellyfish includes two stages: the medusa stage and the polyp stage. The polypreproduces asexually by budding, and the medusa reproduces sexually.
Class CubozoaThis class includes jellies that have a box-shaped medusa, or a bell that is square in cross-section; hence, are colloquiallyknown as “box jellyfish.” These species may achieve sizes of 15–25 cm. Cubozoans display overall morphological andanatomical characteristics that are similar to those of the scyphozoans. A prominent difference between the two classes isthe arrangement of tentacles. This is the most venomous group of all the cnidarians (Figure 28.11).The cubozoans contain muscular pads called pedalia at the corners of the square bell canopy, with one or more tentaclesattached to each pedalium. These animals are further classified into orders based on the presence of single or multipletentacles per pedalium. In some cases, the digestive system may extend into the pedalia. Nematocysts may be arranged ina spiral configuration along the tentacles; this arrangement helps to effectively subdue and capture prey. Cubozoans existin a polypoid form that develops from a planula larva. These polyps show limited mobility along the substratum and, likescyphozoans, may bud to form more polyps to colonize a habitat. Polyp forms then transform into the medusoid forms.
The (a) tiny cubazoan jelly Malo kingi is thimble shaped and, like all cubozoan jellies, (b) has fourmuscular pedalia to which the tentacles attach. M. kingi is one of two species of jellies known to cause Irukandjisyndrome, a condition characterized by excruciating muscle pain, vomiting, increased heart rate, and psychologicalsymptoms. Two people in Australia, where Irukandji jellies are most commonly found, are believed to have died fromIrukandji stings. (c) A sign on a beach in northern Australia warns swimmers of the danger.
Class HydrozoaHydrozoa includes nearly 3,200 species; most are marine, although some freshwater species are known (Figure 28.12).Animals in this class are polymorphs, and most exhibit both polypoid and medusoid forms in their lifecycle, although thisis variable.The polyp form in these animals often shows a cylindrical morphology with a central gastrovascular cavity lined bythe gastrodermis. The gastrodermis and epidermis have a simple layer of mesoglea sandwiched between them. A mouthopening, surrounded by tentacles, is present at the oral end of the animal. Many hydrozoans form colonies that are composedof a branched colony of specialized polyps that share a gastrovascular cavity, such as in the colonial hydroid Obelia.Colonies may also be free-floating and contain medusoid and polypoid individuals in the colony as in Physalia (thePortuguese Man O’War) or Velella (By-the-wind sailor). Even other species are solitary polyps (Hydra) or solitary medusae(Gonionemus). The true characteristic shared by all of these diverse species is that their gonads for sexual reproduction arederived from epidermal tissue, whereas in all other cnidarians they are derived from gastrodermal tissue.
Obelia, (b) Physalia physalis, known as the Portuguese Man O‘ War, (c) Velella bae, and (d) Hydrahave different body shapes but all belong to the family Hydrozoa.
Animals belonging to superphylum Lophotrochozoa are protostomes, in which the blastopore, or the point of involution ofthe ectoderm or outer germ layer, becomes the mouth opening to the alimentary canal. This is called protostomy or “firstmouth.” In protostomy, solid groups of cells split from the endoderm or inner germ layer to form a central mesodermal layer of cells. This layer multiplies into a band and then splits internally to form the coelom; this protostomic coelom is hencetermed schizocoelom.As lophotrochozoans, the organisms in this superphylum possess either a lophophore or trochophore larvae. Thelophophores include groups that are united by the presence of the lophophore, a set of ciliated tentacles surrounding themouth. Lophophorata include the flatworms and several other phyla. These clades are upheld when RNA sequences arecompared. Trochophore larvae are characterized by two bands of cilia around the body.The lophotrochozoans are triploblastic and possess an embryonic mesoderm sandwiched between the ectoderm andendoderm found in the diploblastic cnidarians. These phyla are also bilaterally symmetrical, meaning that a longitudinalsection will divide them into right and left sides that are symmetrical. It also means the beginning of cephalization, theevolution of a concentration of nervous tissues and sensory organs in the head of the organism, which is where it firstencounters its environment.Phylum PlatyhelminthesThe flatworms are acoelomate organisms that include many free-living and parasitic forms. Most of the flatworms areclassified in the superphylum Lophotrochozoa, which also includes the mollusks and annelids. The Platyhelminthes consistof two lineages: the Catenulida and the Rhabditophora. The Catenulida, or "chain worms" is a small clade of just over 100species. These worms typically reproduce asexually by budding. However, the offspring do not fully attach from the parentsand, resemble a chain in appearance. All of the remaining flatworms discussed here are part of the Rhabditophora. Manyflatworms are parasitic, including important parasites of humans. Flatworms have three embryonic tissue layers that giverise to surfaces that cover tissues (from ectoderm), internal tissues (from mesoderm), and line the digestive system (fromendoderm). The epidermal tissue is a single layer cells or a layer of fused cells (syncytium) that covers a layer of circularmuscle above a layer of longitudinal muscle. The mesodermal tissues include mesenchymal cells that contain collagen andsupport secretory cells that secrete mucus and other materials at the surface. The flatworms are acoelomates, so their bodiesare solid between the outer surface and the cavity of the digestive system.Physiological Processes of FlatwormsThe free-living species of flatworms are predators or scavengers. Parasitic forms feed on the tissues of their hosts. Mostflatworms, such as the planarian shown in Figure 28.13, have a gastrovascular cavity rather than a complete digestivesystem. In such animals, the “mouth” is also used to expel waste materials from the digestive system. Some species alsohave an anal opening. The gut may be a simple sac or highly branched. Digestion is extracellular, with digested materialstaken in to the cells of the gut lining by phagocytosis. One group, the cestodes, lacks a digestive system. Flatworms havean excretory system with a network of tubules throughout the body with openings to the environment and nearby flamecells, whose cilia beat to direct waste fluids concentrated in the tubules out of the body. The system is responsible for theregulation of dissolved salts and the excretion of nitrogenous wastes. The nervous system consists of a pair of nerve cordsrunning the length of the body with connections between them and a large ganglion or concentration of nerves at the anteriorend of the worm, where there may also be a concentration of photosensory and chemosensory cells.There is neither a circulatory nor respiratory system, with gas and nutrient exchange dependent on diffusion and cell-celljunctions. This necessarily limits the thickness of the body in these organisms, constraining them to be “flat” worms.Most flatworm species are monoecious, and fertilization is typically internal. Asexual reproduction is common in somegroups.
The planarian is a flatworm that has a gastrovascular cavity with one opening that serves as both mouthand anus. The excretory system is made up of tubules connected to excretory pores on both sides of the body. Thenervous system is composed of two interconnected nerve cords running the length of the body, with cerebral gangliaand eyespots at the anterior end.Diversity of FlatwormsPlatyhelminthes are traditionally divided into four classes: Turbellaria, Monogenea, Trematoda, and Cestoda (Figure28.14). As discussed above, the relationships among members of these classes is being reassessed, with the turbellarians inparticular now viewed as a paraphyletic group, a group that does not have a single common ancestor.
Phylum Platyhelminthes is divided into four classes. (a) Class Turbellaria includes the Bedford’s flatworm(Pseudobiceros bedfordi), which is about 8–10 cm in length. (b) The parasitic class Monogenea includes Dactylogyrusspp. Dactylogyrus, commonly called a gill fluke, is about 0.2 mm in length and has two anchors, indicated byarrows, that it uses to latch onto the gills of host fish. (c) The Trematoda class includes Fascioloides magna (right)and Fasciaola hepatica (two specimens of left, also known as the common liver fluke). (d) Class Cestoda includestapeworms such as this Taenia saginata. T. saginata, which infects both cattle and humans, can reach 4–10 meters inlength; the specimen shown here is about 4 meters.
The class Turbellaria includes mainly free-living, marine species, although some species live in freshwater or moistterrestrial environments. The ventral epidermis of turbellarians is ciliated and facilitates their locomotion. Someturbellarians are capable of remarkable feats of regeneration in which they may regrow the body, even from a smallfragment.The monogeneans are ectoparasites, mostly of fish, with simple lifecycles that consist of a free-swimming larva that attachesto a fish to begin transformation to the parasitic adult form. The parasite has only one host and that host is usually only onespecies. The worms may produce enzymes that digest the host tissues or simply graze on surface mucus and skin particles.Most monogeneans are hermaphroditic, but the male gametes develop first and so cross-fertilization is quite common.The trematodes, or flukes, are internal parasites of mollusks and many other groups, including humans. Trematodes havecomplex lifecycles that involve a primary host in which sexual reproduction occurs, and one or more secondary hosts inwhich asexual reproduction occurs. The primary host is almost always a mollusk. Trematodes are responsible for serioushuman diseases including schistosomiasis, a blood fluke. The disease infects an estimated 200 million people in the tropics,leading to organ damage and chronic symptoms like fatigue. Infection occurs when the human enters the water and a larva,released from the primary snail host, locates and penetrates the skin. The parasite infects various organs in the body andfeeds on red blood cells before reproducing. Many of the eggs are released in feces and find their way into a waterway,where they are able to reinfect the primary snail host.The cestodes, or tapeworms, are also internal parasites, mainly of vertebrates (Figure 28.15). Tapeworms live in theintestinal tract of the primary host and remain fixed using a sucker on the anterior end, or scolex, of the tapeworm body.
The remaining body of the tapeworm is made up of a long series of units called proglottids, each of which may contain anexcretory system with flame cells, but contain reproductive structures, both male and female. Tapeworms do not possess adigestive system; instead, they absorb nutrients from the food matter passing them in the host’s intestine.Proglottids are produced at the scolex and gradually migrate to the end of the tapeworm; at this point, they are “mature”and all structures except fertilized eggs have degenerated. Most reproduction occurs by cross-fertilization. The proglottiddetaches from the body of the worm and is released into the feces of the organism. The eggs are eaten by an intermediatehost. The juvenile worm infects the intermediate host and takes up residence, usually in muscle tissue. When the muscletissue is eaten by the primary host, the cycle is completed. There are several tapeworm parasites of humans that aretransmitted by eating uncooked or poorly cooked pork, beef, and fish.
Tapeworm (Taenia spp.) infections occur when humans consume raw or undercooked infected meat.
Phylum RotiferaThe rotifers are a microscopic (about 100 μm to 30 mm) group of mostly aquatic organisms that get their name fromthe corona, a rotating, wheel-like structure that is covered with cilia at their anterior end (Figure 28.16). Although theirtaxonomy is currently in flux, one treatment places the rotifers in three classes: Bdelloidea, Monogononta, and Seisonidea.The classification of the group is currently under revision, however, as more phylogenetic evidence becomes available. Itis possible that the “spiny headed worms” currently in phylum Acanthocephala will be incorporated into this group in thefuture.The body form of rotifers consists of a head (which contains the corona), a trunk (which contains the organs), and the foot.Rotifers are typically free-swimming and truly planktonic organisms, but the toes or extensions of the foot can secrete asticky material forming a holdfast to help them adhere to surfaces. The head contains sensory organs in the form of a bilobedbrain and small eyespots near the corona.
Shown are examples from two of the three classes of rotifer. (a) Species from the class Bdelloidea arecharacterized by a large corona, shown separately from the whole animals in the center of this scanning electronmicrograph. (b) Polyarthra, from the class Monogononta, has a smaller corona than Bdelloid rotifers, and a singlegonad, which give the class its name.
The rotifers are filter feeders that will eat dead material, algae, and other microscopic living organisms, and are thereforevery important components of aquatic food webs. Rotifers obtain food that is directed toward the mouth by the currentcreated from the movement of the corona. The food particles enter the mouth and travel to the mastax (pharynx with jawlikestructures). Food then passes by digestive and salivary glands, and into the stomach, then onto the intestines. Digestiveand excretory wastes are collected in a cloacal bladder before being released out the anus.
Rotifers are pseudocoelomates commonly found in fresh water and some salt water environments throughout the world.Figure 28.17 shows the anatomy of a rotifer belonging to class Bdelloidea. About 2,200 species of rotifers have beenidentified. Rotifers are dioecious organisms (having either male or female genitalia) and exhibit sexual dimorphism(males and females have different forms). Many species are parthenogenic and exhibit haplodiploidy, a method of genderdetermination in which a fertilized egg develops into a female and an unfertilized egg develops into a male. In manydioecious species, males are short-lived and smaller with no digestive system and a single testis. Females can produce eggsthat are capable of dormancy for protection during harsh environmental conditions.
This illustration shows the anatomy of a bdelloid rotifer.
Phylum NemerteaThe Nemertea are colloquially known as ribbon worms. Most species of phylum Nemertea are marine, predominantlybenthic or bottom dwellers, with an estimated 900 species known. However, nemertini have been recorded in freshwaterand terrestrial habitats as well. Most nemerteans are carnivores, feeding on worms, clams, and crustaceans. Some speciesare scavengers, and some nemertini species, like Malacobdella grossa, have also evolved commensalistic relationships withsome mollusks. Some species have devastated commercial fishing of clams and crabs. Nemerteans have almost no predatorsand two species are sold as fish bait.MorphologyRibbon worms vary in size from 1 cm to several meters. They show bilateral symmetry and remarkable contractileproperties. Because of their contractility, they can change their morphological presentation in response to environmentalcues. Animals in phylum Nemertea show a flattened morphology, that is, they are flat from front to back, like a flattenedtube. Nemertea are soft and unsegmented animals.
The proboscis worm (Parborlasia corrugatus) is a scavenger that combs the sea floor for food. Thespecies is a member of the phylum Nemertea. The specimen shown here was photographed in the Ross Sea,Antarctica.
A unique characteristic of this phylum is the presence of a proboscis enclosed in a rhynchocoel. The proboscis serves tocapture food and may be ornamented with barbs in some species. The rhynchocoel is a fluid-filled cavity that extends fromthe head to nearly two-thirds of the length of the gut in these animals (Figure 28.19). The proboscis may be extended orretracted by the retractor muscle attached to the wall of the rhynchocoel.
Digestive SystemThe nemertini show a very well-developed digestive system. A mouth opening that is ventral to the rhynchocoel leads intothe foregut, followed by the intestine. The intestine is present in the form of diverticular pouches and ends in a rectumthat opens via an anus. Gonads are interspersed with the intestinal diverticular pouches and open outwards via genitalpores. A circulatory system consists of a closed loop of a pair of lateral blood vessels. The circulatory system is derivedfrom the coelomic cavity of the embryo. Some animals may also have cross-connecting vessels in addition to lateral ones.Although these are called blood vessels, since they are of coelomic origin, the circulatory fluid is colorless. Some speciesbear hemoglobin as well as other yellow or green pigments. The blood vessels are connected to the rhynchocoel. The flowof fluid in these vessels is facilitated by the contraction of muscles in the body wall. A pair of protonephridia, or primitivekidneys, is present in these animals to facilitate osmoregulation. Gaseous exchange occurs through the skin in the nemertini.
Nervous SystemNemertini have a ganglion or “brain” situated at the anterior end between the mouth and the foregut, surrounding thedigestive system as well as the rhynchocoel. A ring of four nerve masses called “ganglia” composes the brain in theseanimals. Paired longitudinal nerve cords emerge from the brain ganglia and extend to the posterior end. Ocelli or eyespotsare present in pairs, in multiples of two in the anterior portion of the body. It is speculated that the eyespots originate fromneural tissue and not from the epidermis.ReproductionAnimals in phylum Nemertea show sexual dimorphism, although freshwater species may be hermaphroditic. Eggs andsperm are released into the water, and fertilization occurs externally. The zygote then develops into a planuliform larva.In some nemertine species, a pilidium larva may develop inside the young worm, from a series of imaginal discs. Thislarval form, characteristically shaped like a deerstalker cap, devours tissues from the young worm for survival beforemetamorphosing into the adult-like morphology.Phylum MolluscaPhylum Mollusca is the predominant phylum in marine environments. It is estimated that 23 percent of all known marinespecies are mollusks; there are over 75,000 described species, making them the second most diverse phylum of animals.The name “mollusca” signifies a soft body, since the earliest descriptions of mollusks came from observations of unshelledcuttlefish. Mollusks are predominantly a marine group of animals; however, they are known to inhabit freshwater as wellas terrestrial habitats. Mollusks display a wide range of morphologies in each class and subclass, but share a few keycharacteristics, including a muscular foot, a visceral mass containing internal organs, and a mantle that may or may notsecrete a shell of calcium carbonate.
Mollusks have a muscular foot, which is used for locomotion and anchorage, and varies in shape and function, dependingon the type of mollusk under study. In shelled mollusks, this foot is usually the same size as the opening of the shell. Thefoot is a retractable as well as an extendable organ. The foot is the ventral-most organ, whereas the mantle is the limitingdorsal organ. Mollusks are eucoelomate, but the coelomic cavity is restricted to a cavity around the heart in adult animals.The mantle cavity develops independently of the coelomic cavity.The visceral mass is present above the foot, in the visceral hump. This includes digestive, nervous, excretory, reproductive,and respiratory systems. Mollusk species that are exclusively aquatic have gills for respiration, whereas some terrestrialspecies have lungs for respiration. Additionally, a tongue-like organ called a radula, which bears chitinous tooth-like ornamentation, is present in many species, and serves to shred or scrape food. The mantle (also known as the pallium) isthe dorsal epidermis in mollusks; shelled mollusks are specialized to secrete a chitinous and hard calcareous shell.Most mollusks are dioecious animals and fertilization occurs externally, although this is not the case in terrestrial mollusks,such as snails and slugs, or in cephalopods. In some mollusks, the zygote hatches and undergoes two larval stages—trochophore and veliger—before becoming a young adult; bivalves may exhibit a third larval stage, glochidia.Classification of Phylum MolluscaPhylum Mollusca is a very diverse (85,000 species) group of mostly marine species. Mollusks have a dramatic varietyof form, ranging from large predatory squids and octopus, some of which show a high degree of intelligence, to grazingforms with elaborately sculpted and colored shells. This phylum can be segregated into seven classes: Aplacophora,Monoplacophora, Polyplacophora, Bivalvia, Gastropoda, Cephalopoda, and Scaphopoda.Class Aplacophora (“bearing no plates”) includes worm-like animals primarily found in benthic marine habitats. Theseanimals lack a calcareous shell but possess aragonite spicules on their epidermis. They have a rudimentary mantle cavityand lack eyes, tentacles, and nephridia (excretory organs). Members of class Monoplacophora (“bearing one plate”) possesa single, cap-like shell that encloses the body. The morphology of the shell and the underlying animal can vary from circularto ovate. A looped digestive system, multiple pairs of excretory organs, many gills, and a pair of gonads are present in theseanimals. The monoplacophorans were believed extinct and only known via fossil records until the discovery of Neopilinagalathaea in 1952. Today, scientists have identified nearly two dozen extant species.Animals in the class Polyplacophora (“bearing many plates”) are commonly known as “chitons” and bear an armor-likeeight-plated shell (Figure 28.21). These animals have a broad, ventral foot that is adapted for suction to rocks and othersubstrates, and a mantle that extends beyond the shell in the form of a girdle. Calcareous spines may be present on the girdleto offer protection from predators. Respiration is facilitated by ctenidia (gills) that are present ventrally. These animalspossess a radula that is modified for scraping. The nervous system is rudimentary with only buccal or “cheek” gangliapresent at the anterior end. Eyespots are absent in these animals. A single pair of nephridia for excretion is present.
This chiton from the class Polyplacaphora has the eight-plated shell that is indicative of its class.
Class Bivalvia (“two shells”) includes clams, oysters, mussels, scallops, and geoducks. Members of this class are found inmarine as well as freshwater habitats. As the name suggests, bivalves are enclosed in a pair of shells (valves are commonlycalled “shells”) that are hinged at the dorsal end by shell ligaments as well as shell teeth (Figure 28.22). The overallmorphology is laterally flattened, and the head region is poorly developed. Eyespots and statocysts may be absent in somespecies. Since these animals are suspension feeders, a radula is absent in this class of mollusks. Respiration is facilitated bya pair of ctenidia, whereas excretion and osmoregulation are brought about by a pair of nephridia. Bivalves often possess alarge mantle cavity. In some species, the posterior edges of the mantle may fuse to form two siphons that serve to take inand exude water.
These mussels, found in the intertidal zone in Cornwall, England, are bivalves.
One of the functions of the mantle is to secrete the shell. Some bivalves like oysters and mussels possess the unique abilityto secrete and deposit a calcareous nacre or “mother of pearl” around foreign particles that may enter the mantle cavity.This property has been commercially exploited to produce pearls.
Animals in class Gastropoda (“stomach foot”) include well-known mollusks like snails, slugs, conchs, sea hares, andsea butterflies. Gastropoda includes shell-bearing species as well as species with a reduced shell. These animals areasymmetrical and usually present a coiled shell (Figure 28.23). Shells may be planospiral (like a garden hose wound up),commonly seen in garden snails, or conispiral, (like a spiral staircase), commonly seen in marine conches.
Snails and (b) slugs are both gastropods, but slugs lack a shell.
The visceral mass in the shelled species displays torsion around the perpendicular axis on the center of the foot, which isthe key characteristic of this group, along with a foot that is modified for crawling (Figure 28.24). Most gastropods bear a head with tentacles, eyes, and a style. A complex radula is used by the digestive system and aids in the ingestion of food.Eyes may be absent in some gastropods species. The mantle cavity encloses the ctenidia as well as a pair of nephridia.
During embryonic development of gastropods, the visceral mass undergoes torsion, or counterclockwiserotation of anatomical features. As a result, the anus of the adult animal is located over the head. Torsion is anindependent process from coiling of the shell.
Class Cephalopoda (“head foot” animals), include octopi, squids, cuttlefish, and nautilus. Cephalopods are a class of shellbearinganimals as well as mollusks with a reduced shell. They display vivid coloration, typically seen in squids and octopi,which is used for camouflage. All animals in this class are carnivorous predators and have beak-like jaws at the anterior end.All cephalopods show the presence of a very well-developed nervous system along with eyes, as well as a closed circulatorysystem. The foot is lobed and developed into tentacles, and a funnel, which is used as their mode of locomotion. Suckers arepresent on the tentacles in octopi and squid. Ctenidia are enclosed in a large mantle cavity and are serviced by large bloodvessels, each with its own heart associated with it; the mantle has siphonophores that facilitate exchange of water.Locomotion in cephalopods is facilitated by ejecting a stream of water for propulsion. This is called “jet” propulsion. A pairof nephridia is present within the mantle cavity. Sexual dimorphism is seen in this class of animals. Members of a speciesmate, and the female then lays the eggs in a secluded and protected niche. Females of some species care for the eggs for anextended period of time and may end up dying during that time period. Cephalopods such as squids and octopi also producesepia or a dark ink, which is squirted upon a predator to assist in a quick getaway.Reproduction in cephalopods is different from other mollusks in that the egg hatches to produce a juvenile adult withoutundergoing the trochophore and veliger larval stages.In the shell-bearing Nautilus spp., the spiral shell is multi-chambered. These chambers are filled with gas or water toregulate buoyancy. The shell structure in squids and cuttlefish is reduced and is present internally in the form of a squid penand cuttlefish bone, respectively. Examples are shown in Figure 28.26.
The (a) nautilus, (b) giant cuttlefish, (c) reef squid, and (d) blue-ring octopus are all members of the classCephalopoda.
Members of class Scaphopoda (“boat feet”) are known colloquially as “tusk shells” or “tooth shells,” as evident whenexamining Dentalium, one of the few remaining scaphopod genera (Figure 28.27). Scaphopods are usually buried in sandwith the anterior opening exposed to water. These animals bear a single conical shell, which has both ends open. The head isrudimentary and protrudes out of the posterior end of the shell. These animals do not possess eyes, but they have a radula, aswell as a foot modified into tentacles with a bulbous end, known as captaculae. Captaculae serve to catch and manipulateprey. Ctenidia are absent in these animals.
Antalis vulgaris shows the classic Dentaliidae shape that gives these animals their common name of"tusk shell."
Phylum AnnelidaPhylum Annelida includes segmented worms. These animals are found in marine, terrestrial, and freshwater habitats, but apresence of water or humidity is a critical factor for their survival, especially in terrestrial habitats. The name of the phylumis derived from the Latin word annellus, which means a small ring. Animals in this phylum show parasitic and commensalsymbioses with other species in their habitat. Approximately 16,500 species have been described in phylum Annelida. Thephylum includes earthworms, polychaete worms, and leeches. Annelids show protostomic development in embryonic stagesand are often called “segmented worms” due to their key characteristic of metamerism, or true segmentation.MorphologyAnnelids display bilateral symmetry and are worm-like in overall morphology. Annelids have a segmented body planwherein the internal and external morphological features are repeated in each body segment. Metamerism allows animalsto become bigger by adding “compartments” while making their movement more efficient. This metamerism is thought toarise from identical teloblast cells in the embryonic stage, which give rise to identical mesodermal structures. The overallbody can be divided into head, body, and pygidium (or tail). The clitellum is a reproductive structure that generates mucusthat aids in sperm transfer and gives rise to a cocoon within which fertilization occurs; it appears as a fused band in theanterior third of the animal.
The clitellum, seen here as a protruding segment with different coloration than the rest of the body, is astructure that aids in annelid reproduction.
Hence, they are the most advanced worms. A well-developed and complete digestive system is present in earthworms(oligochaetes) with a mouth, muscular pharynx, esophagus, crop, and gizzard being present. The gizzard leads to theintestine and ends in an anal opening. A cross-sectional view of a body segment of an earthworm (a terrestrial type ofannelid) is shown in Figure 28.29; each segment is limited by a membranous septum that divides the coelomic cavity intoa series of compartments.Annelids possess a closed circulatory system of dorsal and ventral blood vessels that run parallel to the alimentary canalas well as capillaries that service individual tissues. In addition, these vessels are connected by transverse loops in everysegment. These animals lack a well-developed respiratory system, and gas exchange occurs across the moist body surface.Excretion is facilitated by a pair of metanephridia (a type of primitive “kidney” that consists of a convoluted tubule andan open, ciliated funnel) that is present in every segment towards the ventral side. Annelids show well-developed nervoussystems with a nerve ring of fused ganglia present around the pharynx. The nerve cord is ventral in position and bearsenlarged nodes or ganglia in each segment.
This schematic drawing shows the basic anatomy of annelids in a cross-sectional view.Annelids may be either monoecious with permanent gonads (as in earthworms and leeches) or dioecious with temporaryor seasonal gonads that develop (as in polychaetes). However, cross-fertilization is preferred in hermaphroditic animals.These animals may also show simultaneous hermaphroditism and participate in simultaneous sperm exchange when theyare aligned for copulation.
Classification of Phylum AnnelidaPhylum Annelida contains the class Polychaeta (the polychaetes) and the class Oligochaeta (the earthworms, leeches andtheir relatives).Earthworms are the most abundant members of the class Oligochaeta, distinguished by the presence of the clitellum as wellas few, reduced chaetae (“oligo- = “few”; -chaetae = “hairs”). The number and size of chaetae are greatly diminished inOligochaeta compared to the polychaetes (poly=many, chaetae = hairs). The many chetae of polychaetes are also arrangedwithin fleshy, flat, paired appendages that protrude from each segment called parapodia, which may be specialized fordifferent functions in the polychates. The subclass Hirudinea includes leeches such as Hirudo medicinalis and Hemiclepsismarginata. The class Oligochaeta includes the subclass Hirudinia and the subclass Brachiobdella. A significant differencebetween leeches and other annelids is the development of suckers at the anterior and posterior ends and a lack of chaetae.
Additionally, the segmentation of the body wall may not correspond to the internal segmentation of the coelomic cavity.This adaptation possibly helps the leeches to elongate when they ingest copious quantities of blood from host vertebrates.The subclass Brachiobdella includes species like Branchiobdella balcanica sketi and Branchiobdella astaci, worms thatshow similarity with leeches as well as oligochaetes.
The (a) earthworm, (b) leech, and (c) featherduster are all annelids.
Superphylum EcdysozoaThe superphylum Ecdysozoa contains an incredibly large number of species. This is because it contains two of the mostdiverse animal groups: phylum Nematoda (the roundworms) and Phylum Arthropoda (the arthropods). The most prominantdistinguising feature of Ecdysozoans is their tough external covering called the cuticle. The cuticle provides a tough, butflexible exoskeleton tht protects these animals from water loss, predators and other aspects of the external environment. Allmembers of this superphylum periodically molt, or shed their cuticle as they grow. After molting, they secrete a new cuticlethat will last until their next growth phase. The process of molting and replacing the cuticle is called ecdysis, which is howthe superphylum derived its name.Phylum NematodaThe Nematoda, like most other animal phyla, are triploblastic and possess an embryonic mesoderm that is sandwichedbetween the ectoderm and endoderm. They are also bilaterally symmetrical, meaning that a longitudinal section will dividethem into right and left sides that are symmetrical. Furthermore, the nematodes, or roundworms, possess a pseudocoelomand consist of both free-living and parasitic forms.It has been said that were all the non-nematode matter of the biosphere removed, there would remain a shadow of the formerworld in the form of nematodes.[1]The arthropods, one of the most successful taxonomic groups on the planet, are coelomateorganisms characterized by a hard exoskeleton and jointed appendages. Both the nematodes and arthropods belong to thesuperphylum Ecdysozoa that is believed to be a clade consisting of all evolutionary descendants from one common ancestor.The name derives from the word ecdysis, which refers to the shedding, or molting, of the exoskeleton. The phyla in thisgroup have a hard cuticle that covers their bodies, which must be periodically shed and replaced for them to increase in size.Phylum Nematoda includes more than 28,000 species with an estimated 16,000 being parasitic in nature. The nameNematoda is derived from the Greek word “Nemos,” which means “thread” and includes roundworms. Nematodes are present in all habitats with a large number of individuals of each species present in each. The free-living nematode,Caenorhabditis elegans has been extensively used as a model system in laboratories all over the world.MorphologyIn contrast with cnidarians, nematodes show a tubular morphology and circular cross-section. These animals arepseudocoelomates and show the presence of a complete digestive system with a distinct mouth and anus. This is in contrastwith the cnidarians, where only one opening is present (an incomplete digestive system).The cuticle of Nematodes is rich in collagen and a carbohydrate-protein polymer called chitin, and forms an external“skeleton” outside the epidermis. The cuticle also lines many of the organs internally, including the pharynx and rectum.The epidermis can be either a single layer of cells or a syncytium, which is a multinucleated cell formed from the fusion ofuninucleated cells.The overall morphology of these worms is cylindrical, as seen in Figure 28.31. The head is radially symmetrical. A mouthopening is present at the anterior end with three or six lips as well as teeth in some species in the form of cuticle extensions.Some nematodes may present other external modifications like rings, head shields, or warts. Rings, however, do not reflecttrue internal body segmentation. The mouth leads to a muscular pharynx and intestine, which leads to a rectum and analopening at the posterior end. The muscles of nematodes differ from those of most animals: They have a longitudinal layeronly, which accounts for the whip-like motion of their movement.
Scanning electron micrograph shows (a) the soybean cyst nematode (Heterodera glycines) and anematode egg. (b) A schematic representation shows the anatomy of a typical nematode.
Excretory SystemIn nematodes, specialized excretory systems are not well developed. Nitrogenous wastes may be lost by diffusion throughthe entire body or into the pseudocoelom (body cavity), where they are removed by specialized cells. Regulation of waterand salt content of the body is achieved by renette glands, present under the pharynx in marine nematodes.
Nervous systemMost nematodes possess four longitudinal nerve cords that run along the length of the body in dorsal, ventral, and lateralpositions. The ventral nerve cord is better developed than the dorsal or lateral cords. All nerve cords fuse at the anterior end,around the pharynx, to form head ganglia or the “brain” of the worm (which take the form of a ring around the pharynx) aswell as at the posterior end to form the tail ganglia. In C. elegans, the nervous system accounts for nearly one-third of thetotal number of cells in the animal.ReproductionNematodes employ a variety of reproductive strategies that range from monoecious to dioecious to parthenogenic,depending upon the species under consideration. C. elegans is a monoecious species and shows development of ovacontained in a uterus as well as sperm contained in the spermatheca. The uterus has an external opening known as the vulva.The female genital pore is near the middle of the body, whereas the male’s is at the tip. Specialized structures at the tailof the male keep him in place while he deposits sperm with copulatory spicules. Fertilization is internal, and embryonicdevelopment starts very soon after fertilization. The embryo is released from the vulva during the gastrulation stage. Theembryonic development stage lasts for 14 hours; development then continues through four successive larval stages withecdysis between each stage—L1, L2, L3, and L4—ultimately leading to the development of a young male or female adultworm. Adverse environmental conditions like overcrowding and lack of food can result in the formation of an intermediatelarval stage known as the dauer larva.
A number of common parasitic nematodes serve as prime examples of parasitism. These animals exhibit complex lifecyclesthat involve multiple hosts, and they can have significant medical and veterinary impacts. Humans may become infected byDracunculus medinensis, known as guinea worms, when they drink unfiltered water containing copepods.
Hookworms, such as Ancyclostoma and Necator, infest the intestines and feed on the blood of mammals, especially indogs, cats, and humans. Trichina worms (Trichinella) are the causal organism of trichinosis in humans, often resulting fromthe consumption of undercooked pork; Trichinella can infect other mammalian hosts as well. Ascaris, a large intestinalroundworm, steals nutrition from its human host and may create physical blockage of the intestines. The filarial worms, suchas Dirofilaria and Wuchereria, are commonly vectored by mosquitoes, which pass the infective agents among mammalsthrough their blood-sucking activity. Dirofilaria immitis, a blood-infective parasite, is the notorious dog heartworm species.Wuchereria bancrofti infects the lymph nodes of humans, resulting in the non-lethal but deforming condition calledelephantiasis, in which parts of the body become swelled to gigantic proportions due to obstruction of lymphatic drainageand inflammation of lymphatic tissues.
The guinea worm Dracunculus medinensis infects about 3.5 million people annually, mostly in Africa. (a)Here, the worm is wrapped around a stick so it can be extracted. (b) Infection occurs when people consume watercontaminated by infected copepods, but this can easily be prevented by simple filtration systems.
Phylum ArthropodaThe name “arthropoda” means “jointed legs” (in the Greek, “arthros” means “joint” and “podos” means “leg”); it aptlydescribes the enormous number of invertebrates included in this phylum. Arthropoda dominate the animal kingdom with an estimated 85 percent of known species included in this phylum and many arthropods yet undocumented. Theprincipal characteristics of all the animals in this phylum are functional segmentation of the body and presence of jointedappendages. Arthropods also show the presence of an exoskeleton made principally of chitin, which is a waterproof, toughpolysaccharide. Phylum Arthropoda is the largest phylum in the animal world, and insects form the single largest classwithin this phylum. Arthropods are eucoelomate, protostomic organisms.Phylum Arthropoda includes animals that have been successful in colonizing terrestrial, aquatic, and aerial habitats. Thisphylum is further classified into five subphyla: Trilobitomorpha (trilobites, all extinct), Hexapoda (insects and relatives),Myriapoda (millipedes, centipedes, and relatives), Crustaceans (crabs, lobsters, crayfish, isopods, barnacles, and somezooplankton), and Chelicerata (horseshoe crabs, arachnids, scorpions, and daddy longlegs). Trilobites are an extinct groupof arthropods found chiefly in the pre-Cambrian Era that are probably most closely related to the Chelicerata. These areidentified based on fossil records.
Trilobites, like the one in this fossil, are an extinct group of arthropods.
MorphologyA unique feature of animals in the arthropod phylum is the presence of a segmented body and fusion of sets of segmentsthat give rise to functional body regions called tagma. Tagma may be in the form of a head, thorax, and abdomen, or acephalothorax and abdomen, or a head and trunk. A central cavity, called the hemocoel (or blood cavity), is present, andthe open circulatory system is regulated by a tubular or single-chambered heart. Respiratory systems vary depending on thegroup of arthropod: insects and myriapods use a series of tubes (tracheae) that branch through the body, open to the outsidethrough openings called spiracles, and perform gas exchange directly between the cells and air in the tracheae, whereasaquatic crustaceans utilize gills, terrestrial chelicerates employ book lungs, and aquatic chelicerates use book gills (Figure28.35). The book lungs of arachnids (scorpions, spiders, ticks and mites) contain a vertical stack of hemocoel wall tissue thatsomewhat resembles the pages of a book. Between each of the "pages" of tissue is an air space. This allows both sides of thetissue to be in contact with the air at all times, greatly increasing the efficiency of gas exchange. The gills of crustaceans arefilamentous structures that exchange gases with the surrounding water. Groups of arthropods also differ in the organs usedfor excretion, with crustaceans possessing green glands and insects using Malpighian tubules, which work in conjunctionwith the hindgut to reabsorb water while ridding the body of nitrogenous waste. The cuticle is the covering of an arthropod.It is made up of two layers: the epicuticle, which is a thin, waxy water-resistant outer layer containing no chitin, and thelayer beneath it, the chitinous procuticle. Chitin is a tough, flexible polysaccharide. In order to grow, the arthropod mustshed the exoskeleton during a process called ecdysis (“to strip off”); this is a cumbersome method of growth, and during thistime, the animal is vulnerable to predation. The characteristic morphology of representative animals from each subphylumis described below.
The book lungs of (a) arachnids are made up of alternating air pockets and hemocoel tissue shaped likea stack of books. The book gills of (b) crustaceans are similar to book lungs but are external so that gas exchange canoccur with the surrounding water.
Subphylum HexapodaThe name Hexapoda denotes the presence of six legs (three pairs) in these animals as differentiated from the number ofpairs present in other arthropods. Hexapods are characterized by the presence of a head, thorax, and abdomen, constitutingthree tagma. The thorax bears the wings as well as six legs in three pairs. Many of the common insects we encounter on adaily basis—including ants, cockroaches, butterflies, and flies—are examples of Hexapoda.Amongst the hexapods, the insects (Figure 28.36) are the largest class in terms of species diversity as well as biomass interrestrial habitats. Typically, the head bears one pair of sensory antennae, mandibles as mouthparts, a pair of compoundeyes, and some ocelli (simple eyes) along with numerous sensory hairs. The thorax bears three pairs of legs (one pair persegment) and two pairs of wings, with one pair each on the second and third thoracic segments. The abdomen usually haseleven segments and bears reproductive apertures. Hexapoda includes insects that are winged (like fruit flies) and wingless(like fleas).
Subphylum MyriapodaSubphylum Myriapoda includes arthropods with numerous legs. Although the name is hyperbolic in suggesting that myriadlegs are present in these invertebrates, the number of legs may vary from 10 to 750. This subphylum includes 13,000species; the most commonly found examples are millipedes and centipedes. All myriapods are terrestrial animals and prefera humid environment.Myriapods are typically found in moist soils, decaying biological material, and leaf litter. Subphylum Myriapoda is dividedinto four classes: Chilopoda, Symphyla, Diplopoda, and Pauropoda. Centipedes like Scutigera coleoptrata (Figure 28.37)are classified as chilopods. These animals bear one pair of legs per segment, mandibles as mouthparts, and are somewhatdorsoventrally flattened. The legs in the first segment are modified to form forcipules (poison claws) that deliver poison toprey like spiders and cockroaches, as these animals are all predatory. Millipedes bear two pairs of legs per diplosegment, afeature that results from embryonic fusion of adjacent pairs of body segments, are usually rounder in cross-section, and areherbivores or detritivores. Millipedes have visibly more numbers of legs as compared to centipedes, although they do notbear a thousand legs.
(a) The Scutigera coleoptrata centipede has up to 15 pairs of legs. (b) This North American millipede(Narceus americanus) bears many legs, although not a thousand, as its name might suggest.
Subphylum CrustaceaCrustaceans are the most dominant aquatic arthropods, since the total number of marine crustacean species stands at 67,000,but there are also freshwater and terrestrial crustacean species. Krill, shrimp, lobsters, crabs, and crayfish are examples ofcrustaceans (Figure 28.38). Terrestrial species like the wood lice (Armadillidium spp.) (also called pill bugs, rolly pollies,potato bugs, or isopods) are also crustaceans, although the number of non-aquatic species in this subphylum is relativelylow.
The (a) crab and (b) shrimp krill are both crustaceans.
Crustaceans possess two pairs of antennae, mandibles as mouthparts, and biramous (“two branched”) appendages, whichmeans that their legs are formed in two parts, as distinct from the uniramous (“one branched”) myriapods and hexapods.
Arthropods may have (a) biramous (two-branched) appendages or (b) uniramous (one-branched)appendages.
Unlike that of the Hexapoda, the head and thorax of most crustaceans is fused to form a cephalothorax (Figure 28.40),which is covered by a plate called the carapace, thus producing a body structure of two tagma. Crustaceans have a chitinousexoskeleton that is shed by molting whenever the animal increases in size. The exoskeletons of many species are alsoinfused with calcium carbonate, which makes them even stronger than in other arthropods. Crustaceans have an opencirculatory system where blood is pumped into the hemocoel by the dorsally located heart. Hemocyanin and hemoglobinare the respiratory pigments present in these animals.
The crayfish is an example of a crustacean. It has a carapace around the cephalothorax and the heart inthe dorsal thorax area.
Most crustaceans are dioecious, which means that the sexes are separate. Some species like barnacles may behermaphrodites. Serial hermaphroditism, where the gonad can switch from producing sperm to ova, may also be seenin some species. Fertilized eggs may be held within the female of the species or may be released in the water. Terrestrialcrustaceans seek out damp spaces in their habitats to lay eggs.Larval stages— nauplius and zoea—are seen in the early development of crustaceans. A cypris larva is also seen in theearly development of barnacles.
All crustaceans go through different larval stages. Shown are (a) the nauplius larval stage of a tadpoleshrimp, (b) the cypris larval stage of a barnacle, and (c) the zoea larval stage of a green crab.
Crustaceans possess a tripartite brain and two compound eyes. Most crustaceans are carnivorous, but herbivorous anddetritivorous species are also known. Crustaceans may also be cannibalistic when extremely high populations of theseorganisms are present.Subphylum ChelicerataThis subphylum includes animals such as spiders, scorpions, horseshoe crabs, and sea spiders. This subphylum ispredominantly terrestrial, although some marine species also exist. An estimated 77,000 species are included in subphylumChelicerata. Chelicerates are found in almost all habitats.The body of chelicerates may be divided into two parts: prosoma and opisthosoma, which are basically the equivalents ofcephalothorax (usually smaller) and abdomen (usually larger). A “head” tagmum is not usually discernible. The phylumderives its name from the first pair of appendages: the chelicerae (Figure 28.42), which are specialized, claw-like or fanglikemouthparts. These animals do not possess antennae. The second pair of appendages is known as pedipalps. In somespecies, like sea spiders, an additional pair of appendages, called ovigers, is present between the chelicerae and pedipalps.
The chelicerae (first set of appendages) are well developed in the scorpion.
Chelicerae are mostly used for feeding, but in spiders, these are often modified into fangs that inject venom into their preybefore feeding (Figure 28.43). Members of this subphylum have an open circulatory system with a heart that pumps bloodinto the hemocoel. Aquatic species have gills, whereas terrestrial species have either trachea or book lungs for gaseousexchange.
The trapdoor spider, like all spiders, is a member of the subphylum Chelicerata.
Most chelicerates ingest food using a preoral cavity formed by the chelicerae and pedipalps. Some chelicerates may secretedigestive enzymes to pre-digest food before ingesting it. Parasitic chelicerates like ticks and mites have evolved bloodsuckingapparatuses.The nervous system in chelicerates consists of a brain and two ventral nerve cords. These animals use external fertilizationas well as internal fertilization strategies for reproduction, depending upon the species and its habitat. Parental care for theyoung ranges from absolutely none to relatively prolonged care.
The phyla Echinodermata and Chordata (the phylum in which humans are placed) both belong to the superphylumDeuterostomia. Recall that protostome and deuterostomes differ in certain aspects of their embryonic development, and theyare named based on which opening of the digestive cavity develops first. The word deuterostome comes from the Greekword meaning “mouth second,” indicating that the anus is the first to develop. There are a series of other developmentalcharacteristics that differ between protostomes and deuterostomes, including the mode of formation of the coelom andthe early cell division of the embryo. In deuterostomes, internal pockets of the endodermal lining called the archenteronfuse to form the coelom. The endodermal lining of the archenteron (or the primitive gut) forms membrane protrusions thatbud off and become the mesodermal layer. These buds, known as coelomic pouches, fuse to form the coelomic cavity, asthey eventually separate from the endodermal layer. The resultant coelom is termed an enterocoelom. The archenterondevelops into the alimentary canal, and a mouth opening is formed by invagination of ectoderm at the pole opposite theblastopore of the gastrula. The blastopore forms the anus of the alimentary system in the juvenile and adult forms. The fatesof embryonic cells in deuterostomes can be altered if they are experimentally moved to a different location in the embryodue to indeterminant cleavage in early embryogenesis.
Phylum EchinodermataEchinodermata are so named owing to their spiny skin (from the Greek “echinos” meaning “spiny” and “dermos” meaning“skin”), and this phylum is a collection of about 7,000 described living species. Echinodermata are exclusively marineorganisms. Sea stars (Figure 28.44), sea cucumbers, sea urchins, sand dollars, and brittle stars are all examples ofechinoderms. To date, no freshwater or terrestrial echinoderms are known.Morphology and AnatomyAdult echinoderms exhibit pentaradial symmetry and have a calcareous endoskeleton made of ossicles, although the earlylarval stages of all echinoderms have bilateral symmetry. The endoskeleton is developed by epidermal cells and may possesspigment cells, giving vivid colors to these animals, as well as cells laden with toxins. Gonads are present in each arm. Inechinoderms like sea stars, every arm bears two rows of tube feet on the oral side. These tube feet help in attachment to thesubstratum. These animals possess a true coelom that is modified into a unique circulatory system called a water vascularsystem. An interesting feature of these animals is their power to regenerate, even when over 75 percent of their body massis lost.
This diagram shows the anatomy of a sea star.
Water Vascular SystemEchinoderms possess a unique ambulacral or water vascular system, consisting of a central ring canal and radial canalsthat extend along each arm. Water circulates through these structures and facilitates gaseous exchange as well as nutrition,predation, and locomotion. The water vascular system also projects from holes in the skeleton in the form of tube feet.These tube feet can expand or contract based on the volume of water present in the system of that arm. By using hydrostaticpressure, the animal can either protrude or retract the tube feet. Water enters the madreporite on the aboral side of theechinoderm. From there, it passes into the stone canal, which moves water into the ring canal. The ring canal connects theradial canals (there are five in a pentaradial animal), and the radial canals move water into the ampullae, which have tubefeet through which the water moves. By moving water through the unique water vascular system, the echinoderm can moveand force open mollusk shells during feeding.Nervous SystemThe nervous system in these animals is a relatively simple structure with a nerve ring at the center and five radial nervesextending outward along the arms. Structures analogous to a brain or derived from fusion of ganglia are not present in theseanimals.Excretory SystemPodocytes, cells specialized for ultrafiltration of bodily fluids, are present near the center of echinoderms. These podocytesare connected by an internal system of canals to an opening called the madreporite.
ReproductionEchinoderms are sexually dimorphic and release their eggs and sperm cells into water; fertilization is external. In somespecies, the larvae divide asexually and multiply before they reach sexual maturity. Echinoderms may also reproduceasexually, as well as regenerate body parts lost in trauma.Classes of EchinodermsThis phylum is divided into five extant classes: Asteroidea (sea stars), Ophiuroidea (brittle stars), Echinoidea (sea urchinsand sand dollars), Crinoidea (sea lilies or feather stars), and Holothuroidea (sea cucumbers) (Figure 28.45).The most well-known echinoderms are members of class Asteroidea, or sea stars. They come in a large variety of shapes,colors, and sizes, with more than 1,800 species known so far. The key characteristic of sea stars that distinguishes themfrom other echinoderm classes includes thick arms (ambulacra) that extend from a central disk where organs penetrate intothe arms. Sea stars use their tube feet not only for gripping surfaces but also for grasping prey. Sea stars have two stomachs,one of which can protrude through their mouths and secrete digestive juices into or onto prey, even before ingestion. Thisprocess can essentially liquefy the prey and make digestion easier.
Brittle stars belong to the class Ophiuroidea. Unlike sea stars, which have plump arms, brittle stars have long, thin arms thatare sharply demarcated from the central disk. Brittle stars move by lashing out their arms or wrapping them around objectsand pulling themselves forward. Sea urchins and sand dollars are examples of Echinoidea. These echinoderms do not havearms, but are hemispherical or flattened with five rows of tube feet that help them in slow movement; tube feet are extrudedthrough pores of a continuous internal shell called a test. Sea lilies and feather stars are examples of Crinoidea. Both ofthese species are suspension feeders. Sea cucumbers of class Holothuroidea are extended in the oral-aboral axis and havefive rows of tube feet. These are the only echinoderms that demonstrate “functional” bilateral symmetry as adults, becausethe uniquely extended oral-aboral axis compels the animal to lie horizontally rather than stand vertically.
Different members of Echinodermata include the (a) sea star of class Asteroidea, (b) the brittle star ofclass Ophiuroidea, (c) the sea urchins of class Echinoidea, (d) the sea lilies belonging to class Crinoidea, and (e) seacucumbers, representing class Holothuroidea.
Phylum ChordataAnimals in the phylum Chordata share four key features that appear at some stage of their development: a notochord,a dorsal hollow nerve cord, pharyngeal slits, and a post-anal tail. In some groups, some of these traits are present onlyduring embryonic development. In addition to containing vertebrate classes, the phylum Chordata contains two cladesof invertebrates: Urochordata (tunicates) and Cephalochordata (lancelets). Most tunicates live on the ocean floor and aresuspension feeders. Lancelets are suspension feeders that feed on phytoplankton and other microorganisms.
