Female seahorses produce eggs for reproduction that are then fertilized by the male. Unlike almost allother animals, the male seahorse then gestates the young until birth.
Animal reproduction is necessary for the survival of a species. In the animal kingdom, there are innumerable ways thatspecies reproduce. Asexual reproduction produces genetically identical organisms (clones), whereas in sexual reproduction,the genetic material of two individuals combines to produce offspring that are genetically different from their parents.During sexual reproduction the male gamete (sperm) may be placed inside the female’s body for internal fertilization, orthe sperm and eggs may be released into the environment for external fertilization. Seahorses, like the one shown in Figure 43.1, provide an example of the latter. Following a mating dance, the female lays eggs in the male seahorse’s abdominalbrood pouch where they are fertilized. The eggs hatch and the offspring develop in the pouch for several weeks.
Reproduction MethodsBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Describe advantages and disadvantages of asexual and sexual reproductionDiscuss asexual reproduction methodsDiscuss sexual reproduction methodsAnimals produce offspring through asexual and/or sexual reproduction. Both methods have advantages and disadvantages.Asexual reproduction produces offspring that are genetically identical to the parent because the offspring are all clonesof the original parent. A single individual can produce offspring asexually and large numbers of offspring can be producedquickly. In a stable or predictable environment, asexual reproduction is an effective means of reproduction because all theoffspring will be adapted to that environment. In an unstable or unpredictable environment asexually-reproducing speciesmay be at a disadvantage because all the offspring are genetically identical and may not have the genetic variation to survivein new or different conditions. On the other hand, the rapid rates of asexual reproduction may allow for a speedy response toenvironmental changes if individuals have mutations. An additional advantage of asexual reproduction is that colonizationof new habitats may be easier when an individual does not need to find a mate to reproduce.During sexual reproduction the genetic material of two individuals is combined to produce genetically diverse offspringthat differ from their parents. The genetic diversity of sexually produced offspring is thought to give species a better chanceof surviving in an unpredictable or changing environment. Species that reproduce sexually must maintain two differenttypes of individuals, males and females, which can limit the ability to colonize new habitats as both sexes must be present.Asexual ReproductionAsexual reproduction occurs in prokaryotic microorganisms (bacteria) and in some eukaryotic single-celled and multicelledorganisms. There are a number of ways that animals reproduce asexually.FissionFission, also called binary fission, occurs in prokaryotic microorganisms and in some invertebrate, multi-celled organisms.After a period of growth, an organism splits into two separate organisms. Some unicellular eukaryotic organisms undergobinary fission by mitosis. In other organisms, part of the individual separates and forms a second individual. This processoccurs, for example, in many asteroid echinoderms through splitting of the central disk. Some sea anemones and some coralpolyps (Figure 43.2) also reproduce through fission.
BuddingBudding is a form of asexual reproduction that results from the outgrowth of a part of a cell or body region leading to aseparation from the original organism into two individuals. Budding occurs commonly in some invertebrate animals suchas corals and hydras. In hydras, a bud forms that develops into an adult and breaks away from the main body, as illustratedin Figure 43.3, whereas in coral budding, the bud does not detach and multiplies as part of a new colony.
Hydra reproduce asexually through budding.
FragmentationFragmentation is the breaking of the body into two parts with subsequent regeneration. If the animal is capable offragmentation, and the part is big enough, a separate individual will regrow.For example, in many sea stars, asexual reproduction is accomplished by fragmentation. Figure 43.4 illustrates a sea star forwhich an arm of the individual is broken off and regenerates a new sea star. Fisheries workers have been known to try to killthe sea stars eating their clam or oyster beds by cutting them in half and throwing them back into the ocean. Unfortunatelyfor the workers, the two parts can each regenerate a new half, resulting in twice as many sea stars to prey upon the oystersand clams. Fragmentation also occurs in annelid worms, turbellarians, and poriferans.
Sea stars can reproduce through fragmentation. The large arm, a fragment from another sea star, isdeveloping into a new individual.Note that in fragmentation, there is generally a noticeable difference in the size of the individuals, whereas in fission, twoindividuals of approximate size are formed.ParthenogenesisParthenogenesis is a form of asexual reproduction where an egg develops into a complete individual without beingfertilized. The resulting offspring can be either haploid or diploid, depending on the process and the species.Parthenogenesis occurs in invertebrates such as water flees, rotifers, aphids, stick insects, some ants, wasps, and bees. Beesuse parthenogenesis to produce haploid males (drones) and diploid females (workers). If an egg is fertilized, a queen isproduced. The queen bee controls the reproduction of the hive bees to regulate the type of bee produced.Some vertebrate animals—such as certain reptiles, amphibians, and fish—also reproduce through parthenogenesis.Although more common in plants, parthenogenesis has been observed in animal species that were segregated by sexin terrestrial or marine zoos. Two female Komodo dragons, a hammerhead shark, and a blacktop shark have producedparthenogenic young when the females have been isolated from males.Sexual ReproductionSexual reproduction is the combination of (usually haploid) reproductive cells from two individuals to form a third (usuallydiploid) unique offspring. Sexual reproduction produces offspring with novel combinations of genes. This can be anadaptive advantage in unstable or unpredictable environments. As humans, we are used to thinking of animals as having twoseparate sexes—male and female—determined at conception. However, in the animal kingdom, there are many variationson this theme.HermaphroditismHermaphroditism occurs in animals where one individual has both male and female reproductive parts. Invertebrates suchas earthworms, slugs, tapeworms and snails, shown in Figure 43.5, are often hermaphroditic. Hermaphrodites may selffertilizeor may mate with another of their species, fertilizing each other and both producing offspring. Self fertilization iscommon in animals that have limited mobility or are not motile, such as barnacles and clams.
Many snails are hermaphrodites. When two individuals mate, they can produce up to one hundred eggseach.
Sex DeterminationMammalian sex determination is determined genetically by the presence of X and Y chromosomes. Individuals homozygousfor X (XX) are female and heterozygous individuals (XY) are male. The presence of a Y chromosome causes thedevelopment of male characteristics and its absence results in female characteristics. The XY system is also found in someinsects and plants.Avian sex determination is dependent on the presence of Z and W chromosomes. Homozygous for Z (ZZ) results in a maleand heterozygous (ZW) results in a female. The W appears to be essential in determining the sex of the individual, similarto the Y chromosome in mammals. Some fish, crustaceans, insects (such as butterflies and moths), and reptiles use thissystem.The sex of some species is not determined by genetics but by some aspect of the environment. Sex determination in somecrocodiles and turtles, for example, is often dependent on the temperature during critical periods of egg development. Thisis referred to as environmental sex determination, or more specifically as temperature-dependent sex determination. Inmany turtles, cooler temperatures during egg incubation produce males and warm temperatures produce females. In somecrocodiles, moderate temperatures produce males and both warm and cool temperatures produce females. In some species,sex is both genetic- and temperature-dependent.Individuals of some species change their sex during their lives, alternating between male and female. If the individual isfemale first, it is termed protogyny or “first female,” if it is male first, its termed protandry or “first male.” Oysters, forexample, are born male, grow, and become female and lay eggs; some oyster species change sex multiple times.FertilizationBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Discuss internal and external methods of fertilizationDescribe the methods used by animals for development of offspring during gestationDescribe the anatomical adaptions that occurred in animals to facilitate reproductionSexual reproduction starts with the combination of a sperm and an egg in a process called fertilization. This can occur eitherinside ( internal fertilization) or outside ( external fertilization) the body of the female. Humans provide an example ofthe former whereas seahorse reproduction is an example of the latter.External FertilizationExternal fertilization usually occurs in aquatic environments where both eggs and sperm are released into the water. Afterthe sperm reaches the egg, fertilization takes place. Most external fertilization happens during the process of spawningwhere one or several females release their eggs and the male(s) release sperm in the same area, at the same time. The release of the reproductive material may be triggered by water temperature or the length of daylight. Nearly all fish spawn, asdo crustaceans (such as crabs and shrimp), mollusks (such as oysters), squid, and echinoderms (such as sea urchins andsea cucumbers). Figure 43.6 shows salmon spawning in a shallow stream. Frogs, like those shown in Figure 43.7, corals,molluscs, and sea cucumbers also spawn.
Salmon reproduce through spawning.
During sexual reproduction in toads, the male grasps the female from behind and externally fertilizes theeggs as they are deposited.
Pairs of fish that are not broadcast spawners may exhibit courtship behavior. This allows the female to select a particularmale. The trigger for egg and sperm release (spawning) causes the egg and sperm to be placed in a small area, enhancingthe possibility of fertilization.External fertilization in an aquatic environment protects the eggs from drying out. Broadcast spawning can result in agreater mixture of the genes within a group, leading to higher genetic diversity and a greater chance of species survival in ahostile environment. For sessile aquatic organisms like sponges, broadcast spawning is the only mechanism for fertilizationand colonization of new environments. The presence of the fertilized eggs and developing young in the water providesopportunities for predation resulting in a loss of offspring. Therefore, millions of eggs must be produced by individuals,and the offspring produced through this method must mature rapidly. The survival rate of eggs produced through broadcastspawning is low.Internal FertilizationInternal fertilization occurs most often in land-based animals, although some aquatic animals also use this method. Thereare three ways that offspring are produced following internal fertilization. In oviparity, fertilized eggs are laid outside the female’s body and develop there, receiving nourishment from the yolk that is a part of the egg. This occurs in most bonyfish, many reptiles, some cartilaginous fish, most amphibians, two mammals, and all birds. Reptiles and insects produceleathery eggs, while birds and turtles produce eggs with high concentrations of calcium carbonate in the shell, making themhard. Chicken eggs are an example of this second type.In ovoviparity, fertilized eggs are retained in the female, but the embryo obtains its nourishment from the egg’s yolk andthe young are fully developed when they are hatched. This occurs in some bony fish (like the guppy Lebistes reticulatus),some sharks, some lizards, some snakes (such as the garter snake Thamnophis sirtalis), some vipers, and some invertebrateanimals (like the Madagascar hissing cockroach Gromphadorhina portentosa).In viviparity the young develop within the female, receiving nourishment from the mother’s blood through a placenta. Theoffspring develops in the female and is born alive. This occurs in most mammals, some cartilaginous fish, and a few reptiles.Internal fertilization has the advantage of protecting the fertilized egg from dehydration on land. The embryo is isolatedwithin the female, which limits predation on the young. Internal fertilization enhances the fertilization of eggs by a specificmale. Fewer offspring are produced through this method, but their survival rate is higher than that for external fertilization.The Evolution of ReproductionOnce multicellular organisms evolved and developed specialized cells, some also developed tissues and organs withspecialized functions. An early development in reproduction occurred in the Annelids. These organisms produce sperm andeggs from undifferentiated cells in their coelom and store them in that cavity. When the coelom becomes filled, the cells arereleased through an excretory opening or by the body splitting open. Reproductive organs evolved with the development ofgonads that produce sperm and eggs. These cells went through meiosis, an adaption of mitosis, which reduced the numberof chromosomes in each reproductive cell by half, while increasing the number of cells through cell division.Complete reproductive systems were developed in insects, with separate sexes. Sperm are made in testes and then travelthrough coiled tubes to the epididymis for storage. Eggs mature in the ovary. When they are released from the ovary, theytravel to the uterine tubes for fertilization. Some insects have a specialized sac, called a spermatheca, which stores spermfor later use, sometimes up to a year. Fertilization can be timed with environmental or food conditions that are optimal foroffspring survival.Vertebrates have similar structures, with a few differences. Non-mammals, such as birds and reptiles, have a common bodyopening, called a cloaca, for the digestive, excretory and reproductive systems. Coupling between birds usually involvespositioning the cloaca openings opposite each other for transfer of sperm. Mammals have separate openings for the systemsin the female and a uterus for support of developing offspring. The uterus has two chambers in species that produce largenumbers of offspring at a time, while species that produce one offspring, such as primates, have a single uterus.Sperm transfer from the male to the female during reproduction ranges from releasing the sperm into the wateryenvironment for external fertilization, to the joining of cloaca in birds, to the development of a penis for direct delivery intothe female’s vagina in mammals.Human Reproductive Anatomy andGametogenesisBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Describe human male and female reproductive anatomiesDiscuss the human sexual responseDescribe spermatogenesis and oogenesis and discuss their differences and similaritiesAs animals became more complex, specific organs and organ systems developed to support specific functions for theorganism. The reproductive structures that evolved in land animals allow males and females to mate, fertilize internally, andsupport the growth and development of offspring.Human Reproductive AnatomyThe reproductive tissues of male and female humans develop similarly in utero until a low level of the hormone testosteroneis released from male gonads. Testosterone causes the undeveloped tissues to differentiate into male sexual organs. Whentestosterone is absent, the tissues develop into female sexual tissues. Primitive gonads become testes or ovaries. Tissues that produce a penis in males produce a clitoris in females. The tissue that will become the scrotum in a male becomes the labiain a female; that is, they are homologous structures.Male Reproductive AnatomyIn the male reproductive system, the scrotum houses the testicles or testes (singular: testis), including providing passagefor blood vessels, nerves, and muscles related to testicular function. The testes are a pair of male reproductive organs thatproduce sperm and some reproductive hormones. Each testis is approximately 2.5 by 3.8 cm (1.5 by 1 in) in size and dividedinto wedge-shaped lobules by connective tissue called septa. Coiled in each wedge are seminiferous tubules that producesperm.Sperm are immobile at body temperature; therefore, the scrotum and penis are external to the body, as illustrated in Figure43.8 so that a proper temperature is maintained for motility. In land mammals, the pair of testes must be suspended outsidethe body at about 2° C lower than body temperature to produce viable sperm. Infertility can occur in land mammals whenthe testes do not descend through the abdominal cavity during fetal development.
Sperm mature in seminiferous tubules that are coiled inside the testes, as illustrated in Figure 43.8. The walls of theseminiferous tubules are made up of the developing sperm cells, with the least developed sperm at the periphery of thetubule and the fully developed sperm in the lumen. The sperm cells are mixed with “nursemaid” cells called Sertoli cellswhich protect the germ cells and promote their development. Other cells mixed in the wall of the tubules are the interstitialcells of Leydig. These cells produce high levels of testosterone once the male reaches adolescence.When the sperm have developed flagella and are nearly mature, they leave the testicles and enter the epididymis, shownin Figure 43.8. This structure resembles a comma and lies along the top and posterior portion of the testes; it is the site ofsperm maturation. The sperm leave the epididymis and enter the vas deferens (or ductus deferens), which carries the sperm,behind the bladder, and forms the ejaculatory duct with the duct from the seminal vesicles. During a vasectomy, a sectionof the vas deferens is removed, preventing sperm from being passed out of the body during ejaculation and preventingfertilization.Semen is a mixture of sperm and spermatic duct secretions (about 10 percent of the total) and fluids from accessory glandsthat contribute most of the semen’s volume. Sperm are haploid cells, consisting of a flagellum as a tail, a neck that containsthe cell’s energy-producing mitochondria, and a head that contains the genetic material. Figure 43.9 shows a micrograph of human sperm as well as a diagram of the parts of the sperm. An acrosome is found at the top of the head of the sperm.This structure contains lysosomal enzymes that can digest the protective coverings that surround the egg to help the spermpenetrate and fertilize the egg. An ejaculate will contain from two to five milliliters of fluid with from 50–120 million spermper milliliter.Human sperm, visualized using scanning electron microscopy, have a flagellum, neck, and head.
The bulk of the semen comes from the accessory glands associated with the male reproductive system. These are the seminalvesicles, the prostate gland, and the bulbourethral gland, all of which are illustrated in Figure 43.8. The seminal vesicles area pair of glands that lie along the posterior border of the urinary bladder. The glands make a solution that is thick, yellowish,and alkaline. As sperm are only motile in an alkaline environment, a basic pH is important to reverse the acidity of thevaginal environment. The solution also contains mucus, fructose (a sperm mitochondrial nutrient), a coagulating enzyme,ascorbic acid, and local-acting hormones called prostaglandins. The seminal vesicle glands account for 60 percent of thebulk of semen.The penis, illustrated in Figure 43.8, is an organ that drains urine from the renal bladder and functions as a copulatory organduring intercourse. The penis contains three tubes of erectile tissue running through the length of the organ. These consistof a pair of tubes on the dorsal side, called the corpus cavernosum, and a single tube of tissue on the ventral side, called thecorpus spongiosum. This tissue will become engorged with blood, becoming erect and hard, in preparation for intercourse.The organ is inserted into the vagina culminating with an ejaculation. During intercourse, the smooth muscle sphincters atthe opening to the renal bladder close and prevent urine from entering the penis. An orgasm is a two-stage process: first,glands and accessory organs connected to the testes contract, then semen (containing sperm) is expelled through the urethraduring ejaculation. After intercourse, the blood drains from the erectile tissue and the penis becomes flaccid.The walnut-shaped prostate gland surrounds the urethra, the connection to the urinary bladder. It has a series of short ductsthat directly connect to the urethra. The gland is a mixture of smooth muscle and glandular tissue. The muscle providesmuch of the force needed for ejaculation to occur. The glandular tissue makes a thin, milky fluid that contains citrate (anutrient), enzymes, and prostate specific antigen (PSA). PSA is a proteolytic enzyme that helps to liquefy the ejaculateseveral minutes after release from the male. Prostate gland secretions account for about 30 percent of the bulk of semen.The bulbourethral gland, or Cowper’s gland, releases its secretion prior to the release of the bulk of the semen. Itneutralizes any acid residue in the urethra left over from urine. This usually accounts for a couple of drops of fluid inthe total ejaculate and may contain a few sperm. Withdrawal of the penis from the vagina before ejaculation to preventpregnancy may not work if sperm are present in the bulbourethral gland secretions. The location and functions of the malereproductive organs are summarized in Table 43.1.
Female Reproductive AnatomyA number of reproductive structures are exterior to the female’s body. These include the breasts and the vulva, whichconsists of the mons pubis, clitoris, labia majora, labia minora, and the vestibular glands, all illustrated in Figure 43.10.The location and functions of the female reproductive organs are summarized in Table 43.2. The vulva is an area associatedwith the vestibule which includes the structures found in the inguinal (groin) area of women. The mons pubis is a round,fatty area that overlies the pubic symphysis. The clitoris is a structure with erectile tissue that contains a large number ofsensory nerves and serves as a source of stimulation during intercourse. The labia majora are a pair of elongated folds oftissue that run posterior from the mons pubis and enclose the other components of the vulva. The labia majora derive fromthe same tissue that produces the scrotum in a male. The labia minora are thin folds of tissue centrally located within thelabia majora. These labia protect the openings to the vagina and urethra. The mons pubis and the anterior portion of thelabia majora become covered with hair during adolescence; the labia minora is hairless. The greater vestibular glands arefound at the sides of the vaginal opening and provide lubrication during intercourse.
The reproductive structures of the human female are shown.
The breasts consist of mammary glands and fat. The size of the breast is determined by the amount of fat deposited behindthe gland. Each gland consists of 15 to 25 lobes that have ducts that empty at the nipple and that supply the nursing childwith nutrient- and antibody-rich milk to aid development and protect the child.Internal female reproductive structures include ovaries, oviducts, the uterus, and the vagina, shown in Figure 43.10. Thepair of ovaries is held in place in the abdominal cavity by a system of ligaments. Ovaries consist of a medulla and cortex:the medulla contains nerves and blood vessels to supply the cortex with nutrients and remove waste. The outer layers ofcells of the cortex are the functional parts of the ovaries. The cortex is made up of follicular cells that surround eggs thatdevelop during fetal development in utero. During the menstrual period, a batch of follicular cells develops and preparesthe eggs for release. At ovulation, one follicle ruptures and one egg is released, as illustrated in Figure 43.11a.
Oocytes develop in (a) follicles, located in the ovary. At the beginning of the menstrual cycle, the folliclematures. At ovulation, the follicle ruptures, releasing the egg. The follicle becomes a corpus luteum, which eventuallydegenerates. The (b) follicle in this light micrograph has an oocyte at its center.
The oviducts, or fallopian tubes, extend from the uterus in the lower abdominal cavity to the ovaries, but they are not incontact with the ovaries. The lateral ends of the oviducts flare out into a trumpet-like structure and have a fringe of fingerlikeprojections called fimbriae, illustrated in Figure 43.10b. When an egg is released at ovulation, the fimbrae help thenon-motile egg enter into the tube and passage to the uterus. The walls of the oviducts are ciliated and are made up mostlyof smooth muscle. The cilia beat toward the middle, and the smooth muscle contracts in the same direction, moving theegg toward the uterus. Fertilization usually takes place within the oviducts and the developing embryo is moved toward theuterus for development. It usually takes the egg or embryo a week to travel through the oviduct. Sterilization in women iscalled a tubal ligation; it is analogous to a vasectomy in males in that the oviducts are severed and sealed.The uterus is a structure about the size of a woman’s fist. This is lined with an endometrium rich in blood vessels andmucus glands. The uterus supports the developing embryo and fetus during gestation. The thickest portion of the wall ofthe uterus is made of smooth muscle. Contractions of the smooth muscle in the uterus aid in passing the baby through thevagina during labor. A portion of the lining of the uterus sloughs off during each menstrual period, and then builds up againin preparation for an implantation. Part of the uterus, called the cervix, protrudes into the top of the vagina. The cervixfunctions as the birth canal.
The vagina is a muscular tube that serves several purposes. It allows menstrual flow to leave the body. It is the receptaclefor the penis during intercourse and the vessel for the delivery of offspring. It is lined by stratified squamous epithelial cellsto protect the underlying tissue.Sexual Response during IntercourseThe sexual response in humans is both psychological and physiological. Both sexes experience sexual arousal throughpsychological and physical stimulation. There are four phases of the sexual response. During phase one, called excitement,vasodilation leads to vasocongestion in erectile tissues in both men and women. The nipples, clitoris, labia, and penisengorge with blood and become enlarged. Vaginal secretions are released to lubricate the vagina to facilitate intercourse.During the second phase, called the plateau, stimulation continues, the outer third of the vaginal wall enlarges with blood,and breathing and heart rate increase.During phase three, or orgasm, rhythmic, involuntary contractions of muscles occur in both sexes. In the male, thereproductive accessory glands and tubules constrict placing semen in the urethra, then the urethra contracts expelling thesemen through the penis. In women, the uterus and vaginal muscles contract in waves that may last slightly less than asecond each. During phase four, or resolution, the processes described in the first three phases reverse themselves and returnto their normal state. Men experience a refractory period in which they cannot maintain an erection or ejaculate for a periodof time ranging from minutes to hours.Gametogenesis (Spermatogenesis and Oogenesis)Gametogenesis, the production of sperm and eggs, takes place through the process of meiosis. During meiosis, two celldivisions separate the paired chromosomes in the nucleus and then separate the chromatids that were made during an earlierstage of the cell’s life cycle. Meiosis produces haploid cells with half of each pair of chromosomes normally found in diploidcells. The production of sperm is called spermatogenesis and the production of eggs is called oogenesis.SpermatogenesisDuring spermatogenesis, four sperm result from each primary spermatocyte.
Spermatogenesis, illustrated in Figure 43.12, occurs in the wall of the seminiferous tubules (Figure 43.8), with stem cellsat the periphery of the tube and the spermatozoa at the lumen of the tube. Immediately under the capsule of the tubule arediploid, undifferentiated cells. These stem cells, called spermatogonia (singular: spermatagonium), go through mitosis withone offspring going on to differentiate into a sperm cell and the other giving rise to the next generation of sperm.Meiosis starts with a cell called a primary spermatocyte. At the end of the first meiotic division, a haploid cell is producedcalled a secondary spermatocyte. This cell is haploid and must go through another meiotic cell division. The cell producedat the end of meiosis is called a spermatid and when it reaches the lumen of the tubule and grows a flagellum, it is called asperm cell. Four sperm result from each primary spermatocyte that goes through meiosis.Stem cells are deposited during gestation and are present at birth through the beginning of adolescence, but in an inactivestate. During adolescence, gonadotropic hormones from the anterior pituitary cause the activation of these cells and theproduction of viable sperm. This continues into old age.
OogenesisOogenesis, illustrated in Figure 43.13, occurs in the outermost layers of the ovaries. As with sperm production, oogenesisstarts with a germ cell, called an oogonium (plural: oogonia), but this cell undergoes mitosis to increase in number,eventually resulting in up to about one to two million cells in the embryo.
The process of oogenesis occurs in the ovary’s outermost layer.The cell starting meiosis is called a primary oocyte, as shown in Figure 43.13. This cell will start the first meiotic divisionand be arrested in its progress in the first prophase stage. At the time of birth, all future eggs are in the prophase stage.At adolescence, anterior pituitary hormones cause the development of a number of follicles in an ovary. This results inthe primary oocyte finishing the first meiotic division. The cell divides unequally, with most of the cellular material andorganelles going to one cell, called a secondary oocyte, and only one set of chromosomes and a small amount of cytoplasm going to the other cell. This second cell is called a polar body and usually dies. A secondary meiotic arrest occurs, thistime at the metaphase II stage. At ovulation, this secondary oocyte will be released and travel toward the uterus through theoviduct. If the secondary oocyte is fertilized, the cell continues through the meiosis II, producing a second polar body and afertilized egg containing all 46 chromosomes of a human being, half of them coming from the sperm.Egg production begins before birth, is arrested during meiosis until puberty, and then individual cells continue through ateach menstrual cycle. One egg is produced from each meiotic process, with the extra chromosomes and chromatids goinginto polar bodies that degenerate and are reabsorbed by the body.Hormonal Control of Human ReproductionBy the end of this chapter, you will be able to:Describe the roles of male and female reproductive hormonesDiscuss the interplay of the ovarian and menstrual cyclesDescribe the process of menopauseThe human male and female reproductive cycles are controlled by the interaction of hormones from the hypothalamusand anterior pituitary with hormones from reproductive tissues and organs. In both sexes, the hypothalamus monitors andcauses the release of hormones from the pituitary gland. When the reproductive hormone is required, the hypothalamussends a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) to the anterior pituitary. This causes the release of follicle stimulatinghormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) from the anterior pituitary into the blood. Note that the body must reachpuberty in order for the adrenals to release the hormones that must be present for GnRH to be produced. Although FSHand LH are named after their functions in female reproduction, they are produced in both sexes and play important roles incontrolling reproduction. Other hormones have specific functions in the male and female reproductive systems.Male HormonesAt the onset of puberty, the hypothalamus causes the release of FSH and LH into the male system for the first time. FSHenters the testes and stimulates the Sertoli cells to begin facilitating spermatogenesis using negative feedback, as illustratedin Figure 43.14. LH also enters the testes and stimulates the interstitial cells of Leydig to make and release testosteroneinto the testes and the blood.Testosterone, the hormone responsible for the secondary sexual characteristics that develop in the male during adolescence,stimulates spermatogenesis. These secondary sex characteristics include a deepening of the voice, the growth of facial,axillary, and pubic hair, and the beginnings of the sex drive.
Hormones control sperm production in a negative feedback system.A negative feedback system occurs in the male with rising levels of testosterone acting on the hypothalamus and anteriorpituitary to inhibit the release of GnRH, FSH, and LH. The Sertoli cells produce the hormone inhibin, which is released intothe blood when the sperm count is too high. This inhibits the release of GnRH and FSH, which will cause spermatogenesis to slow down. If the sperm count reaches 20 million/ml, the Sertoli cells cease the release of inhibin, and the sperm countincreases.Female HormonesThe control of reproduction in females is more complex. As with the male, the anterior pituitary hormones cause the releaseof the hormones FSH and LH. In addition, estrogens and progesterone are released from the developing follicles. Estrogenis the reproductive hormone in females that assists in endometrial regrowth, ovulation, and calcium absorption; it is alsoresponsible for the secondary sexual characteristics of females. These include breast development, flaring of the hips, and ashorter period necessary for bone maturation. Progesterone assists in endometrial re-growth and inhibition of FSH and LHrelease.In females, FSH stimulates development of egg cells, called ova, which develop in structures called follicles. Follicle cellsproduce the hormone inhibin, which inhibits FSH production. LH also plays a role in the development of ova, induction ofovulation, and stimulation of estradiol and progesterone production by the ovaries. Estradiol and progesterone are steroidhormones that prepare the body for pregnancy. Estradiol produces secondary sex characteristics in females, while bothestradiol and progesterone regulate the menstrual cycle.The Ovarian Cycle and the Menstrual CycleThe ovarian cycle governs the preparation of endocrine tissues and release of eggs, while the menstrual cycle governs thepreparation and maintenance of the uterine lining. These cycles occur concurrently and are coordinated over a 22–32 daycycle, with an average length of 28 days.The first half of the ovarian cycle is the follicular phase shown in Figure 43.15. Slowly rising levels of FSH and LHcause the growth of follicles on the surface of the ovary. This process prepares the egg for ovulation. As the follicles grow,they begin releasing estrogens and a low level of progesterone. Progesterone maintains the endometrium to help ensurepregnancy. The trip through the fallopian tube takes about seven days. At this stage of development, called the morula, thereare 30-60 cells. If pregnancy implantation does not occur, the lining is sloughed off. After about five days, estrogen levelsrise and the menstrual cycle enters the proliferative phase. The endometrium begins to regrow, replacing the blood vesselsand glands that deteriorated during the end of the last cycle.
Just prior to the middle of the cycle (approximately day 14), the high level of estrogen causes FSH and especially LH to riserapidly, then fall. The spike in LH causes ovulation: the most mature follicle, like that shown in Figure 43.16, ruptures and releases its egg. The follicles that did not rupture degenerate and their eggs are lost. The level of estrogen decreases whenthe extra follicles degenerate.
This mature egg follicle may rupture and release an egg.
Following ovulation, the ovarian cycle enters its luteal phase, illustrated in Figure 43.15 and the menstrual cycle enters itssecretory phase, both of which run from about day 15 to 28. The luteal and secretory phases refer to changes in the rupturedfollicle. The cells in the follicle undergo physical changes and produce a structure called a corpus luteum. The corpusluteum produces estrogen and progesterone. The progesterone facilitates the regrowth of the uterine lining and inhibits therelease of further FSH and LH. The uterus is being prepared to accept a fertilized egg, should it occur during this cycle. Theinhibition of FSH and LH prevents any further eggs and follicles from developing, while the progesterone is elevated. Thelevel of estrogen produced by the corpus luteum increases to a steady level for the next few days.If no fertilized egg is implanted into the uterus, the corpus luteum degenerates and the levels of estrogen and progesteronedecrease. The endometrium begins to degenerate as the progesterone levels drop, initiating the next menstrual cycle. Thedecrease in progesterone also allows the hypothalamus to send GnRH to the anterior pituitary, releasing FSH and LH andstarting the cycles again. Figure 43.17 visually compares the ovarian and uterine cycles as well as the commensuratehormone levels.
MenopauseAs women approach their mid-40s to mid-50s, their ovaries begin to lose their sensitivity to FSH and LH. Menstrual periodsbecome less frequent and finally cease; this is menopause. There are still eggs and potential follicles on the ovaries, butwithout the stimulation of FSH and LH, they will not produce a viable egg to be released. The outcome of this is the inabilityto have children.The side effects of menopause include hot flashes, heavy sweating (especially at night), headaches, some hair loss, musclepain, vaginal dryness, insomnia, depression, weight gain, and mood swings. Estrogen is involved in calcium metabolismand, without it, blood levels of calcium decrease. To replenish the blood, calcium is lost from bone which may decreasethe bone density and lead to osteoporosis. Supplementation of estrogen in the form of hormone replacement therapy (HRT)can prevent bone loss, but the therapy can have negative side effects. While HRT is thought to give some protection fromcolon cancer, osteoporosis, heart disease, macular degeneration, and possibly depression, its negative side effects includeincreased risk of: stroke or heart attack, blood clots, breast cancer, ovarian cancer, endometrial cancer, gall bladder disease,and possibly dementia.
Human Pregnancy and BirthBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Explain fetal development during the three trimesters of gestationDescribe labor and deliveryCompare the efficacy and duration of various types of contraceptionDiscuss causes of infertility and the therapeutic options availablePregnancy begins with the fertilization of an egg and continues through to the birth of the individual. The length of time ofgestation varies among animals, but is very similar among the great apes: human gestation is 266 days, while chimpanzeegestation is 237 days, a gorilla’s is 257 days, and orangutan gestation is 260 days long. The fox has a 57-day gestation. Dogsand cats have similar gestations averaging 60 days. The longest gestation for a land mammal is an African elephant at 640days. The longest gestations among marine mammals are the beluga and sperm whales at 460 days.Human GestationTwenty-four hours before fertilization, the egg has finished meiosis and becomes a mature oocyte. When fertilized (atconception) the egg becomes known as a zygote. The zygote travels through the oviduct to the uterus (Figure 43.18).The developing embryo must implant into the wall of the uterus within seven days, or it will deteriorate and die. Theouter layers of the zygote (blastocyst) grow into the endometrium by digesting the endometrial cells, and wound healingof the endometrium closes up the blastocyst into the tissue. Another layer of the blastocyst, the chorion, begins releasinga hormone called human beta chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) which makes its way to the corpus luteum and keepsthat structure active. This ensures adequate levels of progesterone that will maintain the endometrium of the uterus forthe support of the developing embryo. Pregnancy tests determine the level of β-HCG in urine or serum. If the hormone ispresent, the test is positive.In humans, fertilization occurs soon after the oocyte leaves the ovary. Implantation occurs eight or ninedays later.
The gestation period is divided into three equal periods or trimesters. During the first two to four weeks of the first trimester,nutrition and waste are handled by the endometrial lining through diffusion. As the trimester progresses, the outer layer ofthe embryo begins to merge with the endometrium, and the placenta forms. This organ takes over the nutrient and wasterequirements of the embryo and fetus, with the mother’s blood passing nutrients to the placenta and removing waste fromit. Chemicals from the fetus, such as bilirubin, are processed by the mother’s liver for elimination. Some of the mother’simmunoglobulins will pass through the placenta, providing passive immunity against some potential infections.Internal organs and body structures begin to develop during the first trimester. By five weeks, limb buds, eyes, the heart, andliver have been basically formed. By eight weeks, the term fetus applies, and the body is essentially formed, as shown inFigure 43.19. The individual is about five centimeters (two inches) in length and many of the organs, such as the lungs andliver, are not yet functioning. Exposure to any toxins is especially dangerous during the first trimester, as all of the body’sorgans and structures are going through initial development. Anything that affects that development can have a severe effecton the fetus’ survival.
Fetal development is shown at nine weeks gestation.During the second trimester, the fetus grows to about 30 cm (12 inches), as shown in Figure 43.20. It becomes active andthe mother usually feels the first movements. All organs and structures continue to develop. The placenta has taken overthe functions of nutrition and waste and the production of estrogen and progesterone from the corpus luteum, which hasdegenerated. The placenta will continue functioning up through the delivery of the baby.
This fetus is just entering the second trimester, when the placenta takes over more of the functionsperformed as the baby develops.
During the third trimester, the fetus grows to 3 to 4 kg (6 ½ -8 ½ lbs.) and about 50 cm (19-20 inches) long, as illustratedin Figure 43.21. This is the period of the most rapid growth during the pregnancy. Organ development continues to birth(and some systems, such as the nervous system and liver, continue to develop after birth). The mother will be at her most uncomfortable during this trimester. She may urinate frequently due to pressure on the bladder from the fetus. There mayalso be intestinal blockage and circulatory problems, especially in her legs. Clots may form in her legs due to pressure fromthe fetus on returning veins as they enter the abdominal cavity.
There is rapid fetal growth during the third trimester.
Labor and BirthLabor is the physical efforts of expulsion of the fetus and the placenta from the uterus during birth (parturition). Toward theend of the third trimester, estrogen causes receptors on the uterine wall to develop and bind the hormone oxytocin. At thistime, the baby reorients, facing forward and down with the back or crown of the head engaging the cervix (uterine opening).This causes the cervix to stretch and nerve impulses are sent to the hypothalamus, which signals for the release of oxytocinfrom the posterior pituitary. The oxytocin causes the smooth muscle in the uterine wall to contract. At the same time, theplacenta releases prostaglandins into the uterus, increasing the contractions. A positive feedback relay occurs between theuterus, hypothalamus, and the posterior pituitary to assure an adequate supply of oxytocin. As more smooth muscle cellsare recruited, the contractions increase in intensity and force.There are three stages to labor. During stage one, the cervix thins and dilates. This is necessary for the baby and placenta tobe expelled during birth. The cervix will eventually dilate to about 10 cm. During stage two, the baby is expelled from theuterus. The uterus contracts and the mother pushes as she compresses her abdominal muscles to aid the delivery. The laststage is the passage of the placenta after the baby has been born and the organ has completely disengaged from the uterinewall. If labor should stop before stage two is reached, synthetic oxytocin, known as Pitocin, can be administered to restartand maintain labor.An alternative to labor and delivery is the surgical delivery of the baby through a procedure called a Caesarian section. Thisis major abdominal surgery and can lead to post-surgical complications for the mother, but in some cases it may be the onlyway to safely deliver the baby.
The mother’s mammary glands go through changes during the third trimester to prepare for lactation and breastfeeding.When the baby begins suckling at the breast, signals are sent to the hypothalamus causing the release of prolactin from theanterior pituitary. Prolactin causes the mammary glands to produce milk. Oxytocin is also released, promoting the releaseof the milk. The milk contains nutrients for the baby’s development and growth as well as immunoglobulins to protect thechild from bacterial and viral infections.Contraception and Birth ControlThe prevention of a pregnancy comes under the terms contraception or birth control. Strictly speaking, contraception refersto preventing the sperm and egg from joining. Both terms are, however, frequently used interchangeably.
Table 43.3 lists common methods of contraception. The failure rates listed are not the ideal rates that could be realized, butthe typical rates that occur. A failure rate is the number of pregnancies resulting from the method’s use over a twelve-monthperiod. Barrier methods, such as condoms, cervical caps, and diaphragms, block sperm from entering the uterus, preventingfertilization. Spermicides are chemicals that are placed in the vagina that kill sperm. Sponges, which are saturated withspermicides, are placed in the vagina at the cervical opening. Combinations of spermicidal chemicals and barrier methodsachieve lower failure rates than do the methods when used separately.Nearly a quarter of the couples using barrier methods, natural family planning, or withdrawal can expect a failure of themethod. Natural family planning is based on the monitoring of the menstrual cycle and having intercourse only during timeswhen the egg is not available. A woman’s body temperature may rise a degree Celsius at ovulation and the cervical mucusmay increase in volume and become more pliable. These changes give a general indication of when intercourse is more orless likely to result in fertilization. Withdrawal involves the removal of the penis from the vagina during intercourse, beforeejaculation occurs. This is a risky method with a high failure rate due to the possible presence of sperm in the bulbourethralgland’s secretion, which may enter the vagina prior to removing the penis.Hormonal methods use synthetic progesterone (sometimes in combination with estrogen), to inhibit the hypothalamus fromreleasing FSH or LH, and thus prevent an egg from being available for fertilization. The method of administering thehormone affects failure rate. The most reliable method, with a failure rate of less than 1 percent, is the implantation of thehormone under the skin. The same rate can be achieved through the sterilization procedures of vasectomy in the man or oftubal ligation in the woman, or by using an intrauterine device (IUD). IUDs are inserted into the uterus and establish aninflammatory condition that prevents fertilized eggs from implanting into the uterine wall.Compliance with the contraceptive method is a strong contributor to the success or failure rate of any particular method.The only method that is completely effective at preventing conception is abstinence. The choice of contraceptive methoddepends on the goals of the woman or couple. Tubal ligation and vasectomy are considered permanent prevention, whileother methods are reversible and provide short-term contraception.Termination of an existing pregnancy can be spontaneous or voluntary. Spontaneous termination is a miscarriage andusually occurs very early in the pregnancy, usually within the first few weeks. This occurs when the fetus cannot developproperly and the gestation is naturally terminated. Voluntary termination of a pregnancy is an abortion. Laws regulatingabortion vary between states and tend to view fetal viability as the criteria for allowing or preventing the procedure.
InfertilityInfertility is the inability to conceive a child or carry a child to birth. About 75 percent of causes of infertility can beidentified; these include diseases, such as sexually transmitted diseases that can cause scarring of the reproductive tubes ineither men or women, or developmental problems frequently related to abnormal hormone levels in one of the individuals.Inadequate nutrition, especially starvation, can delay menstruation. Stress can also lead to infertility. Short-term stress canaffect hormone levels, while long-term stress can delay puberty and cause less frequent menstrual cycles. Other factors thataffect fertility include toxins (such as cadmium), tobacco smoking, marijuana use, gonadal injuries, and aging.If infertility is identified, several assisted reproductive technologies (ART) are available to aid conception. A commontype of ART is in vitro fertilization (IVF) where an egg and sperm are combined outside the body and then placed in theuterus. Eggs are obtained from the woman after extensive hormonal treatments that prepare mature eggs for fertilizationand prepare the uterus for implantation of the fertilized egg. Sperm are obtained from the man and they are combined withthe eggs and supported through several cell divisions to ensure viability of the zygotes. When the embryos have reachedthe eight-cell stage, one or more is implanted into the woman’s uterus. If fertilization is not accomplished by simple IVF,a procedure that injects the sperm into an egg can be used. This is called intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) and isshown in Figure 43.22. IVF procedures produce a surplus of fertilized eggs and embryos that can be frozen and stored forfuture use. The procedures can also result in multiple births.
A sperm is inserted into an egg for fertilization during intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI).
The process in which an organism develops from a single-celled zygote to a multi-cellular organism is complex and wellregulated.The early stages of embryonic development are also crucial for ensuring the fitness of the organism.FertilizationFertilization, pictured in Figure 43.23a is the process in which gametes (an egg and sperm) fuse to form a zygote. Theegg and sperm each contain one set of chromosomes. To ensure that the offspring has only one complete diploid setof chromosomes, only one sperm must fuse with one egg. In mammals, the egg is protected by a layer of extracellularmatrix consisting mainly of glycoproteins called the zona pellucida. When a sperm binds to the zona pellucida, aseries of biochemical events, called the acrosomal reactions, take place. In placental mammals, the acrosome containsdigestive enzymes that initiate the degradation of the glycoprotein matrix protecting the egg and allowing the sperm plasma membrane to fuse with the egg plasma membrane, as illustrated in Figure 43.23b. The fusion of these two membranescreates an opening through which the sperm nucleus is transferred into the ovum. The nuclear membranes of the egg andsperm break down and the two haploid genomes condense to form a diploid genome.
(a) Fertilization is the process in which sperm and egg fuse to form a zygote. (b) Acrosomal reactionshelp the sperm degrade the glycoprotein matrix protecting the egg and allow the sperm to transfer its nucleus.
To ensure that no more than one sperm fertilizes the egg, once the acrosomal reactions take place at one location of the eggmembrane, the egg releases proteins in other locations to prevent other sperm from fusing with the egg. If this mechanismfails, multiple sperm can fuse with the egg, resulting in polyspermy. The resulting embryo is not genetically viable and dieswithin a few days.Cleavage and Blastula StageThe development of multi-cellular organisms begins from a single-celled zygote, which undergoes rapid cell division toform the blastula. The rapid, multiple rounds of cell division are termed cleavage. Cleavage is illustrated in (Figure 43.24a).After the cleavage has produced over 100 cells, the embryo is called a blastula. The blastula is usually a spherical layer ofcells (the blastoderm) surrounding a fluid-filled or yolk-filled cavity (the blastocoel). Mammals at this stage form a structurecalled the blastocyst, characterized by an inner cell mass that is distinct from the surrounding blastula, shown in Figure43.24b. During cleavage, the cells divide without an increase in mass; that is, one large single-celled zygote divides intomultiple smaller cells. Each cell within the blastula is called a blastomere.
(a) During cleavage, the zygote rapidly divides into multiple cells without increasing in size. (b) Thecells rearrange themselves to form a hollow ball with a fluid-filled or yolk-filled cavity called the blastula.
Cleavage can take place in two ways: holoblastic (total) cleavage or meroblastic (partial) cleavage. The type of cleavagedepends on the amount of yolk in the eggs. In placental mammals (including humans) where nourishment is provided by themother’s body, the eggs have a very small amount of yolk and undergo holoblastic cleavage. Other species, such as birds,with a lot of yolk in the egg to nourish the embryo during development, undergo meroblastic cleavage.In mammals, the blastula forms the blastocyst in the next stage of development. Here the cells in the blastula arrangethemselves in two layers: the inner cell mass, and an outer layer called the trophoblast. The inner cell mass is also knownas the embryoblast and this mass of cells will go on to form the embryo. At this stage of development, illustrated in Figure43.25 the inner cell mass consists of embryonic stem cells that will differentiate into the different cell types needed by theorganism. The trophoblast will contribute to the placenta and nourish the embryo.
The rearrangement of the cells in the mammalian blastula to two layers—the inner cell mass and thetrophoblast—results in the formation of the blastocyst.
GastrulationThe typical blastula is a ball of cells. The next stage in embryonic development is the formation of the body plan. Thecells in the blastula rearrange themselves spatially to form three layers of cells. This process is called gastrulation. Duringgastrulation, the blastula folds upon itself to form the three layers of cells. Each of these layers is called a germ layer andeach germ layer differentiates into different organ systems.The three germs layers, shown in Figure 43.26, are the endoderm, the ectoderm, and the mesoderm. The ectoderm givesrise to the nervous system and the epidermis. The mesoderm gives rise to the muscle cells and connective tissue in the body.The endoderm gives rise to columnar cells found in the digestive system and many internal organs.
The three germ layers give rise to different cell types in the animal body.
43.7 | Organogenesis and Vertebrate FormationBy the end of this section, you will be able to:• Describe the process of organogenesis• Identify the anatomical axes formed in vertebratesGastrulation leads to the formation of the three germ layers that give rise, during further development, to the different organsin the animal body. This process is called organogenesis. Organogenesis is characterized by rapid and precise movementsof the cells within the embryo.OrganogenesisOrgans form from the germ layers through the process of differentiation. During differentiation, the embryonic stem cellsexpress specific sets of genes which will determine their ultimate cell type. For example, some cells in the ectodermwill express the genes specific to skin cells. As a result, these cells will differentiate into epidermal cells. The process ofdifferentiation is regulated by cellular signaling cascades.Scientists study organogenesis extensively in the lab in fruit flies (Drosophila) and the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.Drosophila have segments along their bodies, and the patterning associated with the segment formation has allowedscientists to study which genes play important roles in organogenesis along the length of the embryo at different time points.The nematode C.elegans has roughly 1000 somatic cells and scientists have studied the fate of each of these cells duringtheir development in the nematode life cycle. There is little variation in patterns of cell lineage between individuals, unlikein mammals where cell development from the embryo is dependent on cellular cues.In vertebrates, one of the primary steps during organogenesis is the formation of the neural system. The ectoderm formsepithelial cells and tissues, and neuronal tissues. During the formation of the neural system, special signaling molecules called growth factors signal some cells at the edge of the ectoderm to become epidermis cells. The remaining cells in thecenter form the neural plate. If the signaling by growth factors were disrupted, then the entire ectoderm would differentiateinto neural tissue.The neural plate undergoes a series of cell movements where it rolls up and forms a tube called the neural tube, asillustrated in Figure 43.28. In further development, the neural tube will give rise to the brain and the spinal cord.
The central region of the ectoderm forms the neural tube, which gives rise to the brain and the spinalcord.The mesoderm that lies on either side of the vertebrate neural tube will develop into the various connective tissues of theanimal body. A spatial pattern of gene expression reorganizes the mesoderm into groups of cells called somites with spacesbetween them. The somites, illustrated in Figure 43.29 will further develop into the ribs, lungs, and segmental (spine)muscle. The mesoderm also forms a structure called the notochord, which is rod-shaped and forms the central axis of theanimal body.
In this five-week old human embryo, somites are segments along the length of the body.
Vertebrate Axis FormationEven as the germ layers form, the ball of cells still retains its spherical shape. However, animal bodies have lateral-medial(left-right), dorsal-ventral (back-belly), and anterior-posterior (head-feet) axes, illustrated in Figure 43.30.
Animal bodies have three axes for symmetry.
How are these established? In one of the most seminal experiments ever to be carried out in developmental biology,Spemann and Mangold took dorsal cells from one embryo and transplanted them into the belly region of another embryo.They found that the transplanted embryo now had two notochords: one at the dorsal site from the original cells and anotherat the transplanted site. This suggested that the dorsal cells were genetically programmed to form the notochord and definethe axis. Since then, researchers have identified many genes that are responsible for axis formation. Mutations in these genesleads to the loss of symmetry required for organism development.Animal bodies have externally visible symmetry. However, the internal organs are not symmetric. For example, the heartis on the left side and the liver on the right. The formation of the central left-right axis is an important process duringdevelopment. This internal asymmetry is established very early during development and involves many genes. Research isstill ongoing to fully understand the developmental implications of these genes.