Experimenting with thousands of garden peas, Mendel uncovered the fundamentals of genetics.IntroductionGenetics is the study of heredity. Johann Gregor Mendel set the framework for genetics long before chromosomes orgenes had been identified, at a time when meiosis was not well understood. Mendel selected a simple biological systemand conducted methodical, quantitative analyses using large sample sizes. Because of Mendel’s work, the fundamentalprinciples of heredity were revealed. We now know that genes, carried on chromosomes, are the basic functional units ofheredity with the capability to be replicated, expressed, or mutated. Today, the postulates put forth by Mendel form thebasis of classical, or Mendelian, genetics. Not all genes are transmitted from parents to offspring according to Mendeliangenetics, but Mendel’s experiments serve as an excellent starting point for thinking about inheritance.Johann Gregor Mendel is considered the father of genetics.Johann Gregor Mendel (1822–1884) (Figure 12.2) was a lifelong learner, teacher, scientist, and man of faith. As a youngadult, he joined the Augustinian Abbey of St. Thomas in Brno in what is now the Czech Republic. Supported by themonastery, he taught physics, botany, and natural science courses at the secondary and university levels. In 1856, he begana decade-long research pursuit involving inheritance patterns in honeybees and plants, ultimately settling on pea plants ashis primary model system (a system with convenient characteristics used to study a specific biological phenomenon to beapplied to other systems). In 1865, Mendel presented the results of his experiments with nearly 30,000 pea plants to thelocal Natural History Society. He demonstrated that traits are transmitted faithfully from parents to offspring independentlyof other traits and in dominant and recessive patterns. In 1866, he published his work, Experiments in Plant Hybridization,in the proceedings of the Natural History Society of Brünn.Mendel’s work went virtually unnoticed by the scientific community that believed, incorrectly, that the process ofinheritance involved a blending of parental traits that produced an intermediate physical appearance in offspring; thishypothetical process appeared to be correct because of what we know now as continuous variation. Continuous variationresults from the action of many genes to determine a characteristic like human height. Offspring appear to be a “blend” oftheir parents’ traits when we look at characteristics that exhibit continuous variation. The blending theory of inheritanceasserted that the original parental traits were lost or absorbed by the blending in the offspring, but we now know that this isnot the case. Mendel was the first researcher to see it. Instead of continuous characteristics, Mendel worked with traits thatwere inherited in distinct classes (specifically, violet versus white flowers); this is referred to as discontinuous variation.Mendel’s choice of these kinds of traits allowed him to see experimentally that the traits were not blended in the offspring,nor were they absorbed, but rather that they kept their distinctness and could be passed on. In 1868, Mendel became abbotof the monastery and exchanged his scientific pursuits for his pastoral duties. He was not recognized for his extraordinary
scientific contributions during his lifetime. In fact, it was not until 1900 that his work was rediscovered, reproduced, andrevitalized by scientists on the brink of discovering the chromosomal basis of heredity.Mendel’s Model SystemMendel’s seminal work was accomplished using the garden pea, Pisum sativum, to study inheritance. This species naturallyself-fertilizes, such that pollen encounters ova within individual flowers. The flower petals remain sealed tightly until afterpollination, preventing pollination from other plants. The result is highly inbred, or “true-breeding,” pea plants. These areplants that always produce offspring that look like the parent. By experimenting with true-breeding pea plants, Mendelavoided the appearance of unexpected traits in offspring that might occur if the plants were not true breeding. The gardenpea also grows to maturity within one season, meaning that several generations could be evaluated over a relatively shorttime. Finally, large quantities of garden peas could be cultivated simultaneously, allowing Mendel to conclude that hisresults did not come about simply by chance.Mendelian CrossesMendel performed hybridizations, which involve mating two true-breeding individuals that have different traits. In the pea,which is naturally self-pollinating, this is done by manually transferring pollen from the anther of a mature pea plant ofone variety to the stigma of a separate mature pea plant of the second variety. In plants, pollen carries the male gametes(sperm) to the stigma, a sticky organ that traps pollen and allows the sperm to move down the pistil to the female gametes(ova) below. To prevent the pea plant that was receiving pollen from self-fertilizing and confounding his results, Mendelpainstakingly removed all of the anthers from the plant’s flowers before they had a chance to mature.Plants used in first-generation crosses were called P0, or parental generation one, plants (Figure 12.3). Mendel collectedthe seeds belonging to the P0 plants that resulted from each cross and grew them the following season. These offspring werecalled the F1, or the first filial (filial = offspring, daughter or son), generation. Once Mendel examined the characteristicsin the F1 generation of plants, he allowed them to self-fertilize naturally. He then collected and grew the seeds from the F1plants to produce the F2, or second filial, generation. Mendel’s experiments extended beyond the F2 generation to the F3 andF4 generations, and so on, but it was the ratio of characteristics in the P0−F1−F2 generations that were the most intriguingand became the basis for Mendel’s postulates.
In one of his experiments on inheritance patterns, Mendel crossed plants that were true-breeding forviolet flower color with plants true-breeding for white flower color (the P generation). The resulting hybrids in the F1generation all had violet flowers. In the F2 generation, approximately three quarters of the plants had violet flowers,and one quarter had white flowers.Garden Pea Characteristics Revealed the Basics of HeredityIn his 1865 publication, Mendel reported the results of his crosses involving seven different characteristics, each with twocontrasting traits. A trait is defined as a variation in the physical appearance of a heritable characteristic. The characteristicsincluded plant height, seed texture, seed color, flower color, pea pod size, pea pod color, and flower position. For thecharacteristic of flower color, for example, the two contrasting traits were white versus violet. To fully examine eachcharacteristic, Mendel generated large numbers of F1 and F2 plants, reporting results from 19,959 F2 plants alone. Hisfindings were consistent.What results did Mendel find in his crosses for flower color? First, Mendel confirmed that he had plants that bred true forwhite or violet flower color. Regardless of how many generations Mendel examined, all self-crossed offspring of parentswith white flowers had white flowers, and all self-crossed offspring of parents with violet flowers had violet flowers. Inaddition, Mendel confirmed that, other than flower color, the pea plants were physically identical.
Once these validations were complete, Mendel applied the pollen from a plant with violet flowers to the stigma of a plantwith white flowers. After gathering and sowing the seeds that resulted from this cross, Mendel found that 100 percent of theF1 hybrid generation had violet flowers. Conventional wisdom at that time would have predicted the hybrid flowers to bepale violet or for hybrid plants to have equal numbers of white and violet flowers. In other words, the contrasting parentaltraits were expected to blend in the offspring. Instead, Mendel’s results demonstrated that the white flower trait in the F1generation had completely disappeared.Importantly, Mendel did not stop his experimentation there. He allowed the F1 plants to self-fertilize and found that, of F2-generation plants, 705 had violet flowers and 224 had white flowers. This was a ratio of 3.15 violet flowers per one whiteflower, or approximately 3:1. When Mendel transferred pollen from a plant with violet flowers to the stigma of a plant withwhite flowers and vice versa, he obtained about the same ratio regardless of which parent, male or female, contributed whichtrait. This is called a reciprocal cross—a paired cross in which the respective traits of the male and female in one crossbecome the respective traits of the female and male in the other cross. For the other six characteristics Mendel examined,the F1 and F2 generations behaved in the same way as they had for flower color. One of the two traits would disappearcompletely from the F1 generation only to reappear in the F2 generation at a ratio of approximately 3:1
Upon compiling his results for many thousands of plants, Mendel concluded that the characteristics could be divided intoexpressed and latent traits. He called these, respectively, dominant and recessive traits. Dominant traits are those that areinherited unchanged in a hybridization. Recessive traits become latent, or disappear, in the offspring of a hybridization.The recessive trait does, however, reappear in the progeny of the hybrid offspring. An example of a dominant trait is theviolet-flower trait. For this same characteristic (flower color), white-colored flowers are a recessive trait. The fact thatthe recessive trait reappeared in the F2 generation meant that the traits remained separate (not blended) in the plants ofthe F1 generation. Mendel also proposed that plants possessed two copies of the trait for the flower-color characteristic,and that each parent transmitted one of its two copies to its offspring, where they came together. Moreover, the physicalobservation of a dominant trait could mean that the genetic composition of the organism included two dominant versions ofthe characteristic or that it included one dominant and one recessive version. Conversely, the observation of a recessive traitmeant that the organism lacked any dominant versions of this characteristic.
So why did Mendel repeatedly obtain 3:1 ratios in his crosses? To understand how Mendel deduced the basic mechanismsof inheritance that lead to such ratios, we must first review the laws of probability.Probability BasicsProbabilities are mathematical measures of likelihood. The empirical probability of an event is calculated by dividing thenumber of times the event occurs by the total number of opportunities for the event to occur. It is also possible to calculatetheoretical probabilities by dividing the number of times that an event is expected to occur by the number of times thatit could occur. Empirical probabilities come from observations, like those of Mendel. Theoretical probabilities come fromknowing how the events are produced and assuming that the probabilities of individual outcomes are equal. A probabilityof one for some event indicates that it is guaranteed to occur, whereas a probability of zero indicates that it is guaranteed notto occur. An example of a genetic event is a round seed produced by a pea plant. In his experiment, Mendel demonstratedthat the probability of the event “round seed” occurring was one in the F1 offspring of true-breeding parents, one of whichhas round seeds and one of which has wrinkled seeds. When the F1 plants were subsequently self-crossed, the probability ofany given F2 offspring having round seeds was now three out of four. In other words, in a large population of F2 offspringchosen at random, 75 percent were expected to have round seeds, whereas 25 percent were expected to have wrinkled seeds.Using large numbers of crosses, Mendel was able to calculate probabilities and use these to predict the outcomes of othercrosses.The Product Rule and Sum RuleMendel demonstrated that the pea-plant characteristics he studied were transmitted as discrete units from parent tooffspring. As will be discussed, Mendel also determined that different characteristics, like seed color and seed texture, weretransmitted independently of one another and could be considered in separate probability analyses. For instance, performinga cross between a plant with green, wrinkled seeds and a plant with yellow, round seeds still produced offspring that had a3:1 ratio of green:yellow seeds (ignoring seed texture) and a 3:1 ratio of round:wrinkled seeds (ignoring seed color). Thecharacteristics of color and texture did not influence each other.The product rule of probability can be applied to this phenomenon of the independent transmission of characteristics. Theproduct rule states that the probability of two independent events occurring together can be calculated by multiplying theindividual probabilities of each event occurring alone. To demonstrate the product rule, imagine that you are rolling a sixsideddie (D) and flipping a penny (P) at the same time. The die may roll any number from 1–6 (D#), whereas the pennymay turn up heads (PH) or tails (PT). The outcome of rolling the die has no effect on the outcome of flipping the pennyand vice versa. There are 12 possible outcomes of this action (Table 12.2), and each event is expected to occur with equalprobability.
Of the 12 possible outcomes, the die has a 2/12 (or 1/6) probability of rolling a two, and the penny has a 6/12 (or 1/2)probability of coming up heads. By the product rule, the probability that you will obtain the combined outcome 2 and headsis: (D2) x (PH) = (1/6) x (1/2) or 1/12 (Table 12.3). Notice the word “and” in the description of the probability. The “and” isa signal to apply the product rule. For example, consider how the product rule is applied to the dihybrid cross: the probabilityof having both dominant traits in the F2 progeny is the product of the probabilities of having the dominant trait for eachcharacteristic, as shown here:
On the other hand, the sum rule of probability is applied when considering two mutually exclusive outcomes that can comeabout by more than one pathway. The sum rule states that the probability of the occurrence of one event or the other event,of two mutually exclusive events, is the sum of their individual probabilities. Notice the word “or” in the description of theprobability. The “or” indicates that you should apply the sum rule. In this case, let’s imagine you are flipping a penny (P)and a quarter (Q). What is the probability of one coin coming up heads and one coin coming up tails? This outcome can beachieved by two cases: the penny may be heads (PH) and the quarter may be tails (QT), or the quarter may be heads (QH)and the penny may be tails (PT). Either case fulfills the outcome. By the sum rule, we calculate the probability of obtainingone head and one tail as [(PH) × (QT)] + [(QH) × (PT)] = [(1/2) × (1/2)] + [(1/2) × (1/2)] = 1/2 (Table 12.3). You should alsonotice that we used the product rule to calculate the probability of PH and QT, and also the probability of PT and QH, beforewe summed them. Again, the sum rule can be applied to show the probability of having just one dominant trait in the F2generation of a dihybrid cross:
To use probability laws in practice, it is necessary to work with large sample sizes because small sample sizes are proneto deviations caused by chance. The large quantities of pea plants that Mendel examined allowed him calculate theprobabilities of the traits appearing in his F2 generation. As you will learn, this discovery meant that when parental traitswere known, the offspring’s traits could be predicted accurately even before fertilization.
The seven characteristics that Mendel evaluated in his pea plants were each expressed as one of two versions, or traits.The physical expression of characteristics is accomplished through the expression of genes carried on chromosomes. Thegenetic makeup of peas consists of two similar or homologous copies of each chromosome, one from each parent. Eachpair of homologous chromosomes has the same linear order of genes. In other words, peas are diploid organisms in thatthey have two copies of each chromosome. The same is true for many other plants and for virtually all animals. Diploidorganisms utilize meiosis to produce haploid gametes, which contain one copy of each homologous chromosome that uniteat fertilization to create a diploid zygote.
For cases in which a single gene controls a single characteristic, a diploid organism has two genetic copies that may ormay not encode the same version of that characteristic. Gene variants that arise by mutation and exist at the same relativelocations on homologous chromosomes are called alleles. Mendel examined the inheritance of genes with just two alleleforms, but it is common to encounter more than two alleles for any given gene in a natural population.Phenotypes and GenotypesTwo alleles for a given gene in a diploid organism are expressed and interact to produce physical characteristics. Theobservable traits expressed by an organism are referred to as its phenotype. An organism’s underlying genetic makeup,consisting of both physically visible and non-expressed alleles, is called its genotype. Mendel’s hybridization experimentsdemonstrate the difference between phenotype and genotype. When true-breeding plants in which one parent had yellowpods and one had green pods were cross-fertilized, all of the F1 hybrid offspring had yellow pods. That is, the hybridoffspring were phenotypically identical to the true-breeding parent with yellow pods. However, we know that the alleledonated by the parent with green pods was not simply lost because it reappeared in some of the F2 offspring. Therefore, theF1 plants must have been genotypically different from the parent with yellow pods.The P1 plants that Mendel used in his experiments were each homozygous for the trait he was studying. Diploid organismsthat are homozygous at a given gene, or locus, have two identical alleles for that gene on their homologous chromosomes.Mendel’s parental pea plants always bred true because both of the gametes produced carried the same trait. When P1 plantswith contrasting traits were cross-fertilized, all of the offspring were heterozygous for the contrasting trait, meaning thattheir genotype reflected that they had different alleles for the gene being examined.Dominant and Recessive AllelesOur discussion of homozygous and heterozygous organisms brings us to why the F1 heterozygous offspring were identicalto one of the parents, rather than expressing both alleles. In all seven pea-plant characteristics, one of the two contrastingalleles was dominant, and the other was recessive. Mendel called the dominant allele the expressed unit factor; the recessiveallele was referred to as the latent unit factor. We now know that these so-called unit factors are actually genes onhomologous chromosome pairs. For a gene that is expressed in a dominant and recessive pattern, homozygous dominantand heterozygous organisms will look identical (that is, they will have different genotypes but the same phenotype). Therecessive allele will only be observed in homozygous recessive individuals.
Several conventions exist for referring to genes and alleles. For the purposes of this chapter, we will abbreviate genesusing the first letter of the gene’s corresponding dominant trait. For example, violet is the dominant trait for a peaplant’s flower color, so the flower-color gene would be abbreviated as V (note that it is customary to italicize genedesignations). Furthermore, we will use uppercase and lowercase letters to represent dominant and recessive alleles,respectively. Therefore, we would refer to the genotype of a homozygous dominant pea plant with violet flowers as VV, ahomozygous recessive pea plant with white flowers as vv, and a heterozygous pea plant with violet flowers as Vv.The Punnett Square Approach for a Monohybrid CrossWhen fertilization occurs between two true-breeding parents that differ in only one characteristic, the process is called amonohybrid cross, and the resulting offspring are monohybrids. Mendel performed seven monohybrid crosses involvingcontrasting traits for each characteristic. On the basis of his results in F1 and F2 generations, Mendel postulated that each
parent in the monohybrid cross contributed one of two paired unit factors to each offspring, and every possible combinationof unit factors was equally likely.To demonstrate a monohybrid cross, consider the case of true-breeding pea plants with yellow versus green pea seeds.The dominant seed color is yellow; therefore, the parental genotypes were YY for the plants with yellow seeds and yy forthe plants with green seeds, respectively. A Punnett square, devised by the British geneticist Reginald Punnett, can bedrawn that applies the rules of probability to predict the possible outcomes of a genetic cross or mating and their expectedfrequencies. To prepare a Punnett square, all possible combinations of the parental alleles are listed along the top (for oneparent) and side (for the other parent) of a grid, representing their meiotic segregation into haploid gametes. Then thecombinations of egg and sperm are made in the boxes in the table to show which alleles are combining. Each box thenrepresents the diploid genotype of a zygote, or fertilized egg, that could result from this mating. Because each possibilityis equally likely, genotypic ratios can be determined from a Punnett square. If the pattern of inheritance (dominant orrecessive) is known, the phenotypic ratios can be inferred as well. For a monohybrid cross of two true-breeding parents,each parent contributes one type of allele. In this case, only one genotype is possible. All offspring are Yy and have yellowseeds.
In the P generation, pea plants that are true-breeding for the dominant yellow phenotype are crossed withplants with the recessive green phenotype. This cross produces F1 heterozygotes with a yellow phenotype. Punnettsquare analysis can be used to predict the genotypes of the F2 generation.A self-cross of one of the Yy heterozygous offspring can be represented in a 2 × 2 Punnett square because each parentcan donate one of two different alleles. Therefore, the offspring can potentially have one of four allele combinations: YY,Yy, yY, or yy (Figure 12.4). Notice that there are two ways to obtain the Yy genotype: a Y from the egg and a y from thesperm, or a y from the egg and a Y from the sperm. Both of these possibilities must be counted. Recall that Mendel’s peaplantcharacteristics behaved in the same way in reciprocal crosses. Therefore, the two possible heterozygous combinationsproduce offspring that are genotypically and phenotypically identical despite their dominant and recessive alleles derivingfrom different parents. They are grouped together. Because fertilization is a random event, we expect each combination tobe equally likely and for the offspring to exhibit a ratio of YY:Yy:yy genotypes of 1:2:1 (Figure 12.4). Furthermore, because
the YY and Yy offspring have yellow seeds and are phenotypically identical, applying the sum rule of probability, we expectthe offspring to exhibit a phenotypic ratio of 3 yellow:1 green. Indeed, working with large sample sizes, Mendel observedapproximately this ratio in every F2 generation resulting from crosses for individual traits.Mendel validated these results by performing an F3 cross in which he self-crossed the dominant- and recessive-expressingF2 plants. When he self-crossed the plants expressing green seeds, all of the offspring had green seeds, confirming that allgreen seeds had homozygous genotypes of yy. When he self-crossed the F2 plants expressing yellow seeds, he found thatone-third of the plants bred true, and two-thirds of the plants segregated at a 3:1 ratio of yellow:green seeds. In this case,the true-breeding plants had homozygous (YY) genotypes, whereas the segregating plants corresponded to the heterozygous(Yy) genotype. When these plants self-fertilized, the outcome was just like the F1 self-fertilizing cross.The Test Cross Distinguishes the Dominant PhenotypeBeyond predicting the offspring of a cross between known homozygous or heterozygous parents, Mendel also developeda way to determine whether an organism that expressed a dominant trait was a heterozygote or a homozygote. Called thetest cross, this technique is still used by plant and animal breeders. In a test cross, the dominant-expressing organism iscrossed with an organism that is homozygous recessive for the same characteristic. If the dominant-expressing organismis a homozygote, then all F1 offspring will be heterozygotes expressing the dominant trait (Figure 12.5). Alternatively, ifthe dominant expressing organism is a heterozygote, the F1 offspring will exhibit a 1:1 ratio of heterozygotes and recessivehomozygotes (Figure 12.5). The test cross further validates Mendel’s postulate that pairs of unit factors segregate equally.
A test cross can be performed to determine whether an organism expressing a dominant trait is ahomozygote or a heterozygote.In pea plants, round peas (R) are dominant to wrinkled peas (r). You do a test cross between a pea plant withwrinkled peas (genotype rr) and a plant of unknown genotype that has round peas. You end up with threeplants, all which have round peas. From this data, can you tell if the round pea parent plant is homozygousdominant or heterozygous? If the round pea parent plant is heterozygous, what is the probability that arandom sample of 3 progeny peas will all be round?
Many human diseases are genetically inherited. A healthy person in a family in which some members suffer from a recessivegenetic disorder may want to know if he or she has the disease-causing gene and what risk exists of passing the disorder onto his or her offspring. Of course, doing a test cross in humans is unethical and impractical. Instead, geneticists use pedigreeanalysis to study the inheritance pattern of human genetic diseases.
Alkaptonuria is a recessive genetic disorder in which two amino acids, phenylalanine and tyrosine,are not properly metabolized. Affected individuals may have darkened skin and brown urine, and may suffer jointdamage and other complications. In this pedigree, individuals with the disorder are indicated in blue and have thegenotype aa. Unaffected individuals are indicated in yellow and have the genotype AA or Aa. Note that it is oftenpossible to determine a person’s genotype from the genotype of their offspring. For example, if neither parent hasthe disorder but their child does, they must be heterozygous. Two individuals on the pedigree have an unaffectedphenotype but unknown genotype. Because they do not have the disorder, they must have at least one normalallele, so their genotype gets the “A?” designation.
Alternatives to Dominance and RecessivenessMendel’s experiments with pea plants suggested that: (1) two “units” or alleles exist for every gene; (2) alleles maintaintheir integrity in each generation (no blending); and (3) in the presence of the dominant allele, the recessive allele is hiddenand makes no contribution to the phenotype. Therefore, recessive alleles can be “carried” and not expressed by individuals.Such heterozygous individuals are sometimes referred to as “carriers.” Further genetic studies in other plants and animalshave shown that much more complexity exists, but that the fundamental principles of Mendelian genetics still hold true. Inthe sections to follow, we consider some of the extensions of Mendelism. If Mendel had chosen an experimental system thatexhibited these genetic complexities, it’s possible that he would not have understood what his results meant.Incomplete DominanceMendel’s results, that traits are inherited as dominant and recessive pairs, contradicted the view at that time that offspringexhibited a blend of their parents’ traits. However, the heterozygote phenotype occasionally does appear to be intermediatebetween the two parents. For example, in the snapdragon, Antirrhinum majus (Figure 12.7), a cross between a homozygousparent with white flowers (CWCW) and a homozygous parent with red flowers (CRCR) will produce offspring with pinkflowers (CRCW). (Note that different genotypic abbreviations are used for Mendelian extensions to distinguish these patternsfrom simple dominance and recessiveness.) This pattern of inheritance is described as incomplete dominance, denotingthe expression of two contrasting alleles such that the individual displays an intermediate phenotype. The allele for redflowers is incompletely dominant over the allele for white flowers. However, the results of a heterozygote self-cross can still
be predicted, just as with Mendelian dominant and recessive crosses. In this case, the genotypic ratio would be 1 CRCR:2CRCW:1 CWCW, and the phenotypic ratio would be 1:2:1 for red:pink:white.
CodominanceA variation on incomplete dominance is codominance, in which both alleles for the same characteristic are simultaneouslyexpressed in the heterozygote. An example of codominance is the MN blood groups of humans. The M and N allelesare expressed in the form of an M or N antigen present on the surface of red blood cells. Homozygotes (LMLM andLNLN) express either the M or the N allele, and heterozygotes (LMLN) express both alleles equally. In a self-cross betweenheterozygotes expressing a codominant trait, the three possible offspring genotypes are phenotypically distinct. However,the 1:2:1 genotypic ratio characteristic of a Mendelian monohybrid cross still applies.Multiple AllelesMendel implied that only two alleles, one dominant and one recessive, could exist for a given gene. We now know that thisis an oversimplification. Although individual humans (and all diploid organisms) can only have two alleles for a given gene,multiple alleles may exist at the population level such that many combinations of two alleles are observed. Note that whenmany alleles exist for the same gene, the convention is to denote the most common phenotype or genotype among wildanimals as the wild type (often abbreviated “+”); this is considered the standard or norm. All other phenotypes or genotypesare considered variants of this standard, meaning that they deviate from the wild type. The variant may be recessive ordominant to the wild-type allele.An example of multiple alleles is coat color in rabbits (Figure 12.8). Here, four alleles exist for the c gene. The wild-typeversion, C+C+, is expressed as brown fur. The chinchilla phenotype, cchcch, is expressed as black-tipped white fur. TheHimalayan phenotype, chch, has black fur on the extremities and white fur elsewhere. Finally, the albino, or “colorless”phenotype, cc, is expressed as white fur. In cases of multiple alleles, dominance hierarchies can exist. In this case, the wildtypeallele is dominant over all the others, chinchilla is incompletely dominant over Himalayan and albino, and Himalayanis dominant over albino. This hierarchy, or allelic series, was revealed by observing the phenotypes of each possibleheterozygote offspring.
The complete dominance of a wild-type phenotype over all other mutants often occurs as an effect of “dosage” of a specificgene product, such that the wild-type allele supplies the correct amount of gene product whereas the mutant alleles cannot.For the allelic series in rabbits, the wild-type allele may supply a given dosage of fur pigment, whereas the mutants supplya lesser dosage or none at all. Interestingly, the Himalayan phenotype is the result of an allele that produces a temperaturesensitivegene product that only produces pigment in the cooler extremities of the rabbit’s body.Alternatively, one mutant allele can be dominant over all other phenotypes, including the wild type. This may occur whenthe mutant allele somehow interferes with the genetic message so that even a heterozygote with one wild-type allele copyexpresses the mutant phenotype. One way in which the mutant allele can interfere is by enhancing the function of the wildtypegene product or changing its distribution in the body. One example of this is the Antennapedia mutation in Drosophila(Figure 12.9). In this case, the mutant allele expands the distribution of the gene product, and as a result, the Antennapediaheterozygote develops legs on its head where its antennae should be.
As seen in comparing the wild-type Drosophila (left) and the Antennapedia mutant (right), theAntennapedia mutant has legs on its head in place of antennae.
Multiple Alleles Confer Drug Resistance in the Malaria ParasiteMalaria is a parasitic disease in humans that is transmitted by infected female mosquitoes, includingAnopheles gambiae (Figure 12.10a), and is characterized by cyclic high fevers, chills, flu-like symptoms,and severe anemia. Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax are the most common causative agents of malaria,and P. falciparum is the most deadly (Figure 12.10b). When promptly and correctly treated, P. falciparummalaria has a mortality rate of 0.1 percent. However, in some parts of the world, the parasite has evolvedresistance to commonly used malaria treatments, so the most effective malarial treatments can vary bygeographic region.
The (a) Anopheles gambiae, or African malaria mosquito, acts as a vector in the transmission tohumans of the malaria-causing parasite (b) Plasmodium falciparum, here visualized using false-color transmissionelectron microscopy. (credit a: James D. Gathany; credit b: Ute Frevert; false color by Margaret Shear; scale-bardata from Matt Russell)In Southeast Asia, Africa, and South America, P. falciparum has developed resistance to the anti-malarialdrugs chloroquine, mefloquine, and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine. P. falciparum, which is haploid during thelife stage in which it is infectious to humans, has evolved multiple drug-resistant mutant alleles of the dhpsgene. Varying degrees of sulfadoxine resistance are associated with each of these alleles. Being haploid, P.falciparum needs only one drug-resistant allele to express this trait.In Southeast Asia, different sulfadoxine-resistant alleles of the dhps gene are localized to differentgeographic regions. This is a common evolutionary phenomenon that occurs because drug-resistantmutants arise in a population and interbreed with other P. falciparum isolates in close proximity. Sulfadoxineresistantparasites cause considerable human hardship in regions where this drug is widely used as anover-the-counter malaria remedy. As is common with pathogens that multiply to large numbers within aninfection cycle, P. falciparum evolves relatively rapidly (over a decade or so) in response to the selectivepressure of commonly used anti-malarial drugs. For this reason, scientists must constantly work to developnew drugs or drug combinations to combat the worldwide malaria burden.
X-Linked TraitsIn humans, as well as in many other animals and some plants, the sex of the individual is determined by sex chromosomes.The sex chromosomes are one pair of non-homologous chromosomes. Until now, we have only considered inheritancepatterns among non-sex chromosomes, or autosomes. In addition to 22 homologous pairs of autosomes, human femaleshave a homologous pair of X chromosomes, whereas human males have an XY chromosome pair. Although the Ychromosome contains a small region of similarity to the X chromosome so that they can pair during meiosis, the
Y chromosome is much shorter and contains many fewer genes. When a gene being examined is present on the Xchromosome, but not on the Y chromosome, it is said to be X-linked.Eye color in Drosophila was one of the first X-linked traits to be identified. Thomas Hunt Morgan mapped this trait to theX chromosome in 1910. Like humans, Drosophila males have an XY chromosome pair, and females are XX. In flies, thewild-type eye color is red (XW) and it is dominant to white eye color (Xw) (Figure 12.11). Because of the location of theeye-color gene, reciprocal crosses do not produce the same offspring ratios. Males are said to be hemizygous, because theyhave only one allele for any X-linked characteristic. Hemizygosity makes the descriptions of dominance and recessivenessirrelevant for XY males. Drosophila males lack a second allele copy on the Y chromosome; that is, their genotype can onlybe XWY or XwY. In contrast, females have two allele copies of this gene and can be XWXW, XWXw, or XwXw.
In Drosophila, several genes determine eye color. The genes for white and vermilion eye colors arelocated on the X chromosome. Others are located on the autosomes. Clockwise from top left are brown, cinnabar,sepia, vermilion, white, and red. Red eye color is wild-type and is dominant to white eye color.In an X-linked cross, the genotypes of F1 and F2 offspring depend on whether the recessive trait was expressed by themale or the female in the P1 generation. With regard to Drosophila eye color, when the P1 male expresses the white-eyephenotype and the female is homozygous red-eyed, all members of the F1 generation exhibit red eyes (Figure 12.12).The F1 females are heterozygous (XWXw), and the males are all XWY, having received their X chromosome from thehomozygous dominant P1 female and their Y chromosome from the P1 male. A subsequent cross between the XWXw femaleand the XWY male would produce only red-eyed females (with XWXW or XWXw genotypes) and both red- and white-eyedmales (with XWY or XwY genotypes). Now, consider a cross between a homozygous white-eyed female and a male withred eyes. The F1 generation would exhibit only heterozygous red-eyed females (XWXw) and only white-eyed males (XwY).Half of the F2 females would be red-eyed (XWXw) and half would be white-eyed (XwXw). Similarly, half of the F2 maleswould be red-eyed (XWY) and half would be white-eyed (XwY).
Punnett square analysis is used to determine the ratio of offspring from a cross between a red-eyedmale fruit fly and a white-eyed female fruit fly.
Discoveries in fruit fly genetics can be applied to human genetics. When a female parent is homozygous for a recessive Xlinkedtrait, she will pass the trait on to 100 percent of her offspring. Her male offspring are, therefore, destined to expressthe trait, as they will inherit their father's Y chromosome. In humans, the alleles for certain conditions (some forms of colorblindness, hemophilia, and muscular dystrophy) are X-linked. Females who are heterozygous for these diseases are said tobe carriers and may not exhibit any phenotypic effects. These females will pass the disease to half of their sons and will passcarrier status to half of their daughters; therefore, recessive X-linked traits appear more frequently in males than females.In some groups of organisms with sex chromosomes, the gender with the non-homologous sex chromosomes is the femalerather than the male. This is the case for all birds. In this case, sex-linked traits will be more likely to appear in the female,in which they are hemizygous.Human Sex-linked DisordersSex-linkage studies in Morgan’s laboratory provided the fundamentals for understanding X-linked recessive disorders inhumans, which include red-green color blindness, and Types A and B hemophilia. Because human males need to inherit onlyone recessive mutant X allele to be affected, X-linked disorders are disproportionately observed in males. Females mustinherit recessive X-linked alleles from both of their parents in order to express the trait. When they inherit one recessiveX-linked mutant allele and one dominant X-linked wild-type allele, they are carriers of the trait and are typically unaffected.Carrier females can manifest mild forms of the trait due to the inactivation of the dominant allele located on one of the Xchromosomes. However, female carriers can contribute the trait to their sons, resulting in the son exhibiting the trait, or theycan contribute the recessive allele to their daughters, resulting in the daughters being carriers of the trait (Figure 12.13).Although some Y-linked recessive disorders exist, typically they are associated with infertility in males and are thereforenot transmitted to subsequent generations.
The son of a woman who is a carrier of a recessive X-linked disorder will have a 50 percent chance ofbeing affected. A daughter will not be affected, but she will have a 50 percent chance of being a carrier like her mother.
LethalityA large proportion of genes in an individual’s genome are essential for survival. Occasionally, a nonfunctional allele for anessential gene can arise by mutation and be transmitted in a population as long as individuals with this allele also have awild-type, functional copy. The wild-type allele functions at a capacity sufficient to sustain life and is therefore consideredto be dominant over the nonfunctional allele. However, consider two heterozygous parents that have a genotype of wildtype/nonfunctional mutant for a hypothetical essential gene. In one quarter of their offspring, we would expect to observeindividuals that are homozygous recessive for the nonfunctional allele. Because the gene is essential, these individualsmight fail to develop past fertilization, die in utero, or die later in life, depending on what life stage requires this gene. Aninheritance pattern in which an allele is only lethal in the homozygous form and in which the heterozygote may be normalor have some altered non-lethal phenotype is referred to as recessive lethal.For crosses between heterozygous individuals with a recessive lethal allele that causes death before birth when homozygous,only wild-type homozygotes and heterozygotes would be observed. The genotypic ratio would therefore be 2:1. In otherinstances, the recessive lethal allele might also exhibit a dominant (but not lethal) phenotype in the heterozygote. Forinstance, the recessive lethal Curly allele in Drosophila affects wing shape in the heterozygote form but is lethal in thehomozygote.A single copy of the wild-type allele is not always sufficient for normal functioning or even survival. The dominant lethalinheritance pattern is one in which an allele is lethal both in the homozygote and the heterozygote; this allele can only betransmitted if the lethality phenotype occurs after reproductive age. Individuals with mutations that result in dominant lethal
alleles fail to survive even in the heterozygote form. Dominant lethal alleles are very rare because, as you might expect, theallele only lasts one generation and is not transmitted. However, just as the recessive lethal allele might not immediatelymanifest the phenotype of death, dominant lethal alleles also might not be expressed until adulthood. Once the individualreaches reproductive age, the allele may be unknowingly passed on, resulting in a delayed death in both generations. Anexample of this in humans is Huntington’s disease, in which the nervous system gradually wastes away (Figure 12.14).People who are heterozygous for the dominant Huntington allele (Hh) will inevitably develop the fatal disease. However,the onset of Huntington’s disease may not occur until age 40, at which point the afflicted persons may have already passedthe allele to 50 percent of their offspring.
The neuron in the center of this micrograph (yellow) has nuclear inclusions characteristic of Huntington’sdisease (orange area in the center of the neuron). Huntington’s disease occurs when an abnormal dominant allele forthe Huntington gene is present. (credit: Dr. Steven Finkbeiner, Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, The Taube-Koret Center for Huntington's Disease Research, and the University of California San Francisco/Wikimedia)
Mendel generalized the results of his pea-plant experiments into four postulates, some of which are sometimes called“laws,” that describe the basis of dominant and recessive inheritance in diploid organisms. As you have learned, morecomplex extensions of Mendelism exist that do not exhibit the same F2 phenotypic ratios (3:1). Nevertheless, these lawssummarize the basics of classical genetics.Pairs of Unit Factors, or GenesMendel proposed first that paired unit factors of heredity were transmitted faithfully from generation to generation by thedissociation and reassociation of paired factors during gametogenesis and fertilization, respectively. After he crossed peas
with contrasting traits and found that the recessive trait resurfaced in the F2 generation, Mendel deduced that hereditaryfactors must be inherited as discrete units. This finding contradicted the belief at that time that parental traits were blendedin the offspring.Alleles Can Be Dominant or RecessiveMendel’s law of dominance states that in a heterozygote, one trait will conceal the presence of another trait for the samecharacteristic. Rather than both alleles contributing to a phenotype, the dominant allele will be expressed exclusively. Therecessive allele will remain “latent” but will be transmitted to offspring by the same manner in which the dominant allele istransmitted. The recessive trait will only be expressed by offspring that have two copies of this allele (Figure 12.15), andthese offspring will breed true when self-crossed.Since Mendel’s experiments with pea plants, other researchers have found that the law of dominance does not always holdtrue. Instead, several different patterns of inheritance have been found to exist.
Equal Segregation of AllelesObserving that true-breeding pea plants with contrasting traits gave rise to F1 generations that all expressed the dominanttrait and F2 generations that expressed the dominant and recessive traits in a 3:1 ratio, Mendel proposed the law ofsegregation. This law states that paired unit factors (genes) must segregate equally into gametes such that offspringhave an equal likelihood of inheriting either factor. For the F2 generation of a monohybrid cross, the following threepossible combinations of genotypes could result: homozygous dominant, heterozygous, or homozygous recessive. Becauseheterozygotes could arise from two different pathways (receiving one dominant and one recessive allele from either parent),and because heterozygotes and homozygous dominant individuals are phenotypically identical, the law supports Mendel’sobserved 3:1 phenotypic ratio. The equal segregation of alleles is the reason we can apply the Punnett square to accuratelypredict the offspring of parents with known genotypes. The physical basis of Mendel’s law of segregation is the first divisionof meiosis, in which the homologous chromosomes with their different versions of each gene are segregated into daughternuclei. The role of the meiotic segregation of chromosomes in sexual reproduction was not understood by the scientificcommunity during Mendel’s lifetime.Independent AssortmentMendel’s law of independent assortment states that genes do not influence each other with regard to the sorting ofalleles into gametes, and every possible combination of alleles for every gene is equally likely to occur. The independentassortment of genes can be illustrated by the dihybrid cross, a cross between two true-breeding parents that expressdifferent traits for two characteristics. Consider the characteristics of seed color and seed texture for two pea plants, one thathas green, wrinkled seeds (yyrr) and another that has yellow, round seeds (YYRR). Because each parent is homozygous, the
law of segregation indicates that the gametes for the green/wrinkled plant all are yr, and the gametes for the yellow/roundplant are all YR. Therefore, the F1 generation of offspring all are YyRr.
For the F2 generation, the law of segregation requires that each gamete receive either an R allele or an r allele along witheither a Y allele or a y allele. The law of independent assortment states that a gamete into which an r allele sorted wouldbe equally likely to contain either a Y allele or a y allele. Thus, there are four equally likely gametes that can be formedwhen the YyRr heterozygote is self-crossed, as follows: YR, Yr, yR, and yr. Arranging these gametes along the top and leftof a 4 × 4 Punnett square (Figure 12.16) gives us 16 equally likely genotypic combinations. From these genotypes, weinfer a phenotypic ratio of 9 round/yellow:3 round/green:3 wrinkled/yellow:1 wrinkled/green (Figure 12.16). These are theoffspring ratios we would expect, assuming we performed the crosses with a large enough sample size.Because of independent assortment and dominance, the 9:3:3:1 dihybrid phenotypic ratio can be collapsed into two 3:1ratios, characteristic of any monohybrid cross that follows a dominant and recessive pattern. Ignoring seed color andconsidering only seed texture in the above dihybrid cross, we would expect that three quarters of the F2 generation offspringwould be round, and one quarter would be wrinkled. Similarly, isolating only seed color, we would assume that threequarters of the F2 offspring would be yellow and one quarter would be green. The sorting of alleles for texture and colorare independent events, so we can apply the product rule. Therefore, the proportion of round and yellow F2 offspring isexpected to be (3/4) × (3/4) = 9/16, and the proportion of wrinkled and green offspring is expected to be (1/4) × (1/4) = 1/16.These proportions are identical to those obtained using a Punnett square. Round, green and wrinkled, yellow offspring canalso be calculated using the product rule, as each of these genotypes includes one dominant and one recessive phenotype.Therefore, the proportion of each is calculated as (3/4) × (1/4) = 3/16.The law of independent assortment also indicates that a cross between yellow, wrinkled (YYrr) and green, round (yyRR)parents would yield the same F1 and F2 offspring as in the YYRR x yyrr cross.
The physical basis for the law of independent assortment also lies in meiosis I, in which the different homologous pairs lineup in random orientations. Each gamete can contain any combination of paternal and maternal chromosomes (and thereforethe genes on them) because the orientation of tetrads on the metaphase plane is random.Forked-Line MethodWhen more than two genes are being considered, the Punnett-square method becomes unwieldy. For instance, examininga cross involving four genes would require a 16 × 16 grid containing 256 boxes. It would be extremely cumbersome tomanually enter each genotype. For more complex crosses, the forked-line and probability methods are preferred.To prepare a forked-line diagram for a cross between F1 heterozygotes resulting from a cross between AABBCC and aabbccparents, we first create rows equal to the number of genes being considered, and then segregate the alleles in each rowon forked lines according to the probabilities for individual monohybrid crosses (Figure 12.17). We then multiply thevalues along each forked path to obtain the F2 offspring probabilities. Note that this process is a diagrammatic version ofthe product rule. The values along each forked pathway can be multiplied because each gene assorts independently. For atrihybrid cross, the F2 phenotypic ratio is 27:9:9:9:3:3:3:1.
The forked-line method can be used to analyze a trihybrid cross. Here, the probability for color inthe F2 generation occupies the top row (3 yellow:1 green). The probability for shape occupies the second row (3round:1 wrinked), and the probability for height occupies the third row (3 tall:1 dwarf). The probability for each possiblecombination of traits is calculated by multiplying the probability for each individual trait. Thus, the probability of F2offspring having yellow, round, and tall traits is 3 × 3 × 3, or 27.Probability MethodWhile the forked-line method is a diagrammatic approach to keeping track of probabilities in a cross, the probability methodgives the proportions of offspring expected to exhibit each phenotype (or genotype) without the added visual assistance.Both methods make use of the product rule and consider the alleles for each gene separately. Earlier, we examined thephenotypic proportions for a trihybrid cross using the forked-line method; now we will use the probability method toexamine the genotypic proportions for a cross with even more genes.For a trihybrid cross, writing out the forked-line method is tedious, albeit not as tedious as using the Punnett-square method.To fully demonstrate the power of the probability method, however, we can consider specific genetic calculations. Forinstance, for a tetrahybrid cross between individuals that are heterozygotes for all four genes, and in which all four genesare sorting independently and in a dominant and recessive pattern, what proportion of the offspring will be expected tobe homozygous recessive for all four alleles? Rather than writing out every possible genotype, we can use the probabilitymethod.We know that for each gene, the fraction of homozygous recessive offspring will be 1/4. Therefore, multiplying thisfraction for each of the four genes, (1/4) × (1/4) × (1/4) × (1/4), we determine that 1/256 of the offspring will be quadruplyhomozygous recessive.For the same tetrahybrid cross, what is the expected proportion of offspring that have the dominant phenotype at all fourloci? We can answer this question using phenotypic proportions, but let’s do it the hard way—using genotypic proportions.The question asks for the proportion of offspring that are 1) homozygous dominant at A or heterozygous at A, and 2)homozygous at B or heterozygous at B, and so on. Noting the “or” and “and” in each circumstance makes clear where toapply the sum and product rules. The probability of a homozygous dominant at A is 1/4 and the probability of a heterozygoteat A is 1/2. The probability of the homozygote or the heterozygote is 1/4 + 1/2 = 3/4 using the sum rule. The same probabilitycan be obtained in the same way for each of the other genes, so that the probability of a dominant phenotype at A and B andC and D is, using the product rule, equal to 3/4 × 3/4 × 3/4 × 3/4, or 27/64. If you are ever unsure about how to combineprobabilities, returning to the forked-line method should make it clear.
Rules for Multihybrid FertilizationPredicting the genotypes and phenotypes of offspring from given crosses is the best way to test your knowledge ofMendelian genetics. Given a multihybrid cross that obeys independent assortment and follows a dominant and recessivepattern, several generalized rules exist; you can use these rules to check your results as you work through geneticscalculations (Table 12.5). To apply these rules, first you must determine n, the number of heterozygous gene pairs (thenumber of genes segregating two alleles each). For example, a cross between AaBb and AaBb heterozygotes has an n of 2.In contrast, a cross between AABb and AABb has an n of 1 because A is not heterozygous.
Linked Genes Violate the Law of Independent AssortmentAlthough all of Mendel’s pea characteristics behaved according to the law of independent assortment, we now knowthat some allele combinations are not inherited independently of each other. Genes that are located on separate nonhomologouschromosomes will always sort independently. However, each chromosome contains hundreds or thousands ofgenes, organized linearly on chromosomes like beads on a string. The segregation of alleles into gametes can be influencedby linkage, in which genes that are located physically close to each other on the same chromosome are more likely to beinherited as a pair. However, because of the process of recombination, or “crossover,” it is possible for two genes on thesame chromosome to behave independently, or as if they are not linked. To understand this, let’s consider the biologicalbasis of gene linkage and recombination.Homologous chromosomes possess the same genes in the same linear order. The alleles may differ on homologouschromosome pairs, but the genes to which they correspond do not. In preparation for the first division of meiosis,homologous chromosomes replicate and synapse. Like genes on the homologs align with each other. At this stage,segments of homologous chromosomes exchange linear segments of genetic material (Figure 12.18). This process is calledrecombination, or crossover, and it is a common genetic process. Because the genes are aligned during recombination, thegene order is not altered. Instead, the result of recombination is that maternal and paternal alleles are combined onto thesame chromosome. Across a given chromosome, several recombination events may occur, causing extensive shuffling ofalleles.
The process of crossover, or recombination, occurs when two homologous chromosomes align duringmeiosis and exchange a segment of genetic material. Here, the alleles for gene C were exchanged. The result is tworecombinant and two non-recombinant chromosomes.When two genes are located in close proximity on the same chromosome, they are considered linked, and their allelestend to be transmitted through meiosis together. To exemplify this, imagine a dihybrid cross involving flower color andplant height in which the genes are next to each other on the chromosome. If one homologous chromosome has allelesfor tall plants and red flowers, and the other chromosome has genes for short plants and yellow flowers, then when thegametes are formed, the tall and red alleles will go together into a gamete and the short and yellow alleles will go into othergametes. These are called the parental genotypes because they have been inherited intact from the parents of the individualproducing gametes. But unlike if the genes were on different chromosomes, there will be no gametes with tall and yellowalleles and no gametes with short and red alleles. If you create the Punnett square with these gametes, you will see thatthe classical Mendelian prediction of a 9:3:3:1 outcome of a dihybrid cross would not apply. As the distance between twogenes increases, the probability of one or more crossovers between them increases, and the genes behave more like they areon separate chromosomes. Geneticists have used the proportion of recombinant gametes (the ones not like the parents) asa measure of how far apart genes are on a chromosome. Using this information, they have constructed elaborate maps ofgenes on chromosomes for well-studied organisms, including humans.Mendel’s seminal publication makes no mention of linkage, and many researchers have questioned whether he encounteredlinkage but chose not to publish those crosses out of concern that they would invalidate his independent assortmentpostulate. The garden pea has seven chromosomes, and some have suggested that his choice of seven characteristics wasnot a coincidence. However, even if the genes he examined were not located on separate chromosomes, it is possible thathe simply did not observe linkage because of the extensive shuffling effects of recombination.
Testing the Hypothesis of Independent AssortmentTo better appreciate the amount of labor and ingenuity that went into Mendel’s experiments, proceedthrough one of Mendel’s dihybrid crosses.Question: What will be the offspring of a dihybrid cross?Background: Consider that pea plants mature in one growing season, and you have access to a largegarden in which you can cultivate thousands of pea plants. There are several true-breeding plants with thefollowing pairs of traits: tall plants with inflated pods, and dwarf plants with constricted pods. Before theplants have matured, you remove the pollen-producing organs from the tall/inflated plants in your crosses toprevent self-fertilization. Upon plant maturation, the plants are manually crossed by transferring pollen fromthe dwarf/constricted plants to the stigmata of the tall/inflated plants.Hypothesis: Both trait pairs will sort independently according to Mendelian laws. When the true-breedingparents are crossed, all of the F1 offspring are tall and have inflated pods, which indicates that the talland inflated traits are dominant over the dwarf and constricted traits, respectively. A self-cross of the F1heterozygotes results in 2,000 F2 progeny.Test the hypothesis: Because each trait pair sorts independently, the ratios of tall:dwarf andinflated:constricted are each expected to be 3:1. The tall/dwarf trait pair is called T/t, and the inflated/constricted trait pair is designated I/i. Each member of the F1 generation therefore has a genotype of TtIi.Construct a grid analogous to Figure 12.16, in which you cross two TtIi individuals. Each individual candonate four combinations of two traits: TI, Ti, tI, or ti, meaning that there are 16 possibilities of offspringgenotypes. Because the T and I alleles are dominant, any individual having one or two of those alleleswill express the tall or inflated phenotypes, respectively, regardless if they also have a t or i allele. Onlyindividuals that are tt or ii will express the dwarf and constricted alleles, respectively. As shown in Figure12.19, you predict that you will observe the following offspring proportions: tall/inflated:tall/constricted:dwarf/inflated:dwarf/constricted in a 9:3:3:1 ratio. Notice from the grid that when considering the tall/dwarf andinflated/constricted trait pairs in isolation, they are each inherited in 3:1 ratios.
This figure shows all possible combinations of offspring resulting from a dihybrid cross of pea plantsthat are heterozygous for the tall/dwarf and inflated/constricted alleles.Test the hypothesis: You cross the dwarf and tall plants and then self-cross the offspring. For best results,this is repeated with hundreds or even thousands of pea plants. What special precautions should be takenin the crosses and in growing the plants?
Analyze your data: You observe the following plant phenotypes in the F2 generation: 2706 tall/inflated,930 tall/constricted, 888 dwarf/inflated, and 300 dwarf/constricted. Reduce these findings to a ratio anddetermine if they are consistent with Mendelian laws.Form a conclusion: Were the results close to the expected 9:3:3:1 phenotypic ratio? Do the results supportthe prediction? What might be observed if far fewer plants were used, given that alleles segregate randomlyinto gametes? Try to imagine growing that many pea plants, and consider the potential for experimentalerror. For instance, what would happen if it was extremely windy one day?
EpistasisMendel’s studies in pea plants implied that the sum of an individual’s phenotype was controlled by genes (or as he calledthem, unit factors), such that every characteristic was distinctly and completely controlled by a single gene. In fact, singleobservable characteristics are almost always under the influence of multiple genes (each with two or more alleles) acting inunison. For example, at least eight genes contribute to eye color in humans.
In some cases, several genes can contribute to aspects of a common phenotype without their gene products ever directlyinteracting. In the case of organ development, for instance, genes may be expressed sequentially, with each gene adding tothe complexity and specificity of the organ. Genes may function in complementary or synergistic fashions, such that two ormore genes need to be expressed simultaneously to affect a phenotype. Genes may also oppose each other, with one genemodifying the expression of another.In epistasis, the interaction between genes is antagonistic, such that one gene masks or interferes with the expression ofanother. “Epistasis” is a word composed of Greek roots that mean “standing upon.” The alleles that are being masked orsilenced are said to be hypostatic to the epistatic alleles that are doing the masking. Often the biochemical basis of epistasisis a gene pathway in which the expression of one gene is dependent on the function of a gene that precedes or follows it inthe pathway.An example of epistasis is pigmentation in mice. The wild-type coat color, agouti (AA), is dominant to solid-colored fur(aa). However, a separate gene (C) is necessary for pigment production. A mouse with a recessive c allele at this locus isunable to produce pigment and is albino regardless of the allele present at locus A (Figure 12.20). Therefore, the genotypesAAcc, Aacc, and aacc all produce the same albino phenotype. A cross between heterozygotes for both genes (AaCc x AaCc)would generate offspring with a phenotypic ratio of 9 agouti:3 solid color:4 albino (Figure 12.20). In this case, the C geneis epistatic to the A gene.
In mice, the mottled agouti coat color (A) is dominant to a solid coloration, such as black or gray. A geneat a separate locus (C) is responsible for pigment production. The recessive c allele does not produce pigment, and amouse with the homozygous recessive cc genotype is albino regardless of the allele present at the A locus. Thus, theC gene is epistatic to the A gene.Epistasis can also occur when a dominant allele masks expression at a separate gene. Fruit color in summer squash isexpressed in this way. Homozygous recessive expression of the W gene (ww) coupled with homozygous dominant orheterozygous expression of the Y gene (YY or Yy) generates yellow fruit, and the wwyy genotype produces green fruit.However, if a dominant copy of the W gene is present in the homozygous or heterozygous form, the summer squash willproduce white fruit regardless of the Y alleles. A cross between white heterozygotes for both genes (WwYy × WwYy) wouldproduce offspring with a phenotypic ratio of 12 white:3 yellow:1 green.Finally, epistasis can be reciprocal such that either gene, when present in the dominant (or recessive) form, expresses thesame phenotype. In the shepherd’s purse plant (Capsella bursa-pastoris), the characteristic of seed shape is controlled bytwo genes in a dominant epistatic relationship. When the genes A and B are both homozygous recessive (aabb), the seedsare ovoid. If the dominant allele for either of these genes is present, the result is triangular seeds. That is, every possiblegenotype other than aabb results in triangular seeds, and a cross between heterozygotes for both genes (AaBb x AaBb)would yield offspring with a phenotypic ratio of 15 triangular:1 ovoid.As you work through genetics problems, keep in mind that any single characteristic that results in a phenotypic ratio thattotals 16 is typical of a two-gene interaction. Recall the phenotypic inheritance pattern for Mendel’s dihybrid cross, whichconsidered two non-interacting genes—9:3:3:1. Similarly, we would expect interacting gene pairs to also exhibit ratiosexpressed as 16 parts. Note that we are assuming the interacting genes are not linked; they are still assorting independentlyinto gametes.