The leaf chameleon (Brookesia micra) was discovered in northern Madagascar in 2012. At just over oneinch long, it is the smallest known chameleon.
Animal evolution began in the ocean over 600 million years ago with tiny creatures that probably do not resemble anyliving organism today. Since then, animals have evolved into a highly diverse kingdom. Although over one million extant(currently living) species of animals have been identified, scientists are continually discovering more species as they exploreecosystems around the world. The number of extant species is estimated to be between 3 and 30 million.But what is an animal? While we can easily identify dogs, birds, fish, spiders, and worms as animals, other organisms,such as corals and sponges, are not as easy to classify. Animals vary in complexity—from sea sponges to crickets tochimpanzees—and scientists are faced with the difficult task of classifying them within a unified system. They must identifytraits that are common to all animals as well as traits that can be used to distinguish among related groups of animals. Theanimal classification system characterizes animals based on their anatomy, morphology, evolutionary history, features ofembryological development, and genetic makeup. This classification scheme is constantly developing as new informationabout species arises. Understanding and classifying the great variety of living species help us better understand how toconserve the diversity of life on earth.
Even though members of the animal kingdom are incredibly diverse, most animals share certain features that distinguishthem from organisms in other kingdoms. All animals are eukaryotic, multicellular organisms, and almost all animals havea complex tissue structure with differentiated and specialized tissues. Most animals are motile, at least during certain lifestages. All animals require a source of food and are therefore heterotrophic, ingesting other living or dead organisms; thisfeature distinguishes them from autotrophic organisms, such as most plants, which synthesize their own nutrients throughphotosynthesis. As heterotrophs, animals may be carnivores, herbivores, omnivores, or parasites (Figure 27.2ab). Mostanimals reproduce sexually, and the offspring pass through a series of developmental stages that establish a determined andfixed body plan. The body plan refers to the morphology of an animal, determined by developmental cues.
All animals are heterotrophs that derive energy from food. The (a) black bear is an omnivore, eating bothplants and animals. The (b) heartworm Dirofilaria immitis is a parasite that derives energy from its hosts. It spends itslarval stage in mosquitoes and its adult stage infesting the heart of dogs and other mammals, as shown here.
Complex Tissue StructureAs multicellular organisms, animals differ from plants and fungi because their cells don’t have cell walls, their cells maybe embedded in an extracellular matrix (such as bone, skin, or connective tissue), and their cells have unique structuresfor intercellular communication (such as gap junctions). In addition, animals possess unique tissues, absent in fungi andplants, which allow coordination (nerve tissue) of motility (muscle tissue). Animals are also characterized by specializedconnective tissues that provide structural support for cells and organs. This connective tissue constitutes the extracellularsurroundings of cells and is made up of organic and inorganic materials. In vertebrates, bone tissue is a type of connectivetissue that supports the entire body structure. The complex bodies and activities of vertebrates demand such supportivetissues. Epithelial tissues cover, line, protect, and secrete. Epithelial tissues include the epidermis of the integument, thelining of the digestive tract and trachea, and make up the ducts of the liver and glands of advanced animals.The animal kingdom is divided into Parazoa (sponges) and Eumetazoa (all other animals). As very simple animals, theorganisms in group Parazoa (“beside animal”) do not contain true specialized tissues; although they do possess specializedcells that perform different functions, those cells are not organized into tissues. These organisms are considered animalssince they lack the ability to make their own food. Animals with true tissues are in the group Eumetazoa (“true animals”).When we think of animals, we usually think of Eumetazoans, since most animals fall into this category.The different types of tissues in true animals are responsible for carrying out specific functions for the organism. Thisdifferentiation and specialization of tissues is part of what allows for such incredible animal diversity. For example, theevolution of nerve tissues and muscle tissues has resulted in animals’ unique ability to rapidly sense and respond to changes in their environment. This allows animals to survive in environments where they must compete with other species to meettheir nutritional demands.
Animal Reproduction and DevelopmentMost animals are diploid organisms, meaning that their body (somatic) cells are diploid and haploid reproductive (gamete)cells are produced through meiosis. Some exceptions exist: For example, in bees, wasps, and ants, the male is haploidbecause it develops from unfertilized eggs. Most animals undergo sexual reproduction: This fact distinguishes animalsfrom fungi, protists, and bacteria, where asexual reproduction is common or exclusive. However, a few groups, such ascnidarians, flatworm, and roundworms, undergo asexual reproduction, although nearly all of those animals also have asexual phase to their life cycle.Processes of Animal Reproduction and Embryonic DevelopmentDuring sexual reproduction, the haploid gametes of the male and female individuals of a species combine in a process calledfertilization. Typically, the small, motile male sperm fertilizes the much larger, sessile female egg. This process produces adiploid fertilized egg called a zygote.Some animal species—including sea stars and sea anemones, as well as some insects, reptiles, and fish—are capable ofasexual reproduction. The most common forms of asexual reproduction for stationary aquatic animals include buddingand fragmentation, where part of a parent individual can separate and grow into a new individual. In contrast, a formof asexual reproduction found in certain insects and vertebrates is called parthenogenesis (or “virgin beginning”), whereunfertilized eggs can develop into new male offspring. This type of parthenogenesis is called haplodiploidy. These types ofasexual reproduction produce genetically identical offspring, which is disadvantageous from the perspective of evolutionaryadaptability because of the potential buildup of deleterious mutations. However, for animals that are limited in their capacityto attract mates, asexual reproduction can ensure genetic propagation.After fertilization, a series of developmental stages occur during which primary germ layers are established and reorganizeto form an embryo. During this process, animal tissues begin to specialize and organize into organs and organ systems,determining their future morphology and physiology. Some animals, such as grasshoppers, undergo incompletemetamorphosis, in which the young resemble the adult. Other animals, such as some insects, undergo completemetamorphosis where individuals enter one or more larval stages that may in differ in structure and function from the adult(Figure 27.3). For the latter, the young and the adult may have different diets, limiting competition for food between them.Regardless of whether a species undergoes complete or incomplete metamorphosis, the series of developmental stages ofthe embryo remains largely the same for most members of the animal kingdom.
The grasshopper undergoes incomplete metamorphosis. (b) The butterfly undergoes completemetamorphosis.
The process of animal development begins with the cleavage, or series of mitotic cell divisions, of the zygote (Figure27.4). Three cell divisions transform the single-celled zygote into an eight-celled structure. After further cell division andrearrangement of existing cells, a 6–32-celled hollow structure called a blastula is formed. Next, the blastula undergoesfurther cell division and cellular rearrangement during a process called gastrulation. This leads to the formation of the nextdevelopmental stage, the gastrula, in which the future digestive cavity is formed. Different cell layers (called germ layers)are formed during gastrulation. These germ layers are programmed to develop into certain tissue types, organs, and organsystems during a process called organogenesis.
During embryonic development, the zygote undergoes a series of mitotic cell divisions, or cleavages, toform an eight-cell stage, then a hollow blastula. During a process called gastrulation, the blastula folds inward to forma cavity in the gastrula.
The Role of Homeobox (Hox) Genes in Animal DevelopmentSince the early 19th century, scientists have observed that many animals, from the very simple to the complex, shared similarembryonic morphology and development. Surprisingly, a human embryo and a frog embryo, at a certain stage of embryonicdevelopment, look remarkably alike. For a long time, scientists did not understand why so many animal species lookedsimilar during embryonic development but were very different as adults. They wondered what dictated the developmentaldirection that a fly, mouse, frog, or human embryo would take. Near the end of the 20th century, a particular class of geneswas discovered that had this very job. These genes that determine animal structure are called “homeotic genes,” and theycontain DNA sequences called homeoboxes. The animal genes containing homeobox sequences are specifically referredto as Hox genes. This family of genes is responsible for determining the general body plan, such as the number of bodysegments of an animal, the number and placement of appendages, and animal head-tail directionality. The first Hox genesto be sequenced were those from the fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster). A single Hox mutation in the fruit fly can resultin an extra pair of wings or even appendages growing from the “wrong” body part.While there are a great many genes that play roles in the morphological development of an animal, what makes Hox genesso powerful is that they serve as master control genes that can turn on or off large numbers of other genes. Hox genes dothis by coding transcription factors that control the expression of numerous other genes. Hox genes are homologous in theanimal kingdom, that is, the genetic sequences of Hox genes and their positions on chromosomes are remarkably similaracross most animals because of their presence in a common ancestor, from worms to flies, mice, and humans (Figure 27.5).One of the contributions to increased animal body complexity is that Hox genes have undergone at least two duplicationevents during animal evolution, with the additional genes allowing for more complex body types to evolve.
Scientists have developed a classification scheme that categorizes all members of the animal kingdom, although there areexceptions to most “rules” governing animal classification (Figure 27.6). Animals are primarily classified according tomorphological and developmental characteristics, such as a body plan. One of the most prominent features of the body planof true animals is that they are morphologically symmetrical. This means that their distribution of body parts is balancedalong an axis. Additional characteristics include the number of tissue layers formed during development, the presence orabsence of an internal body cavity, and other features of embryological development, such as the origin of the mouth andanus.
Animal Characterization Based on Body SymmetryAt a very basic level of classification, true animals can be largely divided into three groups based on the type of symmetry oftheir body plan: radially symmetrical, bilaterally symmetrical, and asymmetrical. Asymmetry is a unique feature of Parazoa(Figure 27.7a). Only a few animal groups display radial symmetry. All types of symmetry are well suited to meet the uniquedemands of a particular animal’s lifestyle.Radial symmetry is the arrangement of body parts around a central axis, as is seen in a drinking glass or pie. It results inanimals having top and bottom surfaces but no left and right sides, or front or back. The two halves of a radially symmetricalanimal may be described as the side with a mouth or “oral side,” and the side without a mouth (the “aboral side”). Thisform of symmetry marks the body plans of animals in the phyla Ctenophora and Cnidaria, including jellyfish and adult seaanemones (Figure 27.7bc). Radial symmetry equips these sea creatures (which may be sedentary or only capable of slowmovement or floating) to experience the environment equally from all directions.
The (a) sponge is asymmetrical. The (b) jellyfish and (c) anemone are radially symmetrical, and the (d)butterfly is bilaterally symmetrical.
Bilateral symmetry involves the division of the animal through a sagittal plane, resulting in two mirror image, right andleft halves, such as those of a butterfly (Figure 27.7d), crab, or human body. Animals with bilateral symmetry have a“head” and “tail” (anterior vs. posterior), front and back (dorsal vs. ventral), and right and left sides (Figure 27.8). All trueanimals except those with radial symmetry are bilaterally symmetrical. The evolution of bilateral symmetry that allowedfor the formation of anterior and posterior (head and tail) ends promoted a phenomenon called cephalization, which refersto the collection of an organized nervous system at the animal’s anterior end. In contrast to radial symmetry, which isbest suited for stationary or limited-motion lifestyles, bilateral symmetry allows for streamlined and directional motion.In evolutionary terms, this simple form of symmetry promoted active mobility and increased sophistication of resource-seekingand predator-prey relationships.
The bilaterally symmetrical human body can be divided into planes.Animals in the phylum Echinodermata (such as sea stars, sand dollars, and sea urchins) display radial symmetry as adults,but their larval stages exhibit bilateral symmetry. This is termed secondary radial symmetry. They are believed to haveevolved from bilaterally symmetrical animals; thus, they are classified as bilaterally symmetrical.
Animal Characterization Based on Features of EmbryologicalDevelopmentMost animal species undergo a separation of tissues into germ layers during embryonic development. Recall that thesegerm layers are formed during gastrulation, and that they are predetermined to develop into the animal’s specialized tissuesand organs. Animals develop either two or three embryonic germs layers (Figure 27.9). The animals that display radialsymmetry develop two germ layers, an inner layer (endoderm) and an outer layer (ectoderm). These animals are calleddiploblasts. Diploblasts have a non-living layer between the endoderm and ectoderm. More complex animals (those withbilateral symmetry) develop three tissue layers: an inner layer (endoderm), an outer layer (ectoderm), and a middle layer(mesoderm). Animals with three tissue layers are called triploblasts.
Each of the three germ layers is programmed to give rise to particular body tissues and organs. The endoderm gives riseto the lining of the digestive tract (including the stomach, intestines, liver, and pancreas), as well as to the lining of thetrachea, bronchi, and lungs of the respiratory tract, along with a few other structures. The ectoderm develops into the outerepithelial covering of the body surface, the central nervous system, and a few other structures. The mesoderm is the thirdgerm layer; it forms between the endoderm and ectoderm in triploblasts. This germ layer gives rise to all muscle tissues(including the cardiac tissues and muscles of the intestines), connective tissues such as the skeleton and blood cells, andmost other visceral organs such as the kidneys and the spleen.Presence or Absence of a CoelomFurther subdivision of animals with three germ layers (triploblasts) results in the separation of animals that may developan internal body cavity derived from mesoderm, called a coelom, and those that do not. This epithelial cell-lined coelomiccavity represents a space, usually filled with fluid, which lies between the visceral organs and the body wall. It houses manyorgans such as the digestive system, kidneys, reproductive organs, and heart, and contains the circulatory system. In someanimals, such as mammals, the part of the coelom called the pleural cavity provides space for the lungs to expand duringbreathing. The evolution of the coelom is associated with many functional advantages. Primarily, the coelom providescushioning and shock absorption for the major organ systems. Organs housed within the coelom can grow and move freely,which promotes optimal organ development and placement. The coelom also provides space for the diffusion of gases andnutrients, as well as body flexibility, promoting improved animal motility.Triploblasts that do not develop a coelom are called acoelomates, and their mesoderm region is completely filled withtissue, although they do still have a gut cavity. Examples of acoelomates include animals in the phylum Platyhelminthes,also known as flatworms. Animals with a true coelom are called eucoelomates (or coelomates) (Figure 27.10). A truecoelom arises entirely within the mesoderm germ layer and is lined by an epithelial membrane. This membrane also linesthe organs within the coelom, connecting and holding them in position while allowing them some free motion. Annelids,mollusks, arthropods, echinoderms, and chordates are all eucoelomates. A third group of triploblasts has a slightly differentcoelom derived partly from mesoderm and partly from endoderm, which is found between the two layers. Although stillfunctional, these are considered false coeloms, and those animals are called pseudocoelomates. The phylum Nematoda(roundworms) is an example of a pseudocoelomate. True coelomates can be further characterized based on certain featuresof their early embryological development.
Triploblasts may be (a) acoelomates, (b) eucoelomates, or (c) pseudocoelomates. Acoelomates have nobody cavity. Eucoelomates have a body cavity within the mesoderm, called a coelom, which is lined with mesoderm.Pseudocoelomates also have a body cavity, but it is sandwiched between the endoderm and mesoderm.
Embryonic Development of the MouthBilaterally symmetrical, tribloblastic eucoelomates can be further divided into two groups based on differences in their earlyembryonic development. Protostomes include arthropods, mollusks, and annelids. Deuterostomes include more complexanimals such as chordates but also some simple animals such as echinoderms. These two groups are separated based onwhich opening of the digestive cavity develops first: mouth or anus. The word protostome comes from the Greek wordmeaning “mouth first,” and deuterostome originates from the word meaning “mouth second” (in this case, the anus developsfirst). The mouth or anus develops from a structure called the blastopore (Figure 27.11). The blastopore is the indentationformed during the initial stages of gastrulation. In later stages, a second opening forms, and these two openings willeventually give rise to the mouth and anus (Figure 27.11). It has long been believed that the blastopore develops into themouth of protostomes, with the second opening developing into the anus; the opposite is true for deuterostomes. Recentevidence has challenged this view of the development of the blastopore of protostomes, however, and the theory remainsunder debate.Another distinction between protostomes and deuterostomes is the method of coelom formation, beginning from the gastrulastage. The coelom of most protostomes is formed through a process called schizocoely, meaning that during development,a solid mass of the mesoderm splits apart and forms the hollow opening of the coelom. Deuterostomes differ in that theircoelom forms through a process called enterocoely. Here, the mesoderm develops as pouches that are pinched off from theendoderm tissue. These pouches eventually fuse to form the mesoderm, which then gives rise to the coelom.The earliest distinction between protostomes and deuterostomes is the type of cleavage undergone by the zygote.Protostomes undergo spiral cleavage, meaning that the cells of one pole of the embryo are rotated, and thus misaligned,with respect to the cells of the opposite pole. This is due to the oblique angle of the cleavage. Deuterostomes undergo radialcleavage, where the cleavage axes are either parallel or perpendicular to the polar axis, resulting in the alignment of thecells between the two poles.
Eucoelomates can be divided into two groups based on their early embryonic development. Inprotostomes, part of the mesoderm separates to form the coelom in a process called schizocoely. In deuterostomes,the mesoderm pinches off to form the coelom in a process called enterocoely. It was long believed that the blastoporedeveloped into the mouth in protostomes and into the anus in deuterostomes, but recent evidence challenges thisbelief.There is a second distinction between the types of cleavage in protostomes and deuterostomes. In addition to spiral cleavage,protostomes also undergo determinate cleavage. This means that even at this early stage, the developmental fate ofeach embryonic cell is already determined. A cell does not have the ability to develop into any cell type. In contrast,deuterostomes undergo indeterminate cleavage, in which cells are not yet pre-determined at this early stage to developinto specific cell types. These cells are referred to as undifferentiated cells. This characteristic of deuterostomes is reflectedin the existence of familiar embryonic stem cells, which have the ability to develop into any cell type until their fate isprogrammed at a later developmental stage.Biologists strive to understand the evolutionary history and relationships of members of the animal kingdom, and all of life,for that matter. The study of phylogeny aims to determine the evolutionary relationships between phyla. Currently, mostbiologists divide the animal kingdom into 35 to 40 phyla. Scientists develop phylogenetic trees, which serve as hypothesesabout which species have evolved from which ancestorsRecall that until recently, only morphological characteristics and the fossil record were used to determine phylogeneticrelationships among animals. Scientific understanding of the distinctions and hierarchies between anatomical characteristicsprovided much of this knowledge. Used alone, however, this information can be misleading. Morphological characteristicsmay evolve multiple times, and independently, through evolutionary history. Analogous characteristics may appear similarbetween animals, but their underlying evolution may be very different. With the advancement of molecular technologies,modern phylogenetics is now informed by genetic and molecular analyses, in addition to traditional morphological andfossil data. With a growing understanding of genetics, the animal evolutionary tree has changed substantially and continuesto change as new DNA and RNA analyses are performed on additional animal species.Constructing an Animal Phylogenetic TreeThe current understanding of evolutionary relationships between animal, or Metazoa, phyla begins with the distinctionbetween “true” animals with true differentiated tissues, called Eumetazoa, and animal phyla that do not have truedifferentiated tissues (such as the sponges), called Parazoa. Both Parazoa and Eumetazoa evolved from a common ancestral organism that resembles the modern-day protists called choanoflagellates. These protist cells strongly resemble the spongechoanocyte cells today.
Cells of the protist choanoflagellate resemble sponge choanocyte cells. Beating of choanocyte flagelladraws water through the sponge so that nutrients can be extracted and waste removed.Eumetazoa are subdivided into radially symmetrical animals and bilaterally symmetrical animals, and are thus classifiedinto clade Bilateria or Radiata, respectively. As mentioned earlier, the cnidarians and ctenophores are animal phyla withtrue radial symmetry. All other Eumetazoa are members of the Bilateria clade. The bilaterally symmetrical animals arefurther divided into deuterostomes (including chordates and echinoderms) and two distinct clades of protostomes (includingecdysozoans and lophotrochozoans) (Figure 27.13ab). Ecdysozoa includes nematodes and arthropods; they are so namedfor a commonly found characteristic among the group: exoskeletal molting (termed ecdysis). Lophotrochozoa is named fortwo structural features, each common to certain phyla within the clade. Some lophotrochozoan phyla are characterized bya larval stage called trochophore larvae, and other phyla are characterized by the presence of a feeding structure called alophophore.
Animals that molt their exoskeletons, such as these (a) Madagascar hissing cockroaches, are in theclade Ecdysozoa. (b) Phoronids are in the clade Lophotrochozoa. The tentacles are part of a feeding structure calleda lophophore.
Modern Advances in Phylogenetic Understanding Come fromMolecular AnalysesThe phylogenetic groupings are continually being debated and refined by evolutionary biologists. Each year, new evidenceemerges that further alters the relationships described by a phylogenetic tree diagram.
Nucleic acid and protein analyses have greatly informed the modern phylogenetic animal tree. These data come from avariety of molecular sources, such as mitochondrial DNA, nuclear DNA, ribosomal RNA (rRNA), and certain cellularproteins. Many evolutionary relationships in the modern tree have only recently been determined due to molecular evidence.For example, a previously classified group of animals called lophophorates, which included brachiopods and bryozoans,were long-thought to be primitive deuterostomes. Extensive molecular analysis using rRNA data found these animals to beprotostomes, more closely related to annelids and mollusks. This discovery allowed for the distinction of the protostomeclade, the lophotrochozoans. Molecular data have also shed light on some differences within the lophotrochozoan group,and some scientists believe that the phyla Platyhelminthes and Rotifera within this group should actually belong to theirown group of protostomes termed Platyzoa.Molecular research similar to the discoveries that brought about the distinction of the lophotrochozoan clade has alsorevealed a dramatic rearrangement of the relationships between mollusks, annelids, arthropods, and nematodes, and a newecdysozoan clade was formed. Due to morphological similarities in their segmented body types, annelids and arthropodswere once thought to be closely related. However, molecular evidence has revealed that arthropods are actually more closelyrelated to nematodes, now comprising the ecdysozoan clade, and annelids are more closely related to mollusks, brachiopods,and other phyla in the lophotrochozoan clade. These two clades now make up the protostomes.Another change to former phylogenetic groupings because of molecular analyses includes the emergence of an entirely newphylum of worm called Acoelomorpha. These acoel flatworms were long thought to belong to the phylum Platyhelminthesbecause of their similar “flatworm” morphology. However, molecular analyses revealed this to be a false relationship andoriginally suggested that acoels represented living species of some of the earliest divergent bilaterians. More recent researchinto the acoelomorphs has called this hypothesis into question and suggested a closer relationship with deuterostomes. Theplacement of this new phylum remains disputed, but scientists agree that with sufficient molecular data, their true phylogenywill be determined.
Many questions regarding the origins and evolutionary history of the animal kingdom continue to be researched anddebated, as new fossil and molecular evidence change prevailing theories. Some of these questions include the following:How long have animals existed on Earth? What were the earliest members of the animal kingdom, and what organism wastheir common ancestor? While animal diversity increased during the Cambrian period of the Paleozoic era, 530 millionyears ago, modern fossil evidence suggests that primitive animal species existed much earlier.Pre-Cambrian Animal LifeThe time before the Cambrian period is known as the Ediacaran period (from about 635 million years ago to 543 millionyears ago), the final period of the late Proterozoic Neoproterozoic Era (Figure 27.14). It is believed that early animal life, termed Ediacaran biota, evolved from protists at this time. Some protest species called choanoflagellates closely resemblethe choanocyte cells in the simplest animals, sponges. In addition to their morphological similarity, molecular analyses haverevealed similar sequence homologies in their DNA.
Earth’s history is divided into eons, eras, and periods. Note that the Ediacaran period starts in theProterozoic eon and ends in the Cambrian period of the Phanerozoic eon. (b) Stages on the geological time scale arerepresented as a spiral.
The earliest life comprising Ediacaran biota was long believed to include only tiny, sessile, soft-bodied sea creatures.However, recently there has been increasing scientific evidence suggesting that more varied and complex animal specieslived during this time, and possibly even before the Ediacaran period.Fossils believed to represent the oldest animals with hard body parts were recently discovered in South Australia. Thesesponge-like fossils, named Coronacollina acula, date back as far as 560 million years, and are believed to show theexistence of hard body parts and spicules that extended 20–40 cm from the main body (estimated about 5 cm long). Otherfossils from the Ediacaran period are shown in Figure 27.15ab.
Fossils of (a) Cyclomedusa and (b) Dickinsonia date to 650 million years ago, during the Ediacaranperiod.
Another recent fossil discovery may represent the earliest animal species ever found. While the validity of this claim isstill under investigation, these primitive fossils appear to be small, one-centimeter long, sponge-like creatures. These fossilsfrom South Australia date back 650 million years, actually placing the putative animal before the great ice age extinctionevent that marked the transition between the Cryogenian period and the Ediacaran period. Until this discovery, mostscientists believed that there was no animal life prior to the Ediacaran period. Many scientists now believe that animals mayin fact have evolved during the Cryogenian period.The Cambrian Explosion of Animal LifeThe Cambrian period, occurring between approximately 542–488 million years ago, marks the most rapid evolution of newanimal phyla and animal diversity in Earth’s history. It is believed that most of the animal phyla in existence today hadtheir origins during this time, often referred to as the Cambrian explosion (Figure 27.16). Echinoderms, mollusks, worms, arthropods, and chordates arose during this period. One of the most dominant species during the Cambrian period was thetrilobite, an arthropod that was among the first animals to exhibit a sense of vision (Figure 27.17abcd).
An artist’s rendition depicts some organisms from the Cambrian period.
These fossils (a–d) belong to trilobites, extinct arthropods that appeared in the early Cambrian period,525 million years ago, and disappeared from the fossil record during a mass extinction at the end of the Permianperiod, about 250 million years ago.The cause of the Cambrian explosion is still debated. There are many theories that attempt to answer this question.Environmental changes may have created a more suitable environment for animal life. Examples of these changes includerising atmospheric oxygen levels and large increases in oceanic calcium concentrations that preceded the Cambrian period. Some scientists believe that an expansive, continental shelf with numerous shallow lagoons or poolsprovided the necessary living space for larger numbers of different types of animals to co-exist. There is also support fortheories that argue that ecological relationships between species, such as changes in the food web, competition for food andspace, and predator-prey relationships, were primed to promote a sudden massive coevolution of species. Yet other theoriesclaim genetic and developmental reasons for the Cambrian explosion. The morphological flexibility and complexity ofanimal development afforded by the evolution of Hox control genes may have provided the necessary opportunities forincreases in possible animal morphologies at the time of the Cambrian period. Theories that attempt to explain why theCambrian explosion happened must be able to provide valid reasons for the massive animal diversification, as well asexplain why it happened when it did. There is evidence that both supports and refutes each of the theories described above,and the answer may very well be a combination of these and other theories.
The oxygen concentration in Earth’s atmosphere rose sharply around 300 million years ago.However, unresolved questions about the animal diversification that took place during the Cambrian period remain. Forexample, we do not understand how the evolution of so many species occurred in such a short period of time. Was therereally an “explosion” of life at this particular time? Some scientists question the validity of the this idea, because there isincreasing evidence to suggest that more animal life existed prior to the Cambrian period and that other similar species’so-called explosions (or radiations) occurred later in history as well. Furthermore, the vast diversification of animal speciesthat appears to have begun during the Cambrian period continued well into the following Ordovician period. Despite someof these arguments, most scientists agree that the Cambrian period marked a time of impressively rapid animal evolutionand diversification that is unmatched elsewhere during history.
Post-Cambrian Evolution and Mass ExtinctionsThe periods that followed the Cambrian during the Paleozoic Era are marked by further animal evolution and theemergence of many new orders, families, and species. As animal phyla continued to diversify, new species adapted to newecological niches. During the Ordovician period, which followed the Cambrian period, plant life first appeared on land.This change allowed formerly aquatic animal species to invade land, feeding directly on plants or decaying vegetation.
Continual changes in temperature and moisture throughout the remainder of the Paleozoic Era due to continental platemovements encouraged the development of new adaptations to terrestrial existence in animals, such as limbed appendagesin amphibians and epidermal scales in reptiles.Changes in the environment often create new niches (living spaces) that contribute to rapid speciation and increaseddiversity. On the other hand, cataclysmic events, such as volcanic eruptions and meteor strikes that obliterate life, canresult in devastating losses of diversity. Such periods of mass extinction (Figure 27.19) have occurred repeatedly in theevolutionary record of life, erasing some genetic lines while creating room for others to evolve into the empty niches leftbehind. The end of the Permian period (and the Paleozoic Era) was marked by the largest mass extinction event in Earth’shistory, a loss of roughly 95 percent of the extant species at that time. Some of the dominant phyla in the world’s oceans,such as the trilobites, disappeared completely. On land, the disappearance of some dominant species of Permian reptilesmade it possible for a new line of reptiles to emerge, the dinosaurs. The warm and stable climatic conditions of the ensuingMesozoic Era promoted an explosive diversification of dinosaurs into every conceivable niche in land, air, and water. Plants,too, radiated into new landscapes and empty niches, creating complex communities of producers and consumers, some ofwhich became very large on the abundant food available.Another mass extinction event occurred at the end of the Cretaceous period, bringing the Mesozoic Era to an end. Skiesdarkened and temperatures fell as a large meteor impact and tons of volcanic ash blocked incoming sunlight. Plants died,herbivores and carnivores starved, and the mostly cold-blooded dinosaurs ceded their dominance of the landscape tomore warm-blooded mammals. In the following Cenozoic Era, mammals radiated into terrestrial and aquatic niches onceoccupied by dinosaurs, and birds, the warm-blooded offshoots of one line of the ruling reptiles, became aerial specialists.The appearance and dominance of flowering plants in the Cenozoic Era created new niches for insects, as well as for birdsand mammals. Changes in animal species diversity during the late Cretaceous and early Cenozoic were also promoted bya dramatic shift in Earth’s geography, as continental plates slid over the crust into their current positions, leaving someanimal groups isolated on islands and continents, or separated by mountain ranges or inland seas from other competitors.Early in the Cenozoic, new ecosystems appeared, with the evolution of grasses and coral reefs. Late in the Cenozoic, furtherextinctions followed by speciation occurred during ice ages that covered high latitudes with ice and then retreated, leavingnew open spaces for colonization.
