Protists range from the microscopic, single-celled (a) Acanthocystis turfacea and the (b) ciliateTetrahymena thermophila, both visualized here using light microscopy, to the enormous, multicellular (c) kelps(Chromalveolata) that extend for hundreds of feet in underwater “forests.”
Humans have been familiar with macroscopic organisms (organisms big enough to see with the unaided eye) since beforethere was a written history, and it is likely that most cultures distinguished between animals and land plants, and mostprobably included the macroscopic fungi as plants. Therefore, it became an interesting challenge to deal with the world ofmicroorganisms once microscopes were developed a few centuries ago. Many different naming schemes were used over thelast couple of centuries, but it has become the most common practice to refer to eukaryotes that are not land plants, animals,or fungi as protists.This name was first suggested by Ernst Haeckel in the late nineteenth century. It has been applied in many contexts andhas been formally used to represent a kingdom-level taxon called Protista. However, many modern systematists (biologistswho study the relationships among organisms) are beginning to shy away from the idea of formal ranks such as kingdomand phylum. Instead, they are naming taxa as groups of organisms thought to include all the descendants of a last commonancestor (monophyletic group). During the past two decades, the field of molecular genetics has demonstrated that someprotists are more related to animals, plants, or fungi than they are to other protists. Therefore, not including animals,plants and fungi make the kingdom Protista a paraphyletic group, or one that does not include all descendents of itscommon ancestor. For this reason, protist lineages originally classified into the kingdom Protista continue to be examinedand debated. In the meantime, the term “protist” still is used informally to describe this tremendously diverse group ofeukaryotes.Most protists are microscopic, unicellular organisms that are abundant in soil, freshwater, brackish, and marineenvironments. They are also common in the digestive tracts of animals and in the vascular tissues of plants. Others invadethe cells of other protists, animals, and plants. Not all protists are microscopic. Some have huge, macroscopic cells, such asthe plasmodia (giant amoebae) of myxomycete slime molds or the marine green alga Caulerpa, which can have single cells that can be several meters in size. Some protists are multicellular, such as the red, green, and brown seaweeds. It is amongthe protists that one finds the wealth of ways that organisms can grow.
Living things fall into three large groups: Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya. The first two have prokaryotic cells, and the thirdcontains all eukaryotes. A relatively sparse fossil record is available to help discern what the first members of each of theselineages looked like, so it is possible that all the events that led to the last common ancestor of extant eukaryotes will remainunknown. However, comparative biology of extant organisms and the limited fossil record provide some insight into thehistory of Eukarya.The earliest fossils found appear to be Bacteria, most likely cyanobacteria. They are about 3.5 billion years old andare recognizable because of their relatively complex structure and, for prokaryotes, relatively large cells. Most otherprokaryotes have small cells, 1 or 2 μm in size, and would be difficult to pick out as fossils. Most living eukaryotes havecells measuring 10 μm or greater. Structures this size, which might be fossils, appear in the geological record about 2.1billion years ago.Characteristics of EukaryotesData from these fossils have led comparative biologists to the conclusion that living eukaryotes are all descendants of asingle common ancestor. Mapping the characteristics found in all major groups of eukaryotes reveals that the followingcharacteristics must have been present in the last common ancestor, because these characteristics are present in at least someof the members of each major lineage.1. Cells with nuclei surrounded by a nuclear envelope with nuclear pores. This is the single characteristic that is bothnecessary and sufficient to define an organism as a eukaryote. All extant eukaryotes have cells with nuclei.2. Mitochondria. Some extant eukaryotes have very reduced remnants of mitochondria in their cells, whereas othermembers of their lineages have “typical” mitochondria.3. A cytoskeleton containing the structural and motility components called actin microfilaments and microtubules. Allextant eukaryotes have these cytoskeletal elements.4. Flagella and cilia, organelles associated with cell motility. Some extant eukaryotes lack flagella and/or cilia, but theyare descended from ancestors that possessed them.5. Chromosomes, each consisting of a linear DNA molecule coiled around basic (alkaline) proteins called histones. Thefew eukaryotes with chromosomes lacking histones clearly evolved from ancestors that had them.6. Mitosis, a process of nuclear division wherein replicated chromosomes are divided and separated using elements ofthe cytoskeleton. Mitosis is universally present in eukaryotes.7. Sex, a process of genetic recombination unique to eukaryotes in which diploid nuclei at one stage of the life cycleundergo meiosis to yield haploid nuclei and subsequent karyogamy, a stage where two haploid nuclei fuse together tocreate a diploid zygote nucleus.8. Members of all major lineages have cell walls, and it might be reasonable to conclude that the last common ancestorcould make cell walls during some stage of its life cycle. However, not enough is known about eukaryotes’ cell wallsand their development to know how much homology exists among them. If the last common ancestor could make cellwalls, it is clear that this ability must have been lost in many groups.Endosymbiosis and the Evolution of EukaryotesIn order to understand eukaryotic organisms fully, it is necessary to understand that all extant eukaryotes are descendants ofa chimeric organism that was a composite of a host cell and the cell(s) of an alpha-proteobacterium that “took up residence”inside it. This major theme in the origin of eukaryotes is known as endosymbiosis, one cell engulfing another such that the engulfed cell survives and both cells benefit. Over many generations, a symbiotic relationship can result in two organismsthat depend on each other so completely that neither could survive on its own. Endosymbiotic events likely contributed tothe origin of the last common ancestor of today’s eukaryotes and to later diversification in certain lineages of eukaryotes(Figure 23.5). Before explaining this further, it is necessary to consider metabolism in prokaryotes.Prokaryotic MetabolismMany important metabolic processes arose in prokaryotes, and some of these, such as nitrogen fixation, are never foundin eukaryotes. The process of aerobic respiration is found in all major lineages of eukaryotes, and it is localized in themitochondria. Aerobic respiration is also found in many lineages of prokaryotes, but it is not present in all of them,and many forms of evidence suggest that such anaerobic prokaryotes never carried out aerobic respiration nor did theirancestors.While today’s atmosphere is about one-fifth molecular oxygen (O2), geological evidence shows that it originally lacked O2.Without oxygen, aerobic respiration would not be expected, and living things would have relied on fermentation instead.At some point before, about 3.5 billion years ago, some prokaryotes began using energy from sunlight to power anabolicprocesses that reduce carbon dioxide to form organic compounds. That is, they evolved the ability to photosynthesize.Hydrogen, derived from various sources, was captured using light-powered reactions to reduce fixed carbon dioxide in theCalvin cycle. The group of Gram-negative bacteria that gave rise to cyanobacteria used water as the hydrogen source andreleased O2 as a waste product.Eventually, the amount of photosynthetic oxygen built up in some environments to levels that posed a risk to livingorganisms, since it can damage many organic compounds. Various metabolic processes evolved that protected organismsfrom oxygen, one of which, aerobic respiration, also generated high levels of ATP. It became widely present amongprokaryotes, including in a group we now call alpha-proteobacteria. Organisms that did not acquire aerobic respiration hadto remain in oxygen-free environments. Originally, oxygen-rich environments were likely localized around places wherecyanobacteria were active, but by about 2 billion years ago, geological evidence shows that oxygen was building up tohigher concentrations in the atmosphere. Oxygen levels similar to today’s levels only arose within the last 700 million years.Recall that the first fossils that we believe to be eukaryotes date to about 2 billion years old, so they appeared as oxygenlevels were increasing. Also, recall that all extant eukaryotes descended from an ancestor with mitochondria. Theseorganelles were first observed by light microscopists in the late 1800s, where they appeared to be somewhat worm-shapedstructures that seemed to be moving around in the cell. Some early observers suggested that they might be bacteria livinginside host cells, but these hypotheses remained unknown or rejected in most scientific communities.Endosymbiotic TheoryAs cell biology developed in the twentieth century, it became clear that mitochondria were the organelles responsiblefor producing ATP using aerobic respiration. In the 1960s, American biologist Lynn Margulis developed endosymbiotictheory, which states that eukaryotes may have been a product of one cell engulfing another, one living within another, andevolving over time until the separate cells were no longer recognizable as such. In 1967, Margulis introduced new workon the theory and substantiated her findings through microbiological evidence. Although Margulis’ work initially was metwith resistance, this once-revolutionary hypothesis is now widely (but not completely) accepted, with work progressing onuncovering the steps involved in this evolutionary process and the key players involved. Much still remains to be discoveredabout the origins of the cells that now make up the cells in all living eukaryotes.Broadly, it has become clear that many of our nuclear genes and the molecular machinery responsible for replication andexpression appear closely related to those in Archaea. On the other hand, the metabolic organelles and genes responsiblefor many energy-harvesting processes had their origins in bacteria. Much remains to be clarified about how this relationshipoccurred; this continues to be an exciting field of discovery in biology. For instance, it is not known whether theendosymbiotic event that led to mitochondria occurred before or after the host cell had a nucleus. Such organisms would beamong the extinct precursors of the last common ancestor of eukaryotes.MitochondriaOne of the major features distinguishing prokaryotes from eukaryotes is the presence of mitochondria. Eukaryotic cellsmay contain anywhere from one to several thousand mitochondria, depending on the cell’s level of energy consumption.Each mitochondrion measures 1 to 10 or greater micrometers in length and exists in the cell as an organelle that can beovoid to worm-shaped to intricately branched (Figure 23.2). Mitochondria arise from the division of existing mitochondria;they may fuse together; and they may be moved around inside the cell by interactions with the cytoskeleton. However,mitochondria cannot survive outside the cell. As the atmosphere was oxygenated by photosynthesis, and as successfulaerobic prokaryotes evolved, evidence suggests that an ancestral cell with some membrane compartmentalization engulfeda free-living aerobic prokaryote, specifically an alpha-proteobacterium, thereby giving the host cell the ability to use oxygento release energy stored in nutrients. Alpha-proteobacteria are a large group of bacteria that includes species symbiotic withplants, disease organisms that can infect humans via ticks, and many free-living species that use light for energy. Several lines of evidence support that mitochondria are derived from this endosymbiotic event. Most mitochondria are shaped likealpha-proteobacteria and are surrounded by two membranes, which would result when one membrane-bound organismwas engulfed into a vacuole by another membrane-bound organism. The mitochondrial inner membrane is extensive andinvolves substantial infoldings called cristae that resemble the textured, outer surface of alpha-proteobacteria. The matrixand inner membrane are rich with the enzymes necessary for aerobic respiration.
In this transmission electron micrograph of mitochondria in a mammalian lung cell, the cristae, infoldingsof the mitochondrial inner membrane, can be seen in cross-section.
Mitochondria divide independently by a process that resembles binary fission in prokaryotes. Specifically, mitochondria arenot formed from scratch (de novo) by the eukaryotic cell; they reproduce within it and are distributed with the cytoplasmwhen a cell divides or two cells fuse. Therefore, although these organelles are highly integrated into the eukaryotic cell,they still reproduce as if they are independent organisms within the cell. However, their reproduction is synchronized withthe activity and division of the cell. Mitochondria have their own (usually) circular DNA chromosome that is stabilized byattachments to the inner membrane and carries genes similar to genes expressed by alpha-proteobacteria. Mitochondria alsohave special ribosomes and transfer RNAs that resemble these components in prokaryotes. These features all support thatmitochondria were once free-living prokaryotes.Mitochondria that carry out aerobic respiration have their own genomes, with genes similar to those in alpha-proteobacteria.However, many of the genes for respiratory proteins are located in the nucleus. When these genes are compared to those ofother organisms, they appear to be of alpha-proteobacterial origin. Additionally, in some eukaryotic groups, such genes arefound in the mitochondria, whereas in other groups, they are found in the nucleus. This has been interpreted as evidencethat genes have been transferred from the endosymbiont chromosome to the host genome. This loss of genes by theendosymbiont is probably one explanation why mitochondria cannot live without a host.Some living eukaryotes are anaerobic and cannot survive in the presence of too much oxygen. Some appear to lackorganelles that could be recognized as mitochondria. In the 1970s to the early 1990s, many biologists suggested that some ofthese eukaryotes were descended from ancestors whose lineages had diverged from the lineage of mitochondrion-containingeukaryotes before endosymbiosis occurred. However, later findings suggest that reduced organelles are found in most, if notall, anaerobic eukaryotes, and that all eukaryotes appear to carry some genes in their nuclei that are of mitochondrial origin.In addition to the aerobic generation of ATP, mitochondria have several other metabolic functions. One of these functionsis to generate clusters of iron and sulfur that are important cofactors of many enzymes. Such functions are often associatedwith the reduced mitochondrion-derived organelles of anaerobic eukaryotes. Therefore, most biologists accept that the lastcommon ancestor of eukaryotes had mitochondria.PlastidsSome groups of eukaryotes are photosynthetic. Their cells contain, in addition to the standard eukaryotic organelles, anotherkind of organelle called a plastid. When such cells are carrying out photosynthesis, their plastids are rich in the pigmentchlorophyll a and a range of other pigments, called accessory pigments, which are involved in harvesting energy from light.Photosynthetic plastids are called chloroplasts.
This chloroplast cross-section illustrates its elaborate inner membrane organization. Stacks ofthylakoid membranes compartmentalize photosynthetic enzymes and provide scaffolding for chloroplast DNA. (b) Inthis micrograph of Elodea sp., the chloroplasts can be seen as small green spheres.
Like mitochondria, plastids appear to have an endosymbiotic origin. This hypothesis was also championed by LynnMargulis. Plastids are derived from cyanobacteria that lived inside the cells of an ancestral, aerobic, heterotrophic eukaryote.This is called primary endosymbiosis, and plastids of primary origin are surrounded by two membranes. The best evidenceis that this has happened twice in the history of eukaryotes. In one case, the common ancestor of the major lineage/supergroup Archaeplastida took on a cyanobacterial endosymbiont; in the other, the ancestor of the small amoeboidrhizarian taxon, Paulinella, took on a different cyanobacterial endosymbiont. Almost all photosynthetic eukaryotes aredescended from the first event, and only a couple of species are derived from the other.Cyanobacteria are a group of Gram-negative bacteria with all the conventional structures of the group. However, unlikemost prokaryotes, they have extensive, internal membrane-bound sacs called thylakoids. Chlorophyll is a componentof these membranes, as are many of the proteins of the light reactions of photosynthesis. Cyanobacteria also have thepeptidoglycan wall and lipopolysaccharide layer associated with Gram-negative bacteria.Chloroplasts of primary origin have thylakoids, a circular DNA chromosome, and ribosomes similar to those ofcyanobacteria. Each chloroplast is surrounded by two membranes. In the group of Archaeplastida called the glaucophytesand in Paulinella, a thin peptidoglycan layer is present between the outer and inner plastid membranes. All other plastidslack this relictual cyanobacterial wall. The outer membrane surrounding the plastid is thought to be derived from the vacuolein the host, and the inner membrane is thought to be derived from the plasma membrane of the symbiont.There is also, as with the case of mitochondria, strong evidence that many of the genes of the endosymbiont were transferredto the nucleus. Plastids, like mitochondria, cannot live independently outside the host. In addition, like mitochondria,plastids are derived from the division of other plastids and never built from scratch. Researchers have suggested that theendosymbiotic event that led to Archaeplastida occurred 1 to 1.5 billion years ago, at least 5 hundred million years after thefossil record suggests that eukaryotes were present.Not all plastids in eukaryotes are derived directly from primary endosymbiosis. Some of the major groups of algae becamephotosynthetic by secondary endosymbiosis, that is, by taking in either green algae or red algae (both from Archaeplastida)as endosymbionts (Figure 23.4ab). Numerous microscopic and genetic studies have supported this conclusion. Secondaryplastids are surrounded by three or more membranes, and some secondary plastids even have clear remnants of the nucleusof endosymbiotic alga. Others have not “kept” any remnants. There are cases where tertiary or higher-order endosymbioticevents are the best explanations for plastids in some eukaryotes.
Red algae and (b) green algae (visualized by light microscopy) share similar DNA sequences withphotosynthetic cyanobacteria. Scientists speculate that, in a process called endosymbiosis, an ancestral prokaryoteengulfed a photosynthetic cyanobacterium that evolved into modern-day chloroplasts.
There are over 100,000 described living species of protists, and it is unclear how many undescribed species may exist. Sincemany protists live as commensals or parasites in other organisms and these relationships are often species-specific, there isa huge potential for protist diversity that matches the diversity of hosts. As the catchall term for eukaryotic organisms thatare not animal, plant, or fungi, it is not surprising that very few characteristics are common to all protists.Cell StructureThe cells of protists are among the most elaborate of all cells. Most protists are microscopic and unicellular, but some truemulticellular forms exist. A few protists live as colonies that behave in some ways as a group of free-living cells and inother ways as a multicellular organism. Still other protists are composed of enormous, multinucleate, single cells that looklike amorphous blobs of slime, or in other cases, like ferns. In fact, many protist cells are multinucleated; in some species,the nuclei are different sizes and have distinct roles in protist cell function.Single protist cells range in size from less than a micrometer to three meters in length to hectares. Protist cells may beenveloped by animal-like cell membranes or plant-like cell walls. Others are encased in glassy silica-based shells or woundwith pellicles of interlocking protein strips. The pellicle functions like a flexible coat of armor, preventing the protist frombeing torn or pierced without compromising its range of motion.MetabolismProtists exhibit many forms of nutrition and may be aerobic or anaerobic. Protists that store energy by photosynthesis belongto a group of photoautotrophs and are characterized by the presence of chloroplasts. Other protists are heterotrophic andconsume organic materials (such as other organisms) to obtain nutrition. Amoebas and some other heterotrophic protistspecies ingest particles by a process called phagocytosis, in which the cell membrane engulfs a food particle and bringsit inward, pinching off an intracellular membranous sac, or vesicle, called a food vacuole (Figure 23.7). The vesiclecontaining the ingested particle, the phagosome, then fuses with a lysosome containing hydrolytic enzymes to produce aphagolysosome, and the food particle is broken down into small molecules that can diffuse into the cytoplasm and be usedin cellular metabolism. Undigested remains ultimately are expelled from the cell via exocytosis.
The stages of phagocytosis include the engulfment of a food particle, the digestion of the particle usinghydrolytic enzymes contained within a lysosome, and the expulsion of undigested materials from the cell.Subtypes of heterotrophs, called saprobes, absorb nutrients from dead organisms or their organic wastes. Some protists canfunction as mixotrophs, obtaining nutrition by photoautotrophic or heterotrophic routes, depending on whether sunlight ororganic nutrients are available.MotilityThe majority of protists are motile, but different types of protists have evolved varied modes of movement (Figure 23.8).Some protists have one or more flagella, which they rotate or whip. Others are covered in rows or tufts of tiny cilia thatthey coordinately beat to swim. Still others form cytoplasmic extensions called pseudopodia anywhere on the cell, anchorthe pseudopodia to a substrate, and pull themselves forward. Some protists can move toward or away from a stimulus, amovement referred to as taxis. Movement toward light, termed phototaxis, is accomplished by coupling their locomotionstrategy with a light-sensing organ.
Protists use various methods for transportation. (a) Paramecium waves hair-like appendages called ciliato propel itself. (b) Amoeba uses lobe-like pseudopodia to anchor itself to a solid surface and pull itself forward. (c)Euglena uses a whip-like tail called a flagellum to propel itself.
Life CyclesProtists reproduce by a variety of mechanisms. Most undergo some form of asexual reproduction, such as binary fission, toproduce two daughter cells. In protists, binary fission can be divided into transverse or longitudinal, depending on the axisof orientation; sometimes Paramecium exhibits this method. Some protists such as the true slime molds exhibit multiplefission and simultaneously divide into many daughter cells. Others produce tiny buds that go on to divide and grow to thesize of the parental protist. Sexual reproduction, involving meiosis and fertilization, is common among protists, and manyprotist species can switch from asexual to sexual reproduction when necessary. Sexual reproduction is often associatedwith periods when nutrients are depleted or environmental changes occur. Sexual reproduction may allow the protist torecombine genes and produce new variations of progeny that may be better suited to surviving in the new environment.However, sexual reproduction is often associated with resistant cysts that are a protective, resting stage. Depending on theirhabitat, the cysts may be particularly resistant to temperature extremes, desiccation, or low pH. This strategy also allowscertain protists to “wait out” stressors until their environment becomes more favorable for survival or until they are carried(such as by wind, water, or transport on a larger organism) to a different environment, because cysts exhibit virtually nocellular metabolism.Protist life cycles range from simple to extremely elaborate. Certain parasitic protists have complicated life cycles and mustinfect different host species at different developmental stages to complete their life cycle. Some protists are unicellular inthe haploid form and multicellular in the diploid form, a strategy employed by animals. Other protists have multicellularstages in both haploid and diploid forms, a strategy called alternation of generations that is also used by plants.HabitatsNearly all protists exist in some type of aquatic environment, including freshwater and marine environments, damp soil, andeven snow. Several protist species are parasites that infect animals or plants. A few protist species live on dead organismsor their wastes, and contribute to their decay.
In the span of several decades, the Kingdom Protista has been disassembled because sequence analyses have revealednew genetic (and therefore evolutionary) relationships among these eukaryotes. Moreover, protists that exhibit similarmorphological features may have evolved analogous structures because of similar selective pressures—rather than becauseof recent common ancestry. This phenomenon, called convergent evolution, is one reason why protist classification is sochallenging. The emerging classification scheme groups the entire domain Eukaryota into six “supergroups” that contain allof the protists as well as animals, plants, and fungi that evolved from a common ancestor (Figure 23.9). The supergroups are believed to be monophyletic, meaning that all organisms within each supergroup are believed to have evolved from asingle common ancestor, and thus all members are most closely related to each other than to organisms outside that group.There is still evidence lacking for the monophyly of some groups.
This diagram shows a proposed classification of the domain Eukara. Currently, the domain Eukaryais divided into six supergroups. Within each supergroup are multiple kingdoms. Dotted lines indicate suggestedevolutionary relationships that remain under debate.
The classification of eukaryotes is still in flux, and the six supergroups may be modified or replaced by a more appropriatehierarchy as genetic, morphological, and ecological data accumulate. Keep in mind that the classification scheme presentedhere is just one of several hypotheses, and the true evolutionary relationships are still to be determined. When learning aboutprotists, it is helpful to focus less on the nomenclature and more on the commonalities and differences that define the groupsthemselves.
ExcavataMany of the protist species classified into the supergroup Excavata are asymmetrical, single-celled organisms with a feedinggroove “excavated” from one side. This supergroup includes heterotrophic predators, photosynthetic species, and parasites.Its subgroups are the diplomonads, parabasalids, and euglenozoans.DiplomonadsAmong the Excavata are the diplomonads, which include the intestinal parasite, Giardia lamblia (Figure 23.10). Untilrecently, these protists were believed to lack mitochondria. Mitochondrial remnant organelles, called mitosomes, havesince been identified in diplomonads, but these mitosomes are essentially nonfunctional. Diplomonads exist in anaerobicenvironments and use alternative pathways, such as glycolysis, to generate energy. Each diplomonad cell has two identicalnuclei and uses several flagella for locomotion.
The mammalian intestinal parasite Giardia lamblia, visualized here using scanning electron microscopy,is a waterborne protist that causes severe diarrhea when ingested. (credit: modification of work by Janice Carr, CDC;scale-bar data from Matt Russell)ParabasalidsA second Excavata subgroup, the parabasalids, also exhibits semi-functional mitochondria. In parabasalids, these structuresfunction anaerobically and are called hydrogenosomes because they produce hydrogen gas as a byproduct. Parabasalidsmove with flagella and membrane rippling. Trichomonas vaginalis, a parabasalid that causes a sexually transmitteddisease in humans, employs these mechanisms to transit through the male and female urogenital tracts. T. vaginaliscauses trichamoniasis, which appears in an estimated 180 million cases worldwide each year. Whereas men rarely exhibitsymptoms during an infection with this protist, infected women may become more susceptible to secondary infection withhuman immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and may be more likely to develop cervical cancer. Pregnant women infected withT. vaginalis are at an increased risk of serious complications, such as pre-term delivery.EuglenozoansEuglenozoans includes parasites, heterotrophs, autotrophs, and mixotrophs, ranging in size from 10 to 500 μm. Euglenoidsmove through their aquatic habitats using two long flagella that guide them toward light sources sensed by a primitive ocularorgan called an eyespot. The familiar genus, Euglena, encompasses some mixotrophic species that display a photosyntheticcapability only when light is present. In the dark, the chloroplasts of Euglena shrink up and temporarily cease functioning,and the cells instead take up organic nutrients from their environment.The human parasite, Trypanosoma brucei, belongs to a different subgroup of Euglenozoa, the kinetoplastids. Thekinetoplastid subgroup is named after the kinetoplast, a DNA mass carried within the single, oversized mitochondrionpossessed by each of these cells. This subgroup includes several parasites, collectively called trypanosomes, which causedevastating human diseases and infect an insect species during a portion of their life cycle. T. brucei develops in the gut ofthe tsetse fly after the fly bites an infected human or other mammalian host. The parasite then travels to the insect salivaryglands to be transmitted to another human or other mammal when the infected tsetse fly consumes another blood meal. T. brucei is common in central Africa and is the causative agent of African sleeping sickness, a disease associated with severechronic fatigue, coma, and can be fatal if left untreated.
Trypanosoma brucei, the causative agent of sleeping sickness, spends part of its life cycle in the tsetsefly and part in humans.
ChromalveolataCurrent evidence suggests that species classified as chromalveolates are derived from a common ancestor that engulfeda photosynthetic red algal cell, which itself had already evolved chloroplasts from an endosymbiotic relationship witha photosynthetic prokaryote. Therefore, the ancestor of chromalveolates is believed to have resulted from a secondaryendosymbiotic event. However, some chromalveolates appear to have lost red alga-derived plastid organelles or lack plastidgenes altogether. Therefore, this supergroup should be considered a hypothesis-based working group that is subject tochange. Chromalveolates include very important photosynthetic organisms, such as diatoms, brown algae, and significantdisease agents in animals and plants. The chromalveolates can be subdivided into alveolates and stramenopiles.Alveolates: Dinoflagellates, Apicomplexians, and CiliatesA large body of data supports that the alveolates are derived from a shared common ancestor. The alveolates are named forthe presence of an alveolus, or membrane-enclosed sac, beneath the cell membrane. The exact function of the alveolus isunknown, but it may be involved in osmoregulation. The alveolates are further categorized into some of the better-knownprotists: the dinoflagellates, the apicomplexans, and the ciliates.Dinoflagellates exhibit extensive morphological diversity and can be photosynthetic, heterotrophic, or mixotrophic. Manydinoflagellates are encased in interlocking plates of cellulose. Two perpendicular flagella fit into the grooves between thecellulose plates, with one flagellum extending longitudinally and a second encircling the dinoflagellate (Figure 23.12).Together, the flagella contribute to the characteristic spinning motion of dinoflagellates. These protists exist in freshwater and marine habitats, and are a component of plankton, the typically microscopic organisms that drift through the water andserve as a crucial food source for larger aquatic organisms.
The dinoflagellates exhibit great diversity in shape. Many are encased in cellulose armor and have twoflagella that fit in grooves between the plates. Movement of these two perpendicular flagella causes a spinning motion.Some dinoflagellates generate light, called bioluminescence, when they are jarred or stressed. Large numbers of marinedinoflagellates (billions or trillions of cells per wave) can emit light and cause an entire breaking wave to twinkle or take ona brilliant blue color (Figure 23.13). For approximately 20 species of marine dinoflagellates, population explosions (alsocalled blooms) during the summer months can tint the ocean with a muddy red color. This phenomenon is called a redtide, and it results from the abundant red pigments present in dinoflagellate plastids. In large quantities, these dinoflagellatespecies secrete an asphyxiating toxin that can kill fish, birds, and marine mammals. Red tides can be massively detrimentalto commercial fisheries, and humans who consume these protists may become poisoned.
Bioluminescence is emitted from dinoflagellates in a breaking wave, as seen from the New Jersey coast.
The apicomplexan protists are so named because their microtubules, fibrin, and vacuoles are asymmetrically distributedat one end of the cell in a structure called an apical complex (Figure 23.14). The apical complex is specialized for entryand infection of host cells. Indeed, all apicomplexans are parasitic. This group includes the genus Plasmodium, whichcauses malaria in humans. Apicomplexan life cycles are complex, involving multiple hosts and stages of sexual and asexualreproduction.
Apicomplexans are parasitic protists. They have a characteristic apical complex that enables them toinfect host cells. (b) Plasmodium, the causative agent of malaria, has a complex life cycle typical of apicomplexans.
The ciliates, which include Paramecium and Tetrahymena, are a group of protists 10 to 3,000 micrometers in length thatare covered in rows, tufts, or spirals of tiny cilia. By beating their cilia synchronously or in waves, ciliates can coordinatedirected movements and ingest food particles. Certain ciliates have fused cilia-based structures that function like paddles,funnels, or fins. Ciliates also are surrounded by a pellicle, providing protection without compromising agility. The genusParamecium includes protists that have organized their cilia into a plate-like primitive mouth, called an oral groove, whichis used to capture and digest bacteria (Figure 23.15). Food captured in the oral groove enters a food vacuole, where itcombines with digestive enzymes. Waste particles are expelled by an exocytic vesicle that fuses at a specific region on thecell membrane, called the anal pore. In addition to a vacuole-based digestive system, Paramecium also uses contractilevacuoles, which are osmoregulatory vesicles that fill with water as it enters the cell by osmosis and then contract to squeezewater from the cell.
Paramecium has a primitive mouth (called an oral groove) to ingest food, and an anal pore to excreteit. Contractile vacuoles allow the organism to excrete excess water. Cilia enable the organism to move.
Paramecium has two nuclei, a macronucleus and a micronucleus, in each cell. The micronucleus is essential for sexualreproduction, whereas the macronucleus directs asexual binary fission and all other biological functions. The process ofsexual reproduction in Paramecium underscores the importance of the micronucleus to these protists. Paramecium and mostother ciliates reproduce sexually by conjugation. This process begins when two different mating types of Paramecium makephysical contact and join with a cytoplasmic bridge (Figure 23.16). The diploid micronucleus in each cell then undergoesmeiosis to produce four haploid micronuclei. Three of these degenerate in each cell, leaving one micronucleus that thenundergoes mitosis, generating two haploid micronuclei. The cells each exchange one of these haploid nuclei and moveaway from each other. A similar process occurs in bacteria that have plasmids. Fusion of the haploid micronuclei generatesa completely novel diploid pre-micronucleus in each conjugative cell. This pre-micronucleus undergoes three rounds ofmitosis to produce eight copies, and the original macronucleus disintegrates. Four of the eight pre-micronuclei becomefull-fledged micronuclei, whereas the other four perform multiple rounds of DNA replication and go on to become newmacronuclei. Two cell divisions then yield four new Paramecia from each original conjugative cell.
Stramenopiles: Diatoms, Brown Algae, Golden Algae and OomycetesThe other subgroup of chromalveolates, the stramenopiles, includes photosynthetic marine algae and heterotrophic protists.The unifying feature of this group is the presence of a textured, or “hairy,” flagellum. Many stramenopiles also have an additional flagellum that lacks hair-like projections (Figure 23.17). Members of this subgroup range in size from singlecelleddiatoms to the massive and multicellular kelp.
This stramenopile cell has a single hairy flagellum and a secondary smooth flagellum.The diatoms are unicellular photosynthetic protists that encase themselves in intricately patterned, glassy cell wallscomposed of silicon dioxide in a matrix of organic particles (Figure 23.18). These protists are a component of freshwaterand marine plankton. Most species of diatoms reproduce asexually, although some instances of sexual reproductionand sporulation also exist. Some diatoms exhibit a slit in their silica shell, called a raphe. By expelling a stream ofmucopolysaccharides from the raphe, the diatom can attach to surfaces or propel itself in one direction.
Assorted diatoms, visualized here using light microscopy, live among annual sea ice in McMurdo Sound,Antarctica. Diatoms range in size from 2 to 200 μm. (credit: Prof. Gordon T. Taylor, Stony Brook University, NSF, NOAA)During periods of nutrient availability, diatom populations bloom to numbers greater than can be consumed by aquaticorganisms. The excess diatoms die and sink to the sea floor where they are not easily reached by saprobes that feed ondead organisms. As a result, the carbon dioxide that the diatoms had consumed and incorporated into their cells duringphotosynthesis is not returned to the atmosphere. In general, this process by which carbon is transported deep into the oceanis described as the biological carbon pump, because carbon is “pumped” to the ocean depths where it is inaccessible to theatmosphere as carbon dioxide. The biological carbon pump is a crucial component of the carbon cycle that maintains loweratmospheric carbon dioxide levels.Like diatoms, golden algae are largely unicellular, although some species can form large colonies. Their characteristic goldcolor results from their extensive use of carotenoids, a group of photosynthetic pigments that are generally yellow or orange in color. Golden algae are found in both freshwater and marine environments, where they form a major part of the planktoncommunity.The brown algae are primarily marine, multicellular organisms that are known colloquially as seaweeds. Giant kelps area type of brown algae. Some brown algae have evolved specialized tissues that resemble terrestrial plants, with root-likeholdfasts, stem-like stipes, and leaf-like blades that are capable of photosynthesis. The stipes of giant kelps are enormous,extending in some cases for 60 meters. A variety of algal life cycles exists, but the most complex is alternation ofgenerations, in which both haploid and diploid stages involve multicellularity. Compare this life cycle to that of humans,for instance. Haploid gametes produced by meiosis (sperm and egg) combine in fertilization to generate a diploid zygotethat undergoes many rounds of mitosis to produce a multicellular embryo and then a fetus. However, the individual spermand egg themselves never become multicellular beings. Terrestrial plants also have evolved alternation of generations. Inthe brown algae genus Laminaria, haploid spores develop into multicellular gametophytes, which produce haploid gametesthat combine to produce diploid organisms that then become multicellular organisms with a different structure from thehaploid form (Figure 23.19). Certain other organisms perform alternation of generations in which both the haploid anddiploid forms look the same.
The water molds, oomycetes (“egg fungus”), were so-named based on their fungus-like morphology, but molecular datahave shown that the water molds are not closely related to fungi. The oomycetes are characterized by a cellulose-basedcell wall and an extensive network of filaments that allow for nutrient uptake. As diploid spores, many oomycetes havetwo oppositely directed flagella (one hairy and one smooth) for locomotion. The oomycetes are nonphotosynthetic andinclude many saprobes and parasites. The saprobes appear as white fluffy growths on dead organisms (Figure 23.20). Mostoomycetes are aquatic, but some parasitize terrestrial plants. One plant pathogen is Phytophthora infestans, the causativeagent of late blight of potatoes, such as occurred in the nineteenth century Irish potato famine.
A saprobic oomycete engulfs a dead insect. (credit: modification of work by Thomas Bresson)RhizariaThe Rhizaria supergroup includes many of the amoebas, most of which have threadlike or needle-like pseudopodia(Figure 23.21). Pseudopodia function to trap and engulf food particles and to direct movement in rhizarian protists. Thesepseudopods project outward from anywhere on the cell surface and can anchor to a substrate. The protist then transports itscytoplasm into the pseudopod, thereby moving the entire cell. This type of motion, called cytoplasmic streaming, is usedby several diverse groups of protists as a means of locomotion or as a method to distribute nutrients and oxygen.
Ammonia tepida, a Rhizaria species viewed here using phase contrast light microscopy, exhibits manythreadlike pseudopodia.
ForamsForaminiferans, or forams, are unicellular heterotrophic protists, ranging from approximately 20 micrometers to severalcentimeters in length, and occasionally resembling tiny snails (Figure 23.22). As a group, the forams exhibit porous shells,called tests that are built from various organic materials and typically hardened with calcium carbonate. The tests may house photosynthetic algae, which the forams can harvest for nutrition. Foram pseudopodia extend through the pores andallow the forams to move, feed, and gather additional building materials. Typically, forams are associated with sand or otherparticles in marine or freshwater habitats. Foraminiferans are also useful as indicators of pollution and changes in globalweather patterns.
These shells from foraminifera sank to the sea floor. (credit: Deep East 2001, NOAA/OER)RadiolariansA second subtype of Rhizaria, the radiolarians, exhibit intricate exteriors of glassy silica with radial or bilateral symmetry(Figure 23.23). Needle-like pseudopods supported by microtubules radiate outward from the cell bodies of these protistsand function to catch food particles. The shells of dead radiolarians sink to the ocean floor, where they may accumulate in100 meter-thick depths. Preserved, sedimented radiolarians are very common in the fossil record.
This fossilized radiolarian shell was imaged using a scanning electron microscope. (credit: modificationof work by Hannes Grobe, Alfred Wegener Institute; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)ArchaeplastidaRed algae and green algae are included in the supergroup Archaeplastida. It was from a common ancestor of these protiststhat the land plants evolved, since their closest relatives are found in this group. Molecular evidence supports that allArchaeplastida are descendents of an endosymbiotic relationship between a heterotrophic protist and a cyanobacterium. Thered and green algae include unicellular, multicellular, and colonial forms.Red AlgaeRed algae, or rhodophytes, are primarily multicellular, lack flagella, and range in size from microscopic, unicellular protiststo large, multicellular forms grouped into the informal seaweed category. The red algae life cycle is an alternation ofgenerations. Some species of red algae contain phycoerythrins, photosynthetic accessory pigments that are red in color and outcompete the green tint of chlorophyll, making these species appear as varying shades of red. Other protists classified asred algae lack phycoerythrins and are parasites. Red algae are common in tropical waters where they have been detected atdepths of 260 meters. Other red algae exist in terrestrial or freshwater environments.Green Algae: Chlorophytes and CharophytesThe most abundant group of algae is the green algae. The green algae exhibit similar features to the land plants, particularlyin terms of chloroplast structure. That this group of protists shared a relatively recent common ancestor with land plants iswell supported. The green algae are subdivided into the chlorophytes and the charophytes. The charophytes are the closestliving relatives to land plants and resemble them in morphology and reproductive strategies. Charophytes are common inwet habitats, and their presence often signals a healthy ecosystem.The chlorophytes exhibit great diversity of form and function. Chlorophytes primarily inhabit freshwater and damp soil, andare a common component of plankton. Chlamydomonas is a simple, unicellular chlorophyte with a pear-shaped morphologyand two opposing, anterior flagella that guide this protist toward light sensed by its eyespot. More complex chlorophytespecies exhibit haploid gametes and spores that resemble Chlamydomonas.The chlorophyte Volvox is one of only a few examples of a colonial organism, which behaves in some ways like a collectionof individual cells, but in other ways like the specialized cells of a multicellular organism (Figure 23.24). Volvox coloniescontain 500 to 60,000 cells, each with two flagella, contained within a hollow, spherical matrix composed of a gelatinousglycoprotein secretion. Individual Volvox cells move in a coordinated fashion and are interconnected by cytoplasmicbridges. Only a few of the cells reproduce to create daughter colonies, an example of basic cell specialization in thisorganism.
Volvox aureus is a green alga in the supergroup Archaeplastida. This species exists as a colony,consisting of cells immersed in a gel-like matrix and intertwined with each other via hair-like cytoplasmic extensions.
True multicellular organisms, such as the sea lettuce, Ulva, are represented among the chlorophytes. In addition, somechlorophytes exist as large, multinucleate, single cells. Species in the genus Caulerpa exhibit flattened fern-like foliage andcan reach lengths of 3 meters (Figure 23.25). Caulerpa species undergo nuclear division, but their cells do not completecytokinesis, remaining instead as massive and elaborate single cells.
Caulerpa taxifolia is a chlorophyte consisting of a single cell containing potentially thousands of nuclei.
AmoebozoaThe amoebozoans characteristically exhibit pseudopodia that extend like tubes or flat lobes, rather than the hair-likepseudopodia of rhizarian amoeba (Figure 23.26). The Amoebozoa include several groups of unicellular amoeba-likeorganisms that are free-living or parasites.
Amoebae with tubular and lobe-shaped pseudopodia are seen under a microscope. These isolates wouldbe morphologically classified as amoebozoans.Slime MoldsA subset of the amoebozoans, the slime molds, has several morphological similarities to fungi that are thought to be theresult of convergent evolution. For instance, during times of stress, some slime molds develop into spore-generating fruitingbodies, much like fungi.The slime molds are categorized on the basis of their life cycles into plasmodial or cellular types. Plasmodial slime moldsare composed of large, multinucleate cells and move along surfaces like an amorphous blob of slime during their feedingstage (Figure 23.27). Food particles are lifted and engulfed into the slime mold as it glides along. Upon maturation, theplasmodium takes on a net-like appearance with the ability to form fruiting bodies, or sporangia, during times of stress.Haploid spores are produced by meiosis within the sporangia, and spores can be disseminated through the air or water topotentially land in more favorable environments. If this occurs, the spores germinate to form ameboid or flagellate haploidcells that can combine with each other and produce a diploid zygotic slime mold to complete the life cycle.The life cycle of the plasmodial slime mold is shown. The brightly colored plasmodium in the inset photo isa single-celled, multinucleate mass.
The cellular slime molds function as independent amoeboid cells when nutrients are abundant (Figure 23.28). When foodis depleted, cellular slime molds pile onto each other into a mass of cells that behaves as a single unit, called a slug. Somecells in the slug contribute to a 2–3-millimeter stalk, drying up and dying in the process. Cells atop the stalk form an asexualfruiting body that contains haploid spores. As with plasmodial slime molds, the spores are disseminated and can germinateif they land in a moist environment. One representative genus of the cellular slime molds is Dictyostelium, which commonlyexists in the damp soil of forests.
Cellular slime molds may exist as solitary or aggregated amoebas.
OpisthokontaThe opisthokonts include the animal-like choanoflagellates, which are believed to resemble the common ancestor ofsponges and, in fact, all animals. Choanoflagellates include unicellular and colonial forms, and number about 244 describedspecies. These organisms exhibit a single, apical flagellum that is surrounded by a contractile collar composed of microvilli.The collar uses a similar mechanism to sponges to filter out bacteria for ingestion by the protist. The morphology ofchoanoflagellates was recognized early on as resembling the collar cells of sponges, and suggesting a possible relationshipto animals.The Mesomycetozoa form a small group of parasites, primarily of fish, and at least one form that can parasitize humans.Their life cycles are poorly understood. These organisms are of special interest, because they appear to be so closely relatedto animals. In the past, they were grouped with fungi and other protists based on their morphology.
Protists function in various ecological niches. Whereas some protist species are essential components of the food chain andgenerators of biomass, others function in the decomposition of organic materials. Still other protists are dangerous humanpathogens or causative agents of devastating plant diseases.Primary Producers/Food SourcesProtists are essential sources of nutrition for many other organisms. In some cases, as in plankton, protists are consumeddirectly. Alternatively, photosynthetic protists serve as producers of nutrition for other organisms. For instance,photosynthetic dinoflagellates called zooxanthellae use sunlight to fix inorganic carbon. In this symbiotic relationship, theseprotists provide nutrients for coral polyps (Figure 23.29) that house them, giving corals a boost of energy to secrete acalcium carbonate skeleton. In turn, the corals provide the protist with a protected environment and the compounds neededfor photosynthesis. This type of symbiotic relationship is important in nutrient-poor environments. Without dinoflagellatesymbionts, corals lose algal pigments in a process called coral bleaching, and they eventually die. This explains why reefbuildingcorals do not reside in waters deeper than 20 meters: insufficient light reaches those depths for dinoflagellates tophotosynthesize.
Coral polyps obtain nutrition through a symbiotic relationship with dinoflagellates.The protists themselves and their products of photosynthesis are essential—directly or indirectly—to the survival oforganisms ranging from bacteria to mammals (Figure 23.30). As primary producers, protists feed a large proportion of theworld’s aquatic species. (On land, terrestrial plants serve as primary producers.) In fact, approximately one-quarter of theworld’s photosynthesis is conducted by protists, particularly dinoflagellates, diatoms, and multicellular algae.
Virtually all aquatic organisms depend directly or indirectly on protists for food.
Protists do not create food sources only for sea-dwelling organisms. For instance, certain anaerobic parabasalid species existin the digestive tracts of termites and wood-eating cockroaches, where they contribute an essential step in the digestion ofcellulose ingested by these insects as they bore through wood.Human PathogensA pathogen is anything that causes disease. Parasites live in or on an organism and harm the organism. A significant numberof protists are pathogenic parasites that must infect other organisms to survive and propagate. Protist parasites include thecausative agents of malaria, African sleeping sickness, and waterborne gastroenteritis in humans. Other protist pathogensprey on plants, effecting massive destruction of food crops.Plasmodium SpeciesMembers of the genus Plasmodium must colonize both a mosquito and a vertebrate to complete their life cycle. Invertebrates, the parasite develops in liver cells and goes on to infect red blood cells, bursting from and destroying theblood cells with each asexual replication cycle (Figure 23.31). Of the four Plasmodium species known to infect humans,P. falciparum accounts for 50 percent of all malaria cases and is the primary cause of disease-related fatalities in tropicalregions of the world. In 2010, it was estimated that malaria caused between one-half and one million deaths, mostly inAfrican children. During the course of malaria, P. falciparum can infect and destroy more than one-half of a human’s circulating blood cells, leading to severe anemia. In response to waste products released as the parasites burst from infectedblood cells, the host immune system mounts a massive inflammatory response with episodes of delirium-inducing feveras parasites lyse red blood cells, spilling parasite waste into the bloodstream. P. falciparum is transmitted to humans bythe African malaria mosquito, Anopheles gambiae. Techniques to kill, sterilize, or avoid exposure to this highly aggressivemosquito species are crucial to malaria control.
Red blood cells are shown to be infected with P. falciparum, the causative agent of malaria. In thislight microscopic image taken using a 100× oil immersion lens, the ring-shaped P. falciparum stains purple.
TrypanosomesTrypanosoma brucei, the parasite that is responsible for African sleeping sickness, confounds the human immune system bychanging its thick layer of surface glycoproteins with each infectious cycle (Figure 23.32). The glycoproteins are identifiedby the immune system as foreign antigens, and a specific antibody defense is mounted against the parasite. However, T.brucei has thousands of possible antigens, and with each subsequent generation, the protist switches to a glycoproteincoating with a different molecular structure. In this way, T. brucei is capable of replicating continuously without the immunesystem ever succeeding in clearing the parasite. Without treatment, T. brucei attacks red blood cells, causing the patient tolapse into a coma and eventually die. During epidemic periods, mortality from the disease can be high. Greater surveillanceand control measures lead to a reduction in reported cases; some of the lowest numbers reported in 50 years (fewer than10,000 cases in all of sub-Saharan Africa) have happened since 2009.
In Latin America, another species, T. cruzi, is responsible for Chagas disease. T. cruzi infections are mainly caused by ablood-sucking bug. The parasite inhabits heart and digestive system tissues in the chronic phase of infection, leading tomalnutrition and heart failure due to abnormal heart rhythms. An estimated 10 million people are infected with Chagasdisease, and it caused 10,000 deaths in 2008.
Trypanosomes are shown among red blood cells.
Plant ParasitesProtist parasites of terrestrial plants include agents that destroy food crops. The oomycete Plasmopara viticola parasitizesgrape plants, causing a disease called downy mildew (Figure 23.33). Grape plants infected with P. viticola appear stuntedand have discolored, withered leaves. The spread of downy mildew nearly collapsed the French wine industry in thenineteenth century.
Both downy and powdery mildews on this grape leaf are caused by an infection of P. viticola.
Phytophthora infestans is an oomycete responsible for potato late blight, which causes potato stalks and stems to decayinto black slime (Figure 23.34). Widespread potato blight caused by P. infestans precipitated the well-known Irish potato famine in the nineteenth century that claimed the lives of approximately 1 million people and led to the emigration of atleast 1 million more from Ireland. Late blight continues to plague potato crops in certain parts of the United States andRussia, wiping out as much as 70 percent of crops when no pesticides are applied.
These unappetizing remnants result from an infection with P. infestans, the causative agent of potatolate blight.
Agents of DecompositionThe fungus-like protist saprobes are specialized to absorb nutrients from nonliving organic matter, such as dead organismsor their wastes. For instance, many types of oomycetes grow on dead animals or algae. Saprobic protists have the essentialfunction of returning inorganic nutrients to the soil and water. This process allows for new plant growth, which in turngenerates sustenance for other organisms along the food chain. Indeed, without saprobe species, such as protists, fungi, andbacteria, life would cease to exist as all organic carbon became “tied up” in dead organisms.