For this (a) squash seedling (Cucurbita maxima) to develop into a mature plant bearing its (b) fruit,numerous nutritional requirements must be met.
Cucurbitaceae is a family of plants first cultivated in Mesoamerica, although several species are native to North America.The family includes many edible species, such as squash and pumpkin, as well as inedible gourds. In order to grow anddevelop into mature, fruit-bearing plants, many requirements must be met and events must be coordinated. Seeds mustgerminate under the right conditions in the soil; therefore, temperature, moisture, and soil quality are important factorsthat play a role in germination and seedling development. Soil quality and climate are significant to plant distribution andgrowth. The young seedling will eventually grow into a mature plant, and the roots will absorb nutrients and water from thesoil. At the same time, the aboveground parts of the plant will absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and use energyfrom sunlight to produce organic compounds through photosynthesis. This chapter will explore the complex dynamicsbetween plants and soils, and the adaptations that plants have evolved to make better use of nutritional resources.
Nutritional Requirements of PlantsBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Describe how plants obtain nutrientsList the elements and compounds required for proper plant nutritionDescribe an essential nutrientPlants are unique organisms that can absorb nutrients and water through their root system, as well as carbon dioxide fromthe atmosphere. Soil quality and climate are the major determinants of plant distribution and growth. The combination ofsoil nutrients, water, and carbon dioxide, along with sunlight, allows plants to grow.The Chemical Composition of PlantsSince plants require nutrients in the form of elements such as carbon and potassium, it is important to understand thechemical composition of plants. The majority of volume in a plant cell is water; it typically comprises 80 to 90 percent ofthe plant’s total weight. Soil is the water source for land plants, and can be an abundant source of water, even if it appearsdry. Plant roots absorb water from the soil through root hairs and transport it up to the leaves through the xylem. As watervapor is lost from the leaves, the process of transpiration and the polarity of water molecules (which enables them to formhydrogen bonds) draws more water from the roots up through the plant to the leaves (Figure 31.2). Plants need water tosupport cell structure, for metabolic functions, to carry nutrients, and for photosynthesis.
Water is absorbed through the root hairs and moves up the xylem to the leaves.Plant cells need essential substances, collectively called nutrients, to sustain life. Plant nutrients may be composed of eitherorganic or inorganic compounds. An organic compound is a chemical compound that contains carbon, such as carbondioxide obtained from the atmosphere. Carbon that was obtained from atmospheric CO2 composes the majority of the drymass within most plants. An inorganic compound does not contain carbon and is not part of, or produced by, a livingorganism. Inorganic substances, which form the majority of the soil solution, are commonly called minerals: those requiredby plants include nitrogen (N) and potassium (K) for structure and regulation.
Essential NutrientsPlants require only light, water and about 20 elements to support all their biochemical needs: these 20 elements are calledessential nutrients (Table 31.1). For an element to be regarded as essential, three criteria are required: 1) a plant cannotcomplete its life cycle without the element; 2) no other element can perform the function of the element; and 3) the elementis directly involved in plant nutrition.
Macronutrients and MicronutrientsThe essential elements can be divided into two groups: macronutrients and micronutrients. Nutrients that plants requirein larger amounts are called macronutrients. About half of the essential elements are considered macronutrients: carbon,hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium and sulfur. The first of these macronutrients,carbon (C), is required to form carbohydrates, proteins, nucleic acids, and many other compounds; it is therefore present inall macromolecules. On average, the dry weight (excluding water) of a cell is 50 percent carbon. As shown in Figure 31.3,carbon is a key part of plant biomolecules.
Cellulose, the main structural component of the plant cell wall, makes up over thirty percent of plant matter.It is the most abundant organic compound on earth. Plants are able to make their own cellulose, but need carbon fromthe soil to do so.The next most abundant element in plant cells is nitrogen (N); it is part of proteins and nucleic acids. Nitrogen is also used inthe synthesis of some vitamins. Hydrogen and oxygen are macronutrients that are part of many organic compounds, and alsoform water. Oxygen is necessary for cellular respiration; plants use oxygen to store energy in the form of ATP. Phosphorus(P), another macromolecule, is necessary to synthesize nucleic acids and phospholipids. As part of ATP, phosphorus enablesfood energy to be converted into chemical energy through oxidative phosphorylation. Likewise, light energy is convertedinto chemical energy during photophosphorylation in photosynthesis, and into chemical energy to be extracted duringrespiration. Sulfur is part of certain amino acids, such as cysteine and methionine, and is present in several coenzymes.Sulfur also plays a role in photosynthesis as part of the electron transport chain, where hydrogen gradients play a key role inthe conversion of light energy into ATP. Potassium (K) is important because of its role in regulating stomatal opening andclosing. As the openings for gas exchange, stomata help maintain a healthy water balance; a potassium ion pump supportsthis process.
Magnesium (Mg) and calcium (Ca) are also important macronutrients. The role of calcium is twofold: to regulate nutrienttransport, and to support many enzyme functions. Magnesium is important to the photosynthetic process. These minerals,along with the micronutrients, which are described below, also contribute to the plant’s ionic balance.In addition to macronutrients, organisms require various elements in small amounts. These micronutrients, or traceelements, are present in very small quantities. They include boron (B), chlorine (Cl), manganese (Mn), iron (Fe), zinc (Zn),copper (Cu), molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni), silicon (Si), and sodium (Na).Deficiencies in any of these nutrients—particularly the macronutrients—can adversely affect plant growth (Figure 31.4.Depending on the specific nutrient, a lack can cause stunted growth, slow growth, or chlorosis (yellowing of the leaves).Extreme deficiencies may result in leaves showing signs of cell death.
Nutrient deficiency is evident in the symptoms these plants show. This (a) grape tomato suffers fromblossom end rot caused by calcium deficiency. The yellowing in this (b) Frangula alnus results from magnesiumdeficiency. Inadequate magnesium also leads to (c) intervenal chlorosis, seen here in a sweetgum leaf. This (d) palmis affected by potassium deficiency.
The SoilBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Describe how soils are formedExplain soil compositionDescribe a soil profilePlants obtain inorganic elements from the soil, which serves as a natural medium for land plants. Soil is the outer loose layerthat covers the surface of Earth. Soil quality is a major determinant, along with climate, of plant distribution and growth.Soil quality depends not only on the chemical composition of the soil, but also the topography (regional surface features)and the presence of living organisms. In agriculture, the history of the soil, such as the cultivating practices and previouscrops, modify the characteristics and fertility of that soil.Soil develops very slowly over long periods of time, and its formation results from natural and environmental forces actingon mineral, rock, and organic compounds. Soils can be divided into two groups: organic soils are those that are formed fromsedimentation and primarily composed of organic matter, while those that are formed from the weathering of rocks and areprimarily composed of inorganic material are called mineral soils. Mineral soils are predominant in terrestrial ecosystems,where soils may be covered by water for part of the year or exposed to the atmosphere.Soil CompositionSoil consists of these major components (Figure 31.5):• inorganic mineral matter, about 40 to 45 percent of the soil volume• organic matter, about 5 percent of the soil volume• water and air, about 50 percent of the soil volumeThe amount of each of the four major components of soil depends on the amount of vegetation, soil compaction, and waterpresent in the soil. A good healthy soil has sufficient air, water, minerals, and organic material to promote and sustain plantlife.
The organic material of soil, called humus, is made up of microorganisms (dead and alive), and dead animals and plants invarying stages of decay. Humus improves soil structure and provides plants with water and minerals. The inorganic materialof soil consists of rock, slowly broken down into smaller particles that vary in size. Soil particles that are 0.1 to 2 mm indiameter are sand. Soil particles between 0.002 and 0.1 mm are called silt, and even smaller particles, less than 0.002 mmin diameter, are called clay. Some soils have no dominant particle size and contain a mixture of sand, silt, and humus; thesesoils are called loams.
Soil FormationSoil formation is the consequence of a combination of biological, physical, and chemical processes. Soil should ideallycontain 50 percent solid material and 50 percent pore space. About one-half of the pore space should contain water, andthe other half should contain air. The organic component of soil serves as a cementing agent, returns nutrients to theplant, allows soil to store moisture, makes soil tillable for farming, and provides energy for soil microorganisms. Most soilmicroorganisms—bacteria, algae, or fungi—are dormant in dry soil, but become active once moisture is available.Soil distribution is not homogenous because its formation results in the production of layers; together, the vertical section ofa soil is called the soil profile. Within the soil profile, soil scientists define zones called horizons. A horizon is a soil layerwith distinct physical and chemical properties that differ from those of other layers. Five factors account for soil formation:parent material, climate, topography, biological factors, and time.
Parent MaterialThe organic and inorganic material in which soils form is the parent material. Mineral soils form directly from theweathering of bedrock, the solid rock that lies beneath the soil, and therefore, they have a similar composition to theoriginal rock. Other soils form in materials that came from elsewhere, such as sand and glacial drift. Materials located inthe depth of the soil are relatively unchanged compared with the deposited material. Sediments in rivers may have differentcharacteristics, depending on whether the stream moves quickly or slowly. A fast-moving river could have sediments ofrocks and sand, whereas a slow-moving river could have fine-textured material, such as clay.ClimateTemperature, moisture, and wind cause different patterns of weathering and therefore affect soil characteristics. Thepresence of moisture and nutrients from weathering will also promote biological activity: a key component of a quality soil.TopographyRegional surface features (familiarly called “the lay of the land”) can have a major influence on the characteristics andfertility of a soil. Topography affects water runoff, which strips away parent material and affects plant growth. Steeps soilsare more prone to erosion and may be thinner than soils that are relatively flat or level.Biological factorsThe presence of living organisms greatly affects soil formation and structure. Animals and microorganisms can producepores and crevices, and plant roots can penetrate into crevices to produce more fragmentation. Plant secretions promotethe development of microorganisms around the root, in an area known as the rhizosphere. Additionally, leaves and othermaterial that fall from plants decompose and contribute to soil composition.TimeTime is an important factor in soil formation because soils develop over long periods. Soil formation is a dynamic process.Materials are deposited over time, decompose, and transform into other materials that can be used by living organisms ordeposited onto the surface of the soil.Physical Properties of the SoilSoils are named and classified based on their horizons. The soil profile has four distinct layers: 1) O horizon; 2) Ahorizon; 3) B horizon, or subsoil; and 4) C horizon, or soil base (Figure 31.6). The O horizon has freshly decomposingorganic matter—humus—at its surface, with decomposed vegetation at its base. Humus enriches the soil with nutrients andenhances soil moisture retention. Topsoil—the top layer of soil—is usually two to three inches deep, but this depth canvary considerably. For instance, river deltas like the Mississippi River delta have deep layers of topsoil. Topsoil is rich inorganic material; microbial processes occur there, and it is the “workhorse” of plant production. The A horizon consistsof a mixture of organic material with inorganic products of weathering, and it is therefore the beginning of true mineralsoil. This horizon is typically darkly colored because of the presence of organic matter. In this area, rainwater percolatesthrough the soil and carries materials from the surface. The B horizon is an accumulation of mostly fine material that hasmoved downward, resulting in a dense layer in the soil. In some soils, the B horizon contains nodules or a layer of calciumcarbonate. The C horizon, or soil base, includes the parent material, plus the organic and inorganic material that is brokendown to form soil. The parent material may be either created in its natural place, or transported from elsewhere to its presentlocation. Beneath the C horizon lies bedrock.
Some soils may have additional layers, or lack one of these layers. The thickness of the layers is also variable, and dependson the factors that influence soil formation. In general, immature soils may have O, A, and C horizons, whereas mature soilsmay display all of these, plus additional layers.
The San Joaquin soil profile has an O horizon, A horizon, B horizon, and C horizon.
Nutritional Adaptations of PlantsBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Understand the nutritional adaptations of plantsDescribe mycorrhizaeExplain nitrogen fixation
Plants obtain food in two different ways. Autotrophic plants can make their own food from inorganic raw materials, suchas carbon dioxide and water, through photosynthesis in the presence of sunlight. Green plants are included in this group.Some plants, however, are heterotrophic: they are totally parasitic and lacking in chlorophyll. These plants, referred to asholo-parasitic plants, are unable to synthesize organic carbon and draw all of their nutrients from the host plant.Plants may also enlist the help of microbial partners in nutrient acquisition. Particular species of bacteria and fungi haveevolved along with certain plants to create a mutualistic symbiotic relationship with roots. This improves the nutrition ofboth the plant and the microbe. The formation of nodules in legume plants and mycorrhization can be considered among thenutritional adaptations of plants. However, these are not the only type of adaptations that we may find; many plants haveother adaptations that allow them to thrive under specific conditions.
Nitrogen Fixation: Root and Bacteria InteractionsNitrogen is an important macronutrient because it is part of nucleic acids and proteins. Atmospheric nitrogen, which is thediatomic molecule N2, or dinitrogen, is the largest pool of nitrogen in terrestrial ecosystems. However, plants cannot takeadvantage of this nitrogen because they do not have the necessary enzymes to convert it into biologically useful forms.However, nitrogen can be “fixed,” which means that it can be converted to ammonia (NH3) through biological, physical, orchemical processes. As you have learned, biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) is the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen (N2)into ammonia (NH3), exclusively carried out by prokaryotes such as soil bacteria or cyanobacteria. Biological processescontribute 65 percent of the nitrogen used in agriculture. The following equation represents the process:N2 + 16 ATP + 8 e− + 8 H+ → 2NH3 + 16 ADP + 16 Pi + H2The most important source of BNF is the symbiotic interaction between soil bacteria and legume plants, includingmany crops important to humans (Figure 31.9). The NH3 resulting from fixation can be transported into plant tissueand incorporated into amino acids, which are then made into plant proteins. Some legume seeds, such as soybeans andpeanuts, contain high levels of protein, and serve among the most important agricultural sources of protein in the world.
Soil bacteria, collectively called rhizobia, symbiotically interact with legume roots to form specialized structures callednodules, in which nitrogen fixation takes place. This process entails the reduction of atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia,by means of the enzyme nitrogenase. Therefore, using rhizobia is a natural and environmentally friendly way to fertilizeplants, as opposed to chemical fertilization that uses a nonrenewable resource, such as natural gas. Through symbioticnitrogen fixation, the plant benefits from using an endless source of nitrogen from the atmosphere. The processsimultaneously contributes to soil fertility because the plant root system leaves behind some of the biologically availablenitrogen. As in any symbiosis, both organisms benefit from the interaction: the plant obtains ammonia, and bacteria obtaincarbon compounds generated through photosynthesis, as well as a protected niche in which to grow.
Soybean roots contain (a) nitrogen-fixing nodules. Cells within the nodules are infected withBradyrhyzobium japonicum, a rhizobia or “root-loving” bacterium. The bacteria are encased in (b) vesicles insidethe cell, as can be seen in this transmission electron micrograph.
Mycorrhizae: The Symbiotic Relationship between Fungi and RootsA nutrient depletion zone can develop when there is rapid soil solution uptake, low nutrient concentration, low diffusionrate, or low soil moisture. These conditions are very common; therefore, most plants rely on fungi to facilitate the uptake ofminerals from the soil. Fungi form symbiotic associations called mycorrhizae with plant roots, in which the fungi actuallyare integrated into the physical structure of the root. The fungi colonize the living root tissue during active plant growth.Through mycorrhization, the plant obtains mainly phosphate and other minerals, such as zinc and copper, from the soil. Thefungus obtains nutrients, such as sugars, from the plant root (Figure 31.11). Mycorrhizae help increase the surface area ofthe plant root system because hyphae, which are narrow, can spread beyond the nutrient depletion zone. Hyphae can growinto small soil pores that allow access to phosphorus that would otherwise be unavailable to the plant. The beneficial effecton the plant is best observed in poor soils. The benefit to fungi is that they can obtain up to 20 percent of the total carbonaccessed by plants. Mycorrhizae functions as a physical barrier to pathogens. It also provides an induction of generalizedhost defense mechanisms, and sometimes involves production of antibiotic compounds by the fungi.Root tips proliferate in the presence of mycorrhizal infection, which appears as off-white fuzz in thisimage.
There are two types of mycorrhizae: ectomycorrhizae and endomycorrhizae. Ectomycorrhizae form an extensive densesheath around the roots, called a mantle. Hyphae from the fungi extend from the mantle into the soil, which increases thesurface area for water and mineral absorption. This type of mycorrhizae is found in forest trees, especially conifers, birches,and oaks. Endomycorrhizae, also called arbuscular mycorrhizae, do not form a dense sheath over the root. Instead, thefungal mycelium is embedded within the root tissue. Endomycorrhizae are found in the roots of more than 80 percent ofterrestrial plants.Nutrients from Other SourcesSome plants cannot produce their own food and must obtain their nutrition from outside sources. This may occur with plantsthat are parasitic or saprophytic. Some plants are mutualistic symbionts, epiphytes, or insectivorous.Plant ParasitesA parasitic plant depends on its host for survival. Some parasitic plants have no leaves. An example of this is the dodder(Figure 31.12), which has a weak, cylindrical stem that coils around the host and forms suckers. From these suckers, cellsinvade the host stem and grow to connect with the vascular bundles of the host. The parasitic plant obtains water andnutrients through these connections. The plant is a total parasite (a holoparasite) because it is completely dependent on itshost. Other parasitic plants (hemiparasites) are fully photosynthetic and only use the host for water and minerals. There areabout 4,100 species of parasitic plants.
The dodder is a holoparasite that penetrates the host’s vascular tissue and diverts nutrients for its owngrowth. Note that the vines of the dodder, which has white flowers, are beige. The dodder has no chlorophyll andcannot produce its own food.
SaprophytesA saprophyte is a plant that does not have chlorophyll and gets its food from dead matter, similar to bacteria and fungi (notethat fungi are often called saprophytes, which is incorrect, because fungi are not plants). Plants like these use enzymes toconvert organic food materials into simpler forms from which they can absorb nutrients (Figure 31.13). Most saprophytesdo not directly digest dead matter: instead, they parasitize fungi that digest dead matter, or are mycorrhizal, ultimatelyobtaining photosynthate from a fungus that derived photosynthate from its host. Saprophytic plants are uncommon; only afew species are described.
Saprophytes, like this Dutchmen’s pipe (Monotropa hypopitys), obtain their food from dead matter anddo not have chlorophyll.
SymbiontsA symbiont is a plant in a symbiotic relationship, with special adaptations such as mycorrhizae or nodule formation.Fungi also form symbiotic associations with cyanobacteria and green algae (called lichens). Lichens can sometimes beseen as colorful growths on the surface of rocks and trees (Figure 31.14). The algal partner (phycobiont) makes foodautotrophically, some of which it shares with the fungus; the fungal partner (mycobiont) absorbs water and minerals fromthe environment, which are made available to the green alga. If one partner was separated from the other, they would bothdie.
Lichens, which often have symbiotic relationships with other plants, can sometimes be found growing ontrees.
EpiphytesAn epiphyte is a plant that grows on other plants, but is not dependent upon the other plant for nutrition (Figure 31.15).Epiphytes have two types of roots: clinging aerial roots, which absorb nutrients from humus that accumulates in the crevicesof trees; and aerial roots, which absorb moisture from the atmosphere.
These epiphyte plants grow in the main greenhouse of the Jardin des Plantes in Paris.Insectivorous PlantsAn insectivorous plant has specialized leaves to attract and digest insects. The Venus flytrap is popularly known for itsinsectivorous mode of nutrition, and has leaves that work as traps (Figure 31.16). The minerals it obtains from preycompensate for those lacking in the boggy (low pH) soil of its native North Carolina coastal plains. There are three sensitivehairs in the center of each half of each leaf. The edges of each leaf are covered with long spines. Nectar secreted by the plantattracts flies to the leaf. When a fly touches the sensory hairs, the leaf immediately closes. Next, fluids and enzymes breakdown the prey and minerals are absorbed by the leaf. Since this plant is popular in the horticultural trade, it is threatened inits original habitat.
A Venus flytrap has specialized leaves to trap insects.