In the southwestern United States, rainy weather causes an increase in production of pinyon nuts, causingthe deer mouse population to explode. Deer mice may carry a virus called Sin Nombre (a hantavirus) that causesrespiratory disease in humans and has a high fatality rate. In 1992–1993, wet El Niño weather caused a Sin Nombreepidemic. Navajo healers, who were aware of the link between this disease and weather, predicted the outbreak.
In 1993, an interesting example of ecosystem dynamics occurred when a rare lung disease struck inhabitants of thesouthwestern United States. This disease had an alarming rate of fatalities, killing more than half of early patients, manyof whom were Native Americans. These formerly healthy young adults died from complete respiratory failure. The diseasewas unknown, and the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the United States government agency responsible for managingpotential epidemics, was brought in to investigate. The scientists could have learned about the disease had they knownto talk with the Navajo healers who lived in the area and who had observed the connection between rainfall and micepopulations, thereby predicting the 1993 outbreak.The cause of the disease, determined within a few weeks by the CDC investigators, was the hantavirus known as SinNombre, the virus with “no name.” With insights from traditional Navajo medicine, scientists were able to characterizethe disease rapidly and institute effective health measures to prevent its spread. This example illustrates the importance ofunderstanding the complexities of ecosystems and how they respond to changes in the environment.Ecology of EcosystemsBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Describe the basic types of ecosystems on EarthExplain the methods that ecologists use to study ecosystem structure and dynamicsIdentify the different methods of ecosystem modelingDifferentiate between food chains and food webs and recognize the importance of each
Life in an ecosystem is often about competition for limited resources, a characteristic of the theory of natural selection.Competition in communities (all living things within specific habitats) is observed both within species and among differentspecies. The resources for which organisms compete include organic material from living or previously living organisms,sunlight, and mineral nutrients, which provide the energy for living processes and the matter to make up organisms’ physicalstructures. Other critical factors influencing community dynamics are the components of its physical and geographicenvironment: a habitat’s latitude, amount of rainfall, topography (elevation), and available species. These are all importantenvironmental variables that determine which organisms can exist within a particular area.An ecosystem is a community of living organisms and their interactions with their abiotic (non-living) environment.Ecosystems can be small, such as the tide pools found near the rocky shores of many oceans, or large, such as the AmazonRainforest in Brazil.
A (a) tidal pool ecosystem in Matinicus Island in Maine is a small ecosystem, while the (b) AmazonRainforest in Brazil is a large ecosystem.
There are three broad categories of ecosystems based on their general environment: freshwater, ocean water, and terrestrial.Within these broad categories are individual ecosystem types based on the organisms present and the type of environmentalhabitat.Ocean ecosystems are the most common, comprising 75 percent of the Earth's surface and consisting of three basic types:shallow ocean, deep ocean water, and deep ocean surfaces (the low depth areas of the deep oceans). The shallow oceanecosystems include extremely biodiverse coral reef ecosystems, and the deep ocean surface is known for its large numbersof plankton and krill (small crustaceans) that support it. These two environments are especially important to aerobicrespirators worldwide as the phytoplankton perform 40 percent of all photosynthesis on Earth. Although not as diverse asthe other two, deep ocean ecosystems contain a wide variety of marine organisms. Such ecosystems exist even at the bottomof the ocean where light is unable to penetrate through the water.Freshwater ecosystems are the rarest, occurring on only 1.8 percent of the Earth's surface. Lakes, rivers, streams, andsprings comprise these systems; they are quite diverse, and they support a variety of fish, amphibians, reptiles, insects,phytoplankton, fungi, and bacteria.Terrestrial ecosystems, also known for their diversity, are grouped into large categories called biomes, such as tropicalrain forests, savannas, deserts, coniferous forests, deciduous forests, and tundra. Grouping these ecosystems into just a fewbiome categories obscures the great diversity of the individual ecosystems within them. For example, there is great variationin desert vegetation: the saguaro cacti and other plant life in the Sonoran Desert, in the United States, are relatively abundantcompared to the desolate rocky desert of Boa Vista, an island off the coast of Western Africa.
Desert ecosystems, like all ecosystems, can vary greatly. The desert in (a) Saguaro National Park,Arizona, has abundant plant life, while the rocky desert of (b) Boa Vista island, Cape Verde, Africa, is devoid of plantlife.
Ecosystems are complex with many interacting parts. They are routinely exposed to various disturbances, or changes inthe environment that effect their compositions: yearly variations in rainfall and temperature and the slower processes ofplant growth, which may take several years. Many of these disturbances are a result of natural processes. For example,when lightning causes a forest fire and destroys part of a forest ecosystem, the ground is eventually populated by grasses,then by bushes and shrubs, and later by mature trees, restoring the forest to its former state. The impact of environmentaldisturbances caused by human activities is as important as the changes wrought by natural processes. Human agriculturalpractices, air pollution, acid rain, global deforestation, overfishing, eutrophication, oil spills, and illegal dumping on landand into the ocean are all issues of concern to conservationists.Equilibrium is the steady state of an ecosystem where all organisms are in balance with their environment and with eachother. In ecology, two parameters are used to measure changes in ecosystems: resistance and resilience. The ability of anecosystem to remain at equilibrium in spite of disturbances is called resistance. The speed at which an ecosystem recoversequilibrium after being disturbed, called its resilience. Ecosystem resistance and resilience are especially important whenconsidering human impact. The nature of an ecosystem may change to such a degree that it can lose its resilience entirely.This process can lead to the complete destruction or irreversible altering of the ecosystem.Food Chains and Food WebsThe term “food chain” is sometimes used metaphorically to describe human social situations. In this sense, food chains arethought of as a competition for survival, such as “who eats whom?” Someone eats and someone is eaten. Therefore, it is notsurprising that in our competitive “dog-eat-dog” society, individuals who are considered successful are seen as being at thetop of the food chain, consuming all others for their benefit, whereas the less successful are seen as being at the bottom.The scientific understanding of a food chain is more precise than in its everyday usage. In ecology, a food chain is a linearsequence of organisms through which nutrients and energy pass: primary producers, primary consumers, and higher-levelconsumers are used to describe ecosystem structure and dynamics. There is a single path through the chain. Each organismin a food chain occupies what is called a trophic level. Depending on their role as producers or consumers, species orgroups of species can be assigned to various trophic levels.In many ecosystems, the bottom of the food chain consists of photosynthetic organisms (plants and/or phytoplankton),which are called primary producers. The organisms that consume the primary producers are herbivores: the primaryconsumers. Secondary consumers are usually carnivores that eat the primary consumers. Tertiary consumers arecarnivores that eat other carnivores. Higher-level consumers feed on the next lower tropic levels, and so on, up to theorganisms at the top of the food chain: the apex consumers. In the Lake Ontario food chain shown in Figure 46.4, theChinook salmon is the apex consumer at the top of this food chain.
These are the trophic levels of a food chain in Lake Ontario at the United States-Canada border. Energyand nutrients flow from photosynthetic green algae at the bottom to the top of the food chain: the Chinook salmon.One major factor that limits the length of food chains is energy. Energy is lost as heat between each trophic level due to thesecond law of thermodynamics. Thus, after a limited number of trophic energy transfers, the amount of energy remainingin the food chain may not be great enough to support viable populations at yet a higher trophic level.The loss of energy between trophic levels is illustrated by the pioneering studies of Howard T. Odum in the Silver Springs,Florida, ecosystem in the 1940s (Figure 46.5). The primary producers generated 20,819 kcal/m2/yr (kilocalories per squaremeter per year), the primary consumers generated 3368 kcal/m2/yr, the secondary consumers generated 383 kcal/m2/yr, andthe tertiary consumers only generated 21 kcal/m2/yr. Thus, there is little energy remaining for another level of consumers inthis ecosystem.
The relative energy in trophic levels in a Silver Springs, Florida, ecosystem is shown. Each trophic levelhas less energy available and supports fewer organisms at the next level.There is a one problem when using food chains to accurately describe most ecosystems. Even when all organisms aregrouped into appropriate trophic levels, some of these organisms can feed on species from more than one trophic level;likewise, some of these organisms can be eaten by species from multiple trophic levels. In other words, the linear modelof ecosystems, the food chain, is not completely descriptive of ecosystem structure. A holistic model—which accounts forall the interactions between different species and their complex interconnected relationships with each other and with theenvironment—is a more accurate and descriptive model for ecosystems. A food web is a graphic representation of a holistic,non-linear web of primary producers, primary consumers, and higher-level consumers used to describe ecosystem structureand dynamics.
This food web shows the interactions between organisms across trophic levels in the Lake Ontarioecosystem. Primary producers are outlined in green, primary consumers in orange, secondary consumers in blue, andtertiary (apex) consumers in purple. Arrows point from an organism that is consumed to the organism that consumesit. Notice how some lines point to more than one trophic level. For example, the opossum shrimp eats both primaryproducers and primary consumers.
A comparison of the two types of structural ecosystem models shows strength in both. Food chains are more flexible foranalytical modeling, are easier to follow, and are easier to experiment with, whereas food web models more accuratelyrepresent ecosystem structure and dynamics, and data can be directly used as input for simulation modeling.
Two general types of food webs are often shown interacting within a single ecosystem. A grazing food web (such as theLake Ontario food web in Figure 46.6) has plants or other photosynthetic organisms at its base, followed by herbivoresand various carnivores. A detrital food web consists of a base of organisms that feed on decaying organic matter (deadorganisms), called decomposers or detritivores. These organisms are usually bacteria or fungi that recycle organic materialback into the biotic part of the ecosystem as they themselves are consumed by other organisms. As all ecosystems requirea method to recycle material from dead organisms, most grazing food webs have an associated detrital food web. Forexample, in a meadow ecosystem, plants may support a grazing food web of different organisms, primary and other levelsof consumers, while at the same time supporting a detrital food web of bacteria, fungi, and detrivorous invertebrates feedingoff dead plants and animals.
Research into Ecosystem Dynamics: Ecosystem Experimentation andModelingThe study of the changes in ecosystem structure caused by changes in the environment (disturbances) or by internal forcesis called ecosystem dynamics. Ecosystems are characterized using a variety of research methodologies. Some ecologists study ecosystems using controlled experimental systems, while some study entire ecosystems in their natural state, andothers use both approaches.A holistic ecosystem model attempts to quantify the composition, interaction, and dynamics of entire ecosystems; it is themost representative of the ecosystem in its natural state. A food web is an example of a holistic ecosystem model. However,this type of study is limited by time and expense, as well as the fact that it is neither feasible nor ethical to do experimentson large natural ecosystems. To quantify all different species in an ecosystem and the dynamics in their habitat is difficult,especially when studying large habitats such as the Amazon Rainforest, which covers 1.4 billion acres (5.5 million km2) ofthe Earth’s surface.For these reasons, scientists study ecosystems under more controlled conditions. Experimental systems usually involveeither partitioning a part of a natural ecosystem that can be used for experiments, termed a mesocosm, or by re-creating anecosystem entirely in an indoor or outdoor laboratory environment, which is referred to as a microcosm. A major limitationto these approaches is that removing individual organisms from their natural ecosystem or altering a natural ecosystemthrough partitioning may change the dynamics of the ecosystem. These changes are often due to differences in speciesnumbers and diversity and also to environment alterations caused by partitioning (mesocosm) or re-creating (microcosm)the natural habitat. Thus, these types of experiments are not totally predictive of changes that would occur in the ecosystemfrom which they were gathered.As both of these approaches have their limitations, some ecologists suggest that results from these experimental systemsshould be used only in conjunction with holistic ecosystem studies to obtain the most representative data about ecosystemstructure, function, and dynamics.Scientists use the data generated by these experimental studies to develop ecosystem models that demonstrate the structureand dynamics of ecosystems. Three basic types of ecosystem modeling are routinely used in research and ecosystemmanagement: a conceptual model, an analytical model, and a simulation model. A conceptual model is an ecosystem modelthat consists of flow charts to show interactions of different compartments of the living and nonliving components of theecosystem. A conceptual model describes ecosystem structure and dynamics and shows how environmental disturbancesaffect the ecosystem; however, its ability to predict the effects of these disturbances is limited. Analytical and simulationmodels, in contrast, are mathematical methods of describing ecosystems that are indeed capable of predicting the effectsof potential environmental changes without direct experimentation, although with some limitations as to accuracy. Ananalytical model is an ecosystem model that is created using simple mathematical formulas to predict the effects ofenvironmental disturbances on ecosystem structure and dynamics. A simulation model is an ecosystem model that iscreated using complex computer algorithms to holistically model ecosystems and to predict the effects of environmentaldisturbances on ecosystem structure and dynamics. Ideally, these models are accurate enough to determine whichcomponents of the ecosystem are particularly sensitive to disturbances, and they can serve as a guide to ecosystem managers(such as conservation ecologists or fisheries biologists) in the practical maintenance of ecosystem health.Conceptual ModelsConceptual models are useful for describing ecosystem structure and dynamics and for demonstrating the relationshipsbetween different organisms in a community and their environment. Conceptual models are usually depicted graphically asflow charts. The organisms and their resources are grouped into specific compartments with arrows showing the relationshipand transfer of energy or nutrients between them. Thus, these diagrams are sometimes called compartment models.To model the cycling of mineral nutrients, organic and inorganic nutrients are subdivided into those that are bioavailable(ready to be incorporated into biological macromolecules) and those that are not. For example, in a terrestrial ecosystemnear a deposit of coal, carbon will be available to the plants of this ecosystem as carbon dioxide gas in a short-termperiod, not from the carbon-rich coal itself. However, over a longer period, microorganisms capable of digesting coal willincorporate its carbon or release it as natural gas (methane, CH4), changing this unavailable organic source into an availableone. This conversion is greatly accelerated by the combustion of fossil fuels by humans, which releases large amounts ofcarbon dioxide into the atmosphere. This is thought to be a major factor in the rise of the atmospheric carbon dioxide levelsin the industrial age. The carbon dioxide released from burning fossil fuels is produced faster than photosynthetic organismscan use it. This process is intensified by the reduction of photosynthetic trees because of worldwide deforestation. Mostscientists agree that high atmospheric carbon dioxide is a major cause of global climate change.Conceptual models are also used to show the flow of energy through particular ecosystems. Figure 46.8 is based on HowardT. Odum’s classical study of the Silver Springs, Florida, holistic ecosystem in the mid-twentieth century.[2]This study showsthe energy content and transfer between various ecosystem compartments.
Analytical and Simulation ModelsThe major limitation of conceptual models is their inability to predict the consequences of changes in ecosystem speciesand/or environment. Ecosystems are dynamic entities and subject to a variety of abiotic and biotic disturbances caused bynatural forces and/or human activity. Ecosystems altered from their initial equilibrium state can often recover from suchdisturbances and return to a state of equilibrium. As most ecosystems are subject to periodic disturbances and are oftenin a state of change, they are usually either moving toward or away from their equilibrium state. There are many of theseequilibrium states among the various components of an ecosystem, which affects the ecosystem overall. Furthermore, ashumans have the ability to greatly and rapidly alter the species content and habitat of an ecosystem, the need for predictivemodels that enable understanding of how ecosystems respond to these changes becomes more crucial.
Analytical models often use simple, linear components of ecosystems, such as food chains, and are known to be complexmathematically; therefore, they require a significant amount of mathematical knowledge and expertise. Although analyticalmodels have great potential, their simplification of complex ecosystems is thought to limit their accuracy. Simulationmodels that use computer programs are better able to deal with the complexities of ecosystem structure.A recent development in simulation modeling uses supercomputers to create and run individual-based simulations, whichaccounts for the behavior of individual organisms and their effects on the ecosystem as a whole. These simulations areconsidered to be the most accurate and predictive of the complex responses of ecosystems to disturbances.
Energy Flow through EcosystemsBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Describe how organisms acquire energy in a food web and in associated food chainsExplain how the efficiency of energy transfers between trophic levels affects ecosystem structure and dynamicsDiscuss trophic levels and how ecological pyramids are used to model themAll living things require energy in one form or another. Energy is required by most complex metabolic pathways (oftenin the form of adenosine triphosphate, ATP), especially those responsible for building large molecules from smallercompounds, and life itself is an energy-driven process. Living organisms would not be able to assemble macromolecules(proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and complex carbohydrates) from their monomeric subunits without a constant energy input.It is important to understand how organisms acquire energy and how that energy is passed from one organism toanother through food webs and their constituent food chains. Food webs illustrate how energy flows directionally throughecosystems, including how efficiently organisms acquire it, use it, and how much remains for use by other organisms of thefood web.How Organisms Acquire Energy in a Food WebEnergy is acquired by living things in three ways: photosynthesis, chemosynthesis, and the consumption and digestion ofother living or previously living organisms by heterotrophs.Photosynthetic and chemosynthetic organisms are both grouped into a category known as autotrophs: organisms capableof synthesizing their own food (more specifically, capable of using inorganic carbon as a carbon source). Photosyntheticautotrophs (photoautotrophs) use sunlight as an energy source, whereas chemosynthetic autotrophs (chemoautotrophs) useinorganic molecules as an energy source. Autotrophs are critical for all ecosystems. Without these organisms, energy wouldnot be available to other living organisms and life itself would not be possible.Photoautotrophs, such as plants, algae, and photosynthetic bacteria, serve as the energy source for a majority of the world’secosystems. These ecosystems are often described by grazing food webs. Photoautotrophs harness the solar energy of thesun by converting it to chemical energy in the form of ATP (and NADP). The energy stored in ATP is used to synthesizecomplex organic molecules, such as glucose.Chemoautotrophs are primarily bacteria that are found in rare ecosystems where sunlight is not available, such as inthose associated with dark caves or hydrothermal vents at the bottom of the ocean (Figure 46.9). Many chemoautotrophsin hydrothermal vents use hydrogen sulfide (H2S), which is released from the vents as a source of chemical energy. Thisallows chemoautotrophs to synthesize complex organic molecules, such as glucose, for their own energy and in turn suppliesenergy to the rest of the ecosystem.
Swimming shrimp, a few squat lobsters, and hundreds of vent mussels are seen at a hydrothermal ventat the bottom of the ocean. As no sunlight penetrates to this depth, the ecosystem is supported by chemoautotrophicbacteria and organic material that sinks from the ocean’s surface. This picture was taken in 2006 at the submerged NWEifuku volcano off the coast of Japan by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The summit ofthis highly active volcano lies 1535 m below the surface.Productivity within Trophic LevelsProductivity within an ecosystem can be defined as the percentage of energy entering the ecosystem incorporated intobiomass in a particular trophic level. Biomass is the total mass, in a unit area at the time of measurement, of living orpreviously living organisms within a trophic level. Ecosystems have characteristic amounts of biomass at each trophic level.For example, in the English Channel ecosystem the primary producers account for a biomass of 4 g/m2 (grams per metersquared), while the primary consumers exhibit a biomass of 21 g/m2.The productivity of the primary producers is especially important in any ecosystem because these organisms bring energyto other living organisms by photoautotrophy or chemoautotrophy. The rate at which photosynthetic primary producersincorporate energy from the sun is called gross primary productivity. An example of gross primary productivity is shownin the compartment diagram of energy flow within the Silver Springs aquatic ecosystem as shown (Figure 46.8). In thisecosystem, the total energy accumulated by the primary producers (gross primary productivity) was shown to be 20,810kcal/m2/yr.Because all organisms need to use some of this energy for their own functions (like respiration and resulting metabolic heatloss) scientists often refer to the net primary productivity of an ecosystem. Net primary productivity is the energy thatremains in the primary producers after accounting for the organisms’ respiration and heat loss. The net productivity is thenavailable to the primary consumers at the next trophic level. In our Silver Spring example, 13,187 of the 20,810 kcal/m2/yrwere used for respiration or were lost as heat, leaving 7,632 kcal/m2/yr of energy for use by the primary consumers.Ecological Efficiency: The Transfer of Energy between Trophic LevelsAs illustrated in Figure 46.8, large amounts of energy are lost from the ecosystem from one trophic level to the next levelas energy flows from the primary producers through the various trophic levels of consumers and decomposers. The mainreason for this loss is the second law of thermodynamics, which states that whenever energy is converted from one form toanother, there is a tendency toward disorder (entropy) in the system. In biologic systems, this means a great deal of energyis lost as metabolic heat when the organisms from one trophic level consume the next level. In the Silver Springs ecosystemexample (Figure 46.8), we see that the primary consumers produced 1103 kcal/m2/yr from the 7618 kcal/m2/yr of energyavailable to them from the primary producers. The measurement of energy transfer efficiency between two successivetrophic levels is termed the trophic level transfer efficiency (TLTE) and is defined by the formula:
In Silver Springs, the TLTE between the first two trophic levels was approximately 14.8 percent. The low efficiency ofenergy transfer between trophic levels is usually the major factor that limits the length of food chains observed in a foodweb. The fact is, after four to six energy transfers, there is not enough energy left to support another trophic level. In theLake Ontario example shown in Figure 46.6, only three energy transfers occurred between the primary producer, (greenalgae), and the apex consumer (Chinook salmon).Ecologists have many different methods of measuring energy transfers within ecosystems. Some transfers are easier or moredifficult to measure depending on the complexity of the ecosystem and how much access scientists have to observe theecosystem. In other words, some ecosystems are more difficult to study than others, and sometimes the quantification ofenergy transfers has to be estimated.Another main parameter that is important in characterizing energy flow within an ecosystem is the net production efficiency.Net production efficiency (NPE) allows ecologists to quantify how efficiently organisms of a particular trophic levelincorporate the energy they receive into biomass; it is calculated using the following formula:
Net consumer productivity is the energy content available to the organisms of the next trophic level. Assimilation is thebiomass (energy content generated per unit area) of the present trophic level after accounting for the energy lost due toincomplete ingestion of food, energy used for respiration, and energy lost as waste. Incomplete ingestion refers to the factthat some consumers eat only a part of their food. For example, when a lion kills an antelope, it will eat everything exceptthe hide and bones. The lion is missing the energy-rich bone marrow inside the bone, so the lion does not make use of allthe calories its prey could provide.Thus, NPE measures how efficiently each trophic level uses and incorporates the energy from its food into biomass to fuelthe next trophic level. In general, cold-blooded animals (ectotherms), such as invertebrates, fish, amphibians, and reptiles,use less of the energy they obtain for respiration and heat than warm-blooded animals (endotherms), such as birds andmammals. The extra heat generated in endotherms, although an advantage in terms of the activity of these organisms incolder environments, is a major disadvantage in terms of NPE. Therefore, many endotherms have to eat more often thanectotherms to get the energy they need for survival. In general, NPE for ectotherms is an order of magnitude (10x) higherthan for endotherms. For example, the NPE for a caterpillar eating leaves has been measured at 18 percent, whereas theNPE for a squirrel eating acorns may be as low as 1.6 percent.The inefficiency of energy use by warm-blooded animals has broad implications for the world's food supply. It is widelyaccepted that the meat industry uses large amounts of crops to feed livestock, and because the NPE is low, much of theenergy from animal feed is lost. For example, it costs about 1¢ to produce 1000 dietary calories (kcal) of corn or soybeans,but approximately $0.19 to produce a similar number of calories growing cattle for beef consumption. The same energycontent of milk from cattle is also costly, at approximately $0.16 per 1000 kcal. Much of this difference is due to the lowNPE of cattle. Thus, there has been a growing movement worldwide to promote the consumption of non-meat and non-dairyfoods so that less energy is wasted feeding animals for the meat industry.Modeling Ecosystems Energy Flow: Ecological PyramidsThe structure of ecosystems can be visualized with ecological pyramids, which were first described by the pioneeringstudies of Charles Elton in the 1920s. Ecological pyramids show the relative amounts of various parameters (such asnumber of organisms, energy, and biomass) across trophic levels.Pyramids of numbers can be either upright or inverted, depending on the ecosystem. As shown in Figure 46.10, typicalgrassland during the summer has a base of many plants and the numbers of organisms decrease at each trophic level.However, during the summer in a temperate forest, the base of the pyramid consists of few trees compared with the numberof primary consumers, mostly insects. Because trees are large, they have great photosynthetic capability, and dominateother plants in this ecosystem to obtain sunlight. Even in smaller numbers, primary producers in forests are still capable ofsupporting other trophic levels.Another way to visualize ecosystem structure is with pyramids of biomass. This pyramid measures the amount of energyconverted into living tissue at the different trophic levels. Using the Silver Springs ecosystem example, this data exhibits anupright biomass pyramid (Figure 46.10), whereas the pyramid from the English Channel example is inverted. The plants(primary producers) of the Silver Springs ecosystem make up a large percentage of the biomass found there. However, thephytoplankton in the English Channel example make up less biomass than the primary consumers, the zooplankton. Aswith inverted pyramids of numbers, this inverted pyramid is not due to a lack of productivity from the primary producers,but results from the high turnover rate of the phytoplankton. The phytoplankton are consumed rapidly by the primaryconsumers, thus, minimizing their biomass at any particular point in time. However, phytoplankton reproduce quickly, thusthey are able to support the rest of the ecosystem.
Pyramid ecosystem modeling can also be used to show energy flow through the trophic levels. Notice that these numbersare the same as those used in the energy flow compartment diagram in Figure 46.8. Pyramids of energy are always upright,and an ecosystem without sufficient primary productivity cannot be supported. All types of ecological pyramids are usefulfor characterizing ecosystem structure. However, in the study of energy flow through the ecosystem, pyramids of energy arethe most consistent and representative models of ecosystem structure.
Consequences of Food Webs: Biological MagnificationOne of the most important environmental consequences of ecosystem dynamics is biomagnification. Biomagnification isthe increasing concentration of persistent, toxic substances in organisms at each trophic level, from the primary producersto the apex consumers. Many substances have been shown to bioaccumulate, including classical studies with the pesticidedichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), which was published in the 1960s bestseller, Silent Spring, by Rachel Carson.DDT was a commonly used pesticide before its dangers became known. In some aquatic ecosystems, organisms from eachtrophic level consumed many organisms of the lower level, which caused DDT to increase in birds (apex consumers) thatate fish. Thus, the birds accumulated sufficient amounts of DDT to cause fragility in their eggshells. This effect increasedegg breakage during nesting and was shown to have adverse effects on these bird populations. The use of DDT was bannedin the United States in the 1970s.Other substances that biomagnify are polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), which were used in coolant liquids in the UnitedStates until their use was banned in 1979, and heavy metals, such as mercury, lead, and cadmium. These substances werebest studied in aquatic ecosystems, where fish species at different trophic levels accumulate toxic substances broughtthrough the ecosystem by the primary producers. As illustrated in a study performed by the National Oceanic andAtmospheric Administration (NOAA) in the Saginaw Bay of Lake Huron (Figure 46.11), PCB concentrations increasedfrom the ecosystem’s primary producers (phytoplankton) through the different trophic levels of fish species. The apexconsumer (walleye) has more than four times the amount of PCBs compared to phytoplankton. Also, based on results from other studies, birds that eat these fish may have PCB levels at least one order of magnitude higher than those found in thelake fish.
This chart shows the PCB concentrations found at the various trophic levels in the Saginaw Bayecosystem of Lake Huron. Numbers on the x-axis reflect enrichment with heavy isotopes of nitrogen (15N), which is amarker for increasing trophic level. Notice that the fish in the higher trophic levels accumulate more PCBs than thosein lower trophic levels.
Other concerns have been raised by the accumulation of heavy metals, such as mercury and cadmium, in certain typesof seafood. The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recommends that pregnant women and youngchildren should not consume any swordfish, shark, king mackerel, or tilefish because of their high mercury content. Theseindividuals are advised to eat fish low in mercury: salmon, tilapia, shrimp, pollock, and catfish. Biomagnification is a goodexample of how ecosystem dynamics can affect our everyday lives, even influencing the food we eat.Biogeochemical CyclesBy the end of this section, you will be able to:Discuss the biogeochemical cycles of water, carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfurExplain how human activities have impacted these cycles and the potential consequences for EarthEnergy flows directionally through ecosystems, entering as sunlight (or inorganic molecules for chemoautotrophs) andleaving as heat during the many transfers between trophic levels. However, the matter that makes up living organisms isconserved and recycled. The six most common elements associated with organic molecules—carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen,oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur—take a variety of chemical forms and may exist for long periods in the atmosphere, onland, in water, or beneath the Earth’s surface. Geologic processes, such as weathering, erosion, water drainage, and thesubduction of the continental plates, all play a role in this recycling of materials. Because geology and chemistry have majorroles in the study of this process, the recycling of inorganic matter between living organisms and their environment is calleda biogeochemical cycle.Water contains hydrogen and oxygen, which is essential to all living processes. The hydrosphere is the area of the Earthwhere water movement and storage occurs: as liquid water on the surface and beneath the surface or frozen (rivers, lakes,oceans, groundwater, polar ice caps, and glaciers), and as water vapor in the atmosphere. Carbon is found in all organicmacromolecules and is an important constituent of fossil fuels. Nitrogen is a major component of our nucleic acids andproteins and is critical to human agriculture. Phosphorus, a major component of nucleic acid (along with nitrogen), is oneof the main ingredients in artificial fertilizers used in agriculture and their associated environmental impacts on our surface water. Sulfur, critical to the 3–D folding of proteins (as in disulfide binding), is released into the atmosphere by the burningof fossil fuels, such as coal.The cycling of these elements is interconnected. For example, the movement of water is critical for the leaching of nitrogenand phosphate into rivers, lakes, and oceans. Furthermore, the ocean itself is a major reservoir for carbon. Thus, mineralnutrients are cycled, either rapidly or slowly, through the entire biosphere, from one living organism to another, and betweenthe biotic and abiotic world.
The Water (Hydrologic) CycleWater is the basis of all living processes. The human body is more than 1/2 water and human cells are more than 70 percentwater. Thus, most land animals need a supply of fresh water to survive. However, when examining the stores of water onEarth, 97.5 percent of it is non-potable salt water (Figure 46.12). Of the remaining water, 99 percent is locked undergroundas water or as ice. Thus, less than 1 percent of fresh water is easily accessible from lakes and rivers. Many living things, suchas plants, animals, and fungi, are dependent on the small amount of fresh surface water supply, a lack of which can havemassive effects on ecosystem dynamics. Humans, of course, have developed technologies to increase water availability,such as digging wells to harvest groundwater, storing rainwater, and using desalination to obtain drinkable water from theocean. Although this pursuit of drinkable water has been ongoing throughout human history, the supply of fresh water isstill a major issue in modern times.
Only 2.5 percent of water on Earth is fresh water, and less than 1 percent of fresh water is easilyaccessible to living things.Water cycling is extremely important to ecosystem dynamics. Water has a major influence on climate and, thus, on theenvironments of ecosystems, some located on distant parts of the Earth. Most of the water on Earth is stored for long periodsin the oceans, underground, and as ice. Figure 46.13 illustrates the average time that an individual water molecule mayspend in the Earth’s major water reservoirs. Residence time is a measure of the average time an individual water moleculestays in a particular reservoir. A large amount of the Earth’s water is locked in place in these reservoirs as ice, beneath theground, and in the ocean, and, thus, is unavailable for short-term cycling (only surface water can evaporate).
This graph shows the average residence time for water molecules in the Earth’s water reservoirs.There are various processes that occur during the cycling of water, shown in Figure 46.14. These processes include thefollowing:• evaporation/sublimation• condensation/precipitation• subsurface water flow• surface runoff/snowmelt• streamflowThe water cycle is driven by the sun’s energy as it warms the oceans and other surface waters. This leads to the evaporation(water to water vapor) of liquid surface water and the sublimation (ice to water vapor) of frozen water, which deposits largeamounts of water vapor into the atmosphere. Over time, this water vapor condenses into clouds as liquid or frozen dropletsand is eventually followed by precipitation (rain or snow), which returns water to the Earth’s surface. Rain eventuallypermeates into the ground, where it may evaporate again if it is near the surface, flow beneath the surface, or be stored forlong periods. More easily observed is surface runoff: the flow of fresh water either from rain or melting ice. Runoff can thenmake its way through streams and lakes to the oceans or flow directly to the oceans themselves.Rain and surface runoff are major ways in which minerals, including carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur, are cycledfrom land to water. The environmental effects of runoff will be discussed later as these cycles are described.
Water from the land and oceans enters the atmosphere by evaporation or sublimation, where itcondenses into clouds and falls as rain or snow. Precipitated water may enter freshwater bodies or infiltrate the soil.The cycle is complete when surface or groundwater reenters the ocean.
The Carbon CycleCarbon is the second most abundant element in living organisms. Carbon is present in all organic molecules, and its rolein the structure of macromolecules is of primary importance to living organisms. Carbon compounds contain especiallyhigh energy, particularly those derived from fossilized organisms, mainly plants, which humans use as fuel. Since the1800s, the number of countries using massive amounts of fossil fuels has increased. Since the beginning of the IndustrialRevolution, global demand for the Earth’s limited fossil fuel supplies has risen; therefore, the amount of carbon dioxidein our atmosphere has increased. This increase in carbon dioxide has been associated with climate change and otherdisturbances of the Earth’s ecosystems and is a major environmental concern worldwide. Thus, the “carbon footprint” isbased on how much carbon dioxide is produced and how much fossil fuel countries consume.The carbon cycle is most easily studied as two interconnected sub-cycles: one dealing with rapid carbon exchange amongliving organisms and the other dealing with the long-term cycling of carbon through geologic processes. The entire carboncycle is shown in Figure 46.15.
The Carbon CycleCarbon is the second most abundant element in living organisms. Carbon is present in all organic molecules, and its rolein the structure of macromolecules is of primary importance to living organisms. Carbon compounds contain especiallyhigh energy, particularly those derived from fossilized organisms, mainly plants, which humans use as fuel. Since the1800s, the number of countries using massive amounts of fossil fuels has increased. Since the beginning of the IndustrialRevolution, global demand for the Earth’s limited fossil fuel supplies has risen; therefore, the amount of carbon dioxidein our atmosphere has increased. This increase in carbon dioxide has been associated with climate change and otherdisturbances of the Earth’s ecosystems and is a major environmental concern worldwide. Thus, the “carbon footprint” isbased on how much carbon dioxide is produced and how much fossil fuel countries consume.The carbon cycle is most easily studied as two interconnected sub-cycles: one dealing with rapid carbon exchange amongliving organisms and the other dealing with the long-term cycling of carbon through geologic processes. The entire carboncycle is shown in Figure 46.15.
The Biological Carbon CycleLiving organisms are connected in many ways, even between ecosystems. A good example of this connection is theexchange of carbon between autotrophs and heterotrophs within and between ecosystems by way of atmospheric carbondioxide. Carbon dioxide is the basic building block that most autotrophs use to build multi-carbon, high energy compounds,such as glucose. The energy harnessed from the sun is used by these organisms to form the covalent bonds that linkcarbon atoms together. These chemical bonds thereby store this energy for later use in the process of respiration. Mostterrestrial autotrophs obtain their carbon dioxide directly from the atmosphere, while marine autotrophs acquire it in thedissolved form (carbonic acid, H2CO3−). However carbon dioxide is acquired, a by-product of the process is oxygen. Thephotosynthetic organisms are responsible for depositing approximately 21 percent oxygen content of the atmosphere thatwe observe today.Heterotrophs and autotrophs are partners in biological carbon exchange (especially the primary consumers, largelyherbivores). Heterotrophs acquire the high-energy carbon compounds from the autotrophs by consuming them, and breakingthem down by respiration to obtain cellular energy, such as ATP. The most efficient type of respiration, aerobic respiration,requires oxygen obtained from the atmosphere or dissolved in water. Thus, there is a constant exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the autotrophs (which need the carbon) and the heterotrophs (which need the oxygen). Gasexchange through the atmosphere and water is one way that the carbon cycle connects all living organisms on Earth.The Biogeochemical Carbon CycleThe movement of carbon through the land, water, and air is complex, and in many cases, it occurs much more slowlygeologically than as seen between living organisms. Carbon is stored for long periods in what are known as carbonreservoirs, which include the atmosphere, bodies of liquid water (mostly oceans), ocean sediment, soil, land sediments(including fossil fuels), and the Earth’s interior.As stated, the atmosphere is a major reservoir of carbon in the form of carbon dioxide and is essential to the process ofphotosynthesis. The level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is greatly influenced by the reservoir of carbon in the oceans.The exchange of carbon between the atmosphere and water reservoirs influences how much carbon is found in each location,and each one affects the other reciprocally. Carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere dissolves in water and combineswith water molecules to form carbonic acid, and then it ionizes to carbonate and bicarbonate ions.
Carbon dioxide reacts with water to form bicarbonate and carbonate ions.The equilibrium coefficients are such that more than 90 percent of the carbon in the ocean is found as bicarbonate ions.Some of these ions combine with seawater calcium to form calcium carbonate (CaCO3), a major component of marineorganism shells. These organisms eventually form sediments on the ocean floor. Over geologic time, the calcium carbonateforms limestone, which comprises the largest carbon reservoir on Earth.On land, carbon is stored in soil as a result of the decomposition of living organisms (by decomposers) or from weatheringof terrestrial rock and minerals. This carbon can be leached into the water reservoirs by surface runoff. Deeper underground,on land and at sea, are fossil fuels: the anaerobically decomposed remains of plants that take millions of years to form.Fossil fuels are considered a non-renewable resource because their use far exceeds their rate of formation. A non-renewableresource, such as fossil fuel, is either regenerated very slowly or not at all. Another way for carbon to enter the atmosphereis from land (including land beneath the surface of the ocean) by the eruption of volcanoes and other geothermal systems.Carbon sediments from the ocean floor are taken deep within the Earth by the process of subduction: the movement of onetectonic plate beneath another. Carbon is released as carbon dioxide when a volcano erupts or from volcanic hydrothermalvents.Carbon dioxide is also added to the atmosphere by the animal husbandry practices of humans. The large numbers of landanimals raised to feed the Earth’s growing population results in increased carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere due tofarming practices and the respiration and methane production. This is another example of how human activity indirectlyaffects biogeochemical cycles in a significant way. Although much of the debate about the future effects of increasingatmospheric carbon on climate change focuses on fossils fuels, scientists take natural processes, such as volcanoes andrespiration, into account as they model and predict the future impact of this increase.The Nitrogen CycleGetting nitrogen into the living world is difficult. Plants and phytoplankton are not equipped to incorporate nitrogen fromthe atmosphere (which exists as tightly bonded, triple covalent N2) even though this molecule comprises approximately78 percent of the atmosphere. Nitrogen enters the living world via free-living and symbiotic bacteria, which incorporatenitrogen into their macromolecules through nitrogen fixation (conversion of N2). Cyanobacteria live in most aquaticecosystems where sunlight is present; they play a key role in nitrogen fixation. Cyanobacteria are able to use inorganicsources of nitrogen to “fix” nitrogen. Rhizobium bacteria live symbiotically in the root nodules of legumes (such as peas,beans, and peanuts) and provide them with the organic nitrogen they need. Free-living bacteria, such as Azotobacter, arealso important nitrogen fixers.Organic nitrogen is especially important to the study of ecosystem dynamics since many ecosystem processes, such asprimary production and decomposition, are limited by the available supply of nitrogen. As shown in Figure 46.17, thenitrogen that enters living systems by nitrogen fixation is successively converted from organic nitrogen back into nitrogengas by bacteria. This process occurs in three steps in terrestrial systems: ammonification, nitrification, and denitrification.First, the ammonification process converts nitrogenous waste from living animals or from the remains of dead animals into ammonium (NH4+) by certain bacteria and fungi. Second, the ammonium is converted to nitrites (NO2−) by nitrifyingbacteria, such as Nitrosomonas, through nitrification. Subsequently, nitrites are converted to nitrates (NO3−) by similarorganisms. Third, the process of denitrification occurs, whereby bacteria, such as Pseudomonas and Clostridium, convertthe nitrates into nitrogen gas, allowing it to re-enter the atmosphere.
Human activity can release nitrogen into the environment by two primary means: the combustion of fossil fuels, whichreleases different nitrogen oxides, and by the use of artificial fertilizers in agriculture, which are then washed into lakes,streams, and rivers by surface runoff. Atmospheric nitrogen is associated with several effects on Earth’s ecosystemsincluding the production of acid rain (as nitric acid, HNO3) and greenhouse gas (as nitrous oxide, N2O) potentially causingclimate change. A major effect from fertilizer runoff is saltwater and freshwater eutrophication, a process whereby nutrientrunoff causes the excess growth of microorganisms, depleting dissolved oxygen levels and killing ecosystem fauna.A similar process occurs in the marine nitrogen cycle, where the ammonification, nitrification, and denitrification processesare performed by marine bacteria. Some of this nitrogen falls to the ocean floor as sediment, which can then be moved toland in geologic time by uplift of the Earth’s surface and thereby incorporated into terrestrial rock. Although the movementof nitrogen from rock directly into living systems has been traditionally seen as insignificant compared with nitrogen fixedfrom the atmosphere, a recent study showed that this process may indeed be significant and should be included in any studyof the global nitrogen cycle.
The Phosphorus CyclePhosphorus is an essential nutrient for living processes; it is a major component of nucleic acid and phospholipids, and, ascalcium phosphate, makes up the supportive components of our bones. Phosphorus is often the limiting nutrient (necessaryfor growth) in aquatic ecosystems (Figure 46.18).Phosphorus occurs in nature as the phosphate ion (PO43−). In addition to phosphate runoff as a result of human activity,natural surface runoff occurs when it is leached from phosphate-containing rock by weathering, thus sending phosphatesinto rivers, lakes, and the ocean. This rock has its origins in the ocean. Phosphate-containing ocean sediments form primarilyfrom the bodies of ocean organisms and from their excretions. However, in remote regions, volcanic ash, aerosols, andmineral dust may also be significant phosphate sources. This sediment then is moved to land over geologic time by theuplifting of areas of the Earth’s surface.Phosphorus is also reciprocally exchanged between phosphate dissolved in the ocean and marine ecosystems. Themovement of phosphate from the ocean to the land and through the soil is extremely slow, with the average phosphate ionhaving an oceanic residence time between 20,000 and 100,000 years.
In nature, phosphorus exists as the phosphate ion (PO43−). Weathering of rocks and volcanic activityreleases phosphate into the soil, water, and air, where it becomes available to terrestrial food webs. Phosphate entersthe oceans via surface runoff, groundwater flow, and river flow. Phosphate dissolved in ocean water cycles into marinefood webs. Some phosphate from the marine food webs falls to the ocean floor, where it forms sediment.
Excess phosphorus and nitrogen that enters these ecosystems from fertilizer runoff and from sewage causes excessivegrowth of microorganisms and depletes the dissolved oxygen, which leads to the death of many ecosystem fauna, such asshellfish and finfish. This process is responsible for dead zones in lakes and at the mouths of many major rivers.
Dead zones occur when phosphorus and nitrogen from fertilizers cause excessive growth ofmicroorganisms, which depletes oxygen and kills fauna. Worldwide, large dead zones are found in coastal areas ofhigh population density.
A dead zone is an area within a freshwater or marine ecosystem where large areas are depleted of their normal flora andfauna; these zones can be caused by eutrophication, oil spills, dumping of toxic chemicals, and other human activities. Thenumber of dead zones has been increasing for several years, and more than 400 of these zones were present as of 2008.One of the worst dead zones is off the coast of the United States in the Gulf of Mexico, where fertilizer runoff from theMississippi River basin has created a dead zone of over 8463 square miles. Phosphate and nitrate runoff from fertilizers alsonegatively affect several lake and bay ecosystems including the Chesapeake Bay in the eastern United States.
The Sulfur CycleSulfur is an essential element for the macromolecules of living things. As a part of the amino acid cysteine, it is involvedin the formation of disulfide bonds within proteins, which help to determine their 3-D folding patterns, and hence theirfunctions. As shown in Figure 46.20, sulfur cycles between the oceans, land, and atmosphere. Atmospheric sulfur is foundin the form of sulfur dioxide (SO2) and enters the atmosphere in three ways: from the decomposition of organic molecules,from volcanic activity and geothermal vents, and from the burning of fossil fuels by humans.
Sulfur dioxide from the atmosphere becomes available to terrestrial and marine ecosystems when it isdissolved in precipitation as weak sulfuric acid or when it falls directly to the Earth as fallout. Weathering of rocks alsomakes sulfates available to terrestrial ecosystems. Decomposition of living organisms returns sulfates to the ocean,soil and atmosphere.
On land, sulfur is deposited in four major ways: precipitation, direct fallout from the atmosphere, rock weathering, andgeothermal vents (Figure 46.21). Atmospheric sulfur is found in the form of sulfur dioxide (SO2), and as rain falls throughthe atmosphere, sulfur is dissolved in the form of weak sulfuric acid (H2SO4). Sulfur can also fall directly from theatmosphere in a process called fallout. Also, the weathering of sulfur-containing rocks releases sulfur into the soil. Theserocks originate from ocean sediments that are moved to land by the geologic uplifting of ocean sediments. Terrestrialecosystems can then make use of these soil sulfates ( SO4− ), and upon the death and decomposition of these organisms,release the sulfur back into the atmosphere as hydrogen sulfide (H2S) gas.
At this sulfur vent in Lassen Volcanic National Park in northeastern California, the yellowish sulfurdeposits are visible near the mouth of the vent.Sulfur enters the ocean via runoff from land, from atmospheric fallout, and from underwater geothermal vents. Someecosystems (Figure 46.9) rely on chemoautotrophs using sulfur as a biological energy source. This sulfur then supportsmarine ecosystems in the form of sulfates.Human activities have played a major role in altering the balance of the global sulfur cycle. The burning of large quantitiesof fossil fuels, especially from coal, releases larger amounts of hydrogen sulfide gas into the atmosphere. As rain fallsthrough this gas, it creates the phenomenon known as acid rain. Acid rain is corrosive rain caused by rainwater falling tothe ground through sulfur dioxide gas, turning it into weak sulfuric acid, which causes damage to aquatic ecosystems. Acidrain damages the natural environment by lowering the pH of lakes, which kills many of the resident fauna; it also affectsthe man-made environment through the chemical degradation of buildings. For example, many marble monuments, such asthe Lincoln Memorial in Washington, DC, have suffered significant damage from acid rain over the years. These examplesshow the wide-ranging effects of human activities on our environment and the challenges that remain for our future.
