Close your eyes and picture a brick wall. What is the basic building block of that wall? A single brick, of course. Like abrick wall, your body is composed of basic building blocks, and the building blocks of your body are cells.Your body has many kinds of cells, each specialized for a specific purpose. Just as a home is made from a variety of buildingmaterials, the human body is constructed from many cell types. For example, epithelial cells protect the surface of the bodyand cover the organs and body cavities within. Bone cells help to support and protect the body. Cells of the immune systemfight invading bacteria. Additionally, blood and blood cells carry nutrients and oxygen throughout the body while removingcarbon dioxide. Each of these cell types plays a vital role during the growth, development, and day-to-day maintenance ofthe body. In spite of their enormous variety, however, cells from all organisms—even ones as diverse as bacteria, onion, andhuman—share certain fundamental characteristics.
A cell is the smallest unit of a living thing. A living thing, whether made of one cell (like bacteria) or many cells (like ahuman), is called an organism. Thus, cells are the basic building blocks of all organisms.
Several cells of one kind that interconnect with each other and perform a shared function form tissues, several tissuescombine to form an organ (your stomach, heart, or brain), and several organs make up an organ system (such as the digestivesystem, circulatory system, or nervous system). Several systems that function together form an organism (like a humanbeing). Here, we will examine the structure and function of cells.There are many types of cells, all grouped into one of two broad categories: prokaryotic and eukaryotic. For example,both animal and plant cells are classified as eukaryotic cells, whereas bacterial cells are classified as prokaryotic. Beforediscussing the criteria for determining whether a cell is prokaryotic or eukaryotic, let’s first examine how biologists studycells.MicroscopyCells vary in size. With few exceptions, individual cells cannot be seen with the naked eye, so scientists use microscopes(micro- = “small”; -scope = “to look at”) to study them. A microscope is an instrument that magnifies an object. Mostphotographs of cells are taken with a microscope, and these images can also be called micrographs.The optics of a microscope’s lenses change the orientation of the image that the user sees. A specimen that is right-sideup and facing right on the microscope slide will appear upside-down and facing left when viewed through a microscope,and vice versa. Similarly, if the slide is moved left while looking through the microscope, it will appear to move right, andif moved down, it will seem to move up. This occurs because microscopes use two sets of lenses to magnify the image.Because of the manner by which light travels through the lenses, this system of two lenses produces an inverted image(binocular, or dissecting microscopes, work in a similar manner, but include an additional magnification system that makesthe final image appear to be upright).Light MicroscopesTo give you a sense of cell size, a typical human red blood cell is about eight millionths of a meter or eight micrometers(abbreviated as eight μm) in diameter; the head of a pin of is about two thousandths of a meter (two mm) in diameter. Thatmeans about 250 red blood cells could fit on the head of a pin.Most student microscopes are classified as light microscopes (Figure 4.2a). Visible light passes and is bent through thelens system to enable the user to see the specimen. Light microscopes are advantageous for viewing living organisms, butsince individual cells are generally transparent, their components are not distinguishable unless they are colored with specialstains. Staining, however, usually kills the cells.Light microscopes commonly used in the undergraduate college laboratory magnify up to approximately 400 times. Twoparameters that are important in microscopy are magnification and resolving power. Magnification is the process ofenlarging an object in appearance. Resolving power is the ability of a microscope to distinguish two adjacent structures asseparate: the higher the resolution, the better the clarity and detail of the image. When oil immersion lenses are used for thestudy of small objects, magnification is usually increased to 1,000 times. In order to gain a better understanding of cellularstructure and function, scientists typically use electron microscopes.
Most light microscopes used in a college biology lab can magnify cells up to approximately 400 timesand have a resolution of about 200 nanometers. (b) Electron microscopes provide a much higher magnification,100,000x, and a have a resolution of 50 picometers.
Electron MicroscopesIn contrast to light microscopes, electron microscopes (Figure 4.2b) use a beam of electrons instead of a beam of light.Not only does this allow for higher magnification and, thus, more detail (Figure 4.3), it also provides higher resolvingpower. The method used to prepare the specimen for viewing with an electron microscope kills the specimen. Electronshave short wavelengths (shorter than photons) that move best in a vacuum, so living cells cannot be viewed with an electronmicroscope.In a scanning electron microscope, a beam of electrons moves back and forth across a cell’s surface, creating details of cellsurface characteristics. In a transmission electron microscope, the electron beam penetrates the cell and provides details of acell’s internal structures. As you might imagine, electron microscopes are significantly more bulky and expensive than lightmicroscopes.
These Salmonella bacteria appear as tiny purple dots when viewed with a light microscope. (b) Thisscanning electron microscope micrograph shows Salmonella bacteria (in red) invading human cells (yellow). Eventhough subfigure (b) shows a different Salmonella specimen than subfigure (a), you can still observe the comparativeincrease in magnification and detail.
Cell TheoryThe microscopes we use today are far more complex than those used in the 1600s by Antony van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutchshopkeeper who had great skill in crafting lenses. Despite the limitations of his now-ancient lenses, van Leeuwenhoekobserved the movements of protista (a type of single-celled organism) and sperm, which he collectively termed“animalcules.”In a 1665 publication called Micrographia, experimental scientist Robert Hooke coined the term “cell” for the box-likestructures he observed when viewing cork tissue through a lens. In the 1670s, van Leeuwenhoek discovered bacteria andprotozoa. Later advances in lenses, microscope construction, and staining techniques enabled other scientists to see somecomponents inside cells.By the late 1830s, botanist Matthias Schleiden and zoologist Theodor Schwann were studying tissues and proposed theunified cell theory, which states that all living things are composed of one or more cells, the cell is the basic unit of life,and new cells arise from existing cells. Rudolf Virchow later made important contributions to this theory.
Cells fall into one of two broad categories: prokaryotic and eukaryotic. Only the predominantly single-celled organismsof the domains Bacteria and Archaea are classified as prokaryotes (pro- = “before”; -kary- = “nucleus”). Cells of animals,plants, fungi, and protists are all eukaryotes (ceu- = “true”) and are made up of eukaryotic cells.Components of Prokaryotic CellsAll cells share four common components: 1) a plasma membrane, an outer covering that separates the cell’s interior from itssurrounding environment; 2) cytoplasm, consisting of a jelly-like cytosol within the cell in which other cellular components are found; 3) DNA, the genetic material of the cell; and 4) ribosomes, which synthesize proteins. However, prokaryotesdiffer from eukaryotic cells in several ways.A prokaryote is a simple, mostly single-celled (unicellular) organism that lacks a nucleus, or any other membrane-boundorganelle.We will shortly come to see that this is significantly different in eukaryotes. Prokaryotic DNA is found in a centralpart of the cell: the nucleoid.
This figure shows the generalized structure of a prokaryotic cell. All prokaryotes have chromosomal DNAlocalized in a nucleoid, ribosomes, a cell membrane, and a cell wall. The other structures shown are present in some,but not all, bacteria.Most prokaryotes have a peptidoglycan cell wall and many have a polysaccharide capsule (Figure 4.5). The cell wall actsas an extra layer of protection, helps the cell maintain its shape, and prevents dehydration. The capsule enables the cell toattach to surfaces in its environment. Some prokaryotes have flagella, pili, or fimbriae. Flagella are used for locomotion.Pili are used to exchange genetic material during a type of reproduction called conjugation. Fimbriae are used by bacteriato attach to a host cell.
Cell SizeAt 0.1 to 5.0 μm in diameter, prokaryotic cells are significantly smaller than eukaryotic cells, which have diameters rangingfrom 10 to 100 μm (Figure 4.6). The small size of prokaryotes allows ions and organic molecules that enter them to quicklydiffuse to other parts of the cell. Similarly, any wastes produced within a prokaryotic cell can quickly diffuse out. This isnot the case in eukaryotic cells, which have developed different structural adaptations to enhance intracellular transport.
This figure shows relative sizes of microbes on a logarithmic scale (recall that each unit of increase in alogarithmic scale represents a 10-fold increase in the quantity being measured).Small size, in general, is necessary for all cells, whether prokaryotic or eukaryotic. Let’s examine why that is so. First, we’llconsider the area and volume of a typical cell. Not all cells are spherical in shape, but most tend to approximate a sphere.You may remember from your high school geometry course that the formula for the surface area of a sphere is 4πr2, whilethe formula for its volume is 4πr3/3. Thus, as the radius of a cell increases, its surface area increases as the square of itsradius, but its volume increases as the cube of its radius (much more rapidly). Therefore, as a cell increases in size, itssurface area-to-volume ratio decreases. This same principle would apply if the cell had the shape of a cube (Figure 4.7). Ifthe cell grows too large, the plasma membrane will not have sufficient surface area to support the rate of diffusion requiredfor the increased volume. In other words, as a cell grows, it becomes less efficient. One way to become more efficient is todivide; another way is to develop organelles that perform specific tasks. These adaptations lead to the development of moresophisticated cells called eukaryotic cells.
Have you ever heard the phrase “form follows function?” It’s a philosophy practiced in many industries. In architecture,this means that buildings should be constructed to support the activities that will be carried out inside them. For example,a skyscraper should be built with several elevator banks; a hospital should be built so that its emergency room is easilyaccessible.Our natural world also utilizes the principle of form following function, especially in cell biology, and this will become clearas we explore eukaryotic cells ( Figure 4.8). Unlike prokaryotic cells, eukaryotic cells have: 1) a membrane-bound nucleus;2) numerous membrane-bound organelles such as the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, chloroplasts, mitochondria,and others; and 3) several, rod-shaped chromosomes. Because a eukaryotic cell’s nucleus is surrounded by a membrane, it isoften said to have a “true nucleus.” The word “organelle” means “little organ,” and, as already mentioned, organelles havespecialized cellular functions, just as the organs of your body have specialized functions.At this point, it should be clear to you that eukaryotic cells have a more complex structure than prokaryotic cells. Organellesallow different functions to be compartmentalized in different areas of the cell. Before turning to organelles, let’s firstexamine two important components of the cell: the plasma membrane and the cytoplasm.
The Plasma MembraneLike prokaryotes, eukaryotic cells have a plasma membrane ( Figure 4.9), a phospholipid bilayer with embedded proteinsthat separates the internal contents of the cell from its surrounding environment. A phospholipid is a lipid molecule with two fatty acid chains and a phosphate-containing group. The plasma membrane controls the passage of organic molecules,ions, water, and oxygen into and out of the cell.Wastes (such as carbon dioxide and ammonia) also leave the cell by passingthrough the plasma membrane.
The eukaryotic plasma membrane is a phospholipid bilayer with proteins and cholesterol embedded in it.The plasma membranes of cells that specialize in absorption are folded into fingerlike projections called microvilli (singular= microvillus); ( Figure 4.10). Such cells are typically found lining the small intestine, the organ that absorbs nutrientsfrom digested food. This is an excellent example of form following function. People with celiac disease have an immuneresponse to gluten, which is a protein found in wheat, barley, and rye. The immune response damages microvilli, and thus,afflicted individuals cannot absorb nutrients. This leads to malnutrition, cramping, and diarrhea. Patients suffering fromceliac disease must follow a gluten-free diet.
Microvilli, shown here as they appear on cells lining the small intestine, increase the surface area availablefor absorption. These microvilli are only found on the area of the plasma membrane that faces the cavity from whichsubstances will be absorbed.
The CytoplasmThe cytoplasm is the entire region of a cell between the plasma membrane and the nuclear envelope (a structure to bediscussed shortly). It is made up of organelles suspended in the gel-like cytosol, the cytoskeleton, and various chemicals (Figure 4.8). Even though the cytoplasm consists of 70 to 80 percent water, it has a semi-solid consistency, which comesfrom the proteins within it. However, proteins are not the only organic molecules found in the cytoplasm. Glucose and othersimple sugars, polysaccharides, amino acids, nucleic acids, fatty acids, and derivatives of glycerol are found there, too. Ionsof sodium, potassium, calcium, and many other elements are also dissolved in the cytoplasm. Many metabolic reactions,including protein synthesis, take place in the cytoplasm.The NucleusTypically, the nucleus is the most prominent organelle in a cell ( Figure 4.8). The nucleus (plural = nuclei) houses the cell’sDNA and directs the synthesis of ribosomes and proteins. Let’s look at it in more detail ( Figure 4.11).
The nucleus stores chromatin (DNA plus proteins) in a gel-like substance called the nucleoplasm. Thenucleolus is a condensed region of chromatin where ribosome synthesis occurs. The boundary of the nucleus iscalled the nuclear envelope. It consists of two phospholipid bilayers: an outer membrane and an inner membrane. Thenuclear membrane is continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum. Nuclear pores allow substances to enter and exit thenucleus.The Nuclear EnvelopeThe nuclear envelope is a double-membrane structure that constitutes the outermost portion of the nucleus ( Figure 4.11).Both the inner and outer membranes of the nuclear envelope are phospholipid bilayers.The nuclear envelope is punctuated with pores that control the passage of ions, molecules, and RNA between thenucleoplasm and cytoplasm. The nucleoplasm is the semi-solid fluid inside the nucleus, where we find the chromatin andthe nucleolus.Chromatin and ChromosomesTo understand chromatin, it is helpful to first consider chromosomes. Chromosomes are structures within the nucleus thatare made up of DNA, the hereditary material. You may remember that in prokaryotes, DNA is organized into a singlecircular chromosome. In eukaryotes, chromosomes are linear structures. Every eukaryotic species has a specific number ofchromosomes in the nuclei of its body’s cells. For example, in humans, the chromosome number is 46, while in fruit flies, itis eight. Chromosomes are only visible and distinguishable from one another when the cell is getting ready to divide. Whenthe cell is in the growth and maintenance phases of its life cycle, proteins are attached to chromosomes, and they resemblean unwound, jumbled bunch of threads. These unwound protein-chromosome complexes are called chromatin ( Figure4.12); chromatin describes the material that makes up the chromosomes both when condensed and decondensed.
This image shows various levels of the organization of chromatin (DNA and protein). (b) This imageshows paired chromosomes.
The NucleolusWe already know that the nucleus directs the synthesis of ribosomes, but how does it do this? Some chromosomes havesections of DNA that encode ribosomal RNA. A darkly staining area within the nucleus called the nucleolus (plural= nucleoli) aggregates the ribosomal RNA with associated proteins to assemble the ribosomal subunits that are thentransported out through the pores in the nuclear envelope to the cytoplasm.RibosomesRibosomes are the cellular structures responsible for protein synthesis. When viewed through an electron microscope,ribosomes appear either as clusters (polyribosomes) or single, tiny dots that float freely in the cytoplasm. They may beattached to the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane or the cytoplasmic side of the endoplasmic reticulum and theouter membrane of the nuclear envelope ( Figure 4.8). Electron microscopy has shown us that ribosomes, which are largecomplexes of protein and RNA, consist of two subunits, aptly called large and small ( Figure 4.13). Ribosomes receive their“orders” for protein synthesis from the nucleus where the DNA is transcribed into messenger RNA (mRNA). The mRNAtravels to the ribosomes, which translate the code provided by the sequence of the nitrogenous bases in the mRNA into aspecific order of amino acids in a protein. Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins.
Ribosomes are made up of a large subunit (top) and a small subunit (bottom). During protein synthesis,ribosomes assemble amino acids into proteins.Because proteins synthesis is an essential function of all cells (including enzymes, hormones, antibodies, pigments,structural components, and surface receptors), ribosomes are found in practically every cell. Ribosomes are particularlyabundant in cells that synthesize large amounts of protein. For example, the pancreas is responsible for creating severaldigestive enzymes and the cells that produce these enzymes contain many ribosomes. Thus, we see another example of formfollowing function.MitochondriaMitochondria (singular = mitochondrion) are often called the “powerhouses” or “energy factories” of a cell because theyare responsible for making adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the cell’s main energy-carrying molecule. ATP represents theshort-term stored energy of the cell. Cellular respiration is the process of making ATP using the chemical energy found inglucose and other nutrients. In mitochondria, this process uses oxygen and produces carbon dioxide as a waste product. Infact, the carbon dioxide that you exhale with every breath comes from the cellular reactions that produce carbon dioxide asa byproduct.In keeping with our theme of form following function, it is important to point out that muscle cells have a very highconcentration of mitochondria that produce ATP. Your muscle cells need a lot of energy to keep your body moving. Whenyour cells don’t get enough oxygen, they do not make a lot of ATP. Instead, the small amount of ATP they make in theabsence of oxygen is accompanied by the production of lactic acid.
Mitochondria are oval-shaped, double membrane organelles ( Figure 4.14) that have their own ribosomes and DNA. Eachmembrane is a phospholipid bilayer embedded with proteins. The inner layer has folds called cristae. The area surroundedby the folds is called the mitochondrial matrix. The cristae and the matrix have different roles in cellular respiration.
This electron micrograph shows a mitochondrion as viewed with a transmission electron microscope. Thisorganelle has an outer membrane and an inner membrane. The inner membrane contains folds, called cristae, whichincrease its surface area. The space between the two membranes is called the intermembrane space, and the spaceinside the inner membrane is called the mitochondrial matrix. ATP synthesis takes place on the inner membrane.(credit: modification of work by Matthew Britton; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)PeroxisomesPeroxisomes are small, round organelles enclosed by single membranes. They carry out oxidation reactions that breakdown fatty acids and amino acids. They also detoxify many poisons that may enter the body. (Many of these oxidationreactions release hydrogen peroxide, H2O2, which would be damaging to cells; however, when these reactions are confinedto peroxisomes, enzymes safely break down the H2O2 into oxygen and water.) For example, alcohol is detoxified byperoxisomes in liver cells. Glyoxysomes, which are specialized peroxisomes in plants, are responsible for converting storedfats into sugars.Vesicles and VacuolesVesicles and vacuoles are membrane-bound sacs that function in storage and transport. Other than the fact that vacuoles aresomewhat larger than vesicles, there is a very subtle distinction between them: The membranes of vesicles can fuse witheither the plasma membrane or other membrane systems within the cell. Additionally, some agents such as enzymes withinplant vacuoles break down macromolecules. The membrane of a vacuole does not fuse with the membranes of other cellularcomponents.Animal Cells versus Plant CellsAt this point, you know that each eukaryotic cell has a plasma membrane, cytoplasm, a nucleus, ribosomes, mitochondria,peroxisomes, and in some, vacuoles, but there are some striking differences between animal and plant cells. While bothanimal and plant cells have microtubule organizing centers (MTOCs), animal cells also have centrioles associated with theMTOC: a complex called the centrosome. Animal cells each have a centrosome and lysosomes, whereas plant cells do not.Plant cells have a cell wall, chloroplasts and other specialized plastids, and a large central vacuole, whereas animal cells donot.The CentrosomeThe centrosome is a microtubule-organizing center found near the nuclei of animal cells. It contains a pair of centrioles, twostructures that lie perpendicular to each other ( Figure 4.15). Each centriole is a cylinder of nine triplets of microtubules.
The centrosome consists of two centrioles that lie at right angles to each other. Each centriole is a cylindermade up of nine triplets of microtubules. Nontubulin proteins (indicated by the green lines) hold the microtubule tripletstogether.The centrosome (the organelle where all microtubules originate) replicates itself before a cell divides, and the centriolesappear to have some role in pulling the duplicated chromosomes to opposite ends of the dividing cell. However, the exactfunction of the centrioles in cell division isn’t clear, because cells that have had the centrosome removed can still divide,and plant cells, which lack centrosomes, are capable of cell division.LysosomesAnimal cells have another set of organelles not found in plant cells: lysosomes. The lysosomes are the cell’s “garbagedisposal.” In plant cells, the digestive processes take place in vacuoles. Enzymes within the lysosomes aid the breakdown ofproteins, polysaccharides, lipids, nucleic acids, and even worn-out organelles. These enzymes are active at a much lower pHthan that of the cytoplasm. Therefore, the pH within lysosomes is more acidic than the pH of the cytoplasm. Many reactionsthat take place in the cytoplasm could not occur at a low pH, so again, the advantage of compartmentalizing the eukaryoticcell into organelles is apparent.The Cell WallIf you examine Figure 4.8b, the diagram of a plant cell, you will see a structure external to the plasma membrane calledthe cell wall. The cell wall is a rigid covering that protects the cell, provides structural support, and gives shape to the cell.Fungal and protistan cells also have cell walls. While the chief component of prokaryotic cell walls is peptidoglycan, themajor organic molecule in the plant cell wall is cellulose ( Figure 4.16), a polysaccharide made up of glucose units. Haveyou ever noticed that when you bite into a raw vegetable, like celery, it crunches? That’s because you are tearing the rigidcell walls of the celery cells with your teeth.
Cellulose is a long chain of β-glucose molecules connected by a 1-4 linkage. The dashed lines at eachend of the figure indicate a series of many more glucose units. The size of the page makes it impossible to portray anentire cellulose molecule.ChloroplastsLike the mitochondria, chloroplasts have their own DNA and ribosomes, but chloroplasts have an entirely different function.Chloroplasts are plant cell organelles that carry out photosynthesis. Photosynthesis is the series of reactions that use carbondioxide, water, and light energy to make glucose and oxygen. This is a major difference between plants and animals; plants(autotrophs) are able to make their own food, like sugars, while animals (heterotrophs) must ingest their food.Like mitochondria, chloroplasts have outer and inner membranes, but within the space enclosed by a chloroplast’s innermembrane is a set of interconnected and stacked fluid-filled membrane sacs called thylakoids ( Figure 4.17). Each stack ofthylakoids is called a granum (plural = grana). The fluid enclosed by the inner membrane that surrounds the grana is calledthe stroma.
The chloroplast has an outer membrane, an inner membrane, and membrane structures called thylakoidsthat are stacked into grana. The space inside the thylakoid membranes is called the thylakoid space. The lightharvesting reactions take place in the thylakoid membranes, and the synthesis of sugar takes place in the fluid insidethe inner membrane, which is called the stroma. Chloroplasts also have their own genome, which is contained on asingle circular chromosome.The chloroplasts contain a green pigment called chlorophyll, which captures the light energy that drives the reactions ofphotosynthesis. Like plant cells, photosynthetic protists also have chloroplasts. Some bacteria perform photosynthesis, buttheir chlorophyll is not relegated to an organelle.
Previously, we mentioned vacuoles as essential components of plant cells. If you look at Figure 4.8b, you will see that plantcells each have a large central vacuole that occupies most of the area of the cell. The central vacuole plays a key role inregulating the cell’s concentration of water in changing environmental conditions. Have you ever noticed that if you forgetto water a plant for a few days, it wilts? That’s because as the water concentration in the soil becomes lower than the waterconcentration in the plant, water moves out of the central vacuoles and cytoplasm. As the central vacuole shrinks, it leavesthe cell wall unsupported. This loss of support to the cell walls of plant cells results in the wilted appearance of the plant.
The central vacuole also supports the expansion of the cell. When the central vacuole holds more water, the cell gets largerwithout having to invest a lot of energy in synthesizing new cytoplasm.
The endomembrane system (endo = “within”) is a group of membranes and organelles (Figure 4.18) in eukaryotic cellsthat works together to modify, package, and transport lipids and proteins. It includes the nuclear envelope, lysosomes, andvesicles, which we’ve already mentioned, and the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus, which we will cover shortly.Although not technically within the cell, the plasma membrane is included in the endomembrane system because, as you willsee, it interacts with the other endomembranous organelles. The endomembrane system does not include the membranes ofeither mitochondria or chloroplasts.
The Endoplasmic ReticulumThe endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Figure 4.18) is a series of interconnected membranous sacs and tubules that collectivelymodifies proteins and synthesizes lipids. However, these two functions are performed in separate areas of the ER: the roughER and the smooth ER, respectively.The hollow portion of the ER tubules is called the lumen or cisternal space. The membrane of the ER, which is aphospholipid bilayer embedded with proteins, is continuous with the nuclear envelope.
Rough ERThe rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) is so named because the ribosomes attached to its cytoplasmic surface give it astudded appearance when viewed through an electron microscope.
This transmission electron micrograph shows the rough endoplasmic reticulum and other organelles in a pancreatic cell.
Ribosomes transfer their newly synthesized proteins into the lumen of the RER where they undergo structural modifications,such as folding or the acquisition of side chains. These modified proteins will be incorporated into cellular membranes—themembrane of the ER or those of other organelles—or secreted from the cell (such as protein hormones, enzymes). The RERalso makes phospholipids for cellular membranes.If the phospholipids or modified proteins are not destined to stay in the RER, they will reach their destinations via transportvesicles that bud from the RER’s membrane (Figure 4.18).Since the RER is engaged in modifying proteins (such as enzymes, for example) that will be secreted from the cell, youwould be correct in assuming that the RER is abundant in cells that secrete proteins. This is the case with cells of the liver,for example.Smooth ERThe smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) is continuous with the RER but has few or no ribosomes on its cytoplasmicsurface (Figure 4.18). Functions of the SER include synthesis of carbohydrates, lipids, and steroid hormones; detoxificationof medications and poisons; and storage of calcium ions.In muscle cells, a specialized SER called the sarcoplasmic reticulum is responsible for storage of the calcium ions that areneeded to trigger the coordinated contractions of the muscle cells.
The Golgi ApparatusWe have already mentioned that vesicles can bud from the ER and transport their contents elsewhere, but where do thevesicles go? Before reaching their final destination, the lipids or proteins within the transport vesicles still need to be sorted,packaged, and tagged so that they wind up in the right place. Sorting, tagging, packaging, and distribution of lipids andproteins takes place in the Golgi apparatus (also called the Golgi body), a series of flattened membranes.
The Golgi apparatus in this white blood cell is visible as a stack of semicircular, flattened rings in the lowerportion of the image. Several vesicles can be seen near the Golgi apparatus. (credit: modification of work by LouisaHoward)The receiving side of the Golgi apparatus is called the cis face. The opposite side is called the trans face. The transportvesicles that formed from the ER travel to the cis face, fuse with it, and empty their contents into the lumen of the Golgiapparatus. As the proteins and lipids travel through the Golgi, they undergo further modifications that allow them to besorted. The most frequent modification is the addition of short chains of sugar molecules. These newly modified proteinsand lipids are then tagged with phosphate groups or other small molecules so that they can be routed to their properdestinations.Finally, the modified and tagged proteins are packaged into secretory vesicles that bud from the trans face of the Golgi.While some of these vesicles deposit their contents into other parts of the cell where they will be used, other secretoryvesicles fuse with the plasma membrane and release their contents outside the cell.In another example of form following function, cells that engage in a great deal of secretory activity (such as cells of thesalivary glands that secrete digestive enzymes or cells of the immune system that secrete antibodies) have an abundance ofGolgi.
In plant cells, the Golgi apparatus has the additional role of synthesizing polysaccharides, some of which are incorporatedinto the cell wall and some of which are used in other parts of the cell.
LysosomesIn addition to their role as the digestive component and organelle-recycling facility of animal cells, lysosomes areconsidered to be parts of the endomembrane system. Lysosomes also use their hydrolytic enzymes to destroy pathogens(disease-causing organisms) that might enter the cell. A good example of this occurs in a group of white blood cells calledmacrophages, which are part of your body’s immune system. In a process known as phagocytosis or endocytosis, a sectionof the plasma membrane of the macrophage invaginates (folds in) and engulfs a pathogen. The invaginated section, withthe pathogen inside, then pinches itself off from the plasma membrane and becomes a vesicle. The vesicle fuses with alysosome. The lysosome’s hydrolytic enzymes then destroy the pathogen.
A macrophage has engulfed (phagocytized) a potentially pathogenic bacterium and then fuses with alysosomes within the cell to destroy the pathogen. Other organelles are present in the cell but for simplicity are notshown.
If you were to remove all the organelles from a cell, would the plasma membrane and the cytoplasm be the only componentsleft? No. Within the cytoplasm, there would still be ions and organic molecules, plus a network of protein fibers that helpmaintain the shape of the cell, secure some organelles in specific positions, allow cytoplasm and vesicles to move withinthe cell, and enable cells within multicellular organisms to move. Collectively, this network of protein fibers is knownas the cytoskeleton. There are three types of fibers within the cytoskeleton: microfilaments, intermediate filaments, andmicrotubules (Figure 4.22). Here, we will examine each.
Microfilaments thicken the cortex around the inner edge of a cell; like rubber bands, they resist tension.Microtubules are found in the interior of the cell where they maintain cell shape by resisting compressive forces.Intermediate filaments are found throughout the cell and hold organelles in place.MicrofilamentsOf the three types of protein fibers in the cytoskeleton, microfilaments are the narrowest. They function in cellularmovement, have a diameter of about 7 nm, and are made of two intertwined strands of a globular protein called actin (Figure4.23). For this reason, microfilaments are also known as actin filaments.
Actin is powered by ATP to assemble its filamentous form, which serves as a track for the movement of a motor proteincalled myosin. This enables actin to engage in cellular events requiring motion, such as cell division in animal cells andcytoplasmic streaming, which is the circular movement of the cell cytoplasm in plant cells. Actin and myosin are plentifulin muscle cells. When your actin and myosin filaments slide past each other, your muscles contract.Microfilaments also provide some rigidity and shape to the cell. They can depolymerize (disassemble) and reform quickly,thus enabling a cell to change its shape and move. White blood cells (your body’s infection-fighting cells) make good useof this ability. They can move to the site of an infection and phagocytize the pathogen.
Intermediate FilamentsIntermediate filaments are made of several strands of fibrous proteins that are wound together (Figure 4.24). These elementsof the cytoskeleton get their name from the fact that their diameter, 8 to 10 nm, is between those of microfilaments andmicrotubules.
Intermediate filaments consist of several intertwined strands of fibrous proteins.Intermediate filaments have no role in cell movement. Their function is purely structural. They bear tension, thusmaintaining the shape of the cell, and anchor the nucleus and other organelles in place. Figure 4.22 shows how intermediatefilaments create a supportive scaffolding inside the cell.The intermediate filaments are the most diverse group of cytoskeletal elements. Several types of fibrous proteins are foundin the intermediate filaments. You are probably most familiar with keratin, the fibrous protein that strengthens your hair,nails, and the epidermis of the skin.MicrotubulesAs their name implies, microtubules are small hollow tubes. The walls of the microtubule are made of polymerized dimersof α-tubulin and β-tubulin, two globular proteins (Figure 4.25). With a diameter of about 25 nm, microtubules are thewidest components of the cytoskeleton. They help the cell resist compression, provide a track along which vesicles movethrough the cell, and pull replicated chromosomes to opposite ends of a dividing cell. Like microfilaments, microtubulescan dissolve and reform quickly.
Microtubules are hollow. Their walls consist of 13 polymerized dimers of α-tubulin and β-tubulin (rightimage). The left image shows the molecular structure of the tube.Microtubules are also the structural elements of flagella, cilia, and centrioles (the latter are the two perpendicular bodies ofthe centrosome). In fact, in animal cells, the centrosome is the microtubule-organizing center. In eukaryotic cells, flagellaand cilia are quite different structurally from their counterparts in prokaryotes, as discussed below.Flagella and CiliaTo refresh your memory, flagella (singular = flagellum) are long, hair-like structures that extend from the plasma membraneand are used to move an entire cell (for example, sperm, Euglena). When present, the cell has just one flagellum or a fewflagella. When cilia (singular = cilium) are present, however, many of them extend along the entire surface of the plasmamembrane. They are short, hair-like structures that are used to move entire cells (such as paramecia) or substances alongthe outer surface of the cell (for example, the cilia of cells lining the Fallopian tubes that move the ovum toward the uterus,or cilia lining the cells of the respiratory tract that trap particulate matter and move it toward your nostrils.)Despite their differences in length and number, flagella and cilia share a common structural arrangement of microtubulescalled a “9 + 2 array.” This is an appropriate name because a single flagellum or cilium is made of a ring of nine microtubuledoublets, surrounding a single microtubule doublet in the center (Figure 4.26).
You already know that a group of similar cells working together is called a tissue. As you might expect, if cells are to worktogether, they must communicate with each other, just as you need to communicate with others if you work on a groupproject. Let’s take a look at how cells communicate with each other.
Extracellular Matrix of Animal CellsMost animal cells release materials into the extracellular space. The primary components of these materials are proteins,and the most abundant protein is collagen. Collagen fibers are interwoven with carbohydrate-containing protein moleculescalled proteoglycans. Collectively, these materials are called the extracellular matrix (Figure 4.27). Not only does theextracellular matrix hold the cells together to form a tissue, but it also allows the cells within the tissue to communicate witheach other. How can this happen?
The extracellular matrix consists of a network of proteins and carbohydrates.Cells have protein receptors on the extracellular surfaces of their plasma membranes. When a molecule within the matrixbinds to the receptor, it changes the molecular structure of the receptor. The receptor, in turn, changes the conformationof the microfilaments positioned just inside the plasma membrane. These conformational changes induce chemical signalsinside the cell that reach the nucleus and turn “on” or “off” the transcription of specific sections of DNA, which affects theproduction of associated proteins, thus changing the activities within the cell.Blood clotting provides an example of the role of the extracellular matrix in cell communication. When the cells lining ablood vessel are damaged, they display a protein receptor called tissue factor. When tissue factor binds with another factorin the extracellular matrix, it causes platelets to adhere to the wall of the damaged blood vessel, stimulates the adjacentsmooth muscle cells in the blood vessel to contract (thus constricting the blood vessel), and initiates a series of steps thatstimulate the platelets to produce clotting factors.Intercellular JunctionsCells can also communicate with each other via direct contact, referred to as intercellular junctions. There are somedifferences in the ways that plant and animal cells do this. Plasmodesmata are junctions between plant cells, whereas animalcell contacts include tight junctions, gap junctions, and desmosomes.PlasmodesmataIn general, long stretches of the plasma membranes of neighboring plant cells cannot touch one another because they areseparated by the cell wall that surrounds each cell (Figure 4.8b). How then, can a plant transfer water and other soil nutrientsfrom its roots, through its stems, and to its leaves? Such transport uses the vascular tissues (xylem and phloem) primarily.There also exist structural modifications called plasmodesmata (singular = plasmodesma), numerous channels that passbetween cell walls of adjacent plant cells, connect their cytoplasm, and enable materials to be transported from cell to cell,and thus throughout the plant.
A plasmodesma is a channel between the cell walls of two adjacent plant cells. Plasmodesmata allowmaterials to pass from the cytoplasm of one plant cell to the cytoplasm of an adjacent cell.Tight JunctionsA tight junction is a watertight seal between two adjacent animal cells (Figure 4.29). The cells are held tightly against eachother by proteins (predominantly two proteins called claudins and occludins).
Tight junctions form watertight connections between adjacent animal cells. Proteins create tight junctionadherence. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)This tight adherence prevents materials from leaking between the cells; tight junctions are typically found in epithelialtissues that line internal organs and cavities, and comprise most of the skin. For example, the tight junctions of the epithelialcells lining your urinary bladder prevent urine from leaking out into the extracellular space.DesmosomesAlso found only in animal cells are desmosomes, which act like spot welds between adjacent epithelial cells (Figure 4.30).Short proteins called cadherins in the plasma membrane connect to intermediate filaments to create desmosomes. Thecadherins join two adjacent cells together and maintain the cells in a sheet-like formation in organs and tissues that stretch,like the skin, heart, and muscles.
A desmosome forms a very strong spot weld between cells. It is created by the linkage of cadherins andintermediate filaments. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)Gap JunctionsGap junctions in animal cells are like plasmodesmata in plant cells in that they are channels between adjacent cells thatallow for the transport of ions, nutrients, and other substances that enable cells to communicate (Figure 4.31). Structurally,however, gap junctions and plasmodesmata differ.
A gap junction is a protein-lined pore that allows water and small molecules to pass between adjacentanimal cells. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)Gap junctions develop when a set of six proteins (called connexins) in the plasma membrane arrange themselves in anelongated donut-like configuration called a connexon. When the pores (“doughnut holes”) of connexons in adjacent animalcells align, a channel between the two cells forms. Gap junctions are particularly important in cardiac muscle: The electricalsignal for the muscle to contract is passed efficiently through gap junctions, allowing the heart muscle cells to contract intandem.
