This world map shows Earth’s distribution of photosynthesis as seen via chlorophyll a concentrations. Onland, this is evident via terrestrial plants, and in oceanic zones, via phytoplankton.
The processes in all organisms—from bacteria to humans—require energy. To get this energy, many organisms access storedenergy by eating, that is, by ingesting other organisms. But where does the stored energy in food originate? All of thisenergy can be traced back to photosynthesis.
Photosynthesis is essential to all life on earth; both plants and animals depend on it. It is the only biological process thatcan capture energy that originates in outer space (sunlight) and convert it into chemical compounds (carbohydrates) that every organism uses to power its metabolism. In brief, the energy of sunlight is captured and used to energize electrons,which are then stored in the covalent bonds of sugar molecules. How long lasting and stable are those covalent bonds? Theenergy extracted today by the burning of coal and petroleum products represents sunlight energy captured and stored byphotosynthesis almost 200 million years ago.Plants, algae, and a group of bacteria called cyanobacteria are the only organisms capable of performing photosynthesis(Figure 8.2). Because they use light to manufacture their own food, they are called photoautotrophs (literally, “self-feedersusing light”). Other organisms, such as animals, fungi, and most other bacteria, are termed heterotrophs (“other feeders”),because they must rely on the sugars produced by photosynthetic organisms for their energy needs. A third very interestinggroup of bacteria synthesize sugars, not by using sunlight’s energy, but by extracting energy from inorganic chemicalcompounds; hence, they are referred to as chemoautotrophs.
Photoautotrophs including (a) plants, (b) algae, and (c) cyanobacteria synthesize their organic compoundsvia photosynthesis using sunlight as an energy source. Cyanobacteria and planktonic algae can grow over enormousareas in water, at times completely covering the surface. In a (d) deep sea vent, chemoautotrophs, such as these(e) thermophilic bacteria, capture energy from inorganic compounds to produce organic compounds. The ecosystemsurrounding the vents has a diverse array of animals, such as tubeworms, crustaceans, and octopi that deriveenergy from the bacteria.
The importance of photosynthesis is not just that it can capture sunlight’s energy. A lizard sunning itself on a cold day canuse the sun’s energy to warm up. Photosynthesis is vital because it evolved as a way to store the energy in solar radiation(the “photo-” part) as high-energy electrons in the carbon-carbon bonds of carbohydrate molecules (the “-synthesis” part).Those carbohydrates are the energy source that heterotrophs use to power the synthesis of ATP via respiration. Therefore,photosynthesis powers 99 percent of Earth’s ecosystems. When a top predator, such as a wolf, preys on a deer (Figure 8.3),the wolf is at the end of an energy path that went from nuclear reactions on the surface of the sun, to light, to photosynthesis,to vegetation, to deer, and finally to wolf.
The energy stored in carbohydrate molecules from photosynthesis passes through the food chain. Thepredator that eats these deer receives a portion of the energy that originated in the photosynthetic vegetation that thedeer consumed. (credit: modification of work by Steve VanRiper, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)Main Structures and Summary of PhotosynthesisPhotosynthesis is a multi-step process that requires sunlight, carbon dioxide (which is low in energy), and water assubstrates (Figure 8.4). After the process is complete, it releases oxygen and produces glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GA3P),simple carbohydrate molecules (which are high in energy) that can subsequently be converted into glucose, sucrose, or anyof dozens of other sugar molecules. These sugar molecules contain energy and the energized carbon that all living thingsneed to survive.
Photosynthesis uses solar energy, carbon dioxide, and water to produce energy-storing carbohydrates.Oxygen is generated as a waste product of photosynthesis.
Photosynthesis uses solar energy, carbon dioxide, and water to produce energy-storing carbohydrates.Oxygen is generated as a waste product of photosynthesis.
The basic equation for photosynthesis is deceptively simple. In reality, the process takes place in manysteps involving intermediate reactants and products. Glucose, the primary energy source in cells, is made from twothree-carbon GA3Ps.Although the equation looks simple, the many steps that take place during photosynthesis are actually quite complex. Beforelearning the details of how photoautotrophs turn sunlight into food, it is important to become familiar with the structuresinvolved.In plants, photosynthesis generally takes place in leaves, which consist of several layers of cells. The process ofphotosynthesis occurs in a middle layer called the mesophyll. The gas exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen occursthrough small, regulated openings called stomata (singular: stoma), which also play roles in the regulation of gas exchangeand water balance. The stomata are typically located on the underside of the leaf, which helps to minimize water loss. Eachstoma is flanked by guard cells that regulate the opening and closing of the stomata by swelling or shrinking in response toosmotic changes.In all autotrophic eukaryotes, photosynthesis takes place inside an organelle called a chloroplast. For plants, chloroplastcontainingcells exist in the mesophyll. Chloroplasts have a double membrane envelope (composed of an outer membraneand an inner membrane). Within the chloroplast are stacked, disc-shaped structures called thylakoids. Embedded in thethylakoid membrane is chlorophyll, a pigment (molecule that absorbs light) responsible for the initial interaction betweenlight and plant material, and numerous proteins that make up the electron transport chain. The thylakoid membrane enclosesan internal space called the thylakoid lumen. As shown in Figure 8.6, a stack of thylakoids is called a granum, and theliquid-filled space surrounding the granum is called stroma or “bed” (not to be confused with stoma or “mouth,” an openingon the leaf epidermis).
The Two Parts of PhotosynthesisPhotosynthesis takes place in two sequential stages: the light-dependent reactions and the light independent-reactions. Inthe light-dependent reactions, energy from sunlight is absorbed by chlorophyll and that energy is converted into storedchemical energy. In the light-independent reactions, the chemical energy harvested during the light-dependent reactions drive the assembly of sugar molecules from carbon dioxide. Therefore, although the light-independent reactions do not uselight as a reactant, they require the products of the light-dependent reactions to function. In addition, several enzymes ofthe light-independent reactions are activated by light. The light-dependent reactions utilize certain molecules to temporarilystore the energy: These are referred to as energy carriers. The energy carriers that move energy from light-dependentreactions to light-independent reactions can be thought of as “full” because they are rich in energy. After the energy isreleased, the “empty” energy carriers return to the light-dependent reaction to obtain more energy. Figure 8.7 illustrates thecomponents inside the chloroplast where the light-dependent and light-independent reactions take place.
Photosynthesis takes place in two stages: light dependent reactions and the Calvin cycle. Light-dependentreactions, which take place in the thylakoid membrane, use light energy to make ATP and NADPH. The Calvin cycle,which takes place in the stroma, uses energy derived from these compounds to make GA3P from CO2.
How can light be used to make food? When a person turns on a lamp, electrical energy becomes light energy. Like allother forms of kinetic energy, light can travel, change form, and be harnessed to do work. In the case of photosynthesis,light energy is converted into chemical energy, which photoautotrophs use to build carbohydrate molecules (Figure 8.9).However, autotrophs only use a few specific components of sunlight.
What Is Light Energy?The sun emits an enormous amount of electromagnetic radiation (solar energy). Humans can see only a fraction of thisenergy, which portion is therefore referred to as “visible light.” The manner in which solar energy travels is describedas waves. Scientists can determine the amount of energy of a wave by measuring its wavelength, the distance betweenconsecutive points of a wave. A single wave is measured from two consecutive points, such as from crest to crest or fromtrough to trough.
The wavelength of a single wave is the distance between two consecutive points of similar position (twocrests or two troughs) along the wave.Visible light constitutes only one of many types of electromagnetic radiation emitted from the sun and other stars. Scientistsdifferentiate the various types of radiant energy from the sun within the electromagnetic spectrum. The electromagneticspectrum is the range of all possible frequencies of radiation (Figure 8.11). The difference between wavelengths relates tothe amount of energy carried by them.
The sun emits energy in the form of electromagnetic radiation. This radiation exists at differentwavelengths, each of which has its own characteristic energy. All electromagnetic radiation, including visible light, ischaracterized by its wavelength.Each type of electromagnetic radiation travels at a particular wavelength. The longer the wavelength (or the more stretchedout it appears in the diagram), the less energy is carried. Short, tight waves carry the most energy. This may seem illogical,but think of it in terms of a piece of moving a heavy rope. It takes little effort by a person to move a rope in long, widewaves. To make a rope move in short, tight waves, a person would need to apply significantly more energy.The electromagnetic spectrum (Figure 8.11) shows several types of electromagnetic radiation originating from the sun,including X-rays and ultraviolet (UV) rays. The higher-energy waves can penetrate tissues and damage cells and DNA,explaining why both X-rays and UV rays can be harmful to living organisms.Absorption of LightLight energy initiates the process of photosynthesis when pigments absorb the light. Organic pigments, whether in thehuman retina or the chloroplast thylakoid, have a narrow range of energy levels that they can absorb. Energy levels lowerthan those represented by red light are insufficient to raise an orbital electron to a populatable, excited (quantum) state.Energy levels higher than those in blue light will physically tear the molecules apart, called bleaching. So retinal pigmentscan only “see” (absorb) 700 nm to 400 nm light, which is therefore called visible light. For the same reasons, plants pigmentmolecules absorb only light in the wavelength range of 700 nm to 400 nm; plant physiologists refer to this range for plantsas photosynthetically active radiation.The visible light seen by humans as white light actually exists in a rainbow of colors. Certain objects, such as a prism ora drop of water, disperse white light to reveal the colors to the human eye. The visible light portion of the electromagneticspectrum shows the rainbow of colors, with violet and blue having shorter wavelengths, and therefore higher energy. At theother end of the spectrum toward red, the wavelengths are longer and have lower energy.
The colors of visible light do not carry the same amount of energy. Violet has the shortest wavelength andtherefore carries the most energy, whereas red has the longest wavelength and carries the least amount of energy.(credit: modification of work by NASA)Understanding PigmentsDifferent kinds of pigments exist, and each has evolved to absorb only certain wavelengths (colors) of visible light.Pigments reflect or transmit the wavelengths they cannot absorb, making them appear in the corresponding color.Chlorophylls and carotenoids are the two major classes of photosynthetic pigments found in plants and algae; each classhas multiple types of pigment molecules. There are five major chlorophylls: a, b, c and d and a related molecule found inprokaryotes called bacteriochlorophyll. Chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b are found in higher plant chloroplasts and will bethe focus of the following discussion.With dozens of different forms, carotenoids are a much larger group of pigments. The carotenoids found in fruit—such asthe red of tomato (lycopene), the yellow of corn seeds (zeaxanthin), or the orange of an orange peel (β-carotene)—are usedas advertisements to attract seed dispersers. In photosynthesis, carotenoids function as photosynthetic pigments that arevery efficient molecules for the disposal of excess energy. When a leaf is exposed to full sun, the light-dependent reactionsare required to process an enormous amount of energy; if that energy is not handled properly, it can do significant damage.Therefore, many carotenoids reside in the thylakoid membrane, absorb excess energy, and safely dissipate that energy asheat.Each type of pigment can be identified by the specific pattern of wavelengths it absorbs from visible light, which is theabsorption spectrum. The graph in Figure 8.13 shows the absorption spectra for chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b, and a typeof carotenoid pigment called β-carotene (which absorbs blue and green light). Notice how each pigment has a distinct setof peaks and troughs, revealing a highly specific pattern of absorption. Chlorophyll a absorbs wavelengths from either endof the visible spectrum (blue and red), but not green. Because green is reflected or transmitted, chlorophyll appears green.Carotenoids absorb in the short-wavelength blue region, and reflect the longer yellow, red, and orange wavelengths.
Chlorophyll a, (b) chlorophyll b, and (c) β-carotene are hydrophobic organic pigments found inthe thylakoid membrane. Chlorophyll a and b, which are identical except for the part indicated in the red box, areresponsible for the green color of leaves. β-carotene is responsible for the orange color in carrots. Each pigment has(d) a unique absorbance spectrum.Many photosynthetic organisms have a mixture of pigments; using them, the organism can absorb energy from a widerrange of wavelengths. Not all photosynthetic organisms have full access to sunlight. Some organisms grow underwaterwhere light intensity and quality decrease and change with depth. Other organisms grow in competition for light. Plants onthe rainforest floor must be able to absorb any bit of light that comes through, because the taller trees absorb most of thesunlight and scatter the remaining solar radiation.
Plants that commonly grow in the shade have adapted to low levels of light by changing the relativeconcentrations of their chlorophyll pigments. (credit: Jason Hollinger)When studying a photosynthetic organism, scientists can determine the types of pigments present by generating absorptionspectra. An instrument called a spectrophotometer can differentiate which wavelengths of light a substance can absorb.Spectrophotometers measure transmitted light and compute from it the absorption. By extracting pigments from leavesand placing these samples into a spectrophotometer, scientists can identify which wavelengths of light an organism canabsorb. Additional methods for the identification of plant pigments include various types of chromatography that separatethe pigments by their relative affinities to solid and mobile phases.
How Light-Dependent Reactions WorkThe overall function of light-dependent reactions is to convert solar energy into chemical energy in the form of NADPHand ATP. This chemical energy supports the light-independent reactions and fuels the assembly of sugar molecules. Thelight-dependent reactions are depicted in Figure 8.15. Protein complexes and pigment molecules work together to produceNADPH and ATP. A photosystem consists of a light-harvesting complex and a reaction center. Pigments in the lightharvestingcomplex pass light energy to two special chlorophyll a molecules in the reaction center. The light excitesan electron from the chlorophyll a pair, which passes to the primary electron acceptor. The excited electron must thenbe replaced. In (a) photosystem II, the electron comes from the splitting of water, which releases oxygen as a wasteproduct. In (b) photosystem I, the electron comes from the chloroplast electron transport chain discussed below.The actual step that converts light energy into chemical energy takes place in a multiprotein complex called a photosystem,two types of which are found embedded in the thylakoid membrane, photosystem II (PSII) and photosystem I (PSI)(Figure 8.16). The two complexes differ on the basis of what they oxidize (that is, the source of the low-energy electronsupply) and what they reduce (the place to which they deliver their energized electrons).Both photosystems have the same basic structure; a number of antenna proteins to which the chlorophyll molecules arebound surround the reaction center where the photochemistry takes place. Each photosystem is serviced by the lightharvestingcomplex, which passes energy from sunlight to the reaction center; it consists of multiple antenna proteins thatcontain a mixture of 300–400 chlorophyll a and b molecules as well as other pigments like carotenoids. The absorption ofa single photon or distinct quantity or “packet” of light by any of the chlorophylls pushes that molecule into an excitedstate. In short, the light energy has now been captured by biological molecules but is not stored in any useful form yet. Theenergy is transferred from chlorophyll to chlorophyll until eventually (after about a millionth of a second), it is delivered tothe reaction center. Up to this point, only energy has been transferred between molecules, not electrons.
The reaction center contains a pair of chlorophyll a molecules with a special property. Those two chlorophylls can undergooxidation upon excitation; they can actually give up an electron in a process called a photoact. It is at this step in the reactioncenter, this step in photosynthesis, that light energy is converted into an excited electron. All of the subsequent steps involvegetting that electron onto the energy carrier NADPH for delivery to the Calvin cycle where the electron is deposited ontocarbon for long-term storage in the form of a carbohydrate.PSII and PSI are two major components of the photosyntheticelectron transport chain, which also includes the cytochrome complex. The cytochrome complex, an enzyme composedof two protein complexes, transfers the electrons from the carrier molecule plastoquinone (Pq) to the protein plastocyanin(Pc), thus enabling both the transfer of protons across the thylakoid membrane and the transfer of electrons from PSII toPSI.The reaction center of PSII (called P680) delivers its high-energy electrons, one at the time, to the primary electronacceptor, and through the electron transport chain (Pq to cytochrome complex to plastocyanine) to PSI. P680’s missingelectron is replaced by extracting a low-energy electron from water; thus, water is split and PSII is re-reduced after everyphotoact. Splitting one H2O molecule releases two electrons, two hydrogen atoms, and one atom of oxygen. Splitting twomolecules is required to form one molecule of diatomic O2 gas. About 10 percent of the oxygen is used by mitochondriain the leaf to support oxidative phosphorylation. The remainder escapes to the atmosphere where it is used by aerobicorganisms to support respiration.
As electrons move through the proteins that reside between PSII and PSI, they lose energy. That energy is used to movehydrogen atoms from the stromal side of the membrane to the thylakoid lumen. Those hydrogen atoms, plus the onesproduced by splitting water, accumulate in the thylakoid lumen and will be used synthesize ATP in a later step. Because theelectrons have lost energy prior to their arrival at PSI, they must be re-energized by PSI, hence, another photon is absorbedby the PSI antenna. That energy is relayed to the PSI reaction center (called P700). P700 is oxidized and sends a highenergyelectron to NADP+ to form NADPH. Thus, PSII captures the energy to create proton gradients to make ATP, and PSIcaptures the energy to reduce NADP+ into NADPH. The two photosystems work in concert, in part, to guarantee that theproduction of NADPH will roughly equal the production of ATP. Other mechanisms exist to fine tune that ratio to exactlymatch the chloroplast’s constantly changing energy needs.Generating an Energy Carrier: ATPAs in the intermembrane space of the mitochondria during cellular respiration, the buildup of hydrogen ions inside thethylakoid lumen creates a concentration gradient. The passive diffusion of hydrogen ions from high concentration (in thethylakoid lumen) to low concentration (in the stroma) is harnessed to create ATP, just as in the electron transport chain ofcellular respiration. The ions build up energy because of diffusion and because they all have the same electrical charge,repelling each other.To release this energy, hydrogen ions will rush through any opening, similar to water jetting through a hole in a dam. In thethylakoid, that opening is a passage through a specialized protein channel called the ATP synthase. The energy released bythe hydrogen ion stream allows ATP synthase to attach a third phosphate group to ADP, which forms a molecule of ATP(Figure 8.16). The flow of hydrogen ions through ATP synthase is called chemiosmosis because the ions move from anarea of high to an area of low concentration through a semi-permeable structure.
After the energy from the sun is converted into chemical energy and temporarily stored in ATP and NADPH molecules, thecell has the fuel needed to build carbohydrate molecules for long-term energy storage. The products of the light-dependentreactions, ATP and NADPH, have lifespans in the range of millionths of seconds, whereas the products of the lightindependentreactions (carbohydrates and other forms of reduced carbon) can survive for hundreds of millions of years. Thecarbohydrate molecules made will have a backbone of carbon atoms. Where does the carbon come from? It comes fromcarbon dioxide, the gas that is a waste product of respiration in microbes, fungi, plants, and animals.The Calvin CycleIn plants, carbon dioxide (CO2) enters the leaves through stomata, where it diffuses over short distances throughintercellular spaces until it reaches the mesophyll cells. Once in the mesophyll cells, CO2 diffuses into the stroma ofthe chloroplast—the site of light-independent reactions of photosynthesis. These reactions actually have several namesassociated with them. Another term, the Calvin cycle, is named for the man who discovered it, and because these reactions function as a cycle. Others call it the Calvin-Benson cycle to include the name of another scientist involved in its discovery.The most outdated name is dark reactions, because light is not directly required (Figure 8.17). However, the term darkreaction can be misleading because it implies incorrectly that the reaction only occurs at night or is independent of light,which is why most scientists and instructors no longer use it.
Light reactions harness energy from the sun to produce chemical bonds, ATP, and NADPH. These energycarryingmolecules are made in the stroma where carbon fixation takes place.The light-independent reactions of the Calvin cycle can be organized into three basic stages: fixation, reduction, andregeneration.Stage 1: FixationIn the stroma, in addition to CO2, two other components are present to initiate the light-independent reactions: an enzymecalled ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO), and three molecules of ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP),as shown in Figure 8.18. RuBP has five atoms of carbon, flanked by two phosphates. RuBisCO catalyzes a reaction between CO2 and RuBP. For each CO2 molecule that reacts with one RuBP, two moleculesof another compound (3-PGA) form. PGA has three carbons and one phosphate. Each turn of the cycle involves only oneRuBP and one carbon dioxide and forms two molecules of 3-PGA. The number of carbon atoms remains the same, as theatoms move to form new bonds during the reactions (3 atoms from 3CO2 + 15 atoms from 3RuBP = 18 atoms in 3 atoms of3-PGA). This process is called carbon fixation, because CO2 is “fixed” from an inorganic form into organic molecules.Stage 2: ReductionATP and NADPH are used to convert the six molecules of 3-PGA into six molecules of a chemical called glyceraldehyde3-phosphate (G3P). That is a reduction reaction because it involves the gain of electrons by 3-PGA. Recall that a reductionis the gain of an electron by an atom or molecule. Six molecules of both ATP and NADPH are used. For ATP, energy isreleased with the loss of the terminal phosphate atom, converting it into ADP; for NADPH, both energy and a hydrogenatom are lost, converting it into NADP+. Both of these molecules return to the nearby light-dependent reactions to be reusedand reenergized.
Stage 3: RegenerationInterestingly, at this point, only one of the G3P molecules leaves the Calvin cycle and is sent to the cytoplasm to contributeto the formation of other compounds needed by the plant. Because the G3P exported from the chloroplast has three carbonatoms, it takes three “turns” of the Calvin cycle to fix enough net carbon to export one G3P. But each turn makes two G3Ps,thus three turns make six G3Ps. One is exported while the remaining five G3P molecules remain in the cycle and are usedto regenerate RuBP, which enables the system to prepare for more CO2 to be fixed. Three more molecules of ATP are usedin these regeneration reactions.
The harsh conditions of the desert have led plants like these cacti to evolve variations of the lightindependentreactions of photosynthesis. These variations increase the efficiency of water usage, helping to conservewater and energy. (credit: Piotr Wojtkowski)The Energy CycleWhether the organism is a bacterium, plant, or animal, all living things access energy by breaking down carbohydratemolecules. But if plants make carbohydrate molecules, why would they need to break them down, especially when it hasbeen shown that the gas organisms release as a “waste product” (CO2) acts as a substrate for the formation of more food inphotosynthesis? Remember, living things need energy to perform life functions. In addition, an organism can either makeits own food or eat another organism—either way, the food still needs to be broken down. Finally, in the process of breakingdown food, called cellular respiration, heterotrophs release needed energy and produce “waste” in the form of CO2 gas.In nature, there is no such thing as waste. Every single atom of matter and energy is conserved, recycling over andover infinitely. Substances change form or move from one type of molecule to another, but their constituent atoms neverdisappear (Figure 8.20).CO2 is no more a form of waste than oxygen is wasteful to photosynthesis. Both are byproducts of reactions that moveon to other reactions. Photosynthesis absorbs light energy to build carbohydrates in chloroplasts, and aerobic cellularrespiration releases energy by using oxygen to metabolize carbohydrates in the cytoplasm and mitochondria. Both processesuse electron transport chains to capture the energy necessary to drive other reactions. These two powerhouse processes,photosynthesis and cellular respiration, function in biological, cyclical harmony to allow organisms to access life-sustainingenergy that originates millions of miles away in a burning star humans call the sun.
Photosynthesis consumes carbon dioxide and produces oxygen. Aerobic respiration consumes oxygenand produces carbon dioxide. These two processes play an important role in the carbon cycle.
