51For thousands of years, the Pima of southwesternNorth America were hunters and gatherers who supplementedtheir diet with subsistence agriculture.Their environment was arid, so they developed sophisticatedirrigation systems; even so, they frequently encountereddrought and subsequent starvation. Today most individualsof the ethnic Pima population in North Americaare clinically obese. In fact, as a population, they are oneof the heaviest in the world.With obesity come related health problems such asdiabetes, high blood pressure, and heart disease. Theincidence of diabetes among the Pima rose from anextremely high level of 45 percent of adults in 1965 toa staggering 80 percent in 1999. Moreover, diabetes isoccurring in younger individuals than ever before. Whathas caused such a radical health change in an entire population?At least two interacting factors are involved:genetics and lifestyle.Geneticists hypothesize that recurring episodes of starvationproduce strong selective pressure for “thriftygenes”—particular alleles of the genes involved in digestion,absorption, and energy storage that result in greaterthan-average efficiency in converting food into energyand into energy reserves, such as fat. Thrifty genes wouldgive individuals a strong selective advantage when food isscarce. An example of a “thrifty” phenotype is seenamong the Pima. They have a very low resting metabolicrate and convert food into fat readily. As we will see laterin this chapter, the hormone insulin facilitates the conversionof dietary sugar into fat tissue. For many Pima, consuminga standard amount of glucose causes their insulinlevels to rise three times higher than it does in Americansof European ancestry.The other factor in the Pima obesity epidemic is anabrupt change in their traditional lifestyle. When food isplentiful and has high caloric content, thrifty genes con-An obesity epidemicEfficiency Genes ThePima are an example of ahuman population thatrepeatedly experiencedperiods of severe fooddeprivation. These historicoccurrences may haveimposed selection forgenes that improve theefficiency of managing theenergy obtained fromfood. With modern dietsand lifestyles, these “efficiencygenes” can contributeto obesity.IN THIS CHAPTER we will review the nutrients organismsrequire for energy, for molecular building blocks, andfor specific biochemical functions. We will examine diverseadaptations for acquiring, ingesting, and digesting food andabsorbing nutrients. Finally, we will learn how the body regulatesits traffic in metabolic fuels and return to the questionof control of body mass.tribute to obesity by maximizing fat storage. Today thePima eat a modern Western diet that includes high-fat,high-calorie fast foods. In general, they also engage inless physical activity than their ancestors did.A comparative study supports the hypotheses thathave been put forward to explain the obesity epidemic inthe Pima. Another population of Pima live in the SierraMadre of northern Mexico. Genetically, they are the sameas the Arizona population. However, they live a traditionallifestyle and eat traditional foods. Whereas the ArizonaPima engage in an average of only 2 hours of physicalwork per week, the Mexico Pima average 23 hours perweek. Obesity and diabetes are not prevalent among theMexico Pima.A high-calorie diet and sedentary lifestyle affect notjust the Pima but contribute to the overall increase inobesity throughout the U.S. population. Researchers arestudying the Pima to learn more about the genetics ofobesity and related pathologies.The Great American Lunch High-fat fast foods havebecome prevalent in much of the developed world. A steadydiet of such foods will mean weight gain for most people, andis a major reason for obesity in the United States.51.1 What Do Animals Require from Food?Animals are heterotrophs—they derive their nutrition from eatingother organisms. In contrast, autotrophs (most plants, somebacteria, some archaea, and some protists) can use solar energyor inorganic chemical energy to synthesize all of their components.Directly and indirectly, heterotrophs take advantageof—indeed, depend on—the organic synthesis carried out byautotrophs, and have evolved an enormous diversity of adaptationsto exploit this resource (Figure 51.1). In this section wewill discover how animals use food, be it plants or other animals,to obtain energy and building blocks of complex molecules.We will also consider the need for special mineral nutrientsand organic molecules we call vitamins and the diseasesthat result when they are lacking in the diet.Energy needs and expenditures can be measuredEnergy is the capacity to do work, and it comes in differentforms—electrical energy, heat energy, chemical energy, nuclearenergy. As discussed in Chapter 8, a calorie (note the small c) isa unit of heat energy; specifically, it is the amount of heat necessaryto raise the temperature of 1 gram of water 1°C. Since thisis a tiny amount of energy, physiologists commonly use the kilocalorie(kcal) as a unit of measure (1 kcal = 1,000 calories). Nutritionistsalso use the kilocalorie as a standard unit of energy,but they traditionally refer to it as the Calorie (Cal) which is alwayscapitalized to distinguish it from the single calorie.Just about any food container you pick up in the U.S. carriesa label, “Nutrition Facts,” that includes the item “Calories.”How do Calories (or kcal) relate to the discussion in Chapter 9about how energy in the chemical bonds of food molecules istransferred to the high-energy phosphate bonds of adenosinetriphosphate (ATP) and is then used to do cellular work? Andwhy do we use heat energy as a measure of nutrition?The reason is found in the laws of thermodynamics, whichtell us that energy cannot be created or destroyed, but can beconverted from one form to another (see Section 8.1). However,every energy conversion is inefficient and a large portion of theoriginal energy always ends up as heat. Whether we are usingthe energy in glucose to make ATP or are using that ATP topower muscle contraction or ion transport, most of the availablechemical energy is lost as heat. The bottom line is that if ananimal is not growing, not doing work on its environment, andnot changing its body temperature, the heat it loses to the environmentis a measure of its total energy expenditure—its metabolicrate.CHAPTER OUTLINE51.1 What Do Animals Require from Food?51.2 How Do Animals Ingest and Digest Food?51.3 How Does the Vertebrate Gastrointestinal SystemFunction?51.4 How Is the Flow of Nutrients Controlled andRegulated?The metabolic rate of an animal is a measure of its overall energyneeds that must be met by the ingestion, digestion, and assimilationof food (see Section 40.3). The basal metabolic rate ofa human is 1,300–1,500 Cal/day for an adult female and1,600–1,800 Cal/day for an adult male. Physical activity addsto this basal energy requirement. For a person doing sedentarywork, about 30 percent of the Calories expended are usedfor skeletal muscle activity; for a person doing heavy physicallabor, more than 95 percent of total caloric expenditure is dueto skeletal muscle activity.The components of food that provide energy are fats, carbohydrates,and proteins. Fats yield 9.5 Cal/gram, carbohydrates4.2 Cal/gram, and proteins about 4.1 Cal/gram. Figure51.2 shows some equivalencies of food, energy, and energyconsumption.Even though the units calorie, kilocalorie, and Calorie remainin popular use, most scientists now use the International Systemof Units. In this system, the basic unit of energy is the joule:1 joule = 0.239 calories, and the measure of energy utilization is1 joule/second = 1 watt. You are familiar with light bulb ratings,so think about that when you convert kcal/day into watts. Themetabolic rate of the average man is 1,700 kcal/day or 82 watts(note that a watt includes the time dimension, so it is a rate ofenergy utilization).Thus it is possible to quantify the caloric value of any foodan animal eats. It is also possible to quantify the caloric expenditureof any activity or behavior an animal performs. By comparingcalories consumed with calories expended, we can constructenergy budgets that allow ecologists and evolutionarybiologists to apply a cost–benefit analysis to feeding behavior,as we explain in Section 53.4.51.1 | WHAT DO ANIMALS REQUIRE FROM FOOD? 1069(A) (B)51.1 Heterotrophs Get Energy from Autotrophs (A) Herbivores gettheir energy directly from autotrophs. The large herbivores of the Africangrasslands must consume huge amounts of plant matter to fulfill theirnutritional needs. (B) A carnivore’s energy is indirectly obtained fromautotrophs, since the energy stored in a prey animal was originallyobtained from autotrophs.90 min26 min13 min144 min43 min22 min354 min106 min54 min864 min258 min132 minRestingWalkingJoggingRestingWalkingJoggingRestingWalkingJoggingRestingWalkingJogging6 oz. low-fatstrawberry yogurt130 CaloriesTurkey sandwich(white meat)215 Calories1/4 pound fast-foodcheeseburger530 Calories10,,deep-dishcheese pizza1,300 Calories0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10Time (hours)51.2 Food Energy and How We Use It The energy contained in severalcommon food items is shown at the left. The graphs indicate abouthow long it would take a person with a basal metabolic rate of about1,800 Cal/day to utilize the equivalent amount of energy while resting,walking, or jogging.Sources of energy can be stored in the bodyAlthough the cells of the body use energy continuously, mostanimals do not eat continuously. Therefore, animals must storefuel molecules that can be released as needed between meals.Carbohydrates are stored in liver and muscle cells as glycogen,but the total glycogen store represents only about a day’s basalenergy requirements (1,500–2,000 Cal). Fat is the most importantform of stored energy in the bodies of animals. Not onlydoes fat have more energy per gram than glycogen, but it canbe stored with little associated water, making it more compact.Migrating birds store energy as fat to fuel their long flights; ifthey had to store the same amount of energy as glycogen, theywould be too heavy to fly! Proteins are not used as energy storagecompounds, although body protein can be metabolized asan energy source of last resort.If an animal takes in too little food to meet its energy requirements,it is undernourished and must start metabolizing someof the molecules of its own body. This “self-consumption” beginswith the energy storage compounds glycogen and fat.There is some protein loss due to normal protein turnover notbeing fully replaced because of a lack of amino acids for newprotein synthesis. Once fat reserves are seriously depleted, thebody increases its metabolism of proteins for energy (Figure51.3A). The first proteins to be sacrificed are those of the bloodplasma. The loss of plasma proteins decreases the osmotic concentrationof the plasma, resulting in increased loss of fluid fromthe blood to the interstitial spaces (edema; see Section 50.4). Accumulationof fluid in the extremities and abdomen is the classicsign of kwashiorkor, a disease caused by chronic protein deficiency(Figure 51.3B). Continued protein loss damages thebody’s organs, leading eventually to death.When an animal consistently takes in morefood than it needs to meet its energy requirements,it is overnourished, and the excess nutrientsare stored as increased body mass. First,glycogen reserves build up; then additional dietarycarbohydrates, fats, and proteins are convertedto body fat. In some species, such as hibernators,seasonal overnutrition is animportant adaptation for surviving periodswhen food is not available. In humans, however,overnutrition can be a serious health hazard,increasing the risk of high blood pressure,heart attack, diabetes, and other disorders.Food provides carbon skeletons for biosynthesisEvery animal requires certain basic organic molecules that itcannot synthesize for itself but needs as building blocks for itsown complex organic molecules. The acetyl group (CH3CO—)is one such required building block supplying the carbon skeletonof larger organic molecules (Figure 51.4). Animals cannotmake acetyl groups from carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen molecules;they must obtain acetyl groups from food. Acetyl groupscan be derived from the metabolism of almost any food, butthey originate in plants. Acetyl groups are never in short supplyfor an adequately nourished animal. However, some groupssupplying carbon skeletons can be deficient in an animal’s dieteven if caloric intake is adequate.Amino acids, the building blocks of proteins, are a good exampleof carbon skeletons that can be in short supply. Animalscan synthesize some of their own amino acids by utilizing carbonskeletons from acetyl or other groups and transferring tothem amino groups (—NH2) derived from other amino acids.Most animals cannot synthesize all the amino acids they need.Each species must obtain certain essential amino acids fromfood. Essential amino acids vary by species. In general, herbivoreshave fewer essential amino acids than carnivores. If ananimal does not take in enough of even one of its essentialamino acids, its protein synthesis is impaired and its capacityto maintain enzymatic and transport functions is challenged.Most researchers agree that adult humans must obtain eightessential amino acids from their food: isoleucine, leucine, lysine,methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, tryptophan, and valine.All eight are available in milk, eggs, meat, and soybean products,but most plant foods do not contain adequate quantities1070 CHAPTER 51 | NUTRITION, DIGESTION, AND ABSORPTIONCarbohydrate reserves aredepleted by only a singleday without food intake.Our major energy reserve is fat; aperson of average body weight cansurvive 4 or 5 weeks without food.When body fat has beenexhausted, protein is lostat an accelerating rate, withserious consequences.0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Weeks of starvation024681012Stored body energy reserves (kg)(A)CarbohydratesFatProtein(B)51.3 The Course of Starvation (A) In a personsubjected to undernutrition, the body’s energyreserves are eventually depleted. (B) The swollenabdomen, face, hands, and feet of this Somali girl aredue to edema. Along with her spindly limbs, theseare symptoms of kwashiorkor, a syndrome resultingfrom the body breaking down blood proteins andmuscle tissue to fuel metabolism.of all eight, so a strict vegetarian diet carries a risk of proteinmalnutrition. A complementary diet of plant foods, however, suppliesall eight essential amino acids (Figure 51.5). In general,grains (such as rice, wheat, and corn) are complemented bylegumes (such as beans and peas). Long before the chemical basisfor this complementarity was understood, societies withlittle access to meat developed complementary diets. Many Centraland South American peoples traditionally eat beans withcorn, and the native peoples of North America complementedtheir beans with squash.Human infants are thought to require four additional aminoacids in their diets: histidine, tyrosine, cysteine, and arginine.Also, some amino acids are conditionally essential for certain populationsthat cannot synthesize them in adequate amounts. Forexample, individuals with the genetic disease phenylketonurialack the enzyme for converting phenylalanine to tyrosine (seeSection 15.3) and thus must obtain tyrosine from their diets.They must keep their dietary intake of phenylalanine low toprevent its accumulation to toxic levels.Why are dietary proteins completely digested to their constituentamino acids before being used by the body? Wouldn’tit be more energy-efficient to reuse some dietary proteins directly?There are several reasons why ingested proteins arenot used “as is”:• Macromolecules such as proteins are not readily absorbedby the cells of the gut, but their constituent monomers(such as amino acids) are readily absorbed.• Protein structure and function are highly species-specific. Aprotein that functions optimally in one species might notfunction well in another.• Foreign proteins entering the body directly from the gutwould be recognized as invaders and would be attacked bythe immune system.Humans can synthesize almost all the lipids required by thebody using acetyl groups obtained from food (see Figure 51.4),but we must have a dietary source of certain essential fattyacids—notably, linoleic acid—that we cannot synthesize.Linoleic acid is an unsaturated fatty acid needed by mammalsto synthesize other unsaturated fatty acids, such as arachidonicacid, which is a component of several signaling molecules, includingprostaglandins. Essential fatty acids are also necessarycomponents of membrane phospholipids. Adeficiency of linoleicacid can lead to problems such as infertility and impaired lactation,but since it is commonly present in vegetable oils, a deficiencyis unlikely in an adequately nourished individual.Animals need mineral elements for a variety of functionsTable 51.1 lists the principal mineral elements that animals require.Elements required in large amounts are called macronutrients;those required in only tiny amounts (generally less than100 mg/day) are called micronutrients. Some micronutrients arerequired in such minute amounts that deficiencies are never observed,but they are nevertheless essential elements.Calcium is an example of a macronutrient. It is the fifth mostabundant element in the body; a 70-kg person contains about 1.2kg of calcium. Calcium phosphate is the principal structural materialin bones and teeth. Muscle contraction, neural function, andmany other intracellular functions in animals require calcium ions(Ca2+). The turnover of calcium in the extracellular fluid is high,as bones are constantly being remodeled and calcium is constantlyentering and leaving cells. Calcium is lost from the body51.1 | WHAT DO ANIMALS REQUIRE FROM FOOD? 1071The acetyl group ispresent in virtually all ofthe foods animals ingest.Animals use acetyl groups obtained from theirfood to build more complex organic molecules.Protein,carbohydrate, orfat metabolismHH HO C COOHH2C COOHAcetyl groupcarbon skeletonSteroid hormonesOxaloacetateCitratePalmitic acid (and other fatty acids)Amino acids,heme, andother compoundsCC C CCCCCH OOHH2H2 H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H3OOHH O51.4 The Acetyl Group Is an Acquired Carbon Skeleton Animalscannot synthesize the acetyl group for themselves, but they ingest it intheir food and use it to synthesize a wide variety of molecules.Eight essentialamino acidsfor adult humansTryptophanMethionineValineThreoninePhenylalanineLeucineIsoleucineLysineLegumes(beans in bean dip)Grains(corn in tortilla chips)51.5 A Strategy for Vegetarians By combining cereal grains withlegumes, an adult vegetarian can obtain all eight essential amino acids.in urine, sweat, and feces, so it must be replaced regularly. Humansrequire 800–1,000 mg of calcium per day in their diet.Iron is an example of a micronutrient. It is found throughoutthe body because it is the oxygen-binding atom in hemoglobinand myoglobin and is a component of enzymes in the electrontransport chain. Nevertheless, the total amount of iron in a 70-kg person is only about 4 grams, and since iron is recycled efficientlyin the body and is not lost in the urine, we require onlyabout 15 mg per day in our food. Despite the small amount required,insufficient iron is the most common mineral nutrientdeficiency in the world today, leading to anemia. Anemic individualsare weak and tired all the time.Animals must obtain vitamins from foodLike essential amino acids and fatty acids, vitamins are carboncompounds that an animal requires for growth and metabolismbut cannot synthesize for itself. They are required in very smallamounts compared with the essential amino acids and fattyacids, which are incorporated into large body structures. Mostvitamins function as coenzymes or parts of coenzymes.The list of vitamins varies from species to species. Most mammals,for example, can make their own ascorbic acid. Primates(including humans) cannot, so for primates, ascorbic acid is avitamin—vitamin C. If we do not get vitamin C in our food, wedevelop a disease known as scurvy, characterized by bleedinggums, loss of teeth, subcutaneous hemorrhages, and slowwound healing. The disease was a frequently fatal problem forsailors on long voyages until a Scottish physician, James Lind,discovered that scurvy could be prevented if the sailors ate freshgreens and citrus fruit. The British Admiralty made limes standardprovisions for its ships (and British sailors have been called“limeys” ever since). When the active ingredient in limes wasisolated, it was named ascorbic (“without scurvy”) acid.Humans require 13 vitamins (Table 51.2). They are dividedinto two groups: water-soluble and fat-soluble. When watersolublevitamins are ingested in excess of bodily needs, they are1072 CHAPTER 51 | NUTRITION, DIGESTION, AND ABSORPTIONTABLE 51.1Mineral Elements Required by AnimalsELEMENT SOURCE IN HUMAN DIET MAJOR FUNCTIONSMACRONUTRIENTSCalcium (Ca) Dairy foods, eggs, green leafy vegetables, whole grains, Found in bones and teeth; blood clotting; nerve and musclelegumes, nuts, meat action; enzyme activationChlorine (Cl) Table salt (NaCl), meat, eggs, vegetables, dairy foods Water balance; digestion (as HCl); principal negative ionin extracellular fluidMagnesium (Mg) Green vegetables, meat, whole grains, nuts, milk, legumes Required by many enzymes; found in bones and teethPhosphorus (P) Dairy, eggs, meat, whole grains, legumes, nuts Found in nucleic acids, ATP, and phospholipids; boneformation; buffers; metabolism of sugarsPotassium (K) Meat, whole grains, fruits, vegetables Nerve and muscle action; protein synthesis; principalpositive ion in cellsSodium (Na) Table salt, dairy foods, meat, eggs Nerve and muscle action; water balance; principal positiveion in extracellular fluidSulfur (S) Meat, eggs, dairy foods, nuts, legumes Found in proteins and coenzymes; detoxification ofharmful substancesMICRONUTRIENTSChromium (Cr) Meat, dairy, whole grains, legumes, yeast Glucose metabolismCobalt (Co) Meat, tap water Found in vitamin B12; formation of red blood cellsCopper (Cu) Liver, meat, fish, shellfish, legumes, whole grains, nuts Found in active site of many redox enzymes and electroncarriers; production of hemoglobin; bone formationFluorine (F) Most water supplies Found in teeth; helps prevent decayIodine (I) Fish, shellfish, iodized salt Found in thyroid hormonesIron (Fe) Liver, meat, green vegetables, eggs, whole grains, Found in active sites of many redox enzymes andlegumes, nuts electron carriers, hemoglobin, and myoglobinManganese (Mn) Organ meats, whole grains, legumes, nuts, tea, coffee Activates many enzymesMolybdenum (Mo) Organ meats, dairy, whole grains, green vegetables, Found in some enzymeslegumesSelenium (Se) Meat, seafood, whole grains, eggs, milk, garlic Fat metabolismZinc (Zn) Liver, fish, shellfish, and many other foods Found in some enzymes and some transcription factors;insulin physiologyGO TO Web Activity 51.1 • Mineral ElementsRequired by AnimalsyourBioPortal.comsimply eliminated in the urine. (This is the fate of much of theexcess vitamin C that people take.) Fat-soluble vitamins, however,can accumulate in body fat and may build up to toxiclevels in the liver if taken in excess.The fat-soluble vitamin D (cholecalciferol), which is essentialfor absorbing and metabolizing calcium, is a special case becausethe body can synthesize it. (As noted in Section 41.3, vitamin Dis by definition a hormone.) Certain lipids present in the humanbody can be converted into vitamin D by the action of ultravioletlight on the skin. Thus vitamin D must be obtained in the dietby individuals with inadequate exposure to the sun.The need for vitamin D may have been an important factorin the evolution of skin color. Human races that are adapted toequatorial and low latitudes have dark skin pigmentation as aprotection against the damaging effects of ultraviolet radiation.These peoples generally expose extensive areas of skin to thesun on a regular basis, so their skin synthesizes adequateamounts of vitamin D. Most races that adapted to life in thehigher latitudes lost this dark skin pigmentation, probably becauselighter skin facilitates vitamin D production in the relativelysmall areas of skin exposed to sunlight during the shortdays of winter. The Inuit peoples of the Arctic seem to representan exception to the correlation between latitude and skin pigmentation,but these dark-skinned people obtain ample vitaminD from the large amounts of animal fat (especially whaleblubber) and fish oils in their diet.Nutrient deficiencies result in diseasesThe lack of any essential nutrient in the diet produces a stateof deficiency called malnutrition, and chronic malnutrition leadsto a characteristic deficiency disease. We have already discussedkwashiorkor (protein deficiency) and scurvy (vitamin C deficiency).A shortage of any of the vitamins results in specificdeficiency symptoms (see Table 51.2). Another deficiency disease,beriberi, was directly involved in the discovery of vitamins.Beriberi means “extreme weakness.” It became prevalent inAsia in the nineteenth century after it became standard practiceto mill rice to a high, white polish and discard the hulls presentin brown rice. A critical observation was that birds—chickensand pigeons—developed beriberi-like symptoms when fed onlypolished rice. In 1912, Casimir Funk, a Polish scientist workingin England, cured pigeons of beriberi by feeding them discardedrice hulls.At the time of Funk’s discovery, all diseases were thought tobe either caused by microorganisms or inherited. Funk suggestedthe radical idea that beriberi and some other diseases aredietary in origin and result from deficiencies in specific substances.Funk coined the term “vitamines” because he mistakenlythought that all these substances vital for life were compoundswith amino groups (vital amines). In 1926, thiamin(vitamin B1)—the substance lost in the rice milling process—was the first vitamin to be isolated in pure form.Deficiency diseases can also result from an inability to absorbor process an essential nutrient even if it is present in thediet. Vitamin B12 (cobalamin), for example, is present in all foods51.1 | WHAT DO ANIMALS REQUIRE FROM FOOD? 1073TABLE 51.2Vitamins in the Human DietVITAMIN SOURCE FUNCTION DEFICIENCY SYMPTOMSWATER-SOLUBLEB1 (thiamin) Liver, legumes, whole grains Coenzyme in cellular respiration Beriberi, loss of appetite, fatigueB2 (riboflavin) Dairy, meat, eggs, Coenzyme in FAD Lesions in corners of mouth, eye irritation,green leafy vegetables skin disordersNiacin Meat, fowl, liver, yeast Coenzyme in NAD and NADP Pellagra, skin disorders, diarrhea, mentaldisordersB6 (pyridoxine) Liver, whole grains, dairy foods Coenzyme in amino acid metabolism Anemia, slow growth, skin problems, convulsionsPantothenic acid Liver, eggs, yeast Found in acetyl CoA Adrenal problems, reproductive problemsBiotin Liver, yeast, bacteria in gut Found in coenzymes Skin problems, loss of hairB12 (cobalamin) Liver, meat, dairy foods, eggs Formation of nucleic acids, proteins, Pernicious anemiaand red blood cellsFolic acid Vegetables, eggs, liver, whole Coenzyme in formation of heme Anemiagrains and nucleotidesC (ascorbic acid) Citrus fruits, tomatoes, potatoes Formation of connective tissues; Scurvy, slow healing, poor bone growthantioxidantFAT-SOLUBLEA (retinol) Fruits, vegetables, liver, dairy Found in visual pigments Night blindnessD (cholecalciferol) Fortified milk, fish oils, sunshine Absorption of calcium and phosphate RicketsE (tocopherol) Meat, dairy foods, whole grains Muscle maintenance, antioxidant AnemiaK (menadione) Intestinal bacteria, liver Blood clotting Blood-clotting problemsGO TO Web Activity 51.2 • Vitamins in the Human DietyourBioPortal.comof animal origin. Since plants neither use nor produce vitaminB12, a strictly vegetarian diet (not supplemented with dairyproducts or vitamin pills) can lead to a B12 deficiency diseasecalled pernicious anemia, characterized by a failure of red bloodcells to mature. The most common cause of pernicious anemia,however, is not a lack of vitamin B12 in the diet but an inabilityto absorb it. Normally, cells in the stomach lining secretea peptide called intrinsic factor, which binds to vitamin B12 andmakes it possible for it to be absorbed in the small intestine.Conditions that damage the stomach lining, such as alcoholismor gastritis, can thus lead to pernicious anemia.Inadequate mineral nutrition can also lead to deficiency diseases.Examples are hypothyroidism and goiter resulting fromiodine deficiency (see Section 41.3), and anemia resulting fromiron deficiency. Iodine deficiency is almost unheard of todayin the developed world because of the addition of iodide to salt.However, it is still a major health problem in large segments ofthe human population. Probably the single least expensive effectiveaction to improve global health would be to provideiodized salt for everyone.51.1 RECAPAs heterotrophs, animals must obtain the energyand molecular building blocks for biosynthesis fromtheir food. Energy can come from the metabolism ofcarbohydrates, fats, and proteins. Molecular buildingblocks include carbon skeletons, vitamins, andminerals.• Explain the different roles of food energy from proteins,carbohydrates, and fats in the mammalian body.See p. 1070 and Figure 51.3• Give an example of an essential carbon skeleton, a micronutrient,and a macronutrient. See pp. 1070–1073,Figure 51.4 and Table 51.1• Why should fat-soluble vitamins not be taken inexcess? See p. 1073We have surveyed the essential elements of nutrition in animals.Next we will look at various methods and adaptations by whichanimals obtain the food they need, and mechanisms by whichthe food is processed in the body to extract nutrients.How Do Animals Ingest 51.2 and Digest Food?Heterotrophic organisms can be classified by how they acquiretheir nutrition. Saprobes (also called saprotrophs or decomposers)are organisms—mostly protists and fungi—that absorb nutrientsfrom dead organic matter. Detritivores, such as earthwormsand crabs, actively feed on dead organic material. Animals thatfeed on living organisms are predators: herbivores prey onplants, carnivores prey on animals, and omnivores prey on both.Filter feeders, such as clams and blue whales, prey on smallorganisms by filtering them from the aquatic environment. Fluidfeeders include mosquitoes, aphids, leeches, and hummingbirds.The anatomical adaptations that enable a species to exploita particular source of nutrition are usually obvious, butphysiological and biochemical adaptations are also important.The food of herbivores is often low in energyand hard to digestMost vegetation is coarse and difficult to break down, but herbivoresprocess large amounts of it because its energy contentis low. Therefore, herbivores spend a great deal of time feeding.Many have striking adaptations for feeding, such as the trunk(a flexible, gripping nose) of the elephant or the huge bill of thefruit-eating toucan, which can be half as long as its body. Manytypes of grinding, rasping, cutting, and shredding mouthpartshave evolved in invertebrates for ingesting plant material, andthe teeth of herbivorous vertebrates have been shaped by selectionto tear, crush, and grind coarse plant matter.The digestive processes of herbivores can also be quite specialized.An example is the koala, which almost exclusively eatsleaves of eucalyptus trees. These leaves are very fibrous, low inusable energy and protein, and high in toxic chemicals. Koalasactually smell like eucalyptol, a common ingredient in coughdrops. The koala has strong jaws for grinding the leaves, a verylong gut for fermenting them, enzymes in its liver for detoxifyingchemicals in the leaves, and a low metabolic rate to compensatefor low energy intake.Carnivores must detect, capture, and kill preyThe predatory behaviors of many carnivores are legendary—the hunting skills of hawks, wolves, and tigers, for example.Carnivores have evolved stealth, speed, power, large jaws, sharpteeth, and strong gripping appendages. They also have evolvedremarkable means of detecting prey. Bats use echolocation, pitvipers sense infrared radiation from the warm bodies of theirprey, and certain fishes detect electric fields created in the waterby their prey.Adaptations for killing and ingesting prey are diverse andcan be highly specialized. These adaptations are especially importantwhen the prey can inflict damage on the predator. Thereare many fascinating examples of adaptations for capturing andimmobilizing prey, such as the immobilizing venom in the biteof many snakes, the long sticky tongues of chameleons, and thewebs of spiders. The long tentacles of certain jellyfish containsome of the most deadly toxins known and can kill humans.Specialized cells called nematocysts inject toxin into the victim(see Figure 31.9). Some jellyfish harbor enough nematocysts cellsto kill 50 people. Some predators digest their prey externally.For example, a spider injects its insect prey with digestive enzymesand then sucks out the liquefied contents, leaving behindthe empty exoskeletons frequently seen in old spider webs.Vertebrate species have distinctive teethTeeth are adapted for the acquisition and initial processing of specifictypes of foods. Because they are among the hardest struc-1074 CHAPTER 51 | NUTRITION, DIGESTION, AND ABSORPTIONtures of the body, an animal’s teeth remain in the environmentlong after it dies. Paleontologists use teeth to identify animals thatlived in the distant past and to deduce their feeding behavior.All mammalian teeth have the same general, three-layeredstructure (Figure 51.6A). An extremely hard material calledenamel, composed principally of calcium phosphate, covers thecrown of the tooth. Both the crown and root contain a layer ofbony material called dentine, inside of which is a pulp cavitycontaining blood vessels, nerves, and the cells that produce thedentine.There is a great deal of homology in the dentition of mammals,but the shapes and organization of mammalian teeth areadaptations to different diets (Figure 51.6B). In general, incisorsare used for cutting, chopping, and gnawing; canines are usedfor stabbing, gripping, and ripping; and molars and premolars(the cheek teeth) are used for shearing, crushing, and grinding.The highly varied diet of humans is reflected in our multipurposeset of teeth, as is common among omnivores.Digestion usually begins in a body cavityAnimals take food into a body cavity that is continuous withthe outside environment. They secrete digestive enzymes intothat cavity, and the enzymes break down the food into nutrientmolecules that can be absorbed by the cells lining the cavity.The simplest digestive systems are gastrovascular cavities,which connect to the outside world through a single opening.Cnidarians, such the jellyfish mentioned above, capture prey usingstinging nematocysts and use their tentacles to cram the preyinto their gastrovascular cavities. Enzymes in the gastrovascularcavity partly digest the prey. Cells lining the cavity take in smallfood particles by endocytosis. The vesicles created by endocytosisthen fuse with lysosomes containing digestive enzymes, andintracellular digestion completes the breakdown of the food. Nutrientsare released to the cytoplasm as the vesicles break down.Tubular guts have an opening at each endThe guts of most animals are tubular: a mouth takes in food; moleculesare digested and absorbed throughout the length of thegut; and solid digestive wastes are eliminated through an anus.Different regions in the tubular gut are specialized for particularfunctions (Figure 51.7). These functions must be coordinatedso they occur in the proper sequence and at rates that maximizethe efficiency of digestion and absorption of nutrients.At the anterior end of the gut is the mouth cavity where foodcan be fragmented, for example by teeth (in many vertebrates),by radula (in snails), or by mandibles (in many arthropods). Inmost birds, food is ground by small stones in an early, muscular,portion of the gut called the gizzard. Some animals, suchas snakes, simply ingest whole prey with little or no fragmentation.Stomachs and crops are storage chambers that enableanimals to ingest relatively large amounts of food when it isavailable, then digest it gradually. In these storage chambers,food may be further fragmented and mixed, and in most vertebratesit is an important site of digestion. Food delivered intothe next section of the gut, the intestine, is in small particles,well mixed, and usually partially digested.Most digestion occurs in the intestine, and nutrients, water,and ions are absorbed across its walls. Glands secrete digestiveenzymes into the intestine, and other enzymes are producedby cells lining the intestine. The final segment of the intestinerecovers water and ions and stores undigested wastes, or feces,so they can be released to the environment at an appropriate51.2 | HOW DO ANIMALS INGEST AND DIGEST FOOD? 1075A hard material called enamel,composed principally of calciumphosphate, covers the tooth.Both the crown and theroot contain a layer ofbony material calleddentine……within which is a pulpcavity containing bloodvessels, nerves, and thecells that produce thedentine.Herbivores use their incisors andcanines, which are found far forwardon the lower jaw only, to tear leavesoff of plants. Their large molars andpremolars then grind the plant matter.Carnivores have greatlyenlarged canine teethfor gripping, killing, andtearing their prey.Omnivores havea multipurposeset of teeth.(A)CrownRootBoneOmnivore(human)Herbivore(sheep)Carnivore(cat)GumsCement(holds toothin bone)Nerves andblood vesselsPeriodontalmembrane(B)Canines (used for rippingand tearing)Incisors (for cutting)Premolars (for shearing)Molars (for grinding)51.6 Mammalian Teeth (A) A mammalian tooth has three layers:enamel, dentine, and a pulp cavity. (B) The teeth of different mammalianspecies are specialized for different diets. This illustration depicts theteeth of the lower jaw, viewed from above.GO TO Web Activity 51.3 • Mammalian TeethyourBioPortal.comtime or place. A muscular rectum near the anus assists in expellingfeces.Endosymbiotic bacteria colonize the intestines. These bacteriaobtain their nutrition from the food passing through thehost’s gut while contributing to the host’s digestive processes.Members of the leech genus Hirudo, for example, produce noenzymes that can digest the proteins in the blood they suck fromvertebrates; instead, they depend on bacteria to perform thisservice. The resulting amino acids are subsequently used byboth the leech and the bacteria.The microorganisms in the human gut are called the “forgottenorgan” because they provide important services in digestion,elimination of harmful microorganisms, and even the productionof vitamins (vitamin K and biotin). This forgotten organis huge. It is estimated that the human body consists of 1013cells, but our guts contain probably 10 times that number of unicellularorganisms representing at least 500 different species.(And thus most of the DNA in our bodies is from alien species—an interesting thought.)In many animals, the parts of the gut that absorb nutrientshave greater surface areas than would be expected of a simpletube (Figure 51.8A,B). In vertebrates, the wall of the intestine isrichly folded, with the individual folds bearing legions of tinyfingerlike projections called villi (Figure 51.8C). The cells thatline the surfaces of the villi, in turn, have microscopic projectionscalled microvilli. The microvilli give the intestine an enormousinternal surface area for absorbing nutrients.Digestive enzymes break down complex food moleculesProtein, carbohydrate, and fat macromolecules are broken downinto their simplest monomeric units by hydrolytic enzymes producedat different locations in the digestive tract. Many are secretedinto the lumen of the gut, and others remain associatedwith the membranes of the microvilli. All of these enzymescleave the chemical bonds of macromolecules through hydrolysis,a reaction that adds a water molecule (see Figure 3.4B). Digestiveenzymes are classified according to the substances theyhydrolyze: proteases break the bonds between adjacent aminoacids in proteins; carbohydrases hydrolyze carbohydrates; peptidases,peptides; lipases, fats; and nucleases, nucleic acids.How can an organism produce enzymes that hydrolyze biologicalmacromolecules without digesting itself? Many digestiveenzymes are produced in an inactive form known as azymogen, so that they cannot act on the cells that produce them.When secreted into the gut, a zymogen is generally activatedby another enzyme. The cells lining the gut are not digested becausethey are protected by a covering of mucus.51.2 RECAPHeterotrophs have diverse adaptations for acquiringfood. Once captured and/or ingested, food is digestedextracellularly by secreted enzymes to releasenutrients, which are absorbed into the animal’sbody, usually via a tubular gut.• Why do herbivores typically spend a great deal of theirtime feeding? See p. 1074• What is the primary purpose of the intestinal microvilli?See p. 1076 and Figure 51.8• What is a zymogen, and why is it important?See p. 1076Once ingested by an animal, food may be fragmented andmoved into the gut for digestion by hydrolytic enzymes. Theprocesses of digestion release the nutrients needed by the animal.Let’s focus next on how those processes occur in vertebrates.1076 CHAPTER 51 | NUTRITION, DIGESTION, AND ABSORPTIONCockroachRabbitSalivaryglandsPancreasCecumRectumEsophagusLiver Stomach LargeintestineSmallintestineTeeth AnusCropGizzardEsophagusSalivaryglandsIntestineRectumMandiblesAnusMouthEarthwormCropIntestineGizzardEsophagusPharynxAnus51.7 Compartments for Digestion and Absorption Most invertebratesand all vertebrates have a tubular gut that begins with a mouth,which takes in food, and ends in an anus, which eliminates wastes.Between these two structures are specialized regions for digestion andnutrient absorption; the structures in these regions are adapted to differentdiets and vary from species to species.How Does the Vertebrate 51.3 Gastrointestinal System Function?Digestion in vertebrates occurs in the gastrointestinal system,which includes a tubular gut running from mouthto anus and several accessory structures that produce secretionsthat play important roles in digestion (Figure51.9). In this section we will consider three importantprocesses of this system: the movement of food through it,the sequential steps of digestion, and the absorption of nutrients.Our focus will be the human system.The vertebrate gut consists of concentrictissue layersThe tissues of the vertebrate gut are arranged in concentriclayers that have a similar organization throughout itsFingerlike villi increase thesurface area of these folds……and microvilli cover the villi, vastlyincreasing the absorptive surface area.IntestinalfoldsCapillaries Lymphatic vesselVilliBloodvesselsVillusLacteal(see p. 1083)Epithelialcells…and the folding Microvilliof its lining.Earthworms have atyphosole, a longitudinalinfolding of the intestinal wall.In most vertebrates, an enormousabsorptive surface is achieved bythe sheer length of the tubularsmall intestine…Sharks have relativeley short intestines,but the lower region (ilium) has aninternal structure—the spiral valve—that increases surface area.Intestine(A) Earthworm (B) Shark(C) HumanParotidsalivary glandMouthEsophagusTongueTeethSublingual andsubmandibularsalivary glandsStomachPancreasJejunumIleumRectumLiverGallbladderLarge Duodenumintestine(colon)AppendixDiaphragmAnusSmallintestine51.8 Intestinal Surface Area and Nutrient Absorption Maximizingthe surface area of the gut increases an animal’s ability to absorb nutrients.51.9 The Human Digestive System Different compartments inthe long tubular gut specialize in digesting food, absorbing nutrients,and storing and expelling wastes. Accessory organs contributesecretions containing enzymes and other molecules.GO TO Web Activity 51.4 • The Human Digestive SystemyourBioPortal.comlength (Figure 51.10). Starting in the cavity, or lumen, the firstlayer is the mucosa, which consists of delicate epithelial cellsunderlain by connective tissue. Some cells of this mucosal epitheliumhave secretory and absorptive functions. Some secrete mucus,which lubricates and protects the walls of the gut; otherssecrete digestive enzymes or hormones. Mucosal epithelial cellsin the stomach secrete hydrochloric acid (HCl) and, as we notedin Section 51.1, some secrete intrinsic factor to aid the absorptionof vitamin B12. In some regions of the gut, nutrients are absorbedby mucosal epithelial cells. The apical plasma membranesof these absorptive cells have microvilli that increase the surfacearea over which absorption can take place (see Figure 51.8C).At the base of the mucosa are some smooth muscle cells thatcan move the mucosa to improve contact with gut contents, andjust under the mucosa is the submucosal tissue layer. Here wefind the blood and lymph vessels that carry absorbed nutrientsto the rest of the body. The submucosa also contains a networkof nerves; the neurons in this network have sensory functions(responsible for stomach aches) and control various secretoryfunctions of the gut.External to the submucosa are two layers of smooth muscleresponsible for the large movements of the gut. Innermost is thecircular muscle layer, with its cells oriented around the gut. Outermostis the longitudinal muscle layer, with its cells oriented alongthe length of the gut (see Figure 51.10). The circular muscles constrictthe gut, and the longitudinal muscles shorten it. Betweenthe two layers of smooth muscle is another nerve network whichcontrols and coordinates the movements of the gut. The coordinatedactivity of the two smooth muscle layers mixes the contentof the gut and moves it continuously toward the rectum. Interestingly,the stomach has a third layer of smooth muscle thatis closest to the lumen. The orientation of its fibers is oblique tothe longitudinal and circular layers. This third layer is importantin generating the churning motions of the stomach.The nerve nets in the submucosa and between the smoothmuscle layers are called the enteric nervous system, and theyare unusual. Whereas most neurons of the peripheral nervoussystem either receive synapses from neurons in the central nervoussystem (CNS) or contribute synapses to neurons in the CNS,most of the neurons in the enteric nervous system formsynapses only with other neurons in their network. Thus, theyare responsible for communication within the gut. The CNS caninfluence the activity in enteric nervous system and receive informationfrom it, but truly, the gut has a “mind” of its own.Atissue membrane called the peritoneum surrounds the gut,as it does all of the organs of the abdominal cavity as well aslining the wall of the cavity. The peritoneum includes connectiveand epithelial tissues, which secrete a fluid that lubricatesthe organs so they can easily slide against each other in thebody cavity.Mechanical activity moves food through the gutand aids digestionIn humans and most other mammals, food is chewed in themouth and mixed with saliva. Periodically the tongue pushes abolus (mass) of the chewed food toward the throat. By makingcontact with the soft palate at the back of the mouth cavity, thefood bolus initiates swallowing, which is a complex series of reflexes.Swallowing propels the food through the pharynx(where the mouth cavity and nasal passages join) and into theesophagus (food tube). To prevent food from entering the trachea(windpipe), the larynx (voice box) closes, and a flap of tissuecalled the epiglottis covers the entrance to the larynx (Figure51.11A).Once a bolus of food enters the esophagus, it is moved towardthe stomach both by the force of gravity and by waves ofmuscle contraction called peristalsis (Figure 51.11B). The muscleof the upper region of the esophagus is striated (i.e., skeletalmuscle) and is controlled by the central nervous system; themuscles of the rest of the esophagus are smooth muscle controlledby the autonomic and enteric nervous systems.The smooth muscles of the gut contract in response to beingstretched. When a bolus of food reaches the smooth-muscleregion of the esophagus and stretches it, the muscle respondsby contracting, thus pushing the food toward the stomach. Whydoesn’t the contraction of the esophageal smooth muscle pushthe food back toward the mouth? The nerve net between thetwo smooth muscle layers coordinates the muscles so that contractionis always preceded by an anticipatory wave of relaxation.When a region of the gut smooth muscle contracts, the circularsmooth muscle just beyond it relaxes while the longitudinalsmooth muscle contracts, pushing the food into that area. Theresulting stretch causes that circular smooth muscle to contractwhile the next region relaxes. In this way peristalsis movesfood down the gut from the mouth to the anus.The backward movement of food from the stomach into theesophagus is prevented by the lower esophageal sphincter, a thickring of circular smooth muscle at the junction of the esopha-1078 CHAPTER 51 | NUTRITION, DIGESTION, AND ABSORPTIONThe submucosa containsa neural network.The peritoneum iscontinuous with the liningof the abdominal cavity.The enteric nervous system is acomplex of nerve nets made up of neuronsthat reside entirely within the gut.The mucosa includes the single layerof epithelium lining the gut plus underlyingconnective tissue that also containsblood vessels, lymphatics, and glands.Longitudinalmuscle layerCircularmuscle layerNerve netbetweenmuscle layersLumen51.10 Tissue Layers of the Vertebrate Gut The organization of tissuelayers is the same in all compartments of the gut, but specializedadaptations of specific tissues characterize different regions.gus and stomach. This sphincter is normally constricted, butwaves of peristalsis cause it to relax enough to let food pass fromthe esophagus into the stomach. Sphincter muscles are foundelsewhere in the digestive tract as well. The pyloric sphincter governsthe passage of stomach contents into the intestine. Twoother important sphincters also control movement of gut contents:the ileocaecal sphincter between the small and large intestine,and the internal anal sphincter which has to relax to allowdefecation.Chemical digestion begins in the mouth and the stomachThe main role of the stomach is to store food so that digestioncan occur more slowly than ingestion. However, the enzymeamylase is secreted by the salivary glands and mixed with foodas it is chewed. Amylase hydrolyzes the bonds between the glucosemonomers that make up starch molecules. The action ofamylase is what makes a chewed piece of bread or cracker tasteslightly sweet if you hold it in your mouth long enough.The stomach also has secretory functions. Deep infoldings inthe walls of the stomach called gastric pits are lined with threetypes of secretory cells (Figure 51.12A). One type secretes a proteolyticenzyme, pepsin, that begins the digestion of protein.Another type secretes hydrochloric acid (HCl), which kills mostingested microorganisms. This nasty mix of substances coulddamage the stomach walls, but a third cell type secretes mucusthat provides a protective coating for the walls of the gastricpits and stomach. This mucus keeps the pH at the surfaceof the mucosa near neutrality and also prevents pepsin fromacting on the stomach cells.The cells in the gastric pits that secrete pepsin are called chiefcells, and they secrete it as an inactive zymogen called pepsinogen.The extremely low pH of the stomach juices initiates theconversion of pepsinogen to pepsin by cleaving away a sequenceof amino acids that masks the active site of the enzyme.Newly activated pepsin can act on other pepsinogen moleculesto activate them, creating a positive feedback process called autocatalysis(Figure 51.12B).The cells in the gastric pits that secrete HCl are called parietalcells. They can secrete so much HCl—about 2 liters perday—that they can bring the pH of the stomach contents below1, which is the same as battery acid and 10 times more acidicthan pure lemon juice. This means that across their plasmamembranes, gastric pits can create a H+ concentration differenceof 3 million-fold. Such a feat of transport is not seen anywhereelse in the body. How do they do it? Enzymes and transportersare involved.The enzyme carbonic anhydrase in these cells catalyzes thehydration of CO2 to H2CO3, which dissociates into H+ and bicarbonateion (HCO3–). An antiporter transport protein (see Figure6.15) exchanges HCO3– for Cl– on the blood side of the gastricpits, and an antiporter on the gastric pit side exchanges H+for K+ (Figure 51.12C). However, this K+ can leak out againdown its concentration gradient. Thus the inward transport ofK+ acts like an endless conveyer belt moving H+ out into thestomach lumen. Cl– also passively leaks out of the gastric lumenside of the parietal cells to maintain electrical neutrality.Stomach ulcers can be caused by a bacteriumThe secretions of the stomach are highly corrosive to living tissuesand can result in ulcers—places where the mucosal liningof the stomach is damaged. Stomach ulcers can lead to maladiesranging from indigestion and heartburn to gastric bleeding and51.3 | HOW DOES THE VERTEBRATE GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM FUNCTION? 1079(A) Swallowing (B) PeristalsisLarynxStomach1 Food is chewed and the tonguepushes the bolus of food to theback of the mouth. Sensory nervesinitiate the swallowing reflex.2 The soft palate is pulledup as the vocal cordsare pulled together toclose the larynx.4 Peristaltic contractionspropel the food tothe stomach.3 The larynx is pulled up andforward and is covered bythe epiglottis. The esophagealsphincter relaxes. The bolus offood enters the esophagus.TongueFoodPharynxEsophagusTrachea(windpipe)SoftpalateEpiglottisGlottisUpperesophagealsphincterPyloricsphincterFood bolusEsophagusCircular musclesrelaxCircular musclescontractLongitudinal musclescontractLower esophagealsphincter51.11 Swallowing and Peristalsis (A) Food pushed to the back ofthe mouth triggers the swallowing reflex. (B) Once a food bolus enters theesophagus, peristalsis propels it from mouth to anus by coordinatedactions of the circular and longitudinal muscle layers of the gut.stomach cancer. It was logical to assume that all ulcers were dueto actions of the stomach secretions on the stomach mucosa, andthat stress and lifestyle issues leading to excess stomach secretions(especially HCl) were the major causes of ulcers. This viewled the pharmaceutical industry to develop a plethora of drugsto decrease stomach acid production, which became “billiondollar drugs” because they were prescribed so widely. Whatseemed like the simplest fact in gastrointestinal medicine, however,was turned on its head by the work of two Australian researchers.Their work is a perfect example of the applicationof Koch’s postulates (see Section 26.6) for the proof that a microorganismcauses a disease (Figure 51.13).In 1982, pathologist Robin Warren observed an unknown bacteriumin biopsies from the stomachs of patients with ulcers. Ina study of 100 patients, he and Barry Marshall of the Universityof Western Australia found that the bacterium was alwayspresent in the patients with ulcers. They isolated the bacterium,which they named Helicobacter pylori, and grew it in culture. Havingthus satisfied Koch’s first two postulates (microbe shownto be present in all instances of the disease, and isolating the microbefrom diseased tissue), they turned to the last two, as describedin Figure 51.13. Marshall actually drank a flask of the culturedbacteria (don’t try this at home) and developed apre-ulcerous condition that was subsequently cured with antibiotic.Their research showed not only that H. pylori causes stomachulcers but that ulcer patients can be cured with antibiotics.The medical profession was so certain that no microorganismscould live in the stomach and that stomach acid was the cause ofulcers that at first Warren and Marshall’s findings were resistedand even ridiculed. But in 2005 they received the Nobel Prize inMedicine for their important discovery, and antibiotic therapyis now a primary treatment for stomach ulcers worldwide.Drugs that decrease stomach acid production are still importantulcer medications for several reasons. Once a person hasan ulcer, stomach acid exacerbates it. In addition, in many individualsthe lower esophageal sphincter muscle (see Figure51.12A) is inadequate to prevent acid from entering the esophagus,resulting in irritations and lesions there.The stomach gradually releases its contentsto the small intestineContractions of the smooth muscles in the walls of the stomachchurn its contents, thoroughly mixing them with the stomach secretions.The acidic, fluid mixture of gastric juice and partly digestedfood in the stomach is called chyme. Afew substances canbe absorbed across the stomach wall, including alcohol (hence its1080 CHAPTER 51 | NUTRITION, DIGESTION, AND ABSORPTION1 Carbonic anhydrase catalyzesformation of carbonic acid, whichdissociates into H+ and HCO3–.4 K+ and Cl–leak out ofthe cell.2 Bicarbonate is activelytransported out of theblood side of the cell inexchange for Cl–.3 H+ is actively transportedinto the lumen of thegastric pit in exchangefor K+.Low pH converts pepsinogen topepsin. Newly formed pepsin activatesother pepsinogen molecules.Gastric pits are deepfolds of the stomachmucosal epithelium.(A)(B)(C)GastricmucosalepitheliumMucussecretingcellsGastric pitPyloricsphincterLoweresophagealsphincterFoldsParietal (acidsecreting)cellParietal cellBloodvesselLumen ofgastric pitChief (enzymesecreting)cellPepsinogen PepsinHClH2O + CO2H+H+K+K+K+HCO3HCO3Cl–Cl–Cl–Cl–––Stomach51.12 Action in the Stomach (A) Thehuman stomach stores and breaks downingested food. (B) Cells in the gastric glandssecrete hydrochloric acid and pepsin. Boththe gastric glands and the mucosa secretemucus that protects the stomach. (C) Theparietal cells can create a tremendous H+concentration difference by actively transportingH+ ions produced through the catalyticaction of carbonic anhydrase into thelumen of the gastric pit.rapid effects), aspirin, and caffeine, but even these substances areabsorbed in rather small quantities from the stomach.Contractions of the stomach walls push the chyme towardthe bottom of the stomach. These waves of contractions causethe pyloric sphincter to relax briefly so that little squirts of thechyme can enter the small intestine. In this manner, the humanstomach empties itself gradually over a period of approximately4 hours. This slow introduction of food into the smallintestine enables it to work on a little material at a time.Most chemical digestion occurs in the small intestineIn the small intestine, the digestion of carbohydrates and proteinscontinues, and the digestion of fats and absorption of nutrientsbegin. The small intestine takes its name from its diameter;it is in fact a very large organ, about 6 meters long in anadult human. Given its length, and because of the folds, villi,and microvilli of its lining, its inner surface area is roughly thesize of a tennis court. Across this surface, the small intestine absorbsall the nutrient molecules derived from food.The small intestine of humans has three sections. The initialsection (about 25 cm long) is called the duodenum and is the siteof most digestion; the jejunum and the ileum (together about 600cm) carry out 90 percent of the absorption of nutrients (seeFigure 51.9).Digestion in the small intestine requires many specializedenzymes, as well as several other secretions. Two accessory organsthat are not part of the digestive tract—the liver and thepancreas—produce many of these secretions and deliver themto the lumen of the intestine through ducts.LIVER The liver synthesizes bile salts from cholesterol and secretesthem as bile. Bile includes bile salts and other substances,such as phospholipids and bilirubin (the breakdown productof hemoglobin). Bile flows from the liver through the hepaticduct. Aside branch off the hepatic duct called the cystic duct goesto the gallbladder, where it is stored. Below this junction, the hepaticduct is called the common bile duct. Before it reaches theduodenum, it is joined by the pancreatic duct (Figure 51.14).51.3 | HOW DOES THE VERTEBRATE GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM FUNCTION? 1081Test 1The microorganism must be present in every case of the disease.Marshall and Warren set out to satisfy Koch’s postulates:Results: Biopsies from the stomachs of many patients revealed thatthe bacterium was always present if the stomach was inflamed orulcerated.Test 2The microorganism must be cultured from a sick host.Results: The bacterium was isolated from biopsy material andeventually grown in culture media in the laboratory.Test 3The isolated and cultured bacteria must be able to induce thedisease.Results: Marshall was examined and found to be free of bacteria andinflammation in his stomach. After drinking a pure culture of thebacterium, he developed stomach inflammation (gastritis).Test 4The bacteria must be recoverable from the infected volunteers.Results: Biopsy of Marshall’s stomach 2 weeks after he ingested thebacteria revealed the presence of the bacterium, now christenedHelicobacter pylori, in the inflamed tissue.ConclusionAntibiotic treatment eliminated the bacteria and the inflammation inMarshall. The experiment was repeated on healthy volunteers, andmany patients with gastric ulcers were cured with antibiotics.ThusMarshall and Warren demonstrated that the stomach inflammationleading to ulcers is caused by H. pylori infections in the stomach.Helicobacter pylori51.13 Satisfying Koch’sPostulates Marshall andWarren showed that ulcersare caused not by the actionof stomach acid but by infectionwith the bacteriumHelicobacter pylori.The pancreas producesdigestive enzymes andbicarbonate solution.The gallbladderstores bile, which aidsin digesting lipids.The liver produces and secretes bile.Hepatic ductCommonbile ductBileDuodenumof smallintestinePancreaticductCystic duct51.14 Ducts of the Gallbladder and Pancreas Bile produced in theliver leaves the liver via the hepatic duct. Branching off this duct is thegallbladder, which stores bile. Below the gallbladder, the hepatic duct iscalled the common bile duct and is joined by the pancreatic duct beforeentering the duodenum.Fat entering the duodenum stimulates cells of the duodenalepithelium to release the hormone cholecystokinin (CCK),which in turn stimulates the walls of the gallbladder to contractrhythmically. As a result, bile is squeezed out of the gallbladderand through the cystic duct to the common bile duct.Asmall sphincter at the junction of the common bile duct withthe duodenum, the sphincter of Oddi, relaxes in response towaves of peristalsis and allows squirts of bile to enter the duodenallumen.To understand the role of bile in fat digestion, think of an oiland vinegar salad dressing. The oil, which is hydrophobic, tendsto aggregate in large globules. For that reason, many salad dressingsinclude an emulsifier—something that prevents oil dropletsfrom aggregating. Mayonnaise, for example, is oil and vinegarwith egg yolk added as an emulsifier. Bile contains salts thatemulsify fats in the chyme and thereby greatly enlarge the surfacearea of the fats exposed to the lipases—the enzymes that digestfats. One end of each bile salt molecule is lipophilic (solublein fat), and the other end is hydrophilic (soluble in water).The lipophilic ends of bile molecules merge with the fat droplets,leaving their hydrophilic ends sticking out. As a result, bile saltsprevent the fat droplets from sticking together. The very smallfat particles that result are called micelles (Figure 51.15A).PANCREAS The pancreas is a large gland that lies just behindand below the stomach (see Figures 51.9 and 51.14). It is bothan endocrine gland (secreting hormones into the interstitialfluid; see Section 41.1) and an exocrine gland (secreting digestivejuices through the pancreatic duct to the gut lumen). Theexocrine tissues of the pancreas produce a host of digestiveenzymes, including lipases, amylases, proteases, and nucleases(Table 51.3). As in the stomach, the protease enzymes are releasedas zymogens; otherwise, they would digest the pancreasand its ducts before they ever reached the duodenum. Once inthe duodenum, one of these zymogens is activated by an enzymecalled enterokinase (secreted by cells lining the duodenum)to produce the active protease trypsin. Active trypsin can cleaveother zymogens to release more active trypsin, as well as activateother proteases as well. This activation process is similarto the activation of pepsinogen by low pH in the stomach.The mixture of zymogens produced by the pancreas can bedangerous if the pancreatic duct is blocked or if the pancreasis injured by infection or physical trauma such as a blow to theabdomen. Afew activated trypsin molecules can initiate a chainreaction of enzyme activity that digests the pancreas (a conditioncalled pancreatitis), destroying both its endocrine and exocrinefunctions.The pancreas also produces a secretion rich in bicarbonateions (HCO3–). Bicarbonate ions are alkaline (basic) and neutralizethe acidic pH of the chyme that enters the duodenum fromthe stomach. Intestinal enzymes function best at a neutral orslightly alkaline pH.Nutrients are absorbed in the small intestineThe final step in digesting proteins and carbohydrates and absorbingtheir components occurs among the microvilli. Mucosalepithelial cells produce peptidases that cleave small peptidesinto absorbable amino acids. These epithelial cells also producethe enzymes maltase, lactase, and sucrase, which cleave thecommon disaccharides into absorbable monosaccharides—glucose,galactose, and fructose. There is also some lipase activityfor fat digestion.Many humans stop producing the enzyme lactase in childhoodand thereafter have difficulty digesting lactose (the sugarin milk). Lactose is a disaccharide and cannot be absorbed withoutbeing cleaved into its constituents, glucose and galactose.Unabsorbed lactose is metabolized by bacteria in the large intestine,causing gas, diarrhea, and abdominal cramps.The mechanisms by which cells of the intestinal epitheliumabsorb nutrients and inorganic ions are diverse and include dif-1082 CHAPTER 51 | NUTRITION, DIGESTION, AND ABSORPTION1 Dietary fats are emulsified intotiny droplets called micellesthrough the action of bile saltsin the intestinal lumen.2 Pancreatic lipase hydrolyzes fatsin the micelles to produce fattyacids and monoglycerides.4 Triglycerides are packaged withcholesterol and phospholipids inprotein-coated chylomicrons.5 Chylomicrons are enclosed invesicles. They leave the cellby exocytosis and enter thelymphatic system.3 Fatty acids and monoglyceridesenter the cell by diffusion. Theyare resynthesized into triglyceridesin the endoplasmic reticulum.Large lipid dropletMicellesLymphatic vesselEndoplasmicreticulumIntestinalepithelial cellFattyacidsMonoglycerides(A) Digestion of fats(B) Absorption of fatsBile salts51.15 Digestion and Absorption of Fats (A) Dietary fats are brokenup by bile into small micelles that present a large surface area to lipases.(B) The products of fat digestion are absorbed by intestinal mucosal cells,where they are resynthesized into triglycerides and exported to lymphaticvessels.GO TO Animated Tutorial 51.1 • The Digestion andAbsorption of FatsyourBioPortal.comfusion, facilitated diffusion, osmosis, active transport, and cotransport.Many inorganic ions such as sodium, calcium, andiron are actively transported by these cells. For example, activeNa+ transporters exist on the basal and lateral sides of theepithelial cells. They maintain a low concentration of Na+ inthose cells so that Na+ can diffuse in from the chyme in the intestinallumen. About 30 grams of Na+ are transported this wayevery day, and Cl– follows.The transport of Na+ and other ions is also important for waterabsorption because it creates an osmotic concentration gradient.At least 7 to 8 liters of water per day move through thespaces between the epithelial cells in response to this osmoticgradient. Because the water moves through spaces between thecells and not through the cells themselves, it can carry with itnutrients that are in solution—a transport mechanism called solventdrag.Many different kinds of transport proteins exist in the epithelialcell membranes. Some, such as the transport protein forfructose, only facilitate diffusion, and that requires a concentrationgradient. This mechanism works for fructose because oncefructose enters the cell it is converted to glucose. Thus the concentrationof fructose in the cell is always low and the concentrationgradient is maintained. Transport proteins known assymporters (see Figure 6.15) exploit the concentration gradientof Na+ between the inside and outside of the cell, which is maintainedby the Na+/ Ka+ATPase common to all cells. Symporterscombine the transport of Na+ and another molecule, such as glucose,galactose, or an amino acid. As Na+ is pulled down its concentrationgradient into the cell, the “hitchhiking” moleculesare carried along with it.The absorption of the products of fat digestion is relativelysimple. Triglycerides are hydrolyzed to diglycerides, monoglycerides,and fatty acids, all of which are lipid-soluble and thusable to pass through the plasma membranes of the microvilli. Inthe intestinal epithelial cells, these molecules are resynthesizedinto triglycerides, combined with cholesterol and phospholipids,and coated with protein to form water-soluble chylomicrons(Figure 51.15B). Rather than enter the blood directly, chylomicronspass into blind-ended lymph vessels called lacteals thatare inside each villus (see Figure 51.8). They then flow throughthe lymphatic system, entering the bloodstream through the thoracicducts at the base of the neck. After a meal rich in fats, chylomicronscan be so abundant in the blood that they give theplasma a milky appearance. Chylomicrons deliver their triglycerideand cholesterol cargo as they circulate through tissues.The bile salts that emulsify fats are not absorbed along withthe monoglycerides, diglycerides, and the fatty acids, but areshuttled back and forth between the gut contents and the microvilli.In the ileum, bile salts are actively reabsorbed and returnedto the liver via the bloodstream.Absorbed nutrients go to the liverBlood leaving the digestive tract flows to the liver in the hepaticportal vein. This large vein delivers the blood to small spacescalled sinusoids between groups of liver cells. These cells absorbthe nutrients coming from the digestive tract and eitherstore them or convert them to molecules the body needs. Glucose,sucrose, and fructose are used to synthesize glycogen.Amino acids are used to build proteins. Lipids from the chylomicronsare either stored as triglycerides or used to makelipoproteins, which are released by the liver and deliver thetriglycerides and cholesterol to other tissues (see Section 51.4).Water and ions are absorbed in the large intestineThe motility of the small intestine gradually pushes its contentsinto the large intestine, or colon. Most of the available nutrientshave been removed from the chyme that enters the colon, butit contains a lot of water and inorganic ions.The colon absorbs water and ions, producing semisolid fecesfrom the chyme it receives from the small intestine. Fecesare stored in the rectum of the colon until they are eliminated.Absorption of too much water from the colon can cause constipation.The opposite condition, diarrhea, results if too little wateris absorbed; in this case, water in the colon is excreted withthe feces. The excessive diarrhea caused by diseases such ascholera can produce such rapid loss of water and electrolytesthat death can occur in hours.Herbivores rely on microorganisms to digest celluloseAs the primary component of plant cell walls, cellulose is theprincipal component of the food of herbivores. Most herbivores,however, cannot produce cellulases—enzymes that hydrolyze51.3 | HOW DOES THE VERTEBRATE GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM FUNCTION? 1083TABLE 51.3Major Digestive Enzymes of HumansSOURCE/ENZYME ACTIONSALIVARY GLANDSSalivary amylase Starch → MaltoseSTOMACHPepsin Proteins → Peptides; autocatalysisPANCREASPancreatic amylase Starch → MaltoseLipase Fats → Fatty acids and glycerolNuclease Nucleic acids → NucleotidesTrypsin Proteins → Peptides; zymogen activationChymotrypsin Proteins → PeptidesCarboxypeptidase Peptides → Shorter peptides and amino acidsSMALL INTESTINEAminopeptidase Peptides → Shorter peptides and amino acidsDipeptidase Dipeptides → Amino acidsEnterokinase Trypsinogen → TrypsinNuclease Nucleic acids → NucleotidesMaltase Maltose → GlucoseLactase Lactose → Galactose and glucoseSucrase Sucrose → Fructose and glucosecellulose. Exceptions include silverfish (insects that eat booksand stored papers), earthworms, and shipworms. From termitesto cattle, herbivores rely on microorganisms in their digestivetracts to digest cellulose.The stomachs of ruminants (cud chewers) such as cattle arelarge, four-chambered organs that take advantage of their endosymbioticmicroorganisms (Figure 51.16). The first two chambers,the rumen and the reticulum, are packed with microorganismsthat break down cellulose by fermentation. The ruminantperiodically regurgitates the contents of the rumen (the cud) intothe mouth for rechewing. When swallowed again, the vegetalfibers present more surface area to the microorganisms. The microorganismsmetabolize cellulose and other nutrients to simplefatty acids, which become nutrients for their host.Enormous numbers of microorganisms leave the rumen alongwith the partially digested food. This mass is concentrated bywater absorption in the omasum before it enters the true stomach,the abomasum, where the microorganisms are killed bysecreted hydrochloric acid, digested by proteases, and passedon to the small intestine for further digestion and absorption. Acow derives more than 100 grams of protein per day from digestionof its endosymbiotic microorganisms. The rate of multiplicationof microorganisms in the rumen offsets their loss, so awell-balanced, mutually beneficial relationship is maintained.Some mammalian herbivores have a microbial fermentationchamber called a cecum extending from the large intestine.An example is the rabbit (see Figure 51.7). Since the cecum emptiesinto the large intestine, absorption of some nutrients producedby the microorganisms is inefficient, because of the largeintestine’s limited surface area. Such species frequently producetwo kinds of feces—ones that are pure waste and ones that containcecal material. In a behavior known as coprophagy, thesespecies reingest the cecal feces directly from the anus so theycan digest and absorb the nutrients that would otherwise belost. In humans, the cecum has become the vestigial appendix,which serves no digestive function.51.3 RECAPThe vertebrate gastrointestinal system is a tubulargut that is adapted to ingest food, fragment it, digestit, and absorb nutrients. Peristalsis moves foodthrough the gut. Digestion and absorption of nutrientsoccur mostly in the small intestine; water andions are absorbed in the large intestine.• What digestive functions occur in the mouth andstomach? See p. 1079 and Figure 51.12• How do bile salts assist in the digestion of fats?See p. 1082 and Figure 51.15• Describe how symporters drive the absorption ofnutrients. See p. 1083The steps included in ingestion and digestion of food—fromfragmentation in the mouth to the digestive processes in the gastrointestinaltract—make the nutrients in food available forabsorption and ultimately for metabolism. Let’s look at how theprocesses of digestion are controlled and how nutrients are handledby the body once food has been digested.How Is the Flow of Nutrients 51.4 Controlled and Regulated?The vertebrate gut is an assembly line in reverse—a disassemblyline. As with a standard assembly line, the control and coordinationof the sequential processes of digestion is critical.Both neuronal and hormonal controls govern these processes.Once the products of digestion are absorbed, their availabilityto the cells of the body must also be controlled.You have certainly experienced salivation at the sight orsmell of food. That response is an unconscious reflex, as is swallowing.Many such autonomic reflexes coordinate activity indifferent regions of the digestive tract. For example, the introductionof food into the stomach stimulates increased activityin the colon, which can lead to defecation.1084 CHAPTER 51 | NUTRITION, DIGESTION, AND ABSORPTIONEsophagusRumenReticulumThe contents of the rumenare periodically regurgitatedinto the mouth for rechewing.The rumen and thereticulum have abundantcellulose-fermentingmicroorganisms. The mixture of fermented food andmicroorganisms passes through theomasum, where it is concentratedby water absorption.The abomasum is the “true” stomach,secreting HCl and proteases. Themicroorganisms are killed by the HCl,digested by the proteases, and passed onto the small intestine for further digestion.51.16 A Ruminant’s Stomach Bison, like their relatives domestic cattle, havea specialized stomach with four compartments that enables them to obtainenergy from coarse plant material through bacterial fermentation of the otherwiseindigestible plant material. The bacteria themselves become an importantsource of nutrition.As we already mentioned, the digestive tract has an intrinsicnervous system. Neuronal messages can travel from oneregion of the digestive tract to another without being processedby the CNS. One function of the gut’s nervous system is coordinatingthe movement of food through the gut. Of course, thisintrinsic nervous system communicates information to the CNSand receives input from the CNS, but its most important roleis to coordinate actions throughout the digestive tract. In spiteof this marvelous intrinsic nervous system, however, much ofthe control and regulation of the digestive system and nutrientmanagement involves hormonal mechanisms.Hormones control many digestive functionsSeveral hormones control the activities of the digestive tract andits accessory organs (Figure 51.17). The first hormone ever discoveredcame from the duodenum; it was called secretin becauseit causes the pancreas to secrete digestive juices. We nowknow that secretin is only one of several hormones that controlpancreatic secretion; specifically, secretin stimulates the pancreasto secrete a solution rich in bicarbonate ions.The stimulus that causes the duodenum to release secretinis low pH—the arrival of acidic chyme from the stomach. Similarly,the presence of fats and proteins in the chyme stimulatesthe release of cholecystokinin (CCK), the hormone mentionedearlier that stimulates the gallbladder to release bile. CCKalso stimulates the pancreas to release digestive enzymes. BothCCK and secretin slow the movements of the stomach, whichslows the delivery of chyme into the small intestine, allowingmore complete digestion in the duodenum.The presence of food in the stomach stimulates cells in thelower region of the stomach to secrete a hormone called gastrin.Gastrin returns to the stomach in the blood and stimulatesthe secretion of digestive juices and also the movements of thestomach. Gastrin release begins to be inhibited when the pH ofthe stomach contents falls below 3—an example of negativefeedback.Most animals do not eat continuously, so they can be eitherin an absorptive state (food in the gut) or in a postabsorptivestate (no food in the gut). Nutrient requirements for energy metabolismand biosynthesis are continuous, however. Thus, nutrienttraffic must be controlled so that reserves accumulate inthe liver, muscle, and adipose (fat) tissue while the animal isin the absorptive state and are used appropriately during thepostabsorptive state.The liver directs the traffic of the moleculesthat fuel metabolismWhen fuel molecules are abundant in the blood, the liver storesthem in the form of glycogen and fats. The liver also synthesizesblood plasma proteins from circulating amino acids. When fuelmolecule levels in the blood decline, the liver taps its reservesand delivers nutrients into the blood.The liver has an enormous capacity to interconvert fuel molecules.Liver cells can convert monosaccharides into eitherglycogen or fats, and vice versa. The liver can also convert certainamino acids and some other molecules, such as pyruvateand lactate, into glucose—a process termed gluconeogenesis (seeSection 9.5). The liver is also the major controller of fat metabolismthrough its production of lipoproteins. A lipoprotein is aparticle made up of a core of hydrophobic fat and cholesterolwith a covering of hydrophilic protein that allows it to be suspendedin water.LIPOPROTEINS: THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE UGLY Lipoproteinsmove fats, the most abundant fuel reserve in the body, from sitesof storage to sites of use. We saw in the previous section how,51.4 | HOW IS THE FLOW OF NUTRIENTS CONTROLLED AND REGULATED? 1085Food in stomachRelease of gastrin fromstomach mucosal cellsGastrin stimulates secretion ofHCl and pepsin, andincreases motility of stomachLow pHinhibits gastrinreleaseSlowsmovementof stomachSlowsmovementof stomachIncreased stomach motilityincreases delivery of acidicchyme to small intestineUndigested fatsand proteinsin chymeAcid in chymeRelease ofcholecystokininby intestinalmucosaRelease ofsecretinby intestinalmucosaRelease of bilefrom gallbladderemulsifies fatsRelease of digestiveenzymes frompancreasRelease of bicarbonatesolution from pancreasneutralizes acidDigestion of foodGastrin circulates in bloodand returns to stomach51.17 Hormones Control Digestion The hormones gastrin, cholecystokinin,and secretin are involved in feedback loops that control thesequential processing of food in the digestive tract. Red lines indicateinhibitory actions; green lines indicate stimulatory actions.in the intestine, bile solves the problem of processing hydrophobicfats in an aqueous medium. The transport of fats in the circulatorysystem presents the same problem, and lipoproteinsprovide the solution.The chylomicrons (see p. 1083) produced by the mucosal cellsof the intestine are the largest lipoprotein particles in the blood.As the circulation carries chylomicrons through the liver andadipose tissue, lipoprotein lipases begin to break them down,and their triglyceride and cholesterol cargo is absorbed into theliver or fat cells.Lipoproteins other than chylomicrons are synthesized in theliver. These lipoproteins can be classified according to their density.Fat has a low density (it floats in water) and protein has ahigh density, so the greater the fat-to-protein ratio in the lipoprotein,the lower its density.• High-density lipoproteins (HDLs) remove cholesterol fromtissues and carry it to the liver, where it can be used to synthesizebile. HDL consists of about 50% protein, 35% lipids,and 15% cholesterol. These are the “good” lipoproteins, andtheir levels are higher in people who exercise and are fit.• Low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) transport cholesterolaround the body for use in biosynthesis and for storage.LDL consists of about 25% protein, 25% lipids, and 50%cholesterol. These are the “bad” lipoproteins associatedwith a high risk for cardiovascular disease.• Very low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs) contain mostlytriglyceride fats, which they transport to fat cells in adiposetissues around the body. VLDL consists of about 2% protein,94% lipids, and 3% cholesterol. These are the “ugly,”as they are associated with excessive fat deposition as wellas a high risk for cardiovascular disease.INSULIN AND GLUCAGON CONTROL FUEL METABOLISM Duringthe absorptive state, blood glucose levels rise as carbohydratesare digested and absorbed (Figure 51.18).During this time, β cells of the pancreas release insulin,which plays a major role in directing glucose to whereit will be used or stored. The actions of insulin vary indifferent tissues, but they are all aimed at promoting theuse of glucose for metabolic fuel and getting the excessinto storage as glycogen or fat.Glucose enters cells by diffusion facilitated by glucosetransporters. However, the glucose transporters in restingskeletal muscle and adipose tissues are normallysequestered in cytoplasmic vesicles until insulin bindsits receptors on the cell surface and triggers the insertionof transporters into the plasma membrane. In adiposecells, insulin inhibits lipase and promotes fat synthesisfrom glucose. In the liver, insulin activates an enzymethat phosphorylates glucose as it enters the cell so it cannotdiffuse back out again, enhancing the overall diffusionof glucose into the cells. In liver cells, insulin also activatesthe enzymes that catalyze the synthesis of glycogen.During the postabsorptive state, a fall in blood glucose decreasesthe release of insulin, and the uptake of glucose by mostcells is curtailed (see Figure 51.18). To maintain blood glucoselevels, liver cells break down their stored glycogen, which releasesglucose into the blood. The liver and adipose tissues supplyfatty acids to the blood, and most cells preferentially usefatty acids as their metabolic fuel.One tissue that does not switch fuel sources when an animalis postabsorptive is the nervous system. The cells of the nervoussystem require a constant supply of glucose, and they can useother fuels to a very limited extent. Most neurons do not requireinsulin to absorb glucose from the blood, but they do need anadequate glucose concentration gradient to drive the facilitateddiffusion of glucose across their plasma membranes. Thereforeit is critical that blood glucose levels are maintained when an animalis postabsorptive. The overall dependence of neural tissueson glucose, and their requirement for constant blood glucose levels,are the reasons it is so important for other cells of the bodyto shift to fat metabolism during the postabsorptive state.The metabolism of fuel molecules during the postabsorptivestate is mostly controlled by the lack of insulin, but if blood glucosefalls below a certain level, another pancreatic hormone,glucagon, is called into play. Glucagon’s effect is opposite that ofinsulin: it stimulates liver cells to break down glycogen and tocarry out gluconeogenesis. Thus, under the influence of glucagon,the liver produces glucose and releases it into the blood.1086 CHAPTER 51 | NUTRITION, DIGESTION, AND ABSORPTIONIncrease incirculating insulinUptake of glucoseby cellsStimulates pancreasto secrete insulinINCREASE INBLOOD GLUCOSEDECREASE INBLOOD GLUCOSERelease of glucoseto bloodBreakdown ofglycogen in liverStimulates pancreasto secrete glucagonIncreasescirculating glucagonMetabolic energy production,fat synthesis, glycogen synthesis51.18 Regulating Glucose Levels in the Blood Insulin (blue) andglucagon (brown) interactions maintain the homeostasis of circulating glucose.It is important for blood glucose to remain stable because it is theessential source fuel for the nervous system.GO TO Animated Tutorial 51.2 • Insulin and Glucose RegulationyourBioPortal.comRegulating food intake is importantObesity is a major health issue in the United States. A simplerule—take in fewer calories than your body burns while eatinga balanced diet—should solve the problem, but it doesn’t. Why?As we noted at the beginning of this chapter, lifestyle plays amajor role in obesity, and genetic and regulatory factors “weighin” as well.The amount of food an animal eats is governed by its sensationsof hunger and satiety. These sensations are influenced bythe hypothalamus (see Section 41.2). If a region in the middleof the hypothalamus of rats (the ventromedial hypothalamus) is experimentallydamaged, the animals will increase their food intakeand become obese. If a different region, called the lateralhypothalamus, is damaged, they will decrease their food intakeand become thin. In both cases, the rats eventually reach a newequilibrium body weight, which they maintain. Thus, regulationis maintained, but the set point is changed. Other brain regionshave also been implicated in control of hunger and satiety.In Section 40.1 we noted that regulation involves feedbackinformation and a means of comparing that information with aset point. Criteria for a negative feedback signal for food intakeinclude:• Levels of the signal in the circulation reflect body energyreserves.• The signal crosses the blood–brain barrier.• Presence of the signal in the brain decreases food intakeand body mass.• Blocking the signal’s actions in the brain results in increasedfood intake and gain of body mass.Two molecules—insulin and leptin—satisfy these criteria. Wehave already discussed the roles of insulin in fuel management(see Figure 51.18); it may also have a role in signaling the hypothalamusabout the fuel stores of the body.The protein leptin (Greek leptos, “thin”) was discovered in astrain of mice that eat enormous amounts of food and becomeobese. Experiments revealed this trait to be due to a recessiveallele of a single gene, which they designate ob. It was subsequentlylearned that the wild-type Ob gene codes for leptin. Theobese mice carried two copies of the recessive allele for the leptingene and thus were designated ob/ob.Leptin is a circulating hormone produced by fat cells. Receptorsfor leptin are found in the regions of the hypothalamusinvolved in controlling hunger and satiety. It seems that leptinprovides feedback information to the brain about the status ofthe body’s fat reserves. When leptin was injected into ob/obmice, they ate less and lost body fat. However, a different strainof obese mice, db/db, did not respond to leptin injections. Furtherexperiments revealed that db/db mice lacked the receptorfor leptin (Figure 51.19).Could leptin be used to treat human obesity? In the fewobese people who do not produce leptin, injections curb appetiteand facilitate weight loss. Most obese people, however,have higher than normal levels of leptin in their blood, so thelikelihood is that it is their leptin receptors that are not completelyfunctional.51.4 | HOW IS THE FLOW OF NUTRIENTS CONTROLLED AND REGULATED? 1087CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE51.19 A Single-Gene Mutation Leads to Obesity in MiceIn mice the Ob gene codes for the protein leptin, a satiety factorthat signals the brain when enough food has been consumed.The recessive ob allele is a loss-of-function allele, so ob/obmice do not produce leptin; they do not experience satiety andbecome obese. The Db gene encodes the leptin receptor, somice homozygous for the recessive loss-of-function allele db,even if they produce leptin, cannot use it and so become obese.HYPOTHESIS Mice who cannot produce the satiety signalprotein leptin will not become obese if they areable to obtain leptin from an outside source.The protein leptin is a satiety signal that actsto prevent overeating and resultant obesity.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSWTdb/dbWTob/ob1. Create two strains of genetically obese laboratorymice, one of which lacks functional leptin(genotype ob/ob) and one which lacks thereceptor for leptin (genotype db/db).2. Create parabiotic pairs by surgically joining thecirculatory systems of a non-obese (wild-type)mouse with a partner from one of the obesestrains.3. Allow mice to feed at will.Parabiotic pairWild-type mouse(Ob/– and Db/–)Genetically obese mouse(either ob/ob or db/db)Parabiotic ob/ob mice obtain leptin from the wildtypepartner and lose fat. Parabiotic db/db miceremain obese because they lack the leptin receptorand thus the leptin they obtain from their partnerhas no effect.Additional feedback signals are involved in regulating foodintake. A hormone called peptide YY comes from the gut and reducesappetite in both rodents and humans. In contrast, ghrelin,a hormone produced and secreted by cells in the stomach, risesbefore a meal and falls after a meal. Fasting causes an increasein ghrelin levels. Ghrelin binding to its receptors in the hypothalamusstimulates appetite. Ghrelin also stimulates cells inthe pituitary gland to release growth hormone.Most interesting, however, is the discovery of the central roleof the enzyme AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) as a signalof nutrient insufficiency. When most cells are nutrient deprived,they produce AMPK, which stimulates the oxidation ofsubstrates to replenish ATP. However, in the hypothalamus, increasedlevels of AMPK stimulate food intake, and lowered levelsof AMPK inhibit food intake. In addition, AMPK activity inthe hypothalamus is inhibited by leptin and insulin but is stimulatedby ghrelin. Thus, AMPK could be a final common pathwayfor various signals controlling food intake.51.4 RECAPThe major controlling factors of gut function are an intrinsicnervous system and the hormones gastrin,secretin, and cholecystokinin. Insulin is the major hormonalcontroller of fuel metabolism. The hypothalamuscontrols food intake by generating sensations ofhunger and satiety influenced by feedback from bloodglucose and hormones, including leptin and ghrelin.• What are the roles of the three different classes oflipoproteins? See pp. 1085–1086• By what actions does insulin promote uptake andstorage of energy during the absorptive state?See p. 1086 and Figure 51.18• What evidence supports the hypothesis that leptininfluences satiety? See p. 1087 and Figure 51.191088 CHAPTER 51 | NUTRITION, DIGESTION, AND ABSORPTION51.1 What Do Animals Require from Food?• Animals are heterotrophs that derive their energy and molecularbuilding blocks, directly or indirectly, from autotrophs.• Carbohydrates, fats, and proteins in food supply animals withmetabolic energy. A measure of the energy content of food isthe kilocalorie (kcal). Excess caloric intake is stored as glycogenand fat. Review Figure 51.2• For many animals, food provides essential carbon skeletonsthat they cannot synthesize themselves. Review Figure 51.4• Most researchers consider 8 amino acids to be essential foradult humans; some believe that infants require as many as 12essential amino acids in their diet. Macronutrients are mineralelements needed in large quantities, micronutrients are neededin small amounts. Review Figure 51.5, Table 51.1, WEBACTIVITY 51.1• Vitamins are organic molecules that must be obtained in food.Review Table 51.2, WEB ACTIVITY 51.2• Malnutrition results when any essential nutrient is lacking fromthe diet. Chronic malnutrition causes deficiency disease.51.2 How Do Animals Ingest and Digest Food?• Animals can be characterized by how they acquire nutrients:saprobes and detritivores depend on dead organic matter, filterfeeders strain the aquatic environment for small food items,herbivores eat plants, and carnivores eat animals. Behavioraland anatomical adaptations reflect these feeding strategies.SEE WEB ACTIVITY 51.3• Digestion involves the breakdown of complex food moleculesinto monomers that can be absorbed and utilized by cells. Inmost animals, digestion takes place in a tubular gut. ReviewFigure 51.7• Absorptive areas of the gut are characterized by a large surfacearea produced by extensive folding and numerous villi andmicrovilli. Review Figure 51.8• Hydrolytic enzymes break down proteins, carbohydrates, andfats into their monomeric units. To prevent the organism itselffrom being digested, many of these enzymes are released asinactive zymogens, which become activated when secretedinto the gut.51.3 How Does the Vertebrate Gastrointestinal SystemFunction?• The vertebrate gut can be divided into several compartmentswith different functions. Review Figure 51.9, WEB ACTIVITY51.4• The cells and tissues of the vertebrate gut are organized in thesame way throughout its length. The innermost tissue layer, themucosa, is the secretory and absorptive surface. The submucosacontains blood and lymph vessels and a nerve network.External to the submucosa are two smooth muscle layers.Between the two muscle layers is another nerve network thatcontrols the movements of the gut. Review Figure 51.10• Swallowing is a reflex that pushes a bolus of food into the esophagus.Peristalsis and other movements of the gut move thebolus down the esophagus and through the entire length of thegut. Sphincters block the gut at certain locations, but they relaxas a wave of peristalsis approaches. Review Figure 51.11• Digestion begins in the mouth, where amylase is secreted withthe saliva. Digestion of protein begins in the stomach, whereparietal cells secrete HCl and chief cells secrete pepsinogen, azymogen that becomes pepsin when activated by low pH andautocatalysis. The mucosa also secretes mucus, which protectsthe tissues of the gut. Review Figure 51.12• In the duodenum, pancreatic enzymes carry out most of thedigestion of food. Bile from the liver and gallbladder emulsifyfats into micelles. Bicarbonate ions from the pancreas neutralizethe pH of the chyme entering from the stomach to producean environment conducive to the actions of pancreaticenzymes such as trypsin. Review Figure 51.14 and Table 51.3• Final enzymatic cleavage of polypeptides and disaccharidesoccurs among the microvilli of the intestinal mucosa. Aminoacids, monosaccharides, and inorganic ions are absorbed by themicrovilli. Specific transporter proteins are sometimes involved.Symporters often power the active transport of nutrients.CHAPTER SUMMARY
51.1 What Do Animals Require from Food?• Animals are heterotrophs that derive their energy and molecularbuilding blocks, directly or indirectly, from autotrophs.• Carbohydrates, fats, and proteins in food supply animals withmetabolic energy. A measure of the energy content of food isthe kilocalorie (kcal). Excess caloric intake is stored as glycogenand fat. Review Figure 51.2• For many animals, food provides essential carbon skeletonsthat they cannot synthesize themselves. Review Figure 51.4• Most researchers consider 8 amino acids to be essential foradult humans; some believe that infants require as many as 12essential amino acids in their diet. Macronutrients are mineralelements needed in large quantities, micronutrients are neededin small amounts. Review Figure 51.5, Table 51.1, WEBACTIVITY 51.1• Vitamins are organic molecules that must be obtained in food.Review Table 51.2, WEB ACTIVITY 51.2• Malnutrition results when any essential nutrient is lacking fromthe diet. Chronic malnutrition causes deficiency disease.51.2 How Do Animals Ingest and Digest Food?• Animals can be characterized by how they acquire nutrients:saprobes and detritivores depend on dead organic matter, filterfeeders strain the aquatic environment for small food items,herbivores eat plants, and carnivores eat animals. Behavioraland anatomical adaptations reflect these feeding strategies.SEE WEB ACTIVITY 51.3• Digestion involves the breakdown of complex food moleculesinto monomers that can be absorbed and utilized by cells. Inmost animals, digestion takes place in a tubular gut. ReviewFigure 51.7• Absorptive areas of the gut are characterized by a large surfacearea produced by extensive folding and numerous villi andmicrovilli. Review Figure 51.8• Hydrolytic enzymes break down proteins, carbohydrates, andfats into their monomeric units. To prevent the organism itselffrom being digested, many of these enzymes are released asinactive zymogens, which become activated when secretedinto the gut.51.3 How Does the Vertebrate Gastrointestinal SystemFunction?• The vertebrate gut can be divided into several compartmentswith different functions. Review Figure 51.9, WEB ACTIVITY51.4• The cells and tissues of the vertebrate gut are organized in thesame way throughout its length. The innermost tissue layer, themucosa, is the secretory and absorptive surface. The submucosacontains blood and lymph vessels and a nerve network.External to the submucosa are two smooth muscle layers.Between the two muscle layers is another nerve network thatcontrols the movements of the gut. Review Figure 51.10• Swallowing is a reflex that pushes a bolus of food into the esophagus.Peristalsis and other movements of the gut move thebolus down the esophagus and through the entire length of thegut. Sphincters block the gut at certain locations, but they relaxas a wave of peristalsis approaches. Review Figure 51.11• Digestion begins in the mouth, where amylase is secreted withthe saliva. Digestion of protein begins in the stomach, whereparietal cells secrete HCl and chief cells secrete pepsinogen, azymogen that becomes pepsin when activated by low pH andautocatalysis. The mucosa also secretes mucus, which protectsthe tissues of the gut. Review Figure 51.12• In the duodenum, pancreatic enzymes carry out most of thedigestion of food. Bile from the liver and gallbladder emulsifyfats into micelles. Bicarbonate ions from the pancreas neutralizethe pH of the chyme entering from the stomach to producean environment conducive to the actions of pancreaticenzymes such as trypsin. Review Figure 51.14 and Table 51.3• Final enzymatic cleavage of polypeptides and disaccharidesoccurs among the microvilli of the intestinal mucosa. Aminoacids, monosaccharides, and inorganic ions are absorbed by themicrovilli. Specific transporter proteins are sometimes involved.Symporters often power the active transport of nutrients.
• Fats broken down by lipases are absorbed mostly as monoglyceridesand fatty acids and are resynthesized into triglycerideswithin cells. The triglycerides are combined with cholesterol andphospholipids and coated with protein to form chylomicrons,which pass out of the mucosal cells and into lymphatic vesselsin the submucosa. Review Figure 51.15, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 51.1• Water and ions are absorbed in the large intestine as wastematter and consolidated into feces, which are periodicallyeliminated.• Microorganisms in some compartments of the gut digest materialsthat their host cannot. Review Figure 51.1651.4 How Is the Flow of Nutrients Controlled andRegulated?• Autonomic reflexes coordinate activity of the digestive tract,which has an intrinsic nervous system that can act independentlyof the CNS.• The actions of the stomach and small intestine are largely controlledby the hormones gastrin, secretin, and cholecystokinin.Review Figure 51.17• The liver plays a central role in directing the traffic of fuel molecules.In the absorptive state, the liver takes up and stores fatsand carbohydrates, converting monosaccharides to glycogen orfats. The liver also takes up amino acids and uses them to produceblood plasma proteins, and can engage in gluconeogenesis.• Fat and cholesterol are shipped out of the liver as low-densitylipoproteins. High-density lipoproteins act as acceptors of cholesteroland are believed to bring fat and cholesterol back tothe liver.• Insulin largely controls fuel metabolism during the absorptivestate and promotes glucose uptake as well as glycogen and fatsynthesis. In the postabsorptive state, lack of insulin blocks theuptake and utilization of glucose by most cells of the bodyexcept neurons. If blood glucose levels fall, glucagon secretionincreases, stimulating the liver to break down glycogen andrelease glucose to the blood. Review Figure 51.18, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 51.2• Food intake is governed by sensations of hunger and satiety,which are determined by brain mechanisms responding tofeedback signals such as insulin, leptin, and ghrelin. ReviewFigure 51.19