Photosynthesis by terrestrial plants transforms (fixes)the carbon atoms in atmospheric carbon dioxideinto the carbohydrate sugars that fuel the fungaland animal worlds. Concentrations of CO2 in the atmospherehave been rising steadily over the last century,largely as a result of human activities, and some scientistshave hypothesized that we can expect rates of photosynthesis—and thus CO2 fixation and carbon storage inecosystems—to increase. But ecologists are discoveringthat this “silver lining” scenario is probably not going tobe the case.Forest studies are important for determining the responsesof vegetation to atmospheric carbon enrichment.Most photosynthesis in any forest takes place high up intree canopies where sunlight is most intense. Until recently,collecting data from forest canopies requiredclimbing or using balloons. Then, in 1992, Alan Smith atthe Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in Panama realizedthat he could use a construction crane to gain accessto the canopy. He recognized that by swinging thecrane’s boom in a circle, shuttling the gondola along itslength, and lowering the cage to different heights, researcherscould reach and measure biological processesover a large volume of the forest canopy. Smith’s ideacaught on quickly, and today ecologists on four continentsuse cranes to study forest canopies.When they monitored growth, reproduction, and carbonstorage in large trees, Swiss ecologists found that, asexpected, canopy trees increased their growth rates in acarbon-enriched atmosphere; but unlike young, fastgrowingsaplings, they did not store large amounts of carbonin their trunks and branches. Instead, they transportedmore carbon first to the soil, and then tothe atmosphere (via their roots). The leaf litterthey produced was richer in starch and sugar,but poorer in lignin; the litter decomposedfaster as soil microbes rapidly respired the carbonback to the atmosphere. These and otherexperiments suggest that young forests arelikely to respond to greater atmospheric CO2concentrations by growing faster. However, matureforests, along with other types of vegetationsuch as grasslands, shrublands, and tundra,are not likely to store significantly more carbonin response to CO2 enrichment.Ecologists swing in the canopy to measure carbon’s fate58Studying the Canopy A crane 42 meters highallows scientists to study the forest canopy trees ofPanama’s Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute.One aspect of these studies involves taking measurementsthat reveal the amount of carbon stored intropical forest trees.What Are the Compartments of the 58.1 Global Ecosystem?An ecosystem is generally defined as any ecological system withdefined boundaries. It includes all of the organisms within thoseboundaries as well as the physical and chemical factors that influencethose organisms. In other words, all ecosystems haveboth biotic and abiotic components. Ecosystems can occupy awide range of spatial scales, from the global ecosystem to a watershed,a specific forest, a lake or pond, or even a patch of lichenon a rock. In this chapter we focus on the global ecosystem.Energy flows and materials cycle through ecosystemsEarth is essentially a closed system with respect to atomic matter,but it is an open system with respect to energy. The sun deliversan essentially constant amount of energy to Earth everyday and has done so for billions of years. Energy from the sun,combined with energy from the radioactive decay in Earth’s interior,drives the processes that move chemical elements aroundthe planet. The rate at which energy moves through a systemis called its flux. Elements may accumulate, or pool, in somecomponent of an ecosystem; the term flux also applies to themovement of elements between pools. Some pools are sinks, inwhich an element is taken out of circulation and locked up forlong periods.Many elements move around the planet in a cyclic fashion(Figure 58.1). Nearly all the rocks that make up the continents,for example, have been transformed at least once through a complexcycle of plate tectonic processes (see Figure 25.2). Deepwithin the Earth, heat, pressure, and melting change the mineralcomposition of rocks. As the movements of the lithosphericplates push up mountains, the processes of weathering are alreadywearing them down by breaking rocks into soil and sedimentparticles (see Section 36.3). Streams carry sediments to theoceans, where they form sedimentary rocks on the seafloor.Eventually, those rocks may be returned to land in anotherepisode of tectonic uplift.Water is another material that moves cyclically. The water inthe oceans today has evaporated, condensed in the atmosphere,precipitated as rain, and returned to the oceans via stream andgroundwater flow millions of times. The carbon, nitrogen, oxygen,and sulfur in atmospheric gases have cycled repeatedlythrough living organisms, which use them to build the proteinsthat make up their bodies.IN THIS CHAPTER we introduce the compartmentsof the physical environment through which energy flowsand materials cycle. We will trace these events by followingthe movements of several chemical elements that are crucialto life. In so doing, we highlight many ways in which humanactivities have altered these cycles. Finally we will considerthe many goods and services that ecosystems provideto human society.As Chapter 54 described, the global ecosystem iscomposed of many different types of vegetation (biomes),many of which have few woody plants. To understandhow ecosystems function at large scales, scientistsmust make observations and conduct experiments onmany vegetation types. Moreover, because the responsesof natural ecosystems to carbon enrichment willdepend on many other factors—such as temperature,water, wind, and soil fertility—ecologists must study theinteractions among these factors to understand howthey influence ecosystem processes.CHAPTER OUTLINE58.1 What Are the Compartments of the GlobalEcosystem?58.2 How Does Energy Flow through the GlobalEcosystem?58.3 How Do Materials Cycle through the GlobalEcosystem?58.4 What Services Do Ecosystems Provide?58.5 How Can Ecosystems Be Sustainably Managed?Enriching the Canopy Researchers from a team of Swissecologists install a mechanism of fine tubes that administercontrolled amounts of CO2 to enrich the trees’ carbon supply.These experiments simulate what will happen as atmosphericlevels of CO2 increase.MagmaOCEANSRocksRocksLiving organismsFRESHWATERSWeathering,transportGroundwaterrechargeOrganicmatterNutrientsTranspirationSoil and sediments IonsEvaporation,precipitationSoilformationATMOSPHERERadioactive decaySolar radiationLANDEarth is a planet with many unusual features: lithosphericplates that move continuously, a moderate surface temperature,a large quantity of liquid water on its surface, and a tremendousdiversity of living organisms, to name just a few. The plate tectonicprocesses that shape Earth’s surface also release gases (includingcarbon dioxide) into the atmosphere through volcaniceruptions. Those atmospheric gases help to moderate planetarytemperatures, and those moderate temperatures, in turn, keepwater in a liquid state. And living organisms, by virtue of theiractivities, have an enormous influence on the chemical compositionof the atmosphere, the water, and the land.All organisms depend on inputs of energy (in the form ofsunlight or high-energy molecules), liquid water, and nutrientsfor their metabolism and growth. As described in Section 57.1,energy flows through ecological communities from producersto consumers. At each trophic level, much of this energy is usedto power metabolism; that energy is dissipated as heat andlost from the ecosystem (see Figure 57.1). Chemical elements,on the other hand, are not altered when they are transferredamong organisms. The availability of the chemical elements ofwhich living organisms are composed is strongly influenced byhow organisms get them, how long they retain them, and whatthey do with them while they have them.To understand the movementsof energy and materials on Earth, thephysical environment can be divided intofour interacting compartments: the atmosphere,the oceans, fresh waters, and land. Thesefour compartments, and the types of organisms livingin them, are very different. Thus the quantities of differentelements in each compartment, how long they remain in eachcompartment (i.e. their residence time), and the rates at which theyenter and leave the compartments differ strikingly. After describingthe four compartments, we will discuss how energy flowsthrough them and elements cycle among them.The atmosphere regulates temperaturesclose to Earth’s surfaceThe outermost compartment of the global ecosystem, the atmosphere,is a thin layer of gases surrounding Earth. The atmosphereis 78.08% nitrogen gas (N2), 20.95% oxygen gas (O2), 1% watervapor, 0.93% argon, and 0.03% carbon dioxide (CO2). It also containstraces of hydrogen gas, neon, helium, krypton, xenon,ozone, and methane. The atmosphere contains Earth’s biggestpool of N2 as well as a large proportion of its O2. Although CO2constitutes a very small fraction of the atmosphere, atmosphericCO2 is the source of the carbon used by terrestrial photosyntheticorganisms, and atmospheric CO2 that dissolves in ocean wateris the source of the carbon used by marine primary producers.About 80% of the mass of the atmosphere lies in its lowestlayer, the troposphere. This layer extends upward from Earth’ssurface about 17 km in the tropics and subtropics, but onlyabout 10 km at high latitudes. Most global air circulation takesplace within the troposphere, and virtually all of the atmosphericwater vapor is found there (Figure 58.2).58.1 | WHAT ARE THE COMPARTMENTS OF THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM? 122358.1 Compartments of the Global Ecosystem The four compartments—atmosphere, oceans, land, and fresh waters—are connected bythe flux of materials (arrows). The atmosphere exchanges some componentsrapidly; exchange of materials within the other compartments(between rocks and soils, for example) is generally much slower.The stratosphere, which extends from the top of the troposphereup to about 50 kilometers above Earth’s surface, containsvery little water vapor. Most materials enter the stratospherefrom the region of the troposphere that encircles theequator, where air heated by the sun rises to high altitudes (seeSection 54.2).The stratosphere contains a layer of ozone (O3) that absorbsmost of the biologically damaging ultraviolet radiation that entersthe atmosphere. Over the last several decades, this ozonelayer has been seriously damaged by human activities. Thewidespread release of chlorinated fluorocarbons (CFCs), suchas the refrigerant freon, caused chemical reactions in the stratospherethat destroyed ozone molecules. This depletion ofstratospheric ozone is a source of great concern, as increases inultraviolet radiation at Earth’s surface are associated with increasedrates of skin cancer, cataract formation, and crop damage.In 1989, a group of nations signed a global treaty in whichthey agreed to phase out production of CFCs, so there is hopethat the stratospheric ozone layer will one day be restored.The atmosphere regulates temperatures at and close toEarth’s surface by trapping heat. If Earth had no atmosphere,its average surface temperature would be about –18°C, ratherthan its actual +17°C. Carbon dioxide, methane, water vapor,and certain other gases in the atmosphere are known as greenhousegases because they are transparent to sunlight, but trapheat radiating from Earth’s surface back toward space (Figure58.3) The three major greenhouse gases and their potential effectson atmospheric warming are given in Table 58.1. Ozone,when it is present in the troposphere rather than the stratosphere,also acts as a greenhouse gas. As we’ll see later in thischapter, human activities are increasing the concentrations ofgreenhouse gases in the atmosphere, and those increases aremaking the planet warmer.The oceans receive materials fromthe other compartmentsOver time scales of hundreds to thousands of years, most materialsthat cycle through the four compartments of the globalecosystem end up in the oceans. The oceans are enormous, butthey exchange materials with the atmosphere only at their surface,so they respond very slowly to inputs from that compartment.They receive materials from land primarily in runofffrom rivers.Except on continental shelves—the shallow ocean waters surroundinglarge land masses—ocean waters mix slowly. Mostmaterials that enter the oceans from other compartments graduallysink to the seafloor, where they may remain for millionsof years until the seafloor sediments are uplifted above sea levelby plate tectonic processes. Therefore, concentrations of mineralnutrients are very low in most ocean waters. Some nutrientsare brought back to the surface near the coasts of continents,where offshore winds pushing surface waters away from shorecause cold bottom water to rise to the surface. The water in these1224 CHAPTER 58 | ECOSYSTEMS AND GLOBAL ECOLOGYMuch ultraviolet radiationis absorbed by the ozonelayer of the stratosphere.There is an area ofdiffusion, or exchangebetween the two layers.About 80% of theatmosphere’s mass isin the troposphere.Ultravioletradiation50170PrecipitationDiffusionHorizontalcirculationGeneral aircirculationOzonelayerEarth’s surfaceStratosphereAltitude (km)TroposphereTABLE 58.1Global Warming Potentials of ThreeAbundant Greenhouse GasesATMOSPHERICLIFETIMEa GWPbCarbon dioxide (CO2) 50–200 1Methane (CH4) 12 21Nitrous oxide (N2O) 114 289a Atmospheric lifetime is the number of years these moleculestypically remain in the atmosphere before breaking up.b GWP (global warming potential) is the ability of a givenamount of gas relative to CO2 (GWP = 1) to trap heat andwarm the atmosphere over a specific time period (in thiscase, 100 years).58.2 The Two Layers of Earth’s Atmosphere The troposphere andthe stratosphere differ in their circulation patterns, the amount of watervapor they contain, and the amount of ultraviolet radiation they receive.upwelling zones is nutrient-rich because when organisms dietheir bodies sink to the seafloor and return the materials theycontain to the bottom sediments. Upwelling zones support highrates of production by phytoplankton, which in turn supportdense consumer populations (Figure 58.4). Most of the world’sgreat fisheries are concentrated in upwelling zones. The upwellingzone off the coast of Peru is, for example, the source ofmuch of the world’s supply of anchovies. In turn, this rich fishpopulation supports vast seabird communities, which in turnproduce enormous quantities of guano, or droppings, that hasprovided Peru with an important raw material to support a majorfertilizer industry.Water moves rapidly through lakes and streamsThe freshwater compartment of the global ecosystem consistsof streams, lakes, and groundwater (water occupying porespaces in rock, sand, and soil). Only a small fraction of Earth’swater resides in lakes and streams at any given time,but water moves rapidly through this compartment,so most of Earth’s water spends some time there.Some mineral nutrients enter fresh waters in rainfall,but most are released by the weathering of rocks. Theyare carried into streams by surface runoff or by movementof groundwater.After entering streams, mineral nutrients are usuallycarried rapidly to lakes or to the oceans. In lakes,they are taken up by organisms and incorporated intotheir bodies. Those organisms eventually die and sinkto the lake bottom, taking their nutrients with them.Microbial decomposition of their tissues consumesmost or all of the oxygen in the bottom water. The surfacewaters of lakes thus quickly become depleted ofnutrients, while deeper waters become depleted ofoxygen. This process is countered, however, by verti-58.1 | WHAT ARE THE COMPARTMENTS OF THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM? 1225IncomingsolarradiationReflectedby surfaceReflected by clouds,aerosol, andatmospheric gasesAbsorbed byatmosphereAbsorbed by surfaceEvapotranspiration(latent flux)Sensibleheat (convectionand conduction)Surface radiation Absorbed by surfaceEmitted byatmosphereEmitted bycloudsReflected solar radiationOutgoing radiationBackradiationG r e e n h o u s e g a s e s58.3 Radiant Energy Warms the Planet Solar energy (yellow arrows)drives the global climate system described in Chapter 54. Much of thisenergy (in the form of heat) along with the energy generated by Earth’sbiogeochemical processes (orange arrows) is prevented from radiatingback into space by the atmospheric gases. The width of the arrows isroughly proportional to the size of energy flux.EquatorPrimary production (mg of carbon per m2 per day)<150 150–250 >25058.4 Upwelling Zones Are Highly Productive Biologicalproductivity is greatest near continents where surface waters,driven by prevailing winds, move offshore and are replaced bycool, nutrient-rich water upwelling from below.cal movements of water called turnover, which bring nutrientsto the surface and oxygen to deeper water.Wind is an important agent of turnover in shallow lakes, butin deeper lakes it mixes only surface waters. Deep lakes in temperateclimates have an annual turnover cycle that dependson certain unique physical properties of water (Figure 58.5).Water is densest at 4°C, a few degrees above its freezing point;above and below that temperature, it expands. Thus, in winter,the coldest liquid water in a lake floats at its surface, oftencovered by a layer of ice. The waters below remain at 4°C. Inspring, the sun melts the ice and warms the surface water to4°C. At this point, water density is uniform throughout the lake,and even modest winds readily mix the entire water column.As spring and summer progress, the surface water becomeswarmer, and the depth of the warm layer gradually increases.However, there is still a well-defined region, called the thermocline,where the temperature changes abruptly. Only if the lakeis shallow enough to warm right to the bottom does the temperatureof the deepest water rise above 4°C. Another turnoveroccurs in fall as the process reverses itself. The surface of thelake cools until it is denser than the warmer water below it, atwhich point it sinks and is replaced by warmer water from below,with wind again mixing the entire water column.Land covers about a quarter of Earth’s surfaceAbout one-fourth of Earth’s surface, most of it in the NorthernHemisphere, is currently land above sea level. This terrestrialcompartment of the physical environment is connected to the atmosphericcompartment by organisms that take chemical elementsfrom the air and ultimately release them back into the air.Chemical elements in rocks are released by weathering and carriedin solution into groundwater, which transports them ultimatelyinto the oceans, where they are inaccessible to most terrestrialorganisms until an episode of tectonic uplift raises marinesediments above sea level and a new cycle of weathering begins.Even though the global supply of chemical elements in theterrestrial compartment is constant, regional and local variationsin the supply of particular elements influence ecosystemprocesses on land because elements move slowly there and usuallyover only short distances. The type of soil that exists in anarea and the nutrients it contains depend on the underlying rockfrom which it forms, as well as on climate, topography, the localbiota, and the length of time that soil-forming processes havebeen acting (see Section 36.3).1226 CHAPTER 58 | ECOSYSTEMS AND GLOBAL ECOLOGYTurnovers in spring andfall distribute nutrients andoxygen evenly throughoutthe water column.WinterIceFallSpringSummerNutrientsNutrientsWindWindWater temperature (ºC)4º4º4º4º4ºWater temperature (ºC)22º18º6º4º4º0º4º4º4º4º4º4º4º4º4ºSolarheatThe thermocline is a zone ofabrupt temperature changeseveral meters below the surface.Cold waterfrom icemelt sinksSurfacewater coolsrapidly andsinks58.5 The Turnover Cycle in a Temperate Lake Regular turnovers inspring and fall allow nutrients and oxygen to become evenly distributed inthe water column of a lake. The vertical temperature profiles shown hereare typical of temperate-zone lakes that freeze in winter.58.1 RECAPEarth is a closed system with respect to atomicmatter, but an open system with respect to energy.Earth’s physical environment can be divided intofour compartments—atmosphere, oceans, freshwaters, and land—through which energy flows andelements cycle.• How does the atmosphere keep temperatures at andclose to Earth’s surface warmer than they would be inits absence? See pp. 1223–1224 and Figure 58.3• Describe the process of turnover in a temperate-zonelake in fall. See p. 1226 and Figure 58.5Elements cycle through the global ecosystem, but energy flowsthrough it unidirectionally. In the next section we take a brieflook at energy flow through ecosystems.How Does Energy Flow through 58.2 the Global Ecosystem?Solar energy drives nearly all ecosystem processes on Earth.In this section we will examine how the geographic distributionof incoming solar radiation influences the amount of energy assimilatedby primary producers, and how human activitiesare modifying energy flow through the global ecosystem.The geographic distribution of energy flow is unevenNearly all energy utilized by organisms comes (or once came)from the sun. The only exceptions are found in those few ecosystemsin which solar energy is not the main energy source (suchas some caves and deep-sea hydrothermal vent ecosystems).Even the fossil fuels—coal, oil, and natural gas—on which theeconomy of modern human civilization is based are reserves ofcaptured solar energy locked in the remains of organisms thatlived millions of years ago.As described in Section 57.1, solar energy enters ecosystemsby way of plants and other photosynthetic organisms. Theseprimary producers use some of the energy they assimilate fortheir own metabolism; the rest—net primary production—isstored in their bodies or used for their growth and reproduction(see Figure 57.1). Because only the energy of net primaryproduction is potentially available to other organisms that consumethe producers, we use net primary production as a roughmeasure of energy flow through ecosystems (Figure 58.6).The geographic distribution of net primary production reflectsgeographic variation in incoming solar radiation, describedin Section 53.2, and the climate patterns that result fromit. The distribution of land masses, temperatures, and moistureon Earth makes some ecosystems more productive than others58.2 | HOW DOES ENERGY FLOW THROUGH THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM? 1227Primary production in the open ocean is low, butthere is a lot of ocean.Compared with itspercentage of Earth’ssurface, tropicalevergreen forest hashigh production.Algal beds andcoral reefs arehighly productive.Open oceanEcosystemContinental shelfExtreme desert, rock, sand, iceDesert and semidesertTropical evergreen forestSavannaCultivated landBoreal forestTemperate grasslandWoodland and shrublandTundraTropical deciduous forestTemperate deciduous forestTemperate evergreen forestSwamp and streamLake and streamEstuaryAlgal beds and coral reefsUpwelling zones(A) Percentage of Earth’s surface area (B) Average net primaryproduction (g/m2/year)(C) Percentage of Earth’s netprimary production0 1 2 3 4 5 6 0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 0 5 10 15 20 2565.05.24.73.53.32.92.72.41.81.71.61.51.31.00.40.40.30.10.17058.6 Primary Production by Ecosystem Type The contributions ofthe different ecosystem types to primary productivity can be measured by(A) their geographic extent; (B) their net primary production; and (C) theirpercentage of Earth’s total primary production.(Figure 58.7). Close to the equator at sea level, temperatures arehigh throughout the year and the water supply is adequate forplant growth much of the time. In these climates, productiveforests thrive. In lower- and mid-latitude deserts, where plantgrowth is limited by lack of moisture, primary production islow. At still higher latitudes, even though moisture is generallyavailable, primary production is low because it is cold muchof the year. Production in aquatic ecosystems is limited by light,which decreases rapidly with depth (see Figure 54.14); by nutrients,which sink and must be replaced by upwelling (see Figure58.4); and by temperature, which decreases with depth,except in areas on the seafloor near hydrothermal vents.Human activities modify the flow of energyHuman activities modify energy flows through the compartmentsof the global ecosystem. The effects of human activitieson energy flow have accelerated markedly in the last century,and particularly in the last five decades. Some human activitiesdecrease net primary production, as when forests are cut downand replaced by cities; some increase it, as when prairies areconverted to extensive fields of corn and soybeans.Satellite and climate data indicate that humans consumeabout 24% of Earth’s average annual net primary production.Over half of this appropriation results from direct harvest (croplandand rangeland now occupy over one-third of Earth’s icefreesurface); another 40% results from productivity changesbrought about by alterations in land use; and 7% results fromfires caused by humans. The percentage varies strikingly amongregions; urban areas consume as much as 300 times the netprimary production they generate, but people in sparsely inhabitedparts of the Amazon Basin appropriate vanishinglysmall amounts of the net primary production there.58.2 RECAPNearly all energy utilized by living organisms comesfrom the sun. Energy flow through ecosystems, asmeasured by net primary production, varies withgeographic location and climate.• How does the distribution of land masses, temperature,and moisture influence the geographic distributionof net primary production? See pp. 1227–1228and Figure 58.7• What percentage of Earth’s average annual net primaryproduction is appropriated by humans, and howdoes that percentage vary regionally? See p. 1228As we learned in Chapters 3 and 10, most of the biological energyprimary producers transform from sunlight is stored incarbon-containing compounds. In the next section we will considerhow carbon, as well as other chemical elements requiredby living organisms, cycle through the four compartments ofEarth’s physical environment.1228 CHAPTER 58 | ECOSYSTEMS AND GLOBAL ECOLOGYTons of carbon fixed per hectare per year0–2.58.0–10.06.0–8.0>30.02.5–6.010.0–30.0Ice caps 0Low NPP characterizes the hotsubtropical deserts (wheremoisture is limiting) and highlatitudes (where cool temperatureslower photosynthetic rates).High NPP characterizes wettropical and subtropicalregions and the wetter partsof temperate latitudes.Equator58.7 Geographic Variation in Net Primary Production Geographicvariation in solar energy input results in variation in temperature and moistureover Earth’s land surface, and this variation, in turn, influences netprimary production in terrestrial ecosystems.Although rocks and soils contain pools ofgroundwater, this “locked-in” water plays asmall role in the hydrologic cycle.The greatest exchangesof water take place atthe ocean surface.Evaporation(319)Precipitation(283)Transportover land(36)Runoff(36)Oceans(1,380,000)Sedimentaryrocks near surface(210,000)Precipitation(95)Evaporation(59)How Do Materials Cycle through 58.3 the Global Ecosystem?The chemical elements that organisms need in large quantities—carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur—cycle through the abiotic and biotic components of ecosystems.The pattern of movement of a chemical element through livingorganisms and the four compartments of the physical environmentis called its biogeochemical cycle. Each element has adistinctive biogeochemical cycle whose properties depend onthe physical and chemical nature of the element and the waysin which it is used by organisms.Before we describe the biogeochemical cycles of individualelements, however, we must discuss the influences of water andfire on the rates at which elements cycle through ecosystems.Water transfers materials from one compartmentto anotherThe cycling of water through the four compartments of thephysical environment is known as the hydrologic cycle. Wateris an extraordinary molecule by Earth’s standard in that it canbe found in all three states of matter—gas, liquid, and solid—and can change state fairly readily. The sun powers the hydrologiccycle by causing evaporation from the vast surfaces of theoceans. The hydrologic cycle operates because more water isevaporated from the ocean surface than is returned to them asprecipitation. Water also evaporates from soils, from lakes andrivers, and from the leaves of plants (by transpiration), but thetotal amount evaporated from those surfaces is less than theamount that falls on them as precipitation. The excess terrestrialprecipitation eventually returns to the oceans via streams,coastal runoff, and groundwater flows (Figure 58.8). Earth’s 16largest rivers account for more than one-third of total runofffrom the land. More than half of this total comes from the fourlargest rivers—the Amazon in South America, the Nile in Africa,the Mississippi in North America, and the Yangtze in Asia.Despite their relatively small volume, rivers play a disproportionaterole in the hydrologic cycle because the average residencetime of a water molecule in rivers is only a few years. By comparison,the average residence time of a water molecule in lakesranges from a few years to centuries. The larger the lake, thelonger the residence time; the residence time for Lake Michigan,for example, is about 600 years, and the residence time of the topportion of Lake Superior is 1,500 to 2,000 years (and the brackishwater at the bottom never cycles). In the ocean, the average residencetime of a water molecule is about 3,000 years. Other accumulationsof water include glaciers (with residence times of20–100 years), seasonal snow cover (a few months), and soil moisture(a month or two). The average residence time of water in organismsis particularly brief—on average, just under a week.Although large amounts of groundwater are present in undergroundpools called aquifers, this water has a long residencetime underground and plays only a small role in the hydrologic58.3 | HOW DO MATERIALS CYCLE THROUGH THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM? 122958.8 The Global Hydrologic Cycle Thenumbers show the estimated relative amountsof water (expressed as units of 1018 grams)held in or exchanged annually by ecosystemcompartments. The widths of the arrows areproportional to the sizes of the fluxes. GO TO Animated Tutorial 58.1 • The Global Hydrologic CycleyourBioPortal.comAtmospheric CO2(750)Plants and soil CO2(3,800)Atmospheric CO2 is the immediatesource of carbon for terrestrial organisms.The two largest reservoirs of carbon are carboncontainingminerals in rocks (including fossil fuels)and dissolved carbon in the oceans.Oceans(105)Sand and detritus(1,200)Carbonate minerals in rocks and marine sediments(18,000,000)Fossil fuels(6.5)Deforestation(1–2)Runoff(0.5)SoilTerrestrial organisms(110) (50) (60)Shallow(800)Deep(40,000)Oceans(100)Fossil fuels(25,000,000)Sedimentation(0.5)cycle. In some places, however, groundwater is being seriouslydepleted because humans are using it more rapidly than it canbe replaced, primarily by pumping it for irrigation. Much of thegroundwater being used today in the Northern Hemispherewas deposited during the most recent ice age, when regionalprecipitation was much greater than it is now. Using thisgroundwater for irrigation and other purposes has increasedflows of water to the oceans and has contributed to the sea levelrise of the past century.The effects of groundwater depletion are already being felt.On the North China Plain, for example, depletion of shallowaquifers is forcing people to sink wells more than 1,000 metersdeep to reach water. Worldwide, more than 1 billion peoplehave no access to safe drinking water. If current water consumptionpatterns continue, by 2025 at least 3.5 billion people (48%of the current world population) will live in areas with inadequatewater supplies. However, per capita water consumptionin the United States and Europe is dropping as a result of increasinguse of water-efficient home appliances and the increasingcost of water, as well as new regulations that restrict wateruse. If such programs are implemented vigorously, global wateruse in 2025 could be lower than it is today, despite continuedpopulation growth.Fire is a major mover of elementsEvery year, 200–400 million hectares of savannas, 5–15 millionhectares of boreal forests, and smaller expanses of other biomesburn. Lightning ignites some fires, but humans start most firesto manage vegetation (as when they cut down and burn foreststo clear land for growing crops). Fires consume the energystored in, and release chemical elements from, the vegetationthey burn. Some nutrients, such as nitrogen, are easily vaporizedby fire. They are discharged to the atmosphere in smoke orcarried into groundwater by rain falling on burned ground.Fires also release large amounts of carbon into the atmosphere.The global annual flux of carbon to the atmosphere fromsavanna and forest fires is estimated at 1.7 to 4.1 petagrams(1 pg = 1015 g or 1012 kg). Biomass burning (which includes combustionof wood and alcohol, wildfires, and land clearing, butnot the burning of fossil fuels) is responsible for about 40% ofEarth’s annual flux of CO2 into the atmosphere and contributesto the production of other greenhouse gases. Large-scale wildfiresin the western and southeastern U.S. can release as muchCO2 into the atmosphere as motor vehicles in those regions releaseover an entire year.Although biogeochemical cycles interact with one another,it is convenient to discuss the major cycles individually. Our discussionwill focus on those elements whose cycles are best characterizedand have the greatest effect on living organisms.The carbon cycle has been altered by human activitiesAs described in Part One of this book, all the important macromoleculesthat compose living organisms contain carbon, andmuch of the energy that organisms need to fuel their metabolicactivities comes from carbon-containing (organic) compounds.Carbon in the atmosphere, in the form of CO2, is incorporatedinto organic molecules by photosynthesis in the cells ofautotrophs. All heterotrophic organisms get their carbon by consumingautotrophs or other heterotrophs, their remains, or theirwaste products. Most of the carbon stored in the terrestrial compartmentover the short term is stored as organic matter in soils.Biological processes move carbon between the atmospheric andterrestrial compartments, removing it from the atmosphere duringphotosynthesis and returning it to the atmosphere throughmetabolism (Figure 58.9).1230 CHAPTER 58 | ECOSYSTEMS AND GLOBAL ECOLOGY58.9 The Global Carbon Cycle Thenumbers show the quantities of carbon(expressed as petagrams) held in orexchanged annually by ecosystem compartments.The widths of the arrows areproportional to the sizes of the fluxes.GO TO Animated Tutorial 58.2 • The Global Carbon CycleyourBioPortal.comThe amount of carbon in the atmosphere in the form of CO2,and the amount stored in the biosphere in living and dead organisms,are dwarfed by the amount of carbon stored in terrestrialsoils and rocks, in marine sediments, and in dissolved formin ocean waters. Carbon dioxide moves into ocean waters fromthe atmosphere primarily by simple diffusion at the ocean surface;it is stored in seawater in the form of carbonate (CO3–2) orbicarbonate (HCO3–).Today’s oceans absorb 20–25 million tons of CO2 every day—more than at any time during the past 20 million years. As aresult, water near the ocean surface is becoming more acidic.An increase in the acidity of ocean surface waters could havenegative effects on many marine organisms, particularly corals.The combination of decreasing pH and increasing water temperaturekills their symbiotic algae, “bleaching” the corals andkilling them as well (see Figure 27.8A). Because so many otherreef species depend on corals and the structure they provide,the entire reef community collapses.At times in the remote past, great quantities of carbon wereremoved from the global carbon cycle when organisms died inlarge numbers and were buried in sediments lacking oxygen.In such anaerobic environments, detritivores do not reduce organiccarbon to CO2. Instead, organic molecules accumulate andare eventually transformed into deposits of oil, natural gas, coal,or peat. Humans have discovered and used these deposits,known as fossil fuels, at ever-increasing rates during the past150 years. As a result, CO2, one of the final products of the burningof fossil fuels, is being released into the atmosphere fastertoday than it is dissolving in the oceans or being incorporatedinto terrestrial biomass. Based on a variety of calculations, atmosphericscientists believe that before the Industrial Revolution,the concentration of atmospheric CO2 was probably about265 parts per million. Today, it is 387 parts per million (Figure58.10), representing a rate of increase more than 10 times fasterthan at any other time for millions of years.WHERE HAS ALL THE CARBON GONE? Less than half of the vastamount of CO2 released into the atmosphere by human activitiesremains in the atmosphere. Where is the rest? Much of it isdissolved in the oceans. Over decades to centuries, the oceans,which contain 50 times more dissolved inorganic carbon thanthe atmosphere, determine atmospheric CO2 concentrations.The rate at which CO2 moves from the atmosphere to the oceansdepends, in part, on photosynthesis by phytoplankton in thesurface waters. These organisms remove carbon from the water,thereby increasing its absorption from the atmosphere. Inaddition, many marine organisms, including clams, oysters,corals, and some algae, combine bicarbonate ions with calcium(Ca2+) to form calcium carbonate, which they use to build shellsand other structures. When these organisms die, they eventuallysink to the ocean floor.Photosynthesis by terrestrial vegetation, principally in forestsand savannas, typically absorbs roughly the same amount ofcarbon that is released by metabolism—about half of it by plantsand half of it by microbes in the soil that break down organicmatter produced by plants. Currently, the photosynthetic consumptionof CO2 exceeds the metabolic production of CO2, soEarth’s terrestrial vegetation is storing carbon that would otherwisebe increasing atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Yet, aswe saw at the opening of this chapter, we cannot count on terrestrialvegetation to store the extra CO2 that human activitiesare producing. Furthermore, climate warming—another resultof increasing CO2 concentrations, as we’ll see next—increasesplant metabolism and is thus likely to increase the flux of CO2from vegetation to the atmosphere.ATMOSPHERIC CO2 AND GLOBAL WARMING What evidence do wehave that the buildup of atmospheric CO2 stemming from theburning of fossil fuels is raising Earth’s temperature? Measurementsof gases in air trapped in the Antarctic and Greenland icecaps show that atmospheric CO2 levels have been higher whenEarth has been warmer and lower when it has been cooler (Figure58.11). For example, atmospheric CO2 was very low duringthe most recent glaciation, between 30,000 and 15,000 years ago,when temperatures were presumablymuch colder than they are today. In contrast,during a warm interval 5,000 yearsago, atmospheric CO2 may have beenslightly higher than it is today.How global climates and ecosystemswill change in response to this rapidwarming is a subject of intense investigation.Complex computer models of theglobal ecosystem indicate that a doublingof the atmospheric CO2 concentrationfrom today’s level would increase58.3 | HOW DO MATERIALS CYCLE THROUGH THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM? 1231GO TO Animated Tutorial 58.3 • The Ocean Conveyor BeltyourBioPortal.comEach year CO2 concentrations riseduring the Northern Hemispherewinter, when metabolism exceedsphotosynthesis.CO2 concentrations thenfall during the summer,when photosynthesisexceeds metabolism.1960 1970Year1980 1990 2000 2005 2010360380400340320300 CO2 concentrations (ppm)58.10 Atmospheric CO2 ConcentrationsAre Increasing These carbon dioxide concentrations,expressed as parts per million byvolume of dry air, were recorded on top ofMauna Loa, Hawaii, far from most sources ofhuman-generated CO2 emissions.mean annual temperatures worldwide and would probablycause droughts in the central regions of continents while increasingprecipitation in coastal areas. Global warming hasalready resulted in the shrinking of Arctic sea ice (Figure 58.12).If the polar ice caps continue to melt, sea level will rise (dueto both thermal expansion of ocean waters and the additionof glacial meltwater), flooding coastal cities and agriculturallands. Because the rate at which water evaporates from theocean surface increases with temperature, tropical storms arelikely to become more intense. Indeed, during the past twodecades, the number of hurricanes generated per year worldwidehas not increased, but the number of severe (category 4and 5) hurricanes has.Global warming is having a profound effect on the distributionand abundance of interacting species. One clear exampleis an increase in the severity of insect infestations in certaintemperate forest communities. Pine trees in these forests are attackedby pine bark beetles, which carry with them a symbioticfungus that infects the trees and helps the beetles to overcomethe trees’ defenses (see Figure 56.13). In Colorado, cold wintershave historically limited the ability of these beetles to killmany trees. In 2008, however, Colorado experienced an outbreakof mountain pine beetles larger than any previouslyrecorded; more than a million acres of trees were killed. The lackof an extended period of below-zero temperatures in the previouswinter had allowed large numbers of overwintering beetlesto survive.Another result of global warming may be an increase in thefrequency of outbreaks of human diseases. Winter cold typicallykills many pathogens, sometimes eliminating as much as99% of a pathogen population. If climate warming reduces thispopulation bottleneck, some diseases will spread to more temperateregions. For example, dengue fever and its mosquitovector are now spreading to higher latitudes where they wereformerly absent.The 2007 Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panelon Climate Change (IPCC) forecast these and many other negativeeffects of global warming on humans, warning, “Humanbeings are exposed to climate change through changing weatherpatterns (for example, more intense and frequent extremeevents) and indirectly through changes in water, air, food qualityand quantity, ecosystems, agriculture, and economy. At thisearly stage the effects are small but are projected to progressivelyincrease in all countries and regions.”Recent perturbations of the nitrogen cycle have hadadverse effects on ecosystemsNitrogen gas makes up 78% of Earth’s atmosphere, but most organismscannot use nitrogen in its gaseous form. Only a fewspecies of microorganisms can convert atmospheric N2 intoforms that are usable by plants, a process called nitrogen fixation(see Section 36.4). Nitrogen-fixing bacteria are often found assymbiotic associates in the root nodules of plants such aslegumes. Other microorganisms carry out denitrification, theprincipal process that removes nitrogen from the biosphere andreturns it to the atmosphere as N2 (see Figure 36.11). These denitrifyingmicrobes are found in places where oxygen levels are1232 CHAPTER 58 | ECOSYSTEMS AND GLOBAL ECOLOGYAtmospheric CO2 (ppm)Extent of continental glaciation(° latitude)600 500 400 300 200 100 0Time (mya)2,00080907060504030204,0006,0008,000Atmospheric CO2Continental glaciation58.11 Higher Atmospheric CO2 Concentrations Correlate withWarmer Temperatures The geological record of variation in atmosphericCO2 concentrations over the last 500 million years shows that CO2levels have been lowest during times of extensive continental glaciation(red bars), and thus presumably lower temperatures.Sea ice area 1979–2000Sea ice area September 2007CanadaAlaskaRussiaGreenlandIceland58.12 The Ice Caps Are Melting Global warming is causing majorchanges in the sizes of the polar ice caps. In 2008, for the first time inrecorded history, enough of the Arctic Ocean was ice-free that the NorthPole could have been circumnavigated by ship.low, such as bogs, swamps, and marine sediments. Collectively,this microbial processing of nitrogen accounts for about 95 percentof all natural nitrogen flux on Earth (Figure 58.13).All living organisms require nitrogen, and the inability of thevast majority of them to utilize N2 means that usable nitrogenis often in short supply in ecosystems. Populations of nitrogenfixingorganisms rarely increase in abundance to the extent thatnitrogen is no longer limiting because the end products of nitrogenfixation are rapidly lost from ecosystems: ammonia byvaporization and denitrification, and the highly water-solublenitrates by leaching. Furthermore, fixing nitrogen requires largeamounts of energy. Thus nitrogen-fixing organisms often loseout in competition with non-fixers when nitrogen becomes morereadily available.The industrial production of inexpensive artificial fertilizershas had some unanticipated effects on the nitrogen cycle. As aresult of extensive use of these fertilizers on agricultural crops,coupled with the burning of fossil fuels (which generates nitricoxide), total industrial nitrogen fixation by humans todayis about equal to global natural nitrogen fixation. This humangeneratednitrogen flux has been increasing over the past halfcenturyand is expected to continue to increase during the comingdecades (Figure 58.14).These large perturbations of the nitrogen cycle have had numerousadverse effects. When more nitrogen is applied to croplandsthan can be taken up by the crops, the excess nitrogenmoves out of the system in surface runoff, or downward intogroundwater, and ultimately ends up in rivers, lakes, andoceans. The addition of nutrients to these bodies of water,known as eutrophication (“rich food”), can have dramatic effectson aquatic ecosystems. The “dead zone” that has formed58.3 | HOW DO MATERIALS CYCLE THROUGH THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM? 1233Biologicalfixation(44)Industrialfixation(30)Denitrification(40)RunoffNO3NO2 Organic NNH4Inorganic NNO3NO2 Organic NNH4Inorganic NDenitrification(40)Fixation(6)Atmospheric N258.13 The Global NitrogenCycle The numbers inparentheses show the quantitiesof nitrogen (expressedas teragrams) held in orexchanged annually byecosystem compartments.Arrow widths are proportionalto the sizes of the fluxes.GO TO Animated Tutorial 58.4 • The Global Nitrogen CycleyourBioPortal.comNitrogen fixation (teragrams/year)1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000Year50100150200Fossil fuel combustionRange of terrestrialbacterial nitrogenfixation in nonagriculturalecosystemsNitrogen fixation in agroecosystemsFertilizer and industrial usesTotal anthropogenic fixation58.14 Human Activities Have Increased Nitrogen Fixation Most of the industriallyfixed nitrogen (produced by humans by combining, at high pressure and temperatures,atmospheric nitrogen with hydrogen derived from fossil fuels) is manufacturedfor use in agricultural fertilizers. Some nitrogen fixation is a by-product of fossilfuel combustion.near the mouth of the Mississippi River in the Gulf of Mexicois a result of flows of water from agricultural fields in the UpperMidwest carrying high concentrations of nitrogen from fertilizer(Figure 58.15). The high nutrient levels that result promoteluxuriant algal growth. When the algae die, theirdecomposition by microbes uses up the oxygen in the water,and the resulting anaerobic conditions kill most other marineorganisms. Given that the Gulf of Mexico is a key resource forthe seafood industry, providing almost three-fourths of theshrimp and two-thirds of the oysters harvested in the UnitedStates, an expansion of the dead zone could have a devastatingeffect on the economies of the Gulf region, over and above itseffects on biodiversity and ecosystem function.The increase in nitrogen fixation has also increased atmosphericconcentrations of the greenhouse gas nitrous oxide (N2O;see Table 58.1), resulting in the production of tropospheric O3—also a greenhouse gas—and smog. Some of the nitrogen thatenters the atmosphere falls back to land in precipitation or asdry particles. This deposition of nitrogen affects the compositionof terrestrial vegetation by favoring those species that arebest adapted to take advantage of high nutrient levels, whichthen crowd out other species. Atmospheric deposition of nitrogenhas increased dramatically during recent decades due tohuman activity. Spatial variation in nitrogen deposition rateshas allowed ecologists to determine that plant species richnessin grasslands declines as the rate of nitrogen deposition increases.Rates of nitrogen deposition are high enough over muchof Europe and eastern North America to cause substantial reductionsin species richness in grasslands on both continents.The burning of fossil fuels affects the sulfur cycleMost of Earth’s sulfur supply is locked up in rocks on land and assulfate salts in deep-sea sediments. Emissions of the gases sulfurdioxide (SO2) and hydrogen sulfide (H2S) from volcanoes accountfor, on average, 10–20% of the total natural nonbiological flux ofsulfur to the atmosphere, but they occur only intermittently. Althoughvolcanic eruptions spew great quantities of sulfur overbroad areas, they are rare events. Sulfur in soil is taken up byplants and incorporated into proteins; ultimately, this sulfur is returnedto the atmosphere via microbial decomposition. In marinesystems, too, microbial decomposition is important in returningsulfur to the atmosphere. In particular, many marine phytoplanktonand seaweeds manufacture large quantities of a sulfur-containingcompound (DMSP, or dimethylsulfoniopropionate) tomaintain their salt and water balance; when broken down, thiscompound releases dimethyl sulfide (CH3SCH3), the principalodorant of rotting seaweed stench. Because the quantities of phytoplanktonin the vast oceans are enormous, dimethyl sulfide productionaccounts for about half of the biotic component of theglobal sulfur cycle.Atmospheric sulfur plays an important role in global climate.Even if air is moist, clouds do not form readily unless there aresmall particles in the atmosphere around which water can condense.Dimethyl sulfide is the major component of such particles.Therefore, increases in atmospheric sulfur concentrationscan increase cloud cover and reduce the amount of incomingsolar radiation that ultimately reaches Earth’s surface.The burning of fossil fuels alters the sulfur cycle as well asthe carbon and nitrogen cycles. The combustion of fossil fuelsreleases sulfur in the form of SO2 and nitrogen in the form ofnitrogen dioxide (NO2 ) into the atmosphere, where they reactwith water molecules to form sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and nitricacid (HNO3). These acids can travel hundreds of kilometers inthe atmosphere before they settle to Earth as dry particles orin precipitation. Rain or snow containing sufficient levels of nitricand sulfuric acids to lower its pH is called acid precipitation.Acid precipitation now falls in all major industrializedcountries and is particularly widespread in eastern North Americaand Europe. The normal pH of unpolluted precipitation isabout 5.6, but precipitation in New England now averagesabout pH 4.5 and there have been occasional rainfalls and snowfallswith a pH as low as 3.0. Precipitation with a pH of about3.5 or lower damages the leaves of plants and reduces rates ofphotosynthesis. Acidification of lakes in the Adirondack regionof New York State has reduced fish species richness by causingthe extinction of acid-sensitive species (Figure 58.16). Manyinvertebrates that are primary consumers in aquatic communitiesare sensitive to pH; in particular, multiple species ofmayflies and caddisflies have experienced local population reductionsin acidified streams around the world. Even when itseffects are not lethal, acidification can have subtle effects on behaviorthat reduce the viability of aquatic organisms. Divingbeetles, for example, lose their ability to regulate their underwateroxygen supply when pH levels drop significantly.New regulations instituted by the 1990 Clean Air Act haveraised the pH of precipitation in much of the eastern United1234 CHAPTER 58 | ECOSYSTEMS AND GLOBAL ECOLOGYAnoxia—low oxygen levels—results wheneutrophication occurs and algal populationsincrease dramatically. Their decompositonuses up all available oxygen.Mississippi GeorgiaLouisianaTexas58.15 A Dead Zone High concentrations of nitrogen and phosphorusin the runoff from agricultural lands in the midwestern United States arecarried by the Mississippi River to the Gulf of Mexico. This nutrient enrichmentcauses excessive algal growth, depleting the oxygen in the waterand creating a deoxygenated “dead zone” in which few aquatic organismscan survive.States, primarily by lowering sulfur emissions. There are indicationsthat, once emissions have been reduced, acidifiedaquatic systems can recover quickly. David Schindler at the Universityof Alberta studied the effects of acid precipitation byadding enough H2SO4 to two small Canadian lakes to reducetheir pH from about 6.6 to 5.2. In both lakes, nitrifying bacteriafailed to survive under these moderately acidic conditions. Asa result, the nitrogen cycle was blocked. When Schindlerstopped adding acid to one of the lakes, its pH returned to itsoriginal value in about a year, and nitrification resumed. Theseexperiments show that lake ecosystems are very sensitive toacidification but can recover rapidly, presumably because waterin lakes is exchanged rapidly.That said, the larger organisms in such systems may beslower to bounce back. Fourteen rivers in Wales were studiedfor a quarter-century, to determine the impacts of acid rain reductions.Investigators were disappointed that, even after 25years, only four insect species—two mayfly species and twocaddisfly species—had recolonized the area out of the 29 speciesexpected to come back.The global phosphorus cycle lacks asignificant atmospheric componentPhosphorus accounts for only about 0.1% ofEarth’s crust, but it is an essential nutrient forall life forms. It is a key component of DNA,RNA, and ATP. Unlike the elemental cyclesdiscussed thus far, the phosphorus cycle lacksa significant gaseous component. Some phosphorusis transported on dust particles, butvery little of the phosphorus cycle takes placein the atmospheric compartment. Most of Earth’s phosphorusis present in the form of phosphate salts in rocks and deep-seasediments. Phosphorus cycling takes millions of years becausethe processes of sedimentary rock formation, uplift, and weatheringall take a long time(Figure 58.17). In contrast, phosphorusoften cycles rapidly among organisms, and it is often a limitingfactor for their growth, particularly for plants. In additionto nitrogen, fertilizers routinely include phosphorus.Human activity has radically accelerated some parts of thephosphorus cycle. One consequence of the massive use of artificialfertilizers is that between 10.5 and 15.5 teragrams (1 tg =1012 g or 109 kg) of phosphorus accumulate each year, primarilyin agricultural soils. When the concentration of phosphorus insoils exceeds the capacity of plants to take it up, the excess movesinto streams and lakes. Soil erosion due to the clearing of land forpurposes such as agriculture and logging also increases theamount of phosphorus and other nutrients in runoff. Phosphorusis a limiting nutrient in many lakes, so when it enters thoselakes through runoff, algae previously limited by relatively lowlevels of phosphorus respond with phenomenal growth. Thesealgal blooms turn the water green and, depending on the metaboliccapabilities of the algae, toxic. When the algae die, their decompositionby microbes consumes all of the oxygen in the lake,and anaerobic organisms dominate the bottom sediments. Theseanaerobic organisms do not break down carbon compounds allthe way to CO2, and their metabolic end products, many of whichhave unpleasant odors, build up.The capacity of phosphorus-charged runoff to cause extensiveeutrophication was graphically illustrated almost 50 years ago.Atechnological innovation in the formulation of laundry detergentsin the early 1960s was the use of sodium tripolyphosphate(STPP) (Na5P3O10) as a water softener and dirt-breaking agent toenhance cleaning efficiency. Widespread adoption of these newdetergents led to massive phosphorus enrichment of lakes andstreams and concomitant eutrophication and algal blooms. Waterquality declined so much across the United States that phos-58.3 | HOW DO MATERIALS CYCLE THROUGH THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM? 1235Highly acidic lakes supportfewer fish species.Average number of fish species4.00–4.504.51–5.005.01–5.505.51–6.006.01–6.506.51–7.007.01–8.00>8.00pH range12345670792118110154240 297 9658.16 Acidification of Lakes Exterminates Fish Species The numberof fish species found in lakes in the Adirondack region of New YorkState is directly correlated with pH. The numbers in the bars indicate thenumber of lakes in each pH range.Erosion due to land clearing (forfarming, logging, etc.) alsoresults in excessive phosphorusin runoff to fresh waters.Mining phosphorus forfertilizer speeds up itsrelease from crust to soil.Earth’s crustSoil Plants andanimalsPlants andanimalsLakes and riversMillionsof yearsDays toyearsDays toyearsDays toyearsAlgae,plankton,animalsSeafloor58.17 The Phosphorus Cycle Arrow widths are proportional to the flux rates. Twolarge increases in phosphorus flux are due to human activities.phate-based detergents were banned in many states, as well asin Europe. In today’s detergents, phosphonates—forms of phosphorusthat do not appear to promote algal growth—and aluminumsilicates perform the functions STPP used to serve.Detergents, however, are only one agent contributing to eutrophication.Human waste is rich in phosphorus, as are manurefrom domesticated animals and industrial waste of varioustypes. Two hundred years ago, Lake Erie, one of the GreatLakes on the border between the United States and Canada, hadonly moderate rates of photosynthesis and clear, oxygenatedwater. With increasing industrialization in the early part of thetwentieth century, nutrient concentrations in the lake increasedgreatly, and algae proliferated. At the water filtration plant inCleveland, Ohio, algae increased from 81 per milliliter in 1929to 2,423 per milliliter in 1962. Populations of bacteria also increased:the numbers of Escherichia coli increased enough thatmany of the lake’s beaches were closed and declared health hazards.Since 1972, the United States and Canada have investedmore than U.S. $9 billion to improve municipal waste treatmentfacilities and reduce discharges of pollutants into Lake Erie.As a result, the amount of phosphorus added to Lake Erie hasdecreased more than 80% from its highest level, and phosphorusconcentrations in the lake have declined substantially. Thedeeper waters of Lake Erie are still oxygen-poor during thesummer months, but the rate of oxygen depletion is declining.We could greatly reduce phosphorus pollution by recoveringand recycling phosphorus. The phosphorus contained insewage and animal wastes could supply much of the needs ofthe detergent and fertilizer industries. More careful applicationof fertilizers on agricultural lands could reduce the rate of phosphorusaccumulation in soils without reducing crop yields.However, reduction of phosphorus concentrations in soils willtake many decades after remedial actions are initiated, andeutrophication of lakes and streams may persist even after theseactions are taken.Other biogeochemical cycles are also importantOther elements, in addition to those we have just discussed, areimportant to the global ecosystem because they are essential nutrientsfor organisms, even though they are needed only in verysmall amounts. One such element is iron (Fe), an essential micronutrientfor almost all organisms. It is a key component ofthe enzymes involved in chlorophyll synthesis, as well as an essentialcomponent of many animal enzymes. Iron confers oxygen-binding ability on hemoglobin in vertebrate blood andthe cytochrome P450 monooxygenases, which in most aerobicorganisms play a central role in detoxifying environmental poisons,rely upon iron for their catalytic activity.Iron is readily available on land in rocks and minerals. Itmoves into coastal waters in streams and into the open oceanin atmospheric dust. Because iron is insoluble in oxygenatedwater, it rapidly sinks to the ocean floor. Therefore, in mostocean communities, the rate of photosynthesis is limited by iron.In 1996, investigators launched an ecosystem-scale experimentin which surface waters of the equatorial Pacific Ocean wereseeded with dissolved iron. The response was a tremendousphytoplankton bloom, accompanied by massive uptake of nitrateand carbon dioxide, which had apparently been underutilizeddue to iron limitation.Three micronutrients that are relatively rare globally—iodine(I), cobalt (Co), and selenium (Se)—are of particular importanceto living organisms because they regulate the production andfunctioning of many metabolic agents, including hormones, vitamins,and enzymes that contain zinc and copper.• Iodine is found on land in mineral deposits and in seawateras an inorganic salt; fresh water is a relatively poor source.Iodine, which is supplied to land primarily by marine algaethat release it to the air, is often deficient in continental interiors.It is an essential component of the hormone thyroxine,which governs many metabolic processes, and a deficiencyof iodine in humans leads to the medical condition calledgoiter (see Figure 41.10).• Cobalt is a rare element found in soil and rocks. The bacteriathat fix atmospheric nitrogen require coenzymes derivedfrom cobalt. As an essential component of vitamin B12, it isa dietary requirement for almost all animals and is importantfor the synthesis of proteins.• Selenium is also found in soil and rocks. It is a component ofseveral important mammalian enzymes, such as the antioxidantglutathione peroxidase (which protects tissues fromoxidative damage) and several enzymes involved in synthesizingthyroid hormones.Land plants require all three of these micronutrients in minimalconcentrations, but animals, particularly endothermic vertebrates,require them in concentrations that exceed the supply in manyenvironments. Herbivores sometimes obtain these nutrients bydrinking water at mineralized springs or by eating enriched earth(see Figure 53.14). Deficiencies of these elements are most commonin areas with high rainfall and soils that leach readily.Biogeochemical cycles interactThe biogeochemical cycles of different elements interact withone another in complex ways, and perturbations to one cyclecan have profound effects on other cycles. In recent years, human-induced perturbations have made these interactions glaringlyapparent. For example, nitrate released by human activitiescan have profound effects on the biogeochemical cycles ofiron and arsenic. Nitrate is a powerful oxidant, and nitrate pollutantscan increase the movement of arsenic in lakes by causingits oxidation. Some urban lakes have arsenic levels in excessof 2,000 parts per million locked in sediments; oxidation releasesarsenic into the water column in a form that is carcinogenic andhas negative effects on development. Every year, scientists arediscovering interactions of which they were previously unaware,and experiments exploring biogeochemical interactionsare increasing in number.Changes in atmospheric CO2 concentrations have been aparticular focus of investigation in recent years because of theirpotential for interacting with other biogeochemical cyclesthrough photosynthesis. A case in point is a study of whetherelevated atmospheric CO2 concentrations affect rates of nitro-1236 CHAPTER 58 | ECOSYSTEMS AND GLOBAL ECOLOGYgen fixation by microorganisms associated with plant roots. Agroup of ecologists grew a nitrogen-fixing vine called Elliott’smilkpea (Galactia elliottii) under artificially increased CO2 concentrations.Higher CO2 concentrations led to an enhancementof nitrogen fixation during the first year of the experiment, butsurprisingly, the positive effect disappeared by the third year,and elevated CO2 concentrations actually reduced nitrogen fixationbelow normal levels during the fifth, sixth, and seventhyears of the experiment (Figure 58.18). The experimenters suspectedthat depletion of micronutrients such as iron and molybdenumcaused the reduction in nitrogen fixation, so they measuredconcentrations of those elements in the leaves of G. elliottii.They found that concentrations of molybdenum were particularlylow. Elevated CO2 can increase the acidity of water in soilby enhancing the rate of carbonic acid formation and, by enhancingphotosynthesis, increase the accumulation of soil organicmatter; both types of change increase the tendency ofmolybdenum to adsorb onto soil particles, reducing its availabilityto nitrogen-fixing bacteria and causing a decrease in nitrogenfixation rates.58.3 RECAPThe pattern of movement of a chemical elementthrough organisms and the physical environment isits biogeochemical cycle. Human activities haveaffected many biogeochemical cycles, especiallythose of water, carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, and phosphorus.Increasing concentrations of carbon dioxideand other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere areimplicated in global warming.• Describe the global hydrologic cycle and explain whatdrives it. See pp. 1229–1230 and Figure 58.8• How do biological processes move carbon from theatmospheric compartment to the terrestrial compartmentand then return it to the atmosphere? See pp.1230–1231 and Figure 58.9• What are some results of human-induced alterationsof the sulfur and nitrogen cycles? See pp. 1232–1234• Name two elements that can cause eutrophication inaquatic ecosystems and describe their effects on thosesystems. See pp. 1235–1236The biogeochemical cycles of chemical elements are intimatelyinvolved in ecosystem function. Just as human alterations ofthose cycles are having many effects on ecosystems worldwide,the resulting changes in those ecosystems are having profoundeffects on human lives.What Services Do 58.4 Ecosystems Provide?Although it seems obvious today that humans depend on naturalecosystems for survival, explicit recognition of the value ofthose ecosystems is rather recent. Environmental writers introducedthe idea of “natural capital” in the 1940s; it was in 1970that ecosystems were first said to provide people with a varietyof “goods and services.” The goods include food, clean water,clean air, fiber, building materials, and fuel; the services include58.4 | WHAT SERVICES DO ECOSYSTEMS PROVIDE? 1237CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE58.18 Effects of Atmospheric CO2 Concentrations onNitrogen FixationAlthough the original expectation was that CO2 enrichmentwould enhance nitrogen fixation, the reverse—decreasedfixation—was in fact being observed. In an attempt to explainthis result, investigators studied the changes in concentrationsof iron and molybdenum, two micronutrient components ofenzymes that are essential to nitrogen fixation.HYPOTHESIS Higher CO2 levels should enhancenitrogen fixation.Decreasing rates of nitrogen fixation associatedwith increased concentrations of atmosphericCO2 correlate with lower concentrations ofessential iron and molybdenum in planttissues; thus the initial increase in the rateof fixation can result in its eventual depression.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTS Elevated CO2 results ina doubling of rate ofN-fixation the first year……but N-fixation ratesare depressed in lateryears.Elevated CO2 effecton N-fixation (aspercentage of baseline)1996 1998 2000 2002Year–40Iron (mg/g) Molybdenum (ng/g)204060–20Base20406080100Concentration in leaves1. Grow nitrogen-fixing vines (Galactia elliottii) in plotsunder control conditions (normal levels of CO2) andexperimental conditions of artificially heightenedlevels of atmospheric CO2.2. Measure levels of nitrogen fixation over a period of7 years.3. Determine the concentrations of iron andmolybdenum in the leaves of G. elliottii at year 7.Control plantsExperimental plantsflood control, soil stabilization, pollination, and climate regulation.Most of these benefits either are irreplaceable, or the technologynecessary to replace them is prohibitively expensive. Forexample, potable fresh water can be provided by desalinatingseawater, but only at great cost. The aesthetic, psychological,spiritual, and recreational benefits of ecosystems are less tangible,but no less important, and no more easily replaced.Humans have increasingly altered Earth’s ecosystems to increasetheir capacity to provide us with goods such as food,fresh water, timber, fiber, and fuel. The benefits have not, however,been equally distributed, and some human populationshave actually been harmed by our manipulations of naturalecosystems. Moreover, short-term increases in some ecosystemgoods and services have come at the cost of the long-term degradationof others.The most important driver of change in ecosystems has beenchanges in land use as natural ecosystems have been convertedto other, more intensive uses. Although humans have been alteringecosystems for millennia, the pace and scope of the alterationshave increased considerably in recent years. More landwas converted to cropland between 1950 and 1980 than in the150 years between 1700 and 1850. Ecosystem conversions havebeen particularly rapid in tropical and subtropical biomes.Aquatic ecosystems have suffered losses at an increasing paceas well. Between 1970 and 2000, about 20% of the world’s coralreefs were lost, and an additional 20% were degraded. In freshwaterecosystems, so much water is now impounded behinddams that artificial reservoirs hold about six times as much watertoday as do natural rivers. These freshwater systems are beingrapidly depleted: the amount of water withdrawn fromrivers—most of it for agriculture—has doubled since 1960. Interms of nutrient cycles, more than half of all the artificial nitrogenfertilizer ever used on Earth has been used since 1985.Human alteration of ecosystems has had many positive effectson human health and prosperity, but it necessarily involvestrade-offs. Agriculture, for example, feeds and employs hugenumbers of people. But the spread of agriculture into marginallands may degrade soils and compromise ecosystem deliveryof clean water, as when overuse of artificial fertilizers resultsin eutrophication. Extensive use of pesticides controls insectpests, but also reduces populations of pollinators and the servicesthey provide to both crops and native plants.Similarly, the loss of wetlands and other natural buffers hasreduced the ability of ecosystems to regulate flooding and othernatural hazards. The damage from the tsunami that hit Indonesiaand other Southeast Asian countries in December 2004 wasgreater in many places than it would have been had the mangroveforests that protect the coast not been cut down and convertedto cropland. Hurricane Katrina, which struck the U.S.Gulf Coast less than a year later, would not have caused asmuch flooding in New Orleans had the wetlands surroundingthe city been intact. Katrina’s devastating effects were due inpart to a situation that had been developing for decades.New Orleans is located on the Mississippi River delta. Muchof the city lies below sea level, buffered by dams and levees constructedby the Army Corps of Engineers. The upstream damsthat protect New Orleans from flooding also prevent the riverfrom depositing the sediments that have sustained the surroundingdelta wetlands for centuries. Oil and natural gas producershave cut thousands of small canals through those wetlandsin order to lay pipelines and drilling rigs, and theextraction of oil and gas from beneath the land has caused it tosink. Increased dredging of shipping lanes and rising sea levelsdue to global warming have contributed to a rise in salinity,killing off many of the great cypress tree swamps. These extensivealterations resulted in the loss of over 80% (more than1.2 million acres) of the delta wetlands between 1930 and 2005.By the time Katrina made landfall, those wetlands could nolonger protect New Orleans from flooding. Storm surges racedalong the paths carved by canals and shipping lanes to breachthe levees, inundating much of the city.As it flooded New Orleans, Hurricane Katrina raised awarenessand appreciation of an ecosystem hitherto taken forgranted by most people. Crucial not only for their flood controlservices, the delta wetlands provide winter habitat for some 70%of the migrating birds in the huge Mississippi Valley. They arealso the spawning grounds for marine organisms, some ofwhich are commercially valuable. The delta’s famous shrimpingindustry contributes about 30% by weight of the total commercialfish harvest in the continental United States. The importanceof coastal wetlands—and, indeed, of a wide range of otherecosystems—to human well-being mandates careful ecosystemmanagement to guarantee a sustained flow of ecosystem goodsand services.58.4 RECAPEcosystems provide human society with indispensablegoods and services. Altering ecosystems cancompromise their ability to provide these goodsand services.• What are some of the essential goods and servicesthat ecosystems provide to humans? See p. 1238• How do human efforts to increase the provision ofsome ecosystem services cause degradation of otherecosystem services?How can we meet the challenge of obtaining goods and servicesfrom ecosystems without compromising their ability to providethose goods and services over the long term? Fortunately,options exist for sustainable management of ecosystems.How Can Ecosystems Be 58.5 Sustainably Managed?Practices that allow us to conserve or enhance ecosystems so asto benefit from specific ecosystem goods and services over thelong term without compromising others are referred to as sustainable.In many cases, the total economic value of a sustainablymanaged ecosystem is higher than that of an intensivelyexploited ecosystem (Figure 58.19). The long-term economicbenefits of preventing overexploitation of marine fish popula-1238 CHAPTER 58 | ECOSYSTEMS AND GLOBAL ECOLOGYtions, for example, are enormous. The collapse of the cod fisheryon Georges Bank due to overfishing (see Figure 55.13) resultedin the loss of tens of thousands of jobs and cost at least$2 billion in income support and retraining, and it can take along time for such fisheries to recover.Impeding the establishment of policies that encourage sustainablemanagement is the impression that ecosystem servicesare “public goods” with no market value. People who do notstand to profit from the goods and services provided by naturalecosystems have no incentive to pay for them, whereas individualswho own converted ecosystems can reap great economicbenefits from them. As with other “public goods,” governmentaction may be needed to create incentives encouragingsustainable ecosystem management. Examples of such actionmight include:• Elimination of subsidies that promote damaging exploitationof ecosystems. For example, the billions of dollars paidby governments in developed nations to subsidize domesticagriculture (with the hope of insulating farmers fromeconomic risk) have led to greater food production than theglobal market warrants, promoted excessive use of fertilizers,and reduced the profitability of agriculture in developingcountries.• More sustainable use of fresh water could be achieved bycharging users the full cost of providing the water, by developingmethods to use water more efficiently, and by alteringthe allocation of water rights so that the incentivesfavor conservation.• More sustainable use of marine fisheries could be achievedby establishing more protected marine reserves and “notake”zones where fish can grow to reproductive age. Recentdiscussions of marine fisheries management center on whatis colloquially known as the BOFFF hypothesis—for “BigOld Fat Female Fish”—that the largest and oldest females ina population are the most important to protect because theyoutproduce younger fish by an enormous margin.Raising public awareness of endangered ecosystems is essentialto the successful implementation of sustainable managementprograms. Most people do not understand the long-termvalue of ecosystem goods and services or realize how humanactivities affect the functioning of ecosystems, so public educationprograms are needed.Maintaining and enhancing ecosystem goods and servicesthat have no established market value is especially difficult.Probably the most difficult service to maintain in the face ofincreasingly intensive human use of the global ecosystem willbe biological diversity. The final chapter of this book is devotedto this important topic.58.5 | HOW CAN ECOSYSTEMS BE SUSTAINABLY MANAGED? 12390Net present value (thousands of dollars per hectare)WetlandsCanadaTropical forestCameroonMangrovesThailandSustainably managed ecosystemsConverted ecosystemsTropical forestCambodia123456IntactwetlandsIntensivefarmingSustainableforestrySmall-scalefarmingIntactmangrovesShrimpfarmingTraditionalforest useUnsustainabletimberharvest58.19 Economic Values of Sustainably Managed and ConvertedEcosystems Many types of ecosystems can provide more goods andservices when they are sustainably managed than when they are convertedand intensively exploited.58.1 What Are the Compartments of the GlobalEcosystem?• Earth is a closed system with respect to atomic matter, but anopen system with respect to energy.• Earth’s physical environment can be divided into four compartments:atmosphere, oceans, fresh waters, and land. ReviewFigure 58.1• Most global air circulation takes place in the lowest layer of theatmosphere, the troposphere. A layer of ozone in the stratosphereabsorbs ultraviolet radiation. Review Figure 58.2• Water vapor, carbon dioxide, and other greenhouse gases inthe atmosphere are transparent to sunlight but trap heat, thuswarming Earth’s surface. Review Figure 58.3• Most materials that cycle through the four compartments endup in the oceans, where they eventually sink to the bottom.Cold, nutrient-rich water rises and returns nutrients to theocean surface in coastal upwelling zones. Review Figure 58.4• Only a small fraction of Earth’s water resides in the freshwatercompartment, but water cycles rapidly through it. Nutrientsreach lakes and streams by surface flow or by the movement ofgroundwater.• Turnover brings nutrients and dissolved carbon dioxide to thesurface and oxygen to the deeper waters of freshwater lakes.Turnover occurs regularly in temperate-zone lakes in spring infall. Review Figure 58.5• Land covers only one-fourth of Earth’s surface but is connectedto the atmospheric compartment by living organisms, whichCHAPTER SUMMARY
58.1 What Are the Compartments of the GlobalEcosystem?• Earth is a closed system with respect to atomic matter, but anopen system with respect to energy.• Earth’s physical environment can be divided into four compartments:atmosphere, oceans, fresh waters, and land. ReviewFigure 58.1• Most global air circulation takes place in the lowest layer of theatmosphere, the troposphere. A layer of ozone in the stratosphereabsorbs ultraviolet radiation. Review Figure 58.2• Water vapor, carbon dioxide, and other greenhouse gases inthe atmosphere are transparent to sunlight but trap heat, thuswarming Earth’s surface. Review Figure 58.3• Most materials that cycle through the four compartments endup in the oceans, where they eventually sink to the bottom.Cold, nutrient-rich water rises and returns nutrients to theocean surface in coastal upwelling zones. Review Figure 58.4• Only a small fraction of Earth’s water resides in the freshwatercompartment, but water cycles rapidly through it. Nutrientsreach lakes and streams by surface flow or by the movement ofgroundwater.• Turnover brings nutrients and dissolved carbon dioxide to thesurface and oxygen to the deeper waters of freshwater lakes.Turnover occurs regularly in temperate-zone lakes in spring infall. Review Figure 58.5• Land covers only one-fourth of Earth’s surface but is connectedto the atmospheric compartment by living organisms, which
remove chemical elements from the atmosphere and releasethem back.58.2 How Does Energy Flow through the GlobalEcosystem?• Net primary production varies across the globe, reflecting differencesin temperature, moisture, and the distribution of landmasses. Review Figures 58.6 and 58.7• Humans appropriate approximately 24% of Earth’s averageannual net primary production, although the percentage variesregionally.58.3 How Do Materials Cycle through the GlobalEcosystem?• The pattern of movement of a chemical element throughorganisms and the compartments of the global ecosystem is itsbiogeochemical cycle.• The hydrologic cycle is driven by the sun, which evaporateswater from ocean surface than it returns by precipitation. Theexcess precipitation that falls on land eventually returns to theoceans, primarily in rivers. Review Figure 58.8, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 58.1• Groundwater plays a minor role in the hydrologic cycle, but isbeing seriously depleted by human activities.• Carbon is removed from the atmosphere by photosynthesis andreturned to the atmosphere by metabolism. The rate at whichcarbon moves from the atmosphere to the oceans depends inpart on photosynthesis by phytoplankton. Review Figure 58.9,ANIMATED TUTORIALS 58.2 and 58.3• The concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere has greatlyincreased in the last 150 years, largely due to the burning offossil fuels. This buildup of CO2 is warming the global climate.Review Figures 58.10–58.12• As a result of agricultural use of fertilizers and the burning offossil fuels, total nitrogen fixation by humans is about equal tonatural nitrogen fixation. Review Figures 58.13 and 58.14,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 58.4• Human alteration of the nitrogen cycle has resulted in excessesof nitrogen compounds in bodies of water, leading to eutrophicationand “dead zones.”• The burning of fossil fuels increases the concentrations of sulfurand nitrogen in the atmosphere, leading to acid precipitation.Review Figure 58.16• Agricultural use of fertilizers and clearing of land have dramaticallyincreased the input of phosphorus into soils and freshwaters. Review Figure 58.1758.4 What Services Do Ecosystems Provide?• The goods and services provided by ecosystems include food,clean water, flood control, pollination, climate regulation, spiritualfulfillment, and aesthetic enjoyment. Most ecosystem serviceseither are irreplaceable or the technology necessary toreplace them is prohibitively expensive.• Efforts to enhance the capacity of an ecosystem to providesome goods and services often come at the cost of its ability toprovide others.• The most important driver of change in ecosystems has beenchanges in land use, as natural ecosystems have been convertedto other, more intensive uses.58.5 How Can Ecosystems Be Sustainably Managed?• In many cases, the total economic value of a sustainably managedecosystem is higher than that of a converted or intensivelyexploited ecosystem. Review Figure 58.19• Recognition of the value of ecosystem goods and services thatare now perceived as “public goods” may induce governmentaction to protect them. Public education is needed to makepeople aware of how much they benefit from ecosystem goodsand services and how human activities affect the ecosystemsthat provide them.SEE WEB ACTIVITY 58.1 for a concept review of this chapter.