Like success in your biology course, winning a prestigiousmarathon comes only after a lot of hard work.Distance runners have more mitochondria in the legmuscles than most of us. The chemical energy stored inthe bonds of ATP in those mitochondria is converted intomechanical energy to move the muscles.There are two types of muscle fibers. Most people haveabout equal proportions of each type. But in a top marathonracer, 90 percent of the body’s muscle is made up ofso-called slow-twitch fibers. Cells of these fibers have lotsof mitochondria and use oxygen to break down fats andcarbohydrates, forming ATP. In contrast, the muscles ofsprinters are about 80 percent fast-twitch fibers, whichhave fewer mitochondria. Fast-twitch fibers generateshort bursts of ATP in the absence of O2, but the ATP issoon used up. Extensive research with athletes has shownthat training can improve the efficiency of blood circulationto the muscle fibers, providing more oxygen, and caneven change the ratio of fast-twitch to slow-twitch fibers.Now enter Marathon Mouse. No, this is not a cartooncharacter or a computer game, but a very real mouse thatwas genetically programmed by Ron Evans at the Salk Instituteto express high levels of the protein PPARδ in itsmuscles. This protein is a receptor located inside cell nuclei,where it regulates the transcription of genes involvedwith the breakdown of fat to yield ATP. Evans’s mousewas supposed to break down fats better, and thus beleaner—but there was an unexpected bonus. With highlevels of PPARδ came an increase in slow-twitch fibers anda decrease in fast-twitch ones. It was as if the mouse hadbeen in marathon training for a long time!Marathon mice are leaner and meaner than ordinarymice. Leaner, because they are good at burning fat; andmeaner in terms of their ability to run long distances. Onan exercise wheel, a normal mouse can run for 90 minutesand about a half-mile (900 meters) before it gets tired.PPARδ-enhanced mice can run almost twice as long andtwice as far—marks of true distance runners. Could wealso manipulate genes to enhance performance(and fat burning) in humans?The genetic engineering of people, ifit is feasible, is probably far in the future.But implanting genetically altered muscletissue is actually not such a farfetchedidea, and has already raisedconcerns over improper athletic enhancement.More likely in the near termis the use of an experimental drugcalled Aicar, which activates the PPARδOf mice and marathons9Marathon Men It takes a lot of training torun a marathon. One of the results of allthat training is that the leg muscles becomepacked with slow-twitch muscle fibers,containing cells rich in energy-metabolizingmitochondria.How Does Glucose Oxidation Release 9.1 Chemical Energy?Energy is stored in the covalent bonds of fuels, and it can be releasedand transformed. Wood burning in a campfire releasesenergy as heat and light. In cells, fuel molecules release chemicalenergy that is used to make ATP, which in turn drives endergonicreactions. ATP is central to the energy transformationsof all living organisms. Photosynthetic organisms use energyfrom sunlight to synthesize their own fuels, as we describe inChapter 10. In nonphotosynthetic organisms, the most commonchemical fuel is the sugar glucose (C6H12O6). Other molecules,including other carbohydrates, fats, and proteins, can also supplyenergy. However, to release their energy they must be convertedinto glucose or intermediate compounds that can enterinto the various pathways of glucose metabolism.In this section we explore how cells obtain energy from glucoseby the chemical process of oxidation, which is carried outthrough a series of metabolic pathways. Five principles governmetabolic pathways:• Acomplex chemical transformation occurs in a series ofseparate reactions that form a metabolic pathway.• Each reaction is catalyzed by a specific enzyme.• Most metabolic pathways are similar in all organisms, frombacteria to humans.• In eukaryotes, many metabolic pathways are compartmentalized,with certain reactions occurring inside specific organelles.• Each metabolic pathway is regulated by key enzymes thatcan be inhibited or activated, thereby determining how fastthe reactions will go.Cells trap free energy while metabolizing glucoseAs we saw in Section 2.3, the familiar process of combustion(burning) is very similar to the chemical processes that releaseenergy in cells. If glucose is burned in a flame, it reacts with oxygengas (O2), forming carbon dioxide and water and releasingenergy in the form of heat. The balanced equation for the completecombustion reaction isC6H12O6 + 6 O2→6 CO2 + 6 H2O + free energy(ΔG = –686 Kcal/mol)IN THIS CHAPTER we will describe how cells extractusable energy from food, usually in the form of ATP. We describethe general principles of energy transformations incells, and illustrate these principles by describing the pathwaysfor the catabolism of glucose in the presence and absenceof O2. Finally, we describe the relationships betweenthe metabolic pathways that use and produce the four biologicallyimportant classes of molecules—carbohydrates,fats, proteins, and nucleic acids.protein. When Evans and colleagues gave the drug tonormal mice, they achieved the same results as with thegenetically modified mice. A test for Aicar in blood andurine has been developed to prevent its use by humanathletes to gain a competitive advantage. Of more importanceis the drug’s potential in the treatment of obesityand diabetes, since the drug stimulates fat breakdown.Obesity is a key part of a disorder called metabolic syndrome,which also includes high blood pressure, heartdisease, and diabetes.The free energy trapped in ATP is the energy you useall the time to fuel both conscious actions, like running amarathon or turning the pages of a book, and yourbody’s automatic actions, such as breathing or contractingyour heart muscles.CHAPTER OUTLINE9.1 How Does Glucose Oxidation Release ChemicalEnergy?9.2 What Are the Aerobic Pathways of GlucoseMetabolism?9.3 How Does Oxidative Phosphorylation Form ATP?9.4 How Is Energy Harvested from Glucose in theAbsence of Oxygen?9.5 How Are Metabolic Pathways Interrelated andRegulated?Marathon Mouse This mouse can run for much longer thana normal mouse because its energy metabolism has beengenetically altered.This is an oxidation-reduction reaction. Glucose (C6H12O6) becomescompletely oxidized and six molecules of O2 are reducedto six molecules of water. The energy that is released can be usedto do work. The same equation applies to the overall metabolismof glucose in cells. However, in contrast to combustion, themetabolism of glucose is a multistep pathway—each step is catalyzedby an enzyme, and the process is compartmentalized.Unlike combustion, glucose metabolism is tightly regulated andoccurs at temperatures compatible with life.The glucose metabolism pathway “traps” the energy storedin the covalent bonds of glucose and stores it instead in ATPmolecules, via the phosphorylation reaction:ADP + Pi + free energy →ATPAs we introduce in Chapter 8, ATP is the energy currency ofcells. The energy trapped in ATP can be used to do cellularwork—such as movement of muscles or active transport acrossmembranes—just as the energy captured from combustion canbe used to do work.The change in free energy (ΔG) resulting from the completeconversion of glucose and O2 to CO2 and water, whether bycombustion or by metabolism, is –686 kcal/mol (–2,870 kJ/mol).Thus the overall reaction is highly exergonic and can drive theendergonic formation of a great deal of ATP from ADP andphosphate. Note that in the discussion that follows, “energy”means free energy.Three metabolic processes harvest the energy in the chemicalbonds of glucose: glycolysis, cellular respiration, and fermentation(Figure 9.1). All three processes involve pathwaysmade up of many distinct chemical reactions.• Glycolysis begins glucose metabolism in all cells. Through aseries of chemical rearrangements, glucose is converted totwo molecules of the three-carbon product pyruvate, and asmall amount of energy is captured in usable forms. Glycolysisis an anaerobic process because it does not require O2.• Cellular respiration uses O2 from the environment, and thusit is aerobic. Each pyruvate molecule is completely convertedinto three molecules of CO2 through a set of metabolicpathways including pyruvate oxidation, the citric acidcycle, and an electron transport system (the respiratorychain). In the process, a great deal of the energy stored inthe covalent bonds of pyruvate is captured to form ATP.• Fermentation does not involve O2 (it is anaerobic). Fermentationconverts pyruvate into lactic acid or ethyl alcohol(ethanol), which are still relatively energy-rich molecules.Because the breakdown of glucose is incomplete,much less energy is released by fermentation than bycellular respiration.Redox reactions transfer electrons and energyAs is illustrated in Figure 8.6, the addition of a phosphate groupto ADP to make ATP is an endergonic reaction that can extractand transfer energy from exergonic to endergonic reactions. Anotherway of transferring energy is to transfer electrons. Areactionin which one substance transfers one or more electrons toanother substance is called an oxidation–reduction reaction, orredox reaction.• Reduction is the gain of one or more electrons by an atom,ion, or molecule.• Oxidation is the loss of one or more electrons.Oxidation and reduction always occur together: as one chemicalis oxidized, the electrons it loses are transferred to anotherchemical, reducing it. In a redox reaction, we call the reactantthat becomes reduced an oxidizing agent and the one that becomesoxidized a reducing agent:In both the combustion and the metabolism of glucose, glucoseis the reducing agent (electron donor) and O2 is the oxidizingagent (electron acceptor).Although oxidation and reduction are always defined interms of traffic in electrons, it is often helpful to think in termsof the gain or loss of hydrogen atoms. Transfers of hydrogenatoms involve transfers of electrons (H = H+ + e–). So when amolecule loses hydrogen atoms, it becomes oxidized.A is oxidized,having lost electrons.B is reduced,having gained electrons.e–e–e–e–e–e–Reducedcompound A(reducingagent)Oxidizedcompound B(oxidizingagent)Oxidizedcompound AReducedcompound BA BA B170 CHAPTER 9 | PATHWAYS THAT HARVEST CHEMICAL ENERGYGLYCOLYSISGlucoseFERMENTATION• Incomplete oxidation• Net energy trappedper glucose: 2• Waste products:lactic acid or ethanoland CO2• Complete oxidation• Waste products: H2O, CO2• Net energy trappedper glucose: 32CELLULAR RESPIRATIONPhotosynthesisPyruvate(3-carbon molecule)Aerobic (O2 present) Anaerobic (O2 absent)SunATPATPor9.1 Energy for Life Living organisms obtain their energy from thefood compounds produced by photosynthesis. They convert these compoundsinto glucose, which they metabolize to trap energy in ATP.In general, the more reduced a molecule is, the more energyis stored in its covalent bonds (Figure 9.2). In a redox reaction,some energy is transferred from the reducing agent to the reducedproduct. The rest remains in the reducing agent or is lostto entropy. As we will see, some of the key reactions of glycolysisand cellular respiration are highly exergonic redox reactions.The coenzyme NAD+ is a key electron carrierin redox reactionsSection 8.4 describes the role of coenzymes, small molecules thatassist in enzyme-catalyzed reactions. ADP acts as a coenzymewhen it picks up energy released in an exergonic reaction andpackages it to form ATP. On the other hand, the coenzymenicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) acts as an electroncarrier in redox reactions:As you can see, NAD+ exists in two chemicallydistinct forms, one oxidized (NAD+) and the otherreduced (NADH) (Figure 9.3). Both forms participatein redox reactions. The reduction reactionNAD+ + H+ + 2 e– →NADHis actually the transfer of a proton (the hydrogenion, H+) and two electrons, which are released bythe accompanying oxidization reaction.The electrons do not remain with the coenzyme.Oxygen is highly electronegative and readily acceptselectrons from NADH. The oxidation ofNADH by O2 (which occurs in several steps)NADH + H+ + 1⁄2 O2→NAD+ + H2Ois highly exergonic, with a ΔG of –52.4 kcal/mol (–219 kJ/mol).Note that the oxidizing agent appears here as “1⁄2 O2” insteadof “O.” This notation emphasizes that it is molecular oxygen,O2, that acts as the oxidizing agent.Just as a molecule of ATP can be thought of as a package ofabout 12 kcal/mol (50 kJ/mol) of free energy, NADH can bethought of as a larger package of free energy (approximately50 kcal/mol, or 200 kJ/mol). NAD+ is a common electron carrierin cells, but not the only one. Another carrier, flavin adeninedinucleotide (FAD), also transfers electrons during glucosemetabolism.An overview: Harvesting energy from glucoseThe energy-harvesting processes in cells use different combinationsof metabolic pathways depending on the presence or absenceof O2:• Under aerobic conditions, when O2 is available as the finalelectron acceptor, four pathways operate (Figure 9.4A).Glycolysis is followed by the three pathways of cellular respiration:pyruvate oxidation, the citric acid cycle (alsocalled the Krebs cycle or the tricarboxylic acid cycle), andelectron transport/ATP synthesis (also called the respiratorychain).• Under anaerobic conditions when O2 is unavailable,pyruvate oxidation, the citric acid cycle, and the respiratorychain do not function, and the pyruvate produced byglycolysis is further metabolized by fermentation (Figure9.4B).These five metabolic pathways occur in different locations inthe cell (Table 9.1).NAD+AH BHA NADH BOxidation Reduction Oxidation Reduction9.1 | HOW DOES GLUCOSE OXIDATION RELEASE CHEMICAL ENERGY? 171C H HHHCC OH HHHCC O HHCC O HHOC COOMethane(CH4)Methanol(CH3OH)Formaldehyde(CH2O)Formicacid(HCOOH)Carbondioxide(CO2)Most reduced stateHighest free energyMost oxidized stateLowest free energy9.2 Oxidation, Reduction, and Energy The more oxidized a carbonatom in a molecule is, the less its free energy.One proton and two electronsare transferred to the ringstructure of NAD+.NNNCH2H HH HOH OHONH2P ONCH2H HH HOH OHOHP OCONH2+NHCONH2OOO–O–OReduction HReduced form ( )OxidationOxidized form ( NAD+ ) H NADH + + 2e–9.3 NAD+/NADH Is an Electron Carrier inRedox Reactions NAD+ is an important electronacceptor in redox reactions and thus itsreduced form, NADH, is an important energyintermediary in cells. The unshaded portion ofthe molecule (left) remains unchanged by theredox reaction.9.1 RECAPThe free energy released from the oxidation of glucoseis trapped in the form of ATP. Five metabolicpathways combine in different ways to produce ATP,which supplies the energy for myriad other reactionsin living cells.• What principles govern metabolic pathways in cells?See p. 169• Describe how the coupling of oxidation and reductiontransfers energy from one molecule to another.See pp. 170–171• Explain the roles of NAD+ and O2 with respect to electronsin a redox reaction. See p. 171 and Figure 9.3Now that you have an overview of the metabolic pathways thatharvest energy from glucose, let’s take a closer look at the threepathways involved in aerobic catabolism: glycolysis, pyruvateoxidation, and the citric acid cycle.What Are the Aerobic Pathways 9.2 of Glucose Metabolism?The aerobic pathways of glucose metabolism oxidize glucosecompletely to CO2 and H2O. Initially, the glycolysis reactionsconvert the six-carbon glucose molecule to two 3-carbon pyruvatemolecules (Figure 9.5). Pyruvate is then converted to CO2in a second series of reactions beginning with pyruvate oxidationand followed by the citric acid cycle. In addition to generatingCO2, the oxidation events are coupled with the reductionof electron carriers, mostly NAD+. So much of the chemical energyin the C—C and C—H bonds of glucose is transferred toNADH. Ultimately, this energy will be transferred to ATP, butthis comes in a separate series of reactions involving electrontransport, called the respiratory chain. In the respiratory chain,redox reactions result in the oxidative phosphorylation of ADPby ATP synthase. We will begin our consideration of the metabolismof glucose with a closer look at glycolysis.172 CHAPTER 9 | PATHWAYS THAT HARVEST CHEMICAL ENERGYTABLE 9.1Cellular Locations for Energy Pathways in Eukaryotes and ProkaryotesEUKARYOTES PROKARYOTESExternal to mitochondrion In cytoplasmGlycolysis GlycolysisFermentation FermentationCitric acid cycleInside mitochondrion On plasma membraneInner membrane Pyruvate oxidationRespiratory chain Respiratory chainMatrixCitric acid cyclePyruvate oxidationO2 absentCITRICACIDCYCLEGLYCOLYSISELECTRON TRANSPORT/ATP SYNTHESISGlucosePYRUVATEOXIDATIONGLYCOLYSISPyruvateO2 presentPyruvateCO2 and H2OGlucoseFERMENTATIONLactate or alcohol(A) Glycolysis and cellularrespiration(B) Glycolysis and fermentation9.4 Energy-Producing Metabolic Pathways Energy-producingreactions can be grouped into five metabolic pathways: glycolysis, pyruvateoxidation, the citric acid cycle, the respiratory chain/ATP synthesis,and fermentation. (A) The three lower pathways occur only in the presenceof O2 and are collectively referred to as cellular respiration. (B) WhenO2 is unavailable, glycolysis is followed by fermentation.GO TO Web Activity 9.2 • Glycolysis and FermentationyourBioPortal.comGO TO Web Activity 9.1 • Energy Pathways in CellsyourBioPortal.com9.2 | WHAT ARE THE AEROBIC PATHWAYS OF GLUCOSE METABOLISM? 173The two molecules of G3Pgain phosphate groups andare oxidized, forming twomolecules of NADH andtwo molecules of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate (BPG).432176The two molecules of BPGtransfer phosphate groupsto ADP, forming two ATPsand two molecules of3-phosphoglycerate (3PG).The phosphate groups onthe two 3PGs move,forming two 2-phosphoglycerates(2PG).8ATP transfers a phosphate tothe 6-carbon sugar glucose.Glucose-6-phosphateis rearranged to formits isomer, fructose6-phosphate.A second ATPtransfers aphosphate tocreate fructose1,6-bisphosphate.The DAP moleculeis rearranged toform another G3Pmolecule.The fructose ring opens, andthe 6-carbon fructose1,6-bisphosphate breaks intothe 3-carbon sugar phosphateDAP and its isomer G3P.The two molecules of 2PGlose water, becoming twohigh-energy phosphoenolpyruvates(PEP).9Finally, the two PEPstransfer their phosphates toADP, forming two ATPs andtwo molecules of pyruvate.105HH HOOH HOCH2OCH2OOHPPHH HOOH HOCH2OCH2OHOHPOH HH OHHOH HHOHOCH2O PCC OOHCH2OHHPC OCH2OCH2OHPHCC OCH2OHO–O PCC OCH2O–O PC OCH3O–C OHOH HH OHHOH HOHCH2OHOC OCH2OOH C OHPPC OCH2OO–H C OHPCC OOHCH2OHHPFructose 1,6-bisphosphate (FBP)Fructose 6-phosphate (F6P)Glucose 6-phosphate (G6P)Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (G3P)(2 molecules)Dihydroxyacetonephosphate (DAP)2-Phosphoglycerate (2PG)(2 molecules)Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP)(2 molecules)Pyruvate(2 molecules)GlucoseENERGY-INVESTINGREACTIONSENERGY-HARVESTINGREACTIONS1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate (BPG)(2 molecules)3-Phosphoglycerate (3PG)(2 molecules)Glyceraldehyde3-phosphate (G3P)(2 molecules)From every glucose molecule,glycolysis nets two molecules ofATP and two molecules of theelectron carrier NADH. Twomolecules of pyruvate areproduced.AldolasePhosphofructokinasePhosphohexoseisomeraseHexokinaseIsomerasePhosphoglyceromutaseEnolasePyruvatekinaseTriose phosphatedehydrogenasePhosphoglyceratekinaseATPADPATPADP2 H2O22 ATPADP2 2NAD+2PiNADH22 ATPADPCO2 and H2OCITRICACIDCYCLEGLYCOLYSISELECTRON TRANSPORT/ATP SYNTHESISGlucosePYRUVATEOXIDATIONPyruvate9.5 Glycolysis Converts Glucose intoPyruvate Ten enzymes (with names inred), starting with hexokinase, catalyze tenreactions in turn. Along the way, ATP is produced(in reactions 7 and 10), and two NAD+are reduced to two NADH (in reaction 6).Glycolysis takes place in the cytosol. It converts glucose intopyruvate, produces a small amount of energy, and generates noCO2. During glycolysis, some of the covalent bonds betweencarbon and hydrogen in the glucose molecule are oxidized,releasing some of the stored energy. The ten enzyme-catalyzedreactions of glycolysis result in the net production of twomolecules of pyruvate (pyruvic acid), two molecules of ATP,and two molecules of NADH. Glycolysis can be divided intotwo stages: energy-investing reactions that consume ATP, andenergy-harvesting reactions that produce ATP (see Figure 9.5).We’ll begin with the energy-investing reactions.The energy-investing reactions 1–5 ofglycolysis require ATPUsing Figure 9.5 as a guide, let’s work our way through the glycolyticpathway.Two of the reactions (1 and 3 in Figure 9.5), involve the transferof phosphate groups from ATP to form phosphorylated intermediates.The second of these intermediates, fructose 1,6-bisphosphate,has a free energy substantially higher than that ofglucose. Later in the pathway, these phosphate groups are transferredto ADP to make new molecules of ATP. Although both ofthese steps use ATP as a substrate, each is catalyzed by a different,specific enzyme.In reaction 1, the enzyme hexokinase catalyzes the transfer ofa phosphate group from ATP to glucose, forming the sugarphosphate glucose 6-phosphate.In reaction 2, the six-membered glucose ring is rearrangedinto a five-membered fructose ring.In reaction 3, the enzyme phosphofructokinase adds a secondphosphate to the fructose ring, forming fructose 1,6-bisphosphate.Reaction 4 opens up the ring and cleaves it to produce twodifferent three-carbon sugar (triose) phosphates: dihydroxyacetonephosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate.In reaction 5, one of those products, dihydroxyacetone phosphate,is converted into a second molecule of the other, glyceraldehyde3-phosphate (G3P).In summary, by the halfway point of the glycolytic pathway,two things have happened:• Two molecules of ATP have been invested.• The six-carbon glucose molecule has been converted intotwo molecules of a three-carbon sugar phosphate, glyceraldehyde3-phosphate (G3P).The energy-harvesting reactions 6–10 of glycolysisyield NADH and ATPIn the discussion that follows, remember that each reaction occurstwice for each glucose molecule because each glucose moleculehas been split into two molecules of G3P. The transformationof G3P generates both NADH and ATP. Again, follow thesequence by referring to Figure 9.5.PRODUCING NADH Reaction 6 is catalyzed by the enzyme triosephosphate dehydrogenase, and its end product is a phosphateester, 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate (BPG). This is an exergonic oxidationreaction, and it is accompanied by a large drop in free energy—more than 100 kcal of energy is released per mole of glucose(Figure 9.6, left). The free energy released in this reaction isnot lost to heat, but is captured by the accompanying reductionreaction. For each molecule of G3P that is oxidized, one moleculeof NAD+ is reduced to make a molecule of NADH.NAD+ is present in only small amounts in the cell, and itmust be recycled to allow glycolysis to continue. As we will see,NADH is oxidized back to NAD+ in the metabolic pathwaysthat follow glycolysis.PRODUCING ATP In reactions 7–10 of glycolysis, the two phosphategroups of BPG are transferred one at a time to moleculesof ADP, with a rearrangement in between. More than 20 kcal(83.6 kJ/mol) of free energy is stored in ATP for every mole ofBPG broken down. Finally, we are left with two moles of pyruvatefor every mole of glucose that entered glycolysis.The enzyme-catalyzed transfer of phosphate groups fromdonor molecules to ADP to form ATP is called substrate-levelphosphorylation. (Phosphorylation is the addition of a phosphategroup to a molecule.) Substrate-level phosphorylation isdistinct from oxidative phosphorylation, which is carried outby the respiratory chain and ATP synthase, and will be discussedlater in this chapter. Reaction 7 is an example of substrate-level phosphorylation, in which phosphoglycerate kinasecatalyzes the transfer of a phosphate group from BPG to ADP,forming ATP. It is exergonic, even though a substantial amountof energy is consumed in the formation of ATP.To summarize:• The energy-investing steps of glycolysis use the energy ofhydrolysis of two ATP molecules per glucose molecule.• The energy-releasing steps of glycolysis produce four ATPmolecules per glucose molecule, so the net production ofATP is two molecules.• The energy-releasing steps of glycolysis produce two moleculesof NADH.If O2 is present, glycolysis is followed by the three stages ofcellular respiration: pyruvate oxidation, the citric acid cycle, andthe respiratory chain/ATP synthesis.Pyruvate oxidation links glycolysis and thecitric acid cycleIn the process of pyruvate oxidation, pyruvate is oxidized to thetwo-carbon acetate molecule, which is then converted to acetylCoA. This is the link between glycolysis and all the other reactionsof cellular respiration. Coenzyme A (CoA) is a complexmolecule responsible for binding the two-carbon acetate molecule.Acetyl CoA formation is a multi-step reaction catalyzed bythe pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, an enormous complexcontaining 60 individual proteins and 5 different coenzymes. Ineukaryotic cells, pyruvate dehydrogenase is located in the mitochondrialmatrix (see Figure 5.12). Pyruvate enters the mitochondrionby active transport, and then a series of coupled reactionstakes place:174 CHAPTER 9 | PATHWAYS THAT HARVEST CHEMICAL ENERGY1. Pyruvate is oxidized to a two-carbon acetyl group (acetate),and CO2 is released (decarboxylation).2. Part of the energy from this oxidation is captured by the reductionof NAD+ to NADH.3. Some of the remaining energy is stored temporarily by combiningthe acetyl group with CoA, forming acetyl CoA:pyruvate + NAD+ + CoA + H+→acetyl CoA + NADH + CO2(In this reaction, the proton and electrons used to reduce NAD+are derived from the oxidation of both pyruvate and CoA.)Acetyl CoA has 7.5 kcal/mol (31.4 kJ/mol) more energy thansimple acetate. Acetyl CoA can donate its acetyl group to variousacceptor molecules, much as ATP can donate phosphategroups to various acceptors. But the main role of acetyl CoA isto donate its acetyl group to the four-carbon compound oxaloacetate,forming the six-carbon molecule citrate. This initiatesthe citric acid cycle, one of life’s most important energy-harvestingpathways.Arsenic, the classic poison of rodent exterminators and murdermysteries, acts by inhibiting pyruvate dehydrogenase, thusdecreasing acetyl CoA production. The lack of acetyl CoA stopsthe citric acid cycle and all the subsequent reactions that dependon it. Consequently, cells eventually run out of ATP andcannot perform essential processes that are powered by ATPhydrolysis.The citric acid cycle completes the oxidationof glucose to CO2Acetyl CoA is the starting point for the citric acid cycle. Thispathway of eight reactions completely oxidizes the two-carbonacetyl group to two molecules of carbon dioxide. The free energyreleased from these reactions is captured by ADP and theelectron carriers NAD+ and FAD. Figure 9.6 right shows the freeenergy changes during each step of the pathway.The citric acid cycle is maintained in a steady state—that is,although the intermediate compounds in the cycle enter andleave it, the concentrations of those intermediates do not changemuch. Refer to the numbered reactions in Figure 9.7 as you readthe description of each reaction.9.2 | WHAT ARE THE AEROBIC PATHWAYS OF GLUCOSE METABOLISM? 1752 NADH2 NADH2 NADH2 NADH2 NADH0–100–600Change in free energy, ΔG (in kcal/mol)–200–300–400–500–7002 FADH2Oxaloacetate2 ATP2 ATP2 ATPATPATPGLYCOLYSIS CITRIC ACID CYCLEPYRUVATEOXIDATIONGlucosePyruvateAcetyl CoACitrateEach glucose yields:6 CO210 NADH2 FADH24 ATP1 234567 8 9134 + 56721089.6 Changes in Free EnergyDuring Glycolysis and the CitricAcid Cycle The first five reactionsof glycolysis (left) consume free energy,and the remaining five glycolysisreactions release energy. Pyruvateoxidation (middle) and the citric acidcycle (right) both release considerableenergy. Refer to Figures 9.5 and9.7 for the reaction numbers.176 CHAPTER 9 | PATHWAYS THAT HARVEST CHEMICAL ENERGYThe two-carbon acetyl group andfour-carbon oxaloacetate combine,forming six-carbon citrate.Citrate is rearrangedto form its isomer,isocitrate.2Isocitrate is oxidizedto α-ketoglutarate,yielding NADH and CO2.Pyruvate is actively transportedinto the mitochondrial matrix,where it is oxidized and thecitric acid cycle occurs.3Succinyl CoA releases coenzyme A,becoming succinate; the energy thusreleased converts GDP to GTP,which in turn converts ADP to ATP.5Malate is oxidized tooxaloacetate, with theformation of NADH.Oxaloacetate can nowreact with acetyl CoAto reenter the cycle.8Succinate is oxidizedto fumarate, with theformation of FADH2.6Fumarate andwater react,forming malate.7Alpha-ketoglutarate is oxidized to succinyl CoA,with the formation of NADH and CO2; this stepis almost identical to pyruvate oxidation.41Pyruvate is oxidized to acetate,with the formation of NADH andthe release of CO2; acetate iscombined with coenzyme A,yielding acetyl CoA.CH2CH2COO–COO–HCCHCOO–COO–CH2CHCOO–COO–HOCH2O CCOO–COO–COO–COO–COO–CH2HOCH2 CHCCOO–COO–HO CHOO– CH2 CCH2COO–C OOO– CH2 CCHCOCoAOO– CH2 COO–CH3 CCH3OCoA CCCoACoAOPYRUVATEOXIDATIONNAD+SuccinateFumarateMalateOxaloacetateCitrate(citric acid)Isocitratea-ketoglutarateSuccinyl CoAAcetyl CoANAD+PyruvateNADHFADFADH2H2OCoenzyme ACoenzyme ACO2CO2NADHNAD+NADHNAD+CO2NADHMitochondrionADP+PiGDPATPGTPCITRIC ACIDCYCLE12345678CO2 and H2OCITRICACIDCYCLEGLYCOLYSISELECTRON TRANSPORT/ATP SYNTHESISGlucosePYRUVATEOXIDATIONPyruvate9.7 Pyruvate Oxidation and the Citric Acid CyclePyruvate enters the mitochondrion and is oxidized to acetylCoA, which enters the citric acid cycle. Reactions 3, 4, 5, 6,and 8 accomplish the major overall effects of the cycle—thetrapping of energy. This is accomplished by reducing NAD+ orFAD, or by producing GTP (reaction 5), whose energy is thentransferred to ATP. Each reaction is catalyzed by a specificenzyme, although the enzymes are not shown in this figure.GO TO Web Activity 9.3 • The Citric Acid CycleyourBioPortal.comIn reaction 1, the energy temporarily stored in acetyl CoAdrives the formation of citrate from oxaloacetate. During thisreaction, the CoA molecule is removed and can be reused bypyruvate dehydrogenase.In reaction 2, the citrate molecule is rearranged to form isocitrate.In reaction 3, a CO2 molecule, a proton, and two electrons areremoved, converting isocitrate into α-ketoglutarate. This reactionreleases a large amount of free energy, some of which isstored in NADH.In reaction 4, α-ketoglutarate is oxidized to succinyl CoA. Thisreaction is similar to the oxidation of pyruvate to form acetylCoA. Like that reaction, it is catalyzed by a multi-enzyme complexand produces CO2 and NADH.In reaction 5, some of the energy in succinyl CoA is harvestedto make GTP (guanosine triphosphate) from GDP and Pi. Thisis another example of substrate-level phosphorylation. GTP isthen used to make ATP from ADP and Pi.In reaction 6, the succinate released from succinyl CoA in reaction5 is oxidized to fumarate. In the process, free energy isreleased and two hydrogens are transferred to the electron carrierFAD, forming FADH2.Reaction 7 is a molecular rearrangement in which water isadded to fumarate, forming malate.In reaction 8, one more NAD+ reduction occurs, producingoxaloacetate from malate. Reactions 7 and 8 illustrate a commonbiochemical mechanism: in reaction 7, water (H2O) isadded to form a hydroxyl (—OH) group, and then in reaction8 the H from the hydroxyl group is removed, generating a carbonylgroup and reducing NAD+ to NADH.The final product, oxaloacetate, is ready to combine with anotheracetyl group from acetyl CoA and go around the cycleagain. The citric acid cycle operates twice for each glucose moleculethat enters glycolysis (once for each pyruvate that entersthe mitochondrion).To summarize:• The inputs to the citric acid cycle are acetate (in the form ofacetyl CoA), water, and the oxidized electron carriersNAD+, FAD, and GDP.• The outputs are carbon dioxide, reduced electron carriers(NADH and FADH2), and a small amount of GTP. Overall,the citric acid cycle releases two carbons as CO2 and producesfour reduced electron carrier molecules.The citric acid cycle is regulated by the concentrationsof starting materialsWe have seen how pyruvate, a three-carbon molecule, is completelyoxidized to CO2 by pyruvate dehydrogenase and the citricacid cycle. For the cycle to continue, the starting molecules—acetyl CoAand oxidized electron carriers—must all be replenished.The electron carriers are reduced during the cycle and in reaction6 of glycolysis (see Figure 9.5), and they must be reoxidized:NADH →NAD+ + H+ + 2 e–FADH2→FAD + 2 H+ + 2 e–The oxidation of these electron carriers take place in coupled redoxreactions, in which other molecules get reduced. When it ispresent, O2 is the molecule that eventually accepts these electronsand gets reduced to form H2O.9.2 RECAPThe oxidation of glucose in the presence of O2 involvesglycolysis, pyruvate oxidation, and the citricacid cycle. In glycolysis, glucose is converted topyruvate with some energy capture. Following theinitial oxidation of pyruvate, the citric acid cyclecompletes its oxidation to CO2 and more energy iscaptured in the form of reduced electron carriers.• What is the net energy yield of glycolysis in terms ofenergy invested and energy harvested? See p. 174 andFigure 9.6• What role does pyruvate oxidation play in the citricacid cycle? See pp. 174–175 and Figure 9.7• Explain why reoxidation of NADH is crucial for thecontinuation of the citric acid cycle. See p. 177Pyruvate oxidation and the citric acid cycle cannot continue operatingunless O2 is available to receive electrons during thereoxidation of reduced electron carriers. However, these electronsare not passed directly to O2, as you will learn next.How Does Oxidative Phosphorylation 9.3 Form ATP?The overall process of ATP synthesis resulting from the reoxidationof electron carriers in the presence of O2 is called oxidativephosphorylation. Two components of the process can be distinguished:1. Electron transport. The electrons from NADH and FADH2pass through the respiratory chain, a series of membraneassociatedelectron carriers. The flow of electrons along thispathway results in the active transport of protons out of themitochondrial matrix and across the inner mitochondrialmembrane, creating a proton concentration gradient.2. Chemiosmosis. The protons diffuse back into the mitochondrialmatrix through a channel protein, ATP synthase, whichcouples this diffusion to the synthesis of ATP. The inner mitochondrialmembrane is otherwise impermeable to protons,so the only way for them to follow their concentration gradientis through the channel.Before we proceed with the details of these pathways, let’sconsider an important question: Why should the respiratorychain be such a complex process? Why dont cells use the followingsingle step?NADH + H+ + 1⁄2 O2→NAD+ + H2OThe answer is that this reaction would be untamable. It is extremelyexergonic—and would be rather like setting off a stick9.3 | HOW DOES OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION FORM ATP? 177of dynamite in the cell. There is no biochemical way to harvestthat burst of energy efficiently and put it to physiological use(that is, no single metabolic reaction is so endergonic as to consumea significant fraction of that energy in a single step). Tocontrol the release of energy during the oxidation of glucose,cells have evolved a lengthy respiratory chain: a series of reactions,each of which releases a small, manageable amount of energy,one step at a time.The respiratory chain transfers electronsand releases energyThe respiratory chain is located in the inner mitochondrialmembrane and contains several interactive components, includinglarge integral proteins, smaller mobile proteins, and a smalllipid molecule. Figure 9.8 shows a plot of the free energy releasedas electrons are passed between the carriers.• Four large protein complexes (I, II, III, and IV) contain electroncarriers and associated enzymes. In eukaryotes theyare integral proteins of the inner mitochondrial membrane(see Figure 5.12), and three are transmembrane proteins.• Cytochrome c is a small peripheral protein that lies in theintermembrane space. It is loosely attached to the outer surfaceof the inner mitochondrial membrane.• Ubiquinone (abbreviated Q) is a small, nonpolar, lipidmolecule that moves freely within the hydrophobic interiorof the phospholipid bilayer of the inner mitochondrialmembrane.As illustrated in Figure 9.8, NADH passes electrons to proteincomplex I (called NADH-Q reductase), which in turn passesthe electrons to Q. This electron transfer is accompanied by alarge drop in free energy. Complex II (succinate dehydrogenase)passes electrons to Q from FADH2, which was generated in reaction6 of the citric acid cycle (see Figure 9.7). These electronsenter the chain later than those from NADH and will ultimatelyproduce less ATP.Complex III (cytochrome c reductase) receives electrons fromQ and passes them to cytochrome c. Complex IV (cytochromec oxidase) receives electrons from cytochrome c and passes themto oxygen. Finally the reduction of oxygen to H2O occurs:1⁄2 O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e– →H2ONotice that two protons (H+) are also consumed in this reaction.This contributes to the proton gradient across the inner mitochondrialmembrane.During electron transport, protons are also actively transportedacross the membrane—electron transport within each ofthe three transmembrane complexes (I, III, and IV) results in thetransfer of protons from the matrix to the intermembrane space(Figure 9.9). So an imbalance of protons is set up, with the impermeableinner mitochondrial membrane as a barrier. The concentrationof H+ in the intermembrane space is higher than inthe matrix, and this gradient represents a source of potential energy.The diffusion of those protons across the membrane is coupledwith the formation of ATP. Thus the energy originally containedin glucose and other fuel molecules is finallycaptured in the cellular energy currency, ATP. Foreach pair of electrons passed along the chain fromNADH to oxygen, about 2.5 molecules of ATP areformed. FADH2 oxidation produces about 1.5 ATPmolecules.Proton diffusion is coupled to ATP synthesisAll the electron carriers and enzymes of the respiratorychain, except cytochrome c, are embedded inthe inner mitochondrial membrane. As we have justseen, the operation of the respiratory chain resultsin the active transport of protons from the mitochon-178 CHAPTER 9 | PATHWAYS THAT HARVEST CHEMICAL ENERGYElectrons from NADH are acceptedby NADH-Q reductase at the startof the electron transport chain.Electrons also come from succinate by wayof FADH2; these electrons are accepted bysuccinate dehydrogenase.Free energy relative to O2 (kcal/mol)01020304050NADH-QreductasecomplexSuccinate dehydrogenaseUbiquinone (Q)Cytochrome c reductasecomplexCytochrome coxidase complexCytochrome cNADHI FADH2IIIIIIVe–e–e–e–e–O2 H2Oe–9.8 The Oxidation of NADH and FADH2 in theRespiratory Chain Electrons from NADH and FADH2 arepassed along the respiratory chain, a series of protein complexesin the inner mitochondrial membrane containingelectron carriers and enzymes. The carriers gain free energywhen they become reduced and release free energy whenthey are oxidized.GO TO Web Activity 9.4 • Respiratory ChainyourBioPortal.comdrial matrix to the intermembrane space. The transmembraneprotein complexes (I, III, and IV) act as proton pumps, and as aresult, the intermembrane space is more acidic than the matrix.Because of the positive charge carried by a proton (H+), thispumping creates not only a concentration gradient but also adifference in electric charge across the inner mitochondrialmembrane, making the mitochondrial matrix more negativethan the intermembrane space. Together, the proton concentrationgradient and the electrical charge difference constitute asource of potential energy called the proton-motive force. Thisforce tends to drive the protons back across the membrane, justas the charge on a battery drives the flow of electrons to dischargethe battery.The hydrophobic lipid bilayer is essentially impermeableto protons, so the potential energy of the proton-motive forcecannot be discharged by simple diffusion of protons across themembrane. However, protons can diffuse across the membraneby passing through a specific proton channel, called ATP synthase,which couples proton movement to the synthesis of ATP.This coupling of proton-motive force and ATP synthesis is called9.3 | HOW DOES OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION FORM ATP? 179Electrons (carried by NADH and FADH2) fromglycolysis and the citric acid cycle “feed” theelectron carriers of the inner mitochondrialmembrane, which pump protons (H+) out ofthe matrix to the intermembrane space.A highly magnified view of the innermitochondrial membrane. ATP synthase F1units, complexed here with other proteins,project into the mitochondrial matrix andcatalyze ATP synthesis.1Proton pumping creates an imbalance ofH+—and thus a charge difference—betweenthe intermembrane space and the matrix.This imbalance is the proton-motive force.2 The proton-motive force drives protons back to thematrix through the H+ channel of ATP synthase(the F0 unit). This movement of protons is coupledto the formation of ATP in the F1 unit.3H+H+H+H+H+H+H+H+2InnermitochondrialmembraneIntermembrane space(high H+ concentrationand positivecharge)IIIIIICytoplasmMatrix of mitochondrion(low H+ concentrationand negative charge)OutermitochondrialmembraneNADHNAD+FADH2H+ H+H+H+H+H+ H+H+ H+H+e– e–e–e–FADO2H2OIVNADH-Qreductase Ubiquinone Cytochrome creductaseCytochrome cCytochrome coxidaseATPsynthaseF0 unitF1 unitELECTRON TRANSPORT ATP SYNTHESISADP + Pi ATPMitochondrionH+++ H+CO2 and H2OCITRICACIDCYCLEGLYCOLYSISELECTRON TRANSPORT/ATP SYNTHESISGlucosePYRUVATEOXIDATIONPyruvate9.9 The Respiratory Chain and ATP Synthase Produce ATP by aChemiosmotic Mechanism As electrons pass through the transmembraneprotein complexes in the respiratory chain, protons are pumpedfrom the mitochondrial matrix into the intermembrane space. As the protonsreturn to the matrix through ATP synthase, ATP is formed.GO TO Animated Tutorial 9.1 • Electron Transportand ATP SynthesisyourBioPortal.comthe chemiosmotic mechanism (or chemiosmosis) and is foundin all respiring cells.THE CHEMIOSMOTIC MECHANISM FOR ATP SYNTHESIS The chemiosmoticmechanism involves transmembrane proteins, includinga proton channel and the enzyme ATP synthase, that couple protondiffusion to ATP synthesis. The potential energy of the H+gradient, or the proton-motive force (described above), is harnessedby ATP synthase. This protein complex has two roles:it acts as a channel allowing H+ to diffuse back into the matrix,and it uses the energy of that diffusion to make ATP from ADPand Pi.ATP synthesis is a reversible reaction, and ATP synthase canalso act as an ATPase, hydrolyzing ATP to ADP and Pi:ATP~ADP + Pi + free energyIf the reaction goes to the right, free energy is released and is usedto pump H+ out of the mitochondrial matrix—not the usual mode180 CHAPTER 9 | PATHWAYS THAT HARVEST CHEMICAL ENERGYGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHOD METHODRESULTSRESULTSINVESTIGATING LIFEIn the absence of electron transport, an artificialH+ gradient is sufficient for ATP synthesis bymitochondria.CONCLUSION ATP synthase, acting as a H+ channel, isnecessary for ATP synthesis.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: What would happen in the experiment on the right if a second ATP synthase, oriented in the oppositeway to the one originally inserted in the membrane, were added?9.10 Two Experiments Demonstrate the Chemiosmotic MechanismThe chemiosmosis hypothesis was a bold departure for the conventional scientific thinking of the time. It required an intactcompartment separated by a membrane. Could a proton gradient drive the synthesis of ATP? And was this capacity entirelydue to the ATP synthase enzyme?A H+ gradient can drive ATP synthesis byisolated mitochondria.HYPOTHESIS ATP synthase is needed for ATP synthesis.Mitochondria are isolated from cells andplaced in a medium at pH 9. This resultsin a low H+ concentration on both sidesof the inner mitochondrial membrane. A proton pump extractedfrom a bacterium is addedto an artificial lipid vesicle.H+ is pumped into thevesicle, creating a gradient,but no ATP is made.ATP synthase from amammal is inserted intothe vesicle membrane.The H+ diffuses out of thevesicle, and ATP issynthesized.The mitochondria are moved quickly to aneutral medium (pH 7; higher H+ concentration).This raises the H+ concentration in theintermembrane space and creates a H+ gradientacross the inner mitochondrial membrane.H+ movement into the matrix drives the synthesisof ATP in the absence of continuous electrontransport.MitochondrionMatrixIntermembranespacepH 9pH 7pH 9pH 9pH 9pH 9pH 7H+ATPATPADP + PiADP + PiADP + PipH 7H+H+MatrixIntermembrane spaceOuter membraneInner membraneH+H+ H+H+H+H+H+H+ H+H+H+H+H+H+H+H+H+GO TO Animated Tutorial 9.2 • Two Experiments Demonstratethe Chemiosmotic MechanismyourBioPortal.comof operation. If the reaction goes to the left, it uses the free energyfrom H+ diffusion into the matrix to make ATP. What makes itprefer ATP synthesis? There are two answers to this question:• ATP leaves the mitochondrial matrix for use elsewhere inthe cell as soon as it is made, keeping the ATP concentrationin the matrix low, and driving the reaction toward the left.• The H+ gradient is maintained by electron transport andproton pumping.Every day a person hydrolyzes about 1025 ATP moleculesto ADP. This amounts to 9 kg, a significant fraction of almosteveryone’s entire body weight! The vast majority of this ADPis “recycled”—converted back to ATP—using free energy fromthe oxidation of glucose.EXPERIMENTS DEMONSTRATE CHEMIOSMOSIS When it was firstproposed almost a half-century ago, the idea that a proton gradientwas the energy intermediate linking electron transport toATP synthesis was a departure from the current conventionalthinking. Scientists had been searching for a mitochondrial intermediatethat they believed would carry energy in much thesame way as the ATP produced by substrate level phosphorylation.The search for this intermediate was not successful, andthis led to the idea that chemiosmosis was the mechanism ofoxidative phosphorylation. Experimental evidence was neededto support this hypothesis. Two key experiments demonstrated(1) that a proton (H+) gradient across a membrane can drive ATPsynthesis; and (2) that the enzyme ATP synthase is the catalystfor this reaction (Figure 9.10).In the first experiment, mitochondria without a food sourcewere “fooled” into making ATP by raising the H+ concentrationin their environment. In the second experiment, a light-drivenproton pump isolated from bacteria was inserted into artificiallipid vesicles. This generated a proton gradient, but since ATPsynthase was absent, ATP was not made. Then, ATP synthasewas inserted into the vesicles and ATP was generated.UNCOUPLING PROTON DIFFUSION FROM ATP PRODUCTION Thetight coupling between H+ diffusion and the formation of ATPprovides further evidence for the chemiosmotic mechanism. Ifa second type of H+ diffusion channel (that does not synthesizeATP) is present in the mitochondrial membrane, the energy ofthe H+ gradient is released as heat rather than being coupled toATP synthesis. Such uncoupling molecules actually exist in themitochondria of some organisms to generate heat instead ofATP. For example, the natural uncoupling protein thermogeninplays an important role in regulating the temperatures of newbornhuman infants, who lack hair to keep warm, and in hibernatinganimals.A popular weight loss drug in the 1930s was the uncouplermolecule, dinitrophenol. There were claims of dramatic weightloss when the drug was administered to obese patients. Unfortunately,the heat that was released caused fatally high fevers,and the effective dose and fatal dose were quite close. So the useof this drug was discontinued in 1938. However, the generalstrategy of using an uncoupler for weight loss remains a subjectof research.HOW ATP SYNTHASE WORKS: A MOLECULAR MOTOR Now that wehave established that the H+ gradient is needed for ATP synthesis,a question remains: how does the enzyme actually makeATP from ADP and Pi? This is certainly a fundamental questionin biology, as it underlies energy harvesting in most cells. Lookat the structure of ATP synthase in Figure 9.9. It is a molecularmotor composed of two parts: the F0 unit, a transmembrane regionthat is the H+ channel, and the F1 unit, which contains theactive sites for ATP synthesis. F1 consists of six subunits (threeeach of two polypeptide chains), arranged like the segmentsof an orange around a central polypeptide. ATP synthesis is coupledwith conformational changes in the ATP synthase enzyme,which are induced by proton movement through the complex.The potential energy set up by the proton gradient across theinner membrane drives the passage of protons through the ringof polypeptides that make up the F0 component. This ring rotatesas the protons pass through the membrane, causing the F1unit to rotate as well. ADP and Pi bind to active sites that becomeexposed on the F1 unit as it rotates, and ATP is made. Thestructure and function of ATP synthase are shared by livingorganisms as diverse as bacteria and humans. These molecularmotors make ATP at rates up to 100 molecules per second.9.3 RECAPThe oxidation of reduced electron carriers in the respiratorychain drives the active transport of protonsacross the inner mitochondrial membrane, generatinga proton-motive force. Diffusion of protons downtheir electrochemical gradient through ATP synthaseis coupled to the synthesis of ATP.• What are the roles of oxidation and reduction in therespiratory chain? See Figures 9.8 and 9.9• What is the proton motive force and how does it drivechemiosmosis? See pp. 179–180• Explain how the two experiments described in Figure9.10 demonstrate the chemiosmotic mechanism.See p. 181Oxidative phosphorylation captures a great deal of energy inATP. But it does not occur if O2 is absent. We turn now to themetabolism of glucose in anaerobic conditions.How Is Energy Harvested from Glucose 9.4 in the Absence of Oxygen?In the absence of O2 (anaerobic conditions), a small amount ofATP can be produced by glycolysis and fermentation. Like glycolysis,fermentation pathways occur in the cytoplasm. Thereare many different types of fermentation, but they all operateto regenerate NAD+ so that the NAD-requiring reaction of glycolysiscan continue (see reaction 6 in Figure 9.5). Of course, ifa necessary reactant such as NAD+ is not present, the reactionwill not take place. How do fermentation reactions regenerateNAD+ and permit ATP formation to continue?9.4 | HOW IS ENERGY HARVESTED FROM GLUCOSE IN THE ABSENCE OF OXYGEN? 181Prokaryotic organisms often live in O2-deficient environmentsand are known to use many different fermentation pathways.But the two best understood fermentation pathways arefound in a wide variety of organisms including eukaryotes.These two short pathways are lactic acid fermentation, whoseend product is lactic acid (lactate); and alcoholic fermentation,whose end product is ethyl alcohol (ethanol).In lactic acid fermentation, pyruvate serves as the electron acceptorand lactate is the product (Figure 9.11). This process takesplace in many microorganisms and complex organisms, includinghigher plants and vertebrates. Anotable example of lactic acidfermentation occurs in vertebrate muscle tissue. Usually, vertebratesget their energy for muscle contraction aerobically, withthe circulatory system supplying O2 to muscles. In small vertebrates,this is almost always adequate: for example, birds canfly long distances without resting. But in larger vertebrates suchas humans, the circulatory system is not up to the task of deliveringenough O2 when the need is great, such as during high activity.At this point, the muscle cells break down glycogen (astored polysaccharide) and undergo lactic acid fermentation.Lactic acid buildup becomes a problem after prolonged periodsbecause the acid ionizes, forming H+ and lowering thepH of the cell. This affects cellular activities and causes musclecramps, resulting in muscle pain, which abates upon resting.Lactate dehydrogenase, the enzyme that catalyzes the fermentationreaction, works in both directions. That is, it can catalyzethe oxidation of lactate as well as the reduction of pyruvate.When lactate levels are decreased, muscle activity can resume.Alcoholic fermentation takes place in certain yeasts (eukaryoticmicrobes) and some plant cells under anaerobic conditions.This process requires two enzymes, pyruvate dehydrogenaseand alcohol dehydrogenase, which metabolize pyruvate toethanol (Figure 9.12). As with lactic acid fermentation, the reactionsare essentially reversible. For thousands of years, humanshave used anaerobic fermentation by yeast cells to producealcoholic beverages. The cells use sugars from plantsources (glucose from grapes or maltose from barley) to producethe end product, ethanol, in wine and beer.By recycling NAD+, fermentation allows glycolysis to continue,thus producing small amounts of ATP through substratelevelphosphorylation. The net yield of two ATPs per glucose182 CHAPTER 9 | PATHWAYS THAT HARVEST CHEMICAL ENERGYLactatedehydrogenasereactionCCOO–CH3H OHGLYCOLYSISFERMENTATION2 Lactic acid(lactate)2 PyruvateC OCOO–CH32 NAD+2 ATP 222 +2 Pi2 NAD+Glucose(C6H12O6 )Summary of reactants and products:C6H12O6 + 2 ADP + 2 Pi 2 lactic acid + 2 ATPNADHNADHADPNADHC OCOO–CH3CHOCH3CH2OHCH3GLYCOLYSISFERMENTATION2 Pyruvate2 NAD+2 ATP 222 +2 Pi2 NAD+Glucose(C6H12O6)2 Ethanol2 CO22 AcetaldehydePyruvatedehydrogenasereactionAlcoholdehydrogenasereactionSummary of reactants and products:C6H12O6 + 2 ADP + 2 Pi 2 ethanol + 2 CO2 + 2 ATPADPNADH9.11 Lactic Acid Fermentation Glycolysis produces pyruvate, ATP,and NADH from glucose. Lactic acid fermentation uses NADH as areducing agent to reduce pyruvate to lactic acid (lactate), thus regeneratingNAD+ to keep glycolysis operating.9.12 Alcoholic Fermentation In alcoholic fermentation, pyruvate fromglycolysis is converted into acetaldehyde, and CO2 is released. NADHfrom glycolysis is used to reduce acetaldehyde to ethanol, thus regeneratingNAD+ to keep glycolysis operating.molecule is much lower than the energy yield from cellular respiration.For this reason, most organisms existing in anaerobicenvironments are small microbes that grow relatively slowly.Cellular respiration yields much more energythan fermentationThe total net energy yield from glycolysis plus fermentation istwo molecules of ATP per molecule of glucose oxidized. Themaximum yield of ATP that can be harvested from a moleculeof glucose through glycolysis followed by cellular respirationis much greater—about 32 molecules of ATP (Figure 9.13). (ReviewFigures 9.5, 9.7, and 9.9 to see where all the ATP moleculescome from.)Why do the metabolic pathways that operate in aerobic environmentsproduce so much more ATP? Glycolysis and fermentationonly partially oxidize glucose, as does fermentation.Much more energy remains in the end products of fermentation(lactic acid and ethanol) than in CO2, the end product of cellularrespiration. In cellular respiration, carriers (mostly NAD+)are reduced in pyruvate oxidation and the citric acid cycle. Thenthe reduced carriers are oxidized by the respiratory chain, withthe accompanying production of ATP by chemiosmosis (2.5 ATPfor each NADH and 1.5 ATP for each FADH2). In an aerobic environment,a cell or organism capable of aerobic metabolismwill have the advantage over one that is limited to fermentation,in terms of its ability to harvest chemical energy. Two keyevents in the evolution of multicellular organisms were the risein atmospheric O2 levels (see Chapter 1) and the developmentof metabolic pathways to utilize that O2.The yield of ATP is reduced by the impermeabilityof some mitochondria to NADHThe total gross yield of ATP from the oxidation of one moleculeof glucose to CO2 is 32. However, in some animal cells the innermitochondrial membrane is impermeable to NADH, and a“toll” of one ATP must be paid for each NADH molecule thatis produced in glycolysis and must be “shuttled” into the mitochondrialmatrix. So in these animals, the net yield of ATP is 30.NADH shuttle systems transfer the electrons captured by glycolysisonto substrates that are capable of movement across themitochondrial membranes. In muscle and liver tissues, an importantshuttle involves glycerol 3-phosphate. In the cytosol,NADH (from glycolysis) + dihydroxyacetone phosphate(DHAP) →NAD+ + glycerol 3-phosphateGlycerol 3-phosphate crosses both mitochondrial membranes.In the mitochondrial matrix,FAD + glycerol 3-phosphate →FADH2 + DHAPDHAP is able to move back to the cytosol, where it is availableto repeat the process. Note that the reducing electrons are transferredfrom NADH outside the mitochondrion to FADH2 insidethe mitochondrion. As you know from Figures 9.8 and 9.9, theenergy yield in terms of ATP from FADH2 is lower than thatfrom NADH. This lowers the overall energy yield.9.4 | HOW IS ENERGY HARVESTED FROM GLUCOSE IN THE ABSENCE OF OXYGEN? 183282 FADH24 CO226 NADHGLYCOLYSIS2 NADH 22 CO2 2 NADHELECTRON TRANSPORT/ATP SYNTHESISCITRICACIDCYCLE2 acetyl groups as acetyl CoA(2 carbons)Pyruvate(3 carbons)Glucose(6 carbons)PYRUVATE OXIDATION2 Lactate(3 carbons)or2 Ethanol(2 carbons)+ 2 CO2FERMENTATION6 O2 6 H2OSummary of reactants and products:C6H12O6 + 6 O2 6 CO2 + 6 H2O + 32Summary of reactants and products:C6H12O6 2 lactate (or 2 ethanol + 2 CO2) + 2GLYCOLYSIS AND FERMENTATIONGLYCOLYSIS AND CELLULAR RESPIRATIONATPATPATPATPATP9.13 Cellular Respiration Yields More Energy Than FermentationElectron carriers are reduced in pyruvate oxidation and the citric acidcycle, then oxidized by the respiratory chain. These reactions produceATP via chemiosmosis.GO TO Web Activity 9.5 • Energy LevelsyourBioPortal.com9.4 RECAPIn the absence of O2, fermentation pathways useNADH formed by glycolysis to reduce pyruvate andregenerate NAD+. The energy yield of fermentation islow because glucose is only partially oxidized. WhenO2 is present, the electron carriers of cellular respirationallow for the full oxidation of glucose, so the energyyield from glucose is much higher.• Why is replenishing NAD+ crucial to cellular metabolism?See pp. 182–183• What is the total energy yield from glucose in humancells in the presence versus the absence of O2?See p. 183 and Figure 9.13Now that you’ve seen how cells harvest energy, let’s see howthat energy moves through other metabolic pathways in the cell.How Are Metabolic Pathways 9.5 Interrelated and Regulated?Glycolysis and the pathways of cellular respirationdo not operate in isolation. Rather, there isan interchange of molecules into and out of thesepathways, to and from the metabolic pathwaysfor the synthesis and breakdown of amino acids,nucleotides, fatty acids, and other building blocksof life. Carbon skeletons can enter the catabolicpathways and be broken down to release their energy,or they can enter anabolic pathways to beused in the formation of the macromolecules thatare the major constituents of the cell. These relationshipsare summarized in Figure 9.14. In thissection we will explore how pathways are interrelatedby the sharing of intermediate substances,and we will see how pathways are regulated bythe inhibitors of key enzymes.Catabolism and anabolism are linkedAhamburger or veggie burger on a bun containsthree major sources of carbon skeletons: carbohydrates,mostly in the form of starch (a polysaccharide);lipids, mostly as triglycerides (three fattyacids attached to glycerol); and proteins (polymersof amino acids). Look at Figure 9.14 to seehow each of these three types of macromoleculescan be hydrolyzed and used in catabolism oranabolism.CATABOLIC INTERCONVERSIONS Polysaccharides, lipids, and proteinscan all be broken down to provide energy:• Polysaccharides are hydrolyzed to glucose. Glucose thenpasses through glycolysis and cellular respiration, where itsenergy is captured in ATP.• Lipids are broken down into their constituents, glycerol andfatty acids. Glycerol is converted into dihydroxyacetonephosphate (DHAP), an intermediate in glycolysis. Fattyacids are highly reduced molecules that are converted toacetyl CoA inside the mitochondrion by a series of oxidationenzymes, in a process known as β-oxidation. For example,the β-oxidation of a C16 fatty acid occurs in several steps:C16 fatty acid + CoA→C16 fatty acyl CoAC16 fatty acyl CoA + CoA→C14 fatty acyl CoA + acetyl CoArepeat 6 times →8 acetyl CoAThe acetyl CoA can then enter the citric acid cycle and becatabolized to CO2.184 CHAPTER 9 | PATHWAYS THAT HARVEST CHEMICAL ENERGYELECTRON TRANSPORT/ATP SYNTHESISCITRICACIDCYCLEGLYCOLYSISPyruvatePYRUVATEOXIDATIONPurines(nucleic acids)Pyrimidines(nucleic acids)Fatty acidsLipids(triglycerides)Someamino acidsPolysaccharides(starch)GlycerolGlucoseAcetyl CoASomeamino acidsProteinsSomeamino acids9.14 Relationships among the Major Metabolic Pathways of theCell Note the central positions of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle inthis network of metabolic pathways. Also note that many of the pathwayscan operate essentially in reverse.• Proteins are hydrolyzed to their amino acid building blocks.The 20 different amino acids feed into glycolysis or the citricacid cycle at different points. For example, the aminoacid glutamate is converted into α-ketoglutarate, an intermediatein the citric acid cycle.ANABOLIC INTERCONVERSIONS Many catabolic pathways can operateessentially in reverse, with some modifications. Glycolyticand citric acid cycle intermediates, instead of being oxidized toform CO2, can be reduced and used to form glucose in a processcalled gluconeogenesis (which means “new formation of glucose”).Likewise, acetyl CoA can be used to form fatty acids. Themost common fatty acids have even numbers of carbons: 14, 16,or 18. These are formed by the addition of two-carbon acetylCoA “units” one at a time until the appropriate chain length isreached. Acetyl CoA is also a building block for various pigments,plant growth substances, rubber, steroid hormones, andother molecules.Some intermediates in the citric acid cycle are reactants inpathways that synthesize important components of nucleicacids. For example, α-ketoglutarate is a starting point forpurines, and oxaloacetate for pyrimidines. In addition, α-ketoglutarateis a starting point for the synthesis of chlorophyll (usedin photosynthesis; see Chapter 10) and the amino acid glutamate(used in protein synthesis).Catabolism and anabolism are integratedA carbon atom from a protein in your burger can end up inDNA, fat, or CO2, among other fates. How does the organism“decide” which metabolic pathways to follow, in which cells?With all of the possible interconversions, you might expect thatcellular concentrations of various biochemical molecules wouldvary widely. Remarkably, the levels of these substances in whatis called the metabolic pool—the sum total of all the biochemicalmolecules in a cell—are quite constant. Organisms regulatethe enzymes of catabolism and anabolism in various cells in orderto maintain a balance. This metabolic homeostasis gets upsetonly in unusual circumstances. Let’s look one such unusualcircumstance: undernutrition.Glucose is an excellent source of energy, but lipids and proteinscan also be broken down and their constituents used asenergy sources. Any one or all three of these types of moleculescould be used to provide the energy your body needs. But normallythese substances are not equally available for energy metabolismand ATP formation. Proteins, for example, have essentialroles as enzymes and as structural elements, providing supportand movement; they are not stored for energy, and usingthem for energy might deprive the body of other vital functions.Fats (trigylcerides) do not have catalytic roles. Because theyare nonpolar, fats do not bind water, and they are therefore lessdense than polysaccharides in aqueous environments. In addition,fats are more reduced than carbohydrates (have moreC—H bonds and fewer C—OH bonds) and thus have more energystored in their bonds (see Figure 9.2). So it is not surprisingthat fats are the preferred energy store in many organisms.The human body stores fats and carbohydrates; fats are storedin adipose tissue, and glucose is stored as the polysaccharideglycogen in muscles and the liver. A typical person has aboutone day’s worth of food energy stored as glycogen (a polysaccharide)and over a month’s food energy stored as fats.What happens if a person does not eat enough to producesufficient ATP and NADH for anabolism and biological activities?This situation can be deliberate (to lose weight), but for toomany people, it is forced upon them because not enough foodis available, resulting in undernutrition and starvation. Initially,homeostasis can be maintained. The first energy stores to beused are the glycogen stores in muscle and liver cells. Thesestores do not last long, and next come the fats.In cells that have access to fatty acids, their breakdown producesacetyl CoA for cellular respiration. However, a problemremains: because fatty acids cannot cross from the blood to thebrain, the brain can use only glucose as its energy source. Withglycogen already depleted, the body must convert somethingelse to make glucose for the brain. This is accomplished by thebreakdown of proteins and the conversion of their amino acidsto glucose by gluconeogenesis. Without sufficient food intake,proteins and fats are used up. After several weeks of starvation,fat stores become depleted, and the only energy source left isprotein. At this point, essential structural proteins, enzymes,and antibodies get broken down. The loss of such proteins canlead to severe illness and eventual death.Metabolic pathways are regulated systemsWe have described the relationships between metabolic pathwaysand noted that these pathways work together to providehomeostasis in the cell and organism. But how does the cellregulate the interconversions between pathways to maintainconstant metabolic pools? This is a problem of systems biology,which seeks to understand how biochemical pathways interact(see Figure 8.15). It is a bit like trying to predict traffic patternsin a city: if an accident blocks traffic on a major road, driverstake alternate routes, where the traffic volume consequentlychanges.Consider what happens to the starch in your burger bun. Inthe digestive system, starch is hydrolyzed to glucose, which entersthe blood for distribution to the rest of the body. But beforethe glucose is distributed, a regulatory check must be made: ifthere is already enough glucose in the blood to supply thebody’s needs, the excess glucose is converted into glycogen andAlpha-ketoglutarateis an intermediate inthe citric acid cycle.Glutamate is anamino acid.COO–CH2CCH2OCOO–COO–CH2H CCH2NH3+COO–+ NH4+NAD+ NADH9.5 | HOW ARE METABOLIC PATHWAYS INTERRELATED AND REGULATED? 185stored in the liver. If not enough glucose is supplied by food,glycogen is broken down, or other molecules are used tomake glucose by gluconeogenesis.The end result is that the level of glucose in the blood isremarkably constant. How does the body accomplish this?Glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and the respiratory chainare subject to allosteric regulation (see Section 8.5) of the enzymesinvolved. An example of allosteric regulation is feedbackinhibition, illustrated in Figure 8.19. In a metabolicpathway, a high concentration of the final product can inhibitthe action of an enzyme that catalyzes an earlier reaction.On the other hand, an excess of the product of one pathwaycan speed up reactions in another pathway, divertingraw materials away from synthesis of the first product (Figure9.15). These negative and positive feedback mechanismsare used at many points in the energy-harvesting pathways,and are summarized in Figure 9.16.• The main control point in glycolysis is the enzyme phosphofructokinase(reaction 3 in Figure 9.5). This enzyme isallosterically inhibited by ATP or citrate, and activatedby ADP or AMP. Under anaerobic conditions, fermentationyields a relatively small amount of ATP, and phosphofructokinaseoperates at a high rate. However whenconditions are aerobic, respiration makes 16 times moreATP than fermentation does, and the abundant ATP allostericallyinhibits phosphofructokinase. Consequently,the conversion of fructose 6-phosphate to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate declines, and so does the rate of glucoseutilization.• The main control point in the citric acid cycle is the enzymeisocitrate dehydrogenase, which converts isocitrateto α-ketoglutarate (reaction 3 in Figure 9.7). NADH andATP are feedback inhibitors of this reaction, while ADP andNAD+ are activators. If too much ATP or NADH accumulates,the conversion of isocitrate is slowed, and the citricacid cycle shuts down. Ashutdown of the citric acid cyclewould cause large amounts of isocitrate and citrate to accumulateif the production of citrate were not also slowed.But, as mentioned above, an excess of citrate acts as a feedbackinhibitor of phosphofructokinase. Thus, if the citricacid cycle has been slowed or shut down because of abun-186 CHAPTER 9 | PATHWAYS THAT HARVEST CHEMICAL ENERGYCompound G providespositive feedback to theenzyme catalyzing thestep from D to E.Compound G inhibits theenzyme catalyzing theconversion of C to F,blocking that reaction andultimately its own synthesis.ABCD FGPositivefeedbackNegativefeedbackE9.15 Regulation by Negative and Positive FeedbackAllosteric feedback regulation plays an important role in metabolicpathways. The accumulation of some products can shut downtheir synthesis, or can stimulate other pathways that require thesame raw materials.Citrate inhibitsphosphofructokinase.Citrateactivates fattyacid synthase.ADP or NAD+activatethis enzyme.ATP or NADHinhibitthis enzyme.ADP or AMPactivatesthis enzyme.ATP inhibitsthis enzyme.ATP and NADHinhibit thisenzyme. orATPNADHorATPNADHNAD+orADPELECTRON TRANSPORT/ATP SYNTHESISCITRICACIDCYCLEGLYCOLYSISPYRUVATE OXIDATIONGlucoseFructose 6-phosphateFructose 1,6-bisphosphateorAMPADPATPα-ketoglutarateIsocitrateCitrateAcetylCoAFattyacidsPhosphofructokinaseIsocitratedehydrogenaseCitratesynthaseFattyacidsynthasePyruvate9.16 Allosteric Regulation of Glycolysis and the Citric Acid CycleAllosteric regulation controls glycolysis and the citric acid cycle at crucialearly steps, increasing their efficiency and preventing the excessivebuildup of intermediates.GO TO Web Activity 9.6 • Regulation of Energy PathwaysyourBioPortal.comCHAPTER SUMMARY 1879.1 How Does Glucose Oxidation Release Chemical Energy?•As a material is oxidized, the electrons it loses are transferred toanother material, which is thereby reduced. Such redox reactionstransfer large amounts of energy. Review Figure 9.2, WEBACTIVITIES 9.1 and 9.2•The coenzyme NAD+ is a key electron carrier in biological redoxreactions. It exists in two forms, one oxidized (NAD+) and theother reduced (NADH).•Glycolysis operates in the presence or absence of O2. Underaerobic conditions, cellular respiration continues the processof breaking down glucose. Under anaerobic conditions, fermentationoccurs. Review Figure 9.4•The pathways of cellular respiration after glycolysis are pyruvateoxidation, the citric acid cycle, and the electron transport/ATPsynthesis.9.2 What Are the Aerobic Pathways of Glucose Metabolism?•Glycolysis consists of 10 enzyme-catalyzed reactions that occurin the cell cytoplasm. Two pyruvate molecules are produced foreach partially oxidized molecule of glucose, providing the startingmaterial for both cellular respiration and fermentation.Review Figure 9.5•The first five reactions of glycolysis require an investment ofenergy; the last five produce energy. The net gain is two moleculesof ATP. Review Figure 9.6•The enzyme-catalyzed transfer of phosphate groups to ADP byenzymes other than ATPase is called substrate-level phosphorylationand produces ATP.•Pyruvate oxidation follows glycolysis and links glycolysis to thecitric acid cycle. This pathway converts pyruvate into acetyl CoA.•Acetyl CoA is the starting point of the citric acid cycle. It reactswith oxaloacetate to produce citrate. A series of eight enzymecatalyzedreactions oxidize citrate and regenerate oxaloacetate,continuing the cycle. Review Figure 9.7, WEB ACTIVITY 9.39.3 How Does Oxidative Phosphorylation Form ATP?•Oxidation of electron carriers in the presence of O2 releasesenergy that can be used to form ATP in a process called oxidativephosphorylation.•The NADH and FADH2 produced in glycolysis, pyruvate oxidation,and the citric acid cycle are oxidized by the respiratorychain, regenerating NAD+ and FAD. Oxygen (O2) is the finalacceptor of electrons and protons, forming water (H2O). ReviewFigure 9.8, WEB ACTIVITY 9.4•The respiratory chain not only transports electrons, but alsopumps protons across the inner mitochondrial membrane, creatingthe proton-motive force.•Protons driven by the proton-motive force can return to themitochondrial matrix via ATP synthase, a molecular motor thatcouples this movement of protons to the synthesis of ATP. Thisprocess is called chemiosmosis. Review Figure 9.9, ANIMATEDTUTORIALS 9.1 and 9.29.4 How Is Energy Harvested from Glucose in theAbsence of Oxygen?•In the absence of O2, glycolysis is followed by fermentation.Together, these pathways partially oxidize pyruvate and generateend products such as lactic acid or ethanol. In the process,NAD+ is regenerated from NADH so that glycolysis can continue,thus generating a small amount of ATP. Review Figures 9.11and 9. 12•For each molecule of glucose used, fermentation yields 2 moleculesof ATP. In contrast, glycolysis operating with pyruvate oxidation,the citric acid cycle, and the respiratory chain/ATP synthaseyields up to 32 molecules of ATP per molecule of glucose.Review Figure 9.13, WEB ACTIVITY 9.59.5 How Are Metabolic Pathways Interrelated andRegulated?•The catabolic pathways for the breakdown of carbohydrates,fats, and proteins feed into the energy-harvesting metabolicpathways. Review Figure 9.14•Anabolic pathways use intermediate components of the energy-harvesting pathways to synthesize fats, amino acids, andother essential building blocks.•The formation of glucose from intermediates of glycolysis andthe citric acid cycle is called gluconeogenesis.•The rates of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle are controlled byallosteric regulation and by the diversion of excess acetyl CoAinto fatty acid synthesis. Key regulated enzymes include phosphofructokinase,citrate synthase, isocitrate dehydrogenase,and fatty acid synthase. See Figure 9.16, WEB ACTIVITY 9.6CHAPTER SUMMARYdant ATP (and not because of a lack ofoxygen), glycolysis is slowed as well. Bothprocesses resume when the ATP level fallsand they are needed again. Allosteric regulationkeeps these processes in balance.• Another control point involves acetyl CoA.If the level of ATP is high and the citricacid cycle shuts down, the accumulationof citrate activates fatty acid synthase, divertingacetyl CoA to the synthesis offatty acids for storage. That is one reasonwhy people who eat too much accumulatefat. These fatty acids may be metabolizedlater to produce more acetyl CoA.9.5 RECAPGlucose can be made from intermediates in glycolysis and the citricacid cycle by a process called gluconeogenesis. The metabolic pathwaysfor the production and breakdown of lipids and amino acids aretied to those of glucose metabolism. Reaction products regulate keyenzymes in the various pathways.• Give examples of a catabolic interconversion of a lipid and of ananabolic interconversion of a protein. See pp. 184–185 and Figure 9.14• How does phosphofructokinase serve as a control point for glycolysis?See p. 186 and Figure 9.16• Describe what would happen if there was no allosteric mechanism formodulating the level of acetyl CoA.9.1 How Does Glucose Oxidation Release Chemical Energy?•As a material is oxidized, the electrons it loses are transferred toanother material, which is thereby reduced. Such redox reactionstransfer large amounts of energy. Review Figure 9.2, WEBACTIVITIES 9.1 and 9.2•The coenzyme NAD+ is a key electron carrier in biological redoxreactions. It exists in two forms, one oxidized (NAD+) and theother reduced (NADH).•Glycolysis operates in the presence or absence of O2. Underaerobic conditions, cellular respiration continues the processof breaking down glucose. Under anaerobic conditions, fermentationoccurs. Review Figure 9.4•The pathways of cellular respiration after glycolysis are pyruvateoxidation, the citric acid cycle, and the electron transport/ATPsynthesis.9.2 What Are the Aerobic Pathways of Glucose Metabolism?•Glycolysis consists of 10 enzyme-catalyzed reactions that occurin the cell cytoplasm. Two pyruvate molecules are produced foreach partially oxidized molecule of glucose, providing the startingmaterial for both cellular respiration and fermentation.Review Figure 9.5•The first five reactions of glycolysis require an investment ofenergy; the last five produce energy. The net gain is two moleculesof ATP. Review Figure 9.6•The enzyme-catalyzed transfer of phosphate groups to ADP byenzymes other than ATPase is called substrate-level phosphorylationand produces ATP.•Pyruvate oxidation follows glycolysis and links glycolysis to thecitric acid cycle. This pathway converts pyruvate into acetyl CoA.•Acetyl CoA is the starting point of the citric acid cycle. It reactswith oxaloacetate to produce citrate. A series of eight enzymecatalyzedreactions oxidize citrate and regenerate oxaloacetate,continuing the cycle. Review Figure 9.7, WEB ACTIVITY 9.39.3 How Does Oxidative Phosphorylation Form ATP?•Oxidation of electron carriers in the presence of O2 releasesenergy that can be used to form ATP in a process called oxidativephosphorylation.•The NADH and FADH2 produced in glycolysis, pyruvate oxidation,and the citric acid cycle are oxidized by the respiratorychain, regenerating NAD+ and FAD. Oxygen (O2) is the finalacceptor of electrons and protons, forming water (H2O). ReviewFigure 9.8, WEB ACTIVITY 9.4•The respiratory chain not only transports electrons, but alsopumps protons across the inner mitochondrial membrane, creatingthe proton-motive force.•Protons driven by the proton-motive force can return to themitochondrial matrix via ATP synthase, a molecular motor thatcouples this movement of protons to the synthesis of ATP. Thisprocess is called chemiosmosis. Review Figure 9.9, ANIMATEDTUTORIALS 9.1 and 9.29.4 How Is Energy Harvested from Glucose in theAbsence of Oxygen?•In the absence of O2, glycolysis is followed by fermentation.Together, these pathways partially oxidize pyruvate and generateend products such as lactic acid or ethanol. In the process,NAD+ is regenerated from NADH so that glycolysis can continue,thus generating a small amount of ATP. Review Figures 9.11and 9. 12•For each molecule of glucose used, fermentation yields 2 moleculesof ATP. In contrast, glycolysis operating with pyruvate oxidation,the citric acid cycle, and the respiratory chain/ATP synthaseyields up to 32 molecules of ATP per molecule of glucose.Review Figure 9.13, WEB ACTIVITY 9.59.5 How Are Metabolic Pathways Interrelated andRegulated?•The catabolic pathways for the breakdown of carbohydrates,fats, and proteins feed into the energy-harvesting metabolicpathways. Review Figure 9.14•Anabolic pathways use intermediate components of the energy-harvesting pathways to synthesize fats, amino acids, andother essential building blocks.•The formation of glucose from intermediates of glycolysis andthe citric acid cycle is called gluconeogenesis.•The rates of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle are controlled byallosteric regulation and by the diversion of excess acetyl CoAinto fatty acid synthesis. Key regulated enzymes include phosphofructokinase,citrate synthase, isocitrate dehydrogenase,and fatty acid synthase. See Figure 9.16, WEB ACTIVITY 9.6