As a rule, however, there was no ostensible cause; but peoplein good health were all of a sudden attacked by violentheats in the head, and redness and inflammation in theeyes, the inward parts, such as the throat or tongue, becomingbloody and emitting an unnatural and fetid breath. The Athenian historian Thucydides wrote these wordsin 430 BCE. He was describing a rapidly spreading infectiousdisease, or plague, that was sweeping thecity of Athens in ancient Greece, and would ultimately killabout one-third of its inhabitants.One year earlier, in 431 BCE, the Spartans had surroundedAthens. Sparta was a rival state with a highlydisciplined army, while Athens was near a port and hada powerful navy. The Athenian leader Pericles decided totake advantage of his naval supremacy. He instructed hissoldiers to abandon the countryside to the Spartans, relyingon the navy to keep the enemies out of the city and tokeep the Athenians supplied with food. People living inthe countryside poured into Athens.As Athens became more crowded, declining sanitationand close living conditions resulted in the city becomingan incubator for infectious diseases. In his famous Historyof the Peloponnesian War, Thucydides speculated that theplague came to Athens from Africa. His precise clinical descriptionof the disease has provoked great debateamong medical historians regarding its nature. In 1994, aburial ground was found near Athens that apparentlycontained the remains of several dozen people who diedin the plague. PCR (polymerase chain reaction) analyses ofdental pulp from the skeletons revealed the presence ofDNA sequences from the bacterium that causes typhoidfever, and this has been proposed as the cause of theplague. Other scientists disagree, using arguments basedon a comparison of Thucydides’ account with the clinicaldescription of typhoid fever today.Whatever the cause, another passage from Thucydides(who was one of the few lucky survivors of the plague)bears noting:Yet it was with those who had recoveredfrom the disease that the sick and thedying found most compassion. Theseknew what it was from experience andnow had no fear for themselves; for thesame man was never attacked twice,never at least fatally.Two questions arise from thispassage: First, how could a personsurvive the disease? And second,how could the survivors be resistantto further infection?The plague of Athens42The Peloponnesian War Theblockade of Sparta and its Peloponnesianallies on Athens made the lattercrowded and vulnerable to thespread of an infectious disease.What Are the Major Defense Systems 42.1 of Animals?Animals have a number of ways of defending themselvesagainst pathogens—harmful organisms and viruses that cancause disease. These defense systems are based on the distinctionbetween self—the animal’s own molecules—and nonself, orforeign, molecules. The defensive response involves threephases:• Recognition phase. The organism must be able to discriminatebetween self and nonself.• Activation phase. The recognition event leads to a mobilizationof cells and molecules to fight the invader.• Effector phase. The mobilized cells and molecules destroythe invader.There are two general types of defense mechanisms:• Nonspecific defenses, or innate defenses, provide the firstline of defense against pathogens. They typically act veryrapidly, and include barriers such as the skin, moleculesthat are toxic to invaders, and phagocytic cells (phagocytes,such as macrophages) that ingest invaders. (Recallfrom Section 6.5 that phagocytosis is a form of endocytosis,in which a cell engulfs a large particle or cell.) This systemrecognizes broad classes of organisms or molecules andgives a quick response, within minutes or hours. Most animalshave nonspecific defenses.• Specific defenses are adaptive mechanisms aimed at specificpathogens. For example, a specific defense system canmake an antibody protein that will recognize, bind to, andaid in the destruction of a certain virus if that virus ever entersthe bloodstream. These systems recognize specific configurationsof atoms in a molecule and are typically slow todevelop and long-lasting. Specific defense mechanisms arefound in vertebrate animals.Mammals have both kinds of defense mechanism and arethe focus of this chapter. In mammals and other vertebrates, thenonspecific and specific mechanisms operate together as a coordinateddefense system. The nonspecific defenses are thebody’s first line of defense because the specific defenses oftenrequire days or even weeks to become effective.IN THIS CHAPTER we first describe how the innate,nonspecific immune system prevents most pathogens fromentering the body and deals with those that do. Then welook at how the specific, adaptive immune system targetsinvaders such as the typhoid bacterium, which may havekilled the ancient Athenians. We see how the reshuffling ofgenetic material helps animals fight off the staggering diversityof potential invaders, and finally, we see what happenswhen this complex and crucial system malfunctions.CHAPTER OUTLINE42.1 What Are the Major Defense Systems of Animals?42.2 What Are the Characteristics of the NonspecificDefenses?42.3 How Does Specific Immunity Develop?42.4 What Is the Humoral Immune Response?42.5 What Is the Cellular Immune Response?42.6 How Do Animals Make So Many DifferentAntibodies?42.7 What Happens When the Immune SystemMalfunctions?Thucydides TheAthenian general wrotea detailed history of thePeloponnesian war andthe spread of an infectiousdisease that killed1 in 3 Athenians. Hesurvived the disease,presumablybecause of hisimmune system.Almost 2,500 years after Thucydides recorded his observations,we have some answers to these questions.These answers come from studies of the mammalian immunesystem, which recognizes and fights off pathogens.When Thucydides caught the disease, specialized whiteblood cells called T cells recognized proteins of the infectingagent on the surfaces of his body’s cells. This initiateda series of events that resulted in the killing of infectedcells and destruction of the disease agent byantibodies, specific proteins made by a different set ofwhite blood cells called B cells. Some descendants of theT and B cells persisted in his body as “memory cells,”which defended him when he was exposed to the diseaselater. The operation of the mammalian immunesystem and how its components defend the body are thefocus of this chapter.T cells maturein the thymus.The spleenfilters circulatingblood.In the lymph nodes, lymph isfiltered and white blood cellsinspect it for pathogens.B cells mature inthe bone marrow.Lymph ductsconduct lymph.ThoracicductBlood and lymph tissues play important roles in defenseThe components of the mammalian defense system are dispersedthroughout the body and interact with almost all of its other tissuesand organs. The lymphoid tissues, which include the thymus,bone marrow, spleen, and lymph nodes, are essential parts of thedefense system (Figure 42.1). The blood and lymph are complexsystems with nondefensive functions that are discussed inChapter 50. They each have central roles in defense as well.The blood and lymph both consist of liquids in which cellsare suspended:• Blood plasma is a yellowish solution containing ions, smallmolecular solutes, and soluble proteins. Suspended in theplasma are red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets(cell fragments essential to blood clotting). While red bloodcells are normally confined to the closed circulatory system(the heart, arteries, capillaries, and veins), white blood cellsand platelets are also found in the lymph.• Lymph is a fluid derived from the blood and other tissuesthat accumulates in intercellular spaces throughout thebody. From these spaces, the lymph moves slowly into thevessels of the lymphatic system. Tiny lymph capillariesconduct this fluid to larger ducts that eventually join together,forming one large vessel, the thoracic duct, whichjoins a major vein (the left subclavian vein) near the heart.By this system of vessels, the lymph is eventually returnedto the blood and the circulatory system.At many sites along the lymph vessels are small, roundish structurescalled lymph nodes, which contain a type of white bloodcell called a lymphocyte. As lymph passes through a lymphnode, the lymphocytes encounter foreign cells and moleculesthat have entered the body, and if they are recognized, an immuneresponse is initiated.White blood cells play many defensive rolesOne milliliter of human blood typically contains about 5 billionred blood cells and 7 million of the larger white blood cells. Allof these cells originate from multipotent stem cells (constantlydividing undifferentiated cells that can form several differentcell types) in the bone marrow. Examine Figure 42.2 and you willsee that there are two major families of white blood cells (alsocalled leukocytes): phagocytes and lymphocytes. Lymphocytes,which include B cells and T cells, are smaller than phagocytesand are not phagocytic. Each family contains different types ofcells with specialized functions. Natural killer cells and somekinds of phagocytes are also referred to collectively as granulocytesbecause they contain numerous granules (vesicles containingdefensive enzymes). Defensive proteins and signals play fundamentalroles in the interactions and functioning of these cells.Immune system proteins bind pathogensor signal other cellsSimilar to the actions of hormones, which we discuss in Chapter41, the cells that defend mammalian bodies work together, interactingwith one another and withthe cells of invading pathogens.These cell–cell interactions are accomplishedby a variety of key proteins,including receptors, other cellsurface proteins, and signaling molecules.Four of the major players arelisted here, and will be discussed inmore detail later in the chapter.42.1 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR DEFENSE SYSTEMS OF ANIMALS? 87542.1 The Human Lymphatic System A network of ductsand vessels collects lymph from body tissues and carries ittoward the heart, where it mixes with blood to be pumpedback to the tissues. Other lymphoid tissues, including the thymus,spleen, and bone marrow, are also essential to the body’sdefense system.GO TO Web Activity 42.1 • The Human Defense SystemyourBioPortal.com• Antibodies are proteins that bind specifically to certain substancesidentified by the immune system as nonself or alteredself (a major histocompatibility protein that has beenaltered by a pathogen). This binding can inactivate virusesand toxins, and it can act as tag on nonself cells, makingthem easier for the immune system cells to attack. Antibodiesare produced by B cells.• Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins are found intwo classes. MHC I proteins are found on the surfaces of mostcells in the mammalian body. MHC II proteins are found onmost immune system cells. MHC proteins are important selfidentifyinglabels and play a major role in coordinating interactionsbetween lymphocytes and macrophages.• T cell receptors are integral membrane proteins on the surfacesof T cells. They recognize and bind to nonself substancespresented with self MHC molecules on the surfacesof other cells.• Cytokines are soluble signaling proteins released by manycell types. They bind to cell surface receptors and alter thebehavior of their target cells. Various cytokines activate orinactivate B cells, macrophages, and T cells.42.1 RECAPAnimals have nonspecific and specific defensesagainst pathogens. Both kinds of mechanism arebased on the ability to differentiate self from nonself.Nonspecific defenses target a broad range of moleculesand organisms, while specific defenses targetspecific configurations of atoms on molecules.• List the differences between specific and nonspecificdefenses. See p. 874• What are the two classes of white blood cells, and howdo they function in vertebrate defense systems? Seep. 875 and Figure 42.2876 CHAPTER 42 | IMMUNOLOGY: ANIMAL DEFENSE SYSTEMSMultipotenthematopoieticcellMyeloidprogenitorcellBonemarrowLymphoidprogenitorcellTYPE OF CELL FUNCTIONRed blood cells Transport oxygen and carbon dioxide(erythrocytes)Platelets (cell fragments Initiate blood clottingwithout nuclei)White blood cells(leukocytes)Basophils Release histamine; may promote development of T cellsEosinophils Kill antibody-coated parasitesNeutrophils Stimulate inflammationMast cells Release histamine when damagedMonocytes Develop into macrophages and dendritic cellsMacrophages Engulf and digest microorganisms; activate T cellsDendritic cells Present antigens to T cellsB lymphocytes Differentiate to form antibody-producing cellsand memory cellsT lymphocytes Kill virus-infected cells; regulate activities of otherwhite blood cellsNatural killer cells Attack and lyse virus-infected or cancerous body cellsGRANULAR CELLSAGRANULAR CELLS42.2 Blood Cells Multipotent stem cellsin the bone marrow can differentiate intored blood cells, platelets, and the varioustypes of white blood cells.GO TO Animated Tutorial 42.1 • Cells of the Immune SystemyourBioPortal.comThe outcome of a disease—the life or death of the host—oftendepends on the success of both rapid, nonspecific responses andlong-lasting, specific responses to invading pathogens. We turnnow to the nonspecific defenses that protect vertebrates fromdisease.What Are the Characteristics of 42.2 the Nonspecific Defenses?Nonspecific defenses are general protection mechanisms thatattempt to stop pathogens from invading the body. As notedabove, they provide first line of defense, in both time and location.Essentially, they are “ready to go,” in contrast to specificimmunity, which takes time to develop after a pathogen or toxinhas been recognized as nonself. In mammals, nonspecific mechanismsinclude physical barriers as well as cellular and chemicaldefenses (Table 42.1).Barriers and local agents defend the bodyagainst invadersConsider a pathogenic bacterium that causes disease in internalorgans and that lands on human skin. The challenges facedby the bacterium just to reach its target are formidable. First,there is the physical barrier of the skin. Bacteria rarely penetrateintact skin; by the same token, broken skin increases the riskof infection. The saltiness and dryness of skin may not be hospitableto the growth of the invader. On the other hand, thereare some bacteria and fungi that normally live and sometimesreproduce in great numbers on our body surfaces without causingdisease. They are referred to as normal flora. These naturaloccupants of our bodies form a nonspecific defense because theycompete with pathogens for space and nutrients.Consider a pathogen that lands on the surface of the nose.The mucous membranes found at the inner surfaces of thenose (as well as the digestive, respiratory, and urogenital systems)contain the enzyme lysozyme, which attacks the cellwalls of many bacteria, causing them to lyse (burst open). Mucusin the nose traps airborne microorganisms, and most ofthose that get past this filter end up trapped in mucus deeperin the respiratory tract. Mucus and trapped pathogens are removedby the beating of cilia in the respiratory passageway,which continuously move a sheet of mucus and its trappeddebris up toward the nose and mouth where it can be expelledor swallowed. Sneezing is another way to remove microorganismsfrom the respiratory tract.42.2 | WHAT ARE THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE NONSPECIFIC DEFENSES? 877TABLE 42.1Human Nonspecific DefensesDEFENSIVE MECHANISM FUNCTIONSurface barriersSkin Prevents entry of pathogens and foreign substancesAcid secretions Inhibit bacterial growth on skinMucus Prevents entry of pathogens; produces defensins that kill pathogensMucous secretions Trap bacteria and other pathogens in digestive and respiratory tractsNasal hairs Filter bacteria in nasal passagesCilia Move mucus and trapped materials away from respiratory passagesGastric juice Concentrated HCl and proteases destroy pathogens in stomachAcid in vagina Limits growth of fungi and bacteria in female reproductive tractTears, saliva Lubricate and cleanse; contain lysozyme, which destroys bacteriaNonspecific cellular, chemical, and coordinated defensesNormal flora Compete with pathogens; may produce substances toxic to pathogensFever Body-wide response inhibits microbial multiplication and speeds body repair processesCoughing, sneezing Expels pathogens from upper respiratory passagesInflammatory response (involves leakage Limits spread of pathogens to neighboring tissues; concentrates defenses; digests pathogens andof blood plasma and phagocytes dead tissue cells; releases chemical mediators that attract phagocytes and lymphocytes to sitefrom vessels)Phagocytes (macrophages and Engulf and destroy pathogens that enter bodyneutrophils)Natural killer cells Attack and lyse virus-infected or cancerous body cellsAntimicrobial proteinsInterferons Released by virus-infected cells to protect healthy tissue from viral infection; mobilize specificdefensesComplement proteins Lyse microorganisms, enhance phagocytosis, and assist in inflammatory and antibody responsesFinally, the mucous membranes produce defensins, peptidesthat are 18–45 amino acids long and contain hydrophobic domains.They are toxic to a wide range of pathogens, includingbacteria, microbial eukaryotes, and enveloped viruses. Defensinsinsert themselves into the plasma membranes of these organismsand make the membranes permeable, thus killing the invaders.Defensins are also produced in phagocytes, where theykill pathogens trapped by phagocytosis. Plants also produce defensinsin response to pathogen exposure (see Chapter 39).Consider a bacterium that lands in the mouth. If it survivesthe lysozyme in saliva and enters the digestive tract (stomach,small intestine, and large intestine) it is met by other defenses.The gastric juice in the stomach is a deadly environment for manybacteria because of the hydrochloric acid and proteases that aresecreted into it. Bacteria cannot normally penetrate the lining ofthe small intestine, and some pathogens are killed by bile saltssecreted into this part of the digestive tract. Any bacteria that survivethese lines of defense (which include normal flora) and enterthe large intestine are removed quickly with the feces.All of these barriers and local agents are nonspecific defensesbecause they act on all invading pathogens in the same way.Most are properties of the tissue, called epithelial tissue, that coverssurfaces on and within organs. More complex nonspecificdefenses await any pathogens that manage to elude this first setof defenses.Other nonspecific defenses include specializedproteins and cellular processesPathogens that penetrate the body’s outer and inner surfacesencounter more complex nonspecific defenses. These includethe activation of defensive cells and the secretion of various defensiveproteins, such as complement and interferon proteins.COMPLEMENT PROTEINS Vertebrate blood contains more than20 different proteins that make up the antimicrobial complementsystem. This system can be activated by various mechanisms,including both nonspecific and specific defense responses.The proteins act in a characteristic sequence, orcascade, with each protein activating the next:• First, they attach to specific components on the surface of amicrobe or to an antibody that has already bound to the microbe’ssurface. In either case, binding helps phagocytesrecognize and destroy the microbe.• Then, they activate the inflammation response and attractphagocytes to the site of infection.• Finally, they lyse invading cells (such as bacteria).INTERFERONS When a cell is infected by a pathogen, it producessmall amounts of signaling proteins called interferons that increasethe resistance of neighboring cells to infection. Interferonsare a class of cytokines and have been found in many vertebrates.Various molecules, including double stranded (viral)RNA, induce the production of interferons. Thus interferons areparticularly important as a first line of nonspecific defenseagainst viruses. Interferons bind to receptors on the plasmamembranes of uninfected cells, stimulating a signaling pathwaythat inhibits viral reproduction if the cells are subsequentlyinfected. In addition, interferons stimulate the cells to hydrolyzebacterial or viral proteins to peptides, an initial step in specificimmunity (see Section 42.3).PHAGOCYTES Some phagocytes travel freely in the circulatoryand lymphatic systems; others can move out of blood vesselsand adhere to certain tissues. Pathogenic cells, viruses, or fragmentsof these invaders can be recognized by phagocytes, whichthen ingest them by phagocytosis. Defensins, nitric oxide, andreactive oxygen intermediates inside these phagocytes then killthe pathogens.NATURAL KILLER CELLS One class of lymphocytes, known asnatural killer cells, can distinguish virus-infected cells and sometumor cells from their normal counterparts and initiate theapoptosis of these target cells. In addition to this nonspecific action,natural killer cells interact with the specific defense mechanismsby lysing antibody-labeled target cells.Inflammation is a coordinated response to infectionor injuryWhen tissue is damaged because of infection or injury, the bodyresponds with inflammation. This response can happen almostanywhere in the body, internally as well as on the surface. Inflammationis an important phenomenon: it isolates the damagedarea to stop the spread of the damage; it recruits cells andmolecules to the damaged location to kill the invader; and itpromotes healing. The first responders to tissue damage aremast cells, which adhere to the skin and the linings of organs,and release numerous chemical signals including:• tumor necrosis factor, a cytokine protein that kills targetcells and activates immune cells.• prostaglandins, fatty acid derivatives that play roles in variousresponses including the widening of blood vessels.Prostaglandins interact with nerve endings and are partlyresponsible for the pain caused by inflammation.• histamine, an amino acid derivative that leads to itchy,watery eyes, and rashes seen with some types of allergicreactions.The redness and heat of inflammation result from the dilationand leakiness of blood vessels in the infected or injured area(Figure 42.3). Phagocytes enter the inflamed area where theyengulf the invaders and dead tissue cells. Phagocytes are responsiblefor most of the healing associated with inflammation.They produce several cytokines, which (among other functions)signal the brain to produce a fever. This rise in body temperatureaccelerates lymphocyte production and phagocytosis,thereby speeding the immune response. In some cases, pathogensare temperature-sensitive, and their growth is inhibited.The pain of inflammation results from increased pressure dueto swelling, the action of leaked enzymes on nerve endings, andthe action of prostaglandins, which increase the sensitivity ofthe nerve endings to pain.878 CHAPTER 42 | IMMUNOLOGY: ANIMAL DEFENSE SYSTEMSFollowing inflammation, pus may accumulate. Pus is a mixtureof leaked fluid and dead cells: bacteria, neutrophils (themost abundant white blood cells—see Figure 42.2), and damagedbody cells. Pus is a normal result of inflammation, and isgradually consumed and further digested by phagocytes calledmacrophages.Inflammation can cause medical problemsWhile inflammation is generally a good thing, sometimes theinflammatory response is inappropriately strong, resulting insome allergies, cases of autoimmunity, and sepsis. In these cases,the response causes more damage than was originally there. Wewill discuss allergy and autoimmune diseases in Section 42.7.In some cases of severe bacterial infection, the inflammation responsedoes not remain local. Instead, it extends throughout thebloodstream in a condition called sepsis. As in a local infectionor injury, blood vessels dilate, but they do so throughout thebody. The lowering of blood pressure that results is a medicalemergency and can be lethal.The symptoms of swelling, pain, and fever caused by excessiveinflammation can be bothersome to the point of incapacitation.Diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and chronicobstructive pulmonary disease, and accidents such as athleticinjuries result in tissue damage and an inflammatory response.In order to manage excessive inflammation, drugs have beendeveloped that act on the various cytokines and signal pathwaysto reduce inflammation and its symptoms. For example,the bark of the willow tree, Salix, has been known for millenniato contain a potent antidote to fever and swelling. In the nineteenthcentury the active ingredient, salicylic acid, was isolatedand a better version, acetylsalicylic acid, was made. This drug—also called aspirin—works by inhibiting an enzyme on the pathwayto the synthesis of prostaglandins. Other anti-inflammatorydrugs act on the prostaglandin pathway, on the actions oftumor necrosis factor, and on the actions of histamine.Cell signaling pathways stimulate the body’s defensesAn invading pathogen can be regarded as a signal. In responseto that signal, the body produces molecules (complement proteins,interferons, and other cytokines) that regulate phagocytosisand other defense processes. Not surprisingly, the link betweensignal and response is a signal transduction pathway,similar to the ones we considered in Section 7.3. Akey group ofreceptors is called the toll-like receptors. The toll protein wasfirst identified in insects, where it is involved in developmentand in sensing infection. Comparative genomics has revealedat least ten similar receptors in humans.Toll-like receptors are part of a protein kinase cascade thatultimately results in the transcription of at least 40 genes in-42.2 | WHAT ARE THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE NONSPECIFIC DEFENSES? 879Damaged tisues attractmast cells which releasehistamine, which diffusesinto the vessels.Histamine causes thevessels to dilate andbecome leaky;complement proteinsleave the vessels andattract phagocytes.Histamine and complementsignaling cease; phagocytesare no longer attracted.Blood plasma andphagocytes moveinto infected tissuefrom the vessels.1 2 5A growth factor from plateletsstimulates endothelial celldivision, healing the wound.63 Phagocytesengulf bacteriaand dead cells.4SplinterEpitheliumSkinBacteriaintroducedby splinterPhagocyteDeadComplement phagocyteproteinsBloodvesselMast cell42.3 Interactions of Cells and Chemical Signals Result in Inflammation Histamineand other signals are released from mast cells to initiate the inflammatory response. Thechemical signals associated with inflammation attract the phagocytes that digest thepathogens and damaged cells.GO TO Web Activity 42.2 • Inflammation ResponseyourBioPortal.comvolved in both nonspecific and specific defenses (Figure 42.4).The CD14 protein (for cluster of differentiation) is a membraneprotein that binds to the toll-like receptor. Among the moleculesthat stimulate this pathway are bacterial and fungal cell wallfragments. Binding of these fragment molecules to the receptorsets in motion a cascade of molecular changes that results in achange in the three-dimensional structure of the transcriptionfactor NF-κB. (NF-κB stands for nuclear factor kappa light chainenhancer of activated B cells. It is a key transcription factor inthe activation of both the nonspecific and specific immune systems.)The shape change allows NF-κB to enter the nucleus,bind to the promoters of genes, and activate the transcriptionof genes encoding defensive proteins.42.2 RECAPNonspecific defenses are the first line of defenseagainst pathogens. These include physical barrierssuch as the skin; defensive proteins; and coordinatedresponses such as inflammation.• How do complement proteins and interferons defendthe body against microbes? See p. 578• Describe the inflammation response. See pp. 878–879and Figure 42.3Often the innate immune system, with its nonspecific defenses,is adequate to prevent or fight off a pathogenic infection. But inmany cases, this system works together with specific immunity,which adapts to a particular pathogen. We now turn to the developmentand functioning of specific immunity.42.3 How Does Specific Immunity Develop?Before the twentieth century, scientists had long suspected thatblood was somehow involved in immunity against pathogens.Over a century ago, Emil von Behring and Shibasaburo Kitasatoat the University of Marburg in Germany performed a key experimentthat pointed to blood as an important factor in specificimmunity (Figure 42.5). They showed that guinea pigsinjected with a sublethal dose of diphtheria toxin developedin their blood serum (the noncellular fluid that remains afterblood is clotted) a factor that protected other guinea pigs froma lethal dose of the same toxin. In other words, the recipientshad developed immunity. Moreover, the immunity was specific:the immune factor made by the guinea pigs protected onlyagainst the specific toxin, from one strain of diphtheria-causingbacteria, that they had been injected with.Based on the animal model, Behring realized that serum protectionmight work in human diseases as well. It did, and hewon the Nobel Prize for his efforts in protecting children againstdiphtheria. Later, the agent of this immunity was identified asan antibody protein, and the process of developing immunityfrom antibodies received from another individual was calledpassive immunity.In this section we outline the main features of the specific immunesystem, much of which does indeed occur in blood serum.We will consider the two major types of specific responses: thehumoral immune response, which produces antibodies; and thecellular immune response, which destroys infected cells.Adaptive immunity has four key featuresFour important features of the adaptive immune system are:specificity; the ability to distinguish self from nonself; the abilityto respond to an enormous diversity of nonself molecules;and immunological memory.SPECIFICITY Lymphocytes (B and T cells) are crucial componentsof specific immunity. T cell receptors and the antibodies producedby B cells recognize and bind to specific nonself or altered selfsubstances (antigens), and this interaction initiates a specific immuneresponse. The specific siteson antigens that the immunesystem recognizes are calledantigenic determinants or epitopes:Antigenic determinants(epitopes) are smallportions of antigens.Antibodies react withantigenic determinants.AntigenAntigenNF-κBCD14Outside of cellNucleusInside of cellPlasmamembraneToll-likereceptormRNADefensiveproteinDNAPromoter Transcription1 A fragment of a bacteriumbinds to the receptor CD14;toll-like receptor is activated.4 NF-κB enters thenucleus and bindsto promoters.5 Genes encodingdefensive proteinsare transcribed.2 A protein kinasecascade occurs.3 The shape of the transcriptionfactor NF-κB is altered.42.4 Cell Signaling and Defense Binding of a pathogenic moleculeto the toll-like receptor initiates a signal transduction pathway whichresults in the transcription of genes whose products are involved in specificand nonspecific defenses. CD14 is expressed on the surface ofwhite blood cells, including macrophages and monocytes.GO TO Animated Tutorial 42.2 • Pregnancy TestyourBioPortal.comAn antigenic determinant is a specific portion of a large molecule,such as a certain sequence of amino acids that may be presentin a protein. Antigens are usually proteins or polysaccharides,and there can be multiple antigens on a single invading bacterium.Asingle antigenic molecule can have multiple, differentantigenic determinants. The host animal responds to the presenceof an antigen with highly specific defenses involving T cellreceptors and antibodies. These receptors and soluble proteinsbind to the antigenic determinants. Each T celland each antibody is specific for a single antigenicdeterminant.For the remainder of the chapter, we willrefer to antigenic determinants simply as“antigens.”DISTINGUISHING SELF FROM NONSELF The humanbody contains tens of thousands of differentproteins, each with a specific three-dimensionalstructure capable of generatingimmune responses. Thus every cell in thebody bears a tremendous number of antigens.A crucial requirement of an individual’simmune system is that it recognize thebody’s own antigens and not attack them.This is accomplished by clonal deletion,which you will encounter in a few pages.DIVERSITY Challenges to the immune systemare numerous. Pathogens take many forms:viruses, bacteria, protists, fungi, and multicellularparasites. Furthermore, each pathogenicspecies usually exists as many subtly differentgenetic strains, and each strain possesses multiplesurface features. Estimates vary, but areasonable guess is that humans can respondspecifically to 10 million different antigens.Upon recognizing an antigen, the immunesystem responds by activating lymphocytesof the appropriate specificity. This capacity isaccomplished by a special genetic recombinationmechanism described in Section 42.6.IMMUNOLOGICAL MEMORY After respondingto a particular type of pathogen once, the immunesystem “remembers” that pathogenand can usually respond more rapidly andpowerfully to the same threat in the future.This immunological memory usually saves usfrom repeats of childhood diseases such aschicken pox. Vaccination against specific diseasesworks because the immune system “remembers”the antigens that were introducedinto the body.All four of these features of specific immunedefense characterize both the humoralimmune response and the cellular immuneresponse.Two types of specific immune responses interact:an overviewThe specific immune system mounts two types of responsesagainst invaders: the humoral immune response and the cellularimmune response. B cells that make antibodies are theworkhorses of the humoral immune response, and cytotoxic42.3 | HOW DOES SPECIFIC IMMUNITY DEVELOP? 881HYPOTHESIS Serum from guinea pigs injected with a sublethal dose of diphtheriatoxin protects other guinea pigs that are exposed to a lethal doseof the toxin.INVESTIGATING LIFEMETHODRESULTS42.5 The Discovery of Specific ImmunityUntil the twentieth century, most people did not survive an attack of the bacteriumthat causes diphtheria, but a few did. Emil von Behring and Shibasaburo Kitasatoperformed a key experiment using an animal model, and demonstrated that thefactor(s) responsible for immunity against diphtheria were in blood serum.CONCLUSION Serum of toxin-exposed guinea pigs is protective against laterexposure to a lethal dose of the toxin from the same geneticstrain of bacteria, but not a different strain.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevantlinks for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.Inject sublethaldose of toxin frombacteria strain A.Inject sublethaldose of toxin frombacteria strain B.Inject all animalswith a sublethaldose of toxinfrom bacteriastrain A.Serum fromunexposed animalDiphtheria No diphtheria DiphtheriaSerum fromtoxin-exposedanimalSerum fromtoxin-exposedanimalGuinea pig #1Guinea pig #2Antibodies made by B cells bindto free antigen and to antigen onthe surface of pathogen cells andantigen-presenting cells.B cell bindsfree antigen toits antibodyreceptors.TC cells killall cells withantigenexposed.The TH cell regulates both thecellular and the humoral systems.TC cellAntibodiesFreeantigensCell withsurfaceantigenB cellT-helpercell(TH)PhagocytosisBindAntigenpresentingcellBindandkillStimulate StimulateHUMORAL IMMUNITY CELLULAR IMMUNITYBindBindBindAntigens(killer) T cells are the workhorses of the cellular immuneresponse. These two responses operate simultaneouslyand cooperatively, sharing many mechanisms.A key event early in these two processes is the exposureof the antigen’s three-dimensional structure to theimmune system. This occurs when an antigenic molecule,or a fragment of the molecule, is inserted intothe plasma membrane of a cell and the unique epitopestructure protrudes from the membrane, where it is exposedto nearby T or B cells. Many different types ofcell can “present” the antigen to the immune systemin this way, and they are collectively referred to as antigen-presenting cells. Figure 42.6 provides anoverview of antigen presentation and the roles of T andB cells in the immune response. The key player integratingthe two responses is the T-helper (TH) cell. Bybinding to the antigen on a presenting cell, the TH cellstimulates events in both responses.HUMORAL IMMUNE RESPONSE In the humoral immune response(from the Latin humor, “fluid”), antibodies reactwith antigens on pathogens in blood, lymph, and tissuefluids. An animal can produce a staggering diversity ofantibodies capable of binding to almost any conceivableantigen the animal encounters. Antibodies are secretedby B cells and travel free in the blood and lymph. AparticularB cell also possesses receptors on its surface withthe same specificity as the antibodies it produces.The first time a specific antigen invades the body, it may bepresented and then detected by binding to a B cell receptor. Thisbinding activates the B cell, which makes and secretes multiplecopies of the antibody.CELLULAR IMMUNE RESPONSE The cellular immune response isdirected against antigens that have become established withina cell of the host animal. It detects and destroys virus-infectedor mutated cells, such as cancer cells expressing unique proteinscaused by mutations.T cells within the lymph nodes, the bloodstream, and the intercellularspaces carry out the cellular immune response. TheseT cells have integral membrane proteins—T cell receptors—thatrecognize and bind to antigens. T cell receptors are rather similarto antibodies in structure and function, each including specificmolecular configurations that bind to specific antigens.Once a T cell is bound to an antigen, it initiates an immune responsethat typically results in the total destruction of the antigen-containing cell.Genetic changes and clonal selection generatethe specific immune responseBefore the reactions just described for the humoral and cellularimmune responses can take place, the body needs to generatea vast diversity of lymphocytes that have the ability to binddifferent antigens. How does this tremendous diversity arise?How do lymphocytes specific for certain antigens proliferate?The answers lie in the processes of DNA rearrangement andclonal selection. These processes generate the enormous numbersof different receptors with antibody-like specificities in theT cell T cell receptorReceptorsSecreted antibodiesB cell882 CHAPTER 42 | IMMUNOLOGY: ANIMAL DEFENSE SYSTEMS42.6 The Specific Immune System Humoral immunityinvolves the production of antibodies by B cells. Cellular immunityinvolves the activation of cytotoxic T cells that bind to cellsexpressing the antigen. For further details, see Figure 42.13.B and T lymphocytes, even before the body encounters antigensfor these receptors.• Diversity is generated primarily by DNA changes—chromosomalrearrangements and other mutations—that occur justafter the B and T cells are formed in the bone marrow. EachB cell is able to produce only one kind of antibody; thusthere are millions of different B cells. Similarly, there aremillions of different T cells with specific T cell receptors.We will describe the mechanisms for the formation of theseantibodies and receptors later in the chapter. For now, keepin mind that the adaptive immune system is “predeveloped”—all of the machinery available to respond to an immensediversity of antigens is already there, even before the antigens areever encountered.• Antigen binding “selects” a particular B or T cell for proliferation.When an antigen fits the surface receptor on a B celland binds to it, that B cell is activated. It divides to form aclone of cells (a genetically identical group derived from asingle cell), all of which produce and secrete antibodieswith the same specificity as the receptor (Figure 42.7).Binding, activation, and proliferation also apply to T lymphocytes.When a foreign or abnormal cell antigen binds toa T cell receptor, that binding activates the proliferation ofT cells with that particular receptor. Binding and activationselect a particular lymphocyte, while proliferation generatesthe clone, hence the term “clonal selection.”Immunity and immunological memory resultfrom clonal selectionThe first time a vertebrate animal is exposed to a particular antigenthere is a time lag (usually several days) before the B cellproducedantibody molecules and T cells specific to that antigenslowly increase. But for years afterward—sometimes forlife—the immune system “remembers” that particular antigen.How does this happen?The answer lies in the fact that activated lymphocytes divideand differentiate to produce two types of daughter cells: effectorcells and memory cells.• Effector cells carry out the attack on the antigen. Effector Bcells, called plasma cells, secrete antibodies. Effector T cellsrelease cytokines and other molecules that initiate reactionsthat destroy nonself or altered cells. Effector cells live only afew days.• Memory cells are long-lived cells that retain the ability tostart dividing on short notice to produce more effector andmore memory cells. Memory B and T cells may survive inthe body for decades, rarely dividing.These two types of lymphocytes can respond to an antigen intwo different ways:• When the body first encounters a particular antigen, a primaryimmune response is activated, in which the “naïve”(previously unexposed to antigen) lymphocytes that recognizethat antigen proliferate to produce clones of effectorand memory cells.• After a primary immune response to a particular antigen,subsequent encounters with the same antigen will triggera much more rapid and powerful secondary immune response.The memory cells that bind with that antigenproliferate, launching a huge army of plasma cells andeffector T cells.Vaccines are an application of immunological memoryYou will recall Behring’s experiment on using the serum of diphtheria-exposed animals to protect other animals from the disease(see Figure 42.5). As we noted, he later used this methodon people to cause passive immunity. Now we can contrast thiswith active immunity, in which the immune system develops aspecific response, including memory cells that lead to long-term42.3 | HOW DOES SPECIFIC IMMUNITY DEVELOP? 8831 This B cell makes an antibodythat binds this specific antigen…3 Primary immune response:Some cells develop into plasma cells(effector B cells) that secrete thesame antibody as the parent cell.4 Potential secondary immune response:A few cells develop into non-secretingmemory cells that divide at a low rate,perpetuating the clone.2 …which then alsobinds to a TH cell.The TH cell stimulatesthe B cell todivide, resulting ina clone of cells.Each naïve B cell makes a different,specific antibody and displaysit on its cell surface.Population ofspecific B cellsPlasma cells Memory cellsAntigenAntibodies42.7 Clonal Selection in B Cells The binding of an antigen to aspecific receptor on the surface of a B cell stimulates that cell to divide,producing a clone of genetically identical cells to fight that invader.protection. The animals that surviveddiphtheria and donated serumin Berhing’s experiment had activeimmunity.Thanks to active immunity andimmunological memory, exposureto many diseases, such as chickenpox, provides a natural immunity tothose diseases. Furthermore, it ispossible to provide artificial immunityagainst many life-threateningdiseases by vaccination: the introductionof antigen into the body ina form that does not cause disease.Vaccination initiates a primaryimmune response, generatingmemory cells without making theperson ill. Later, if a pathogen carryingthe same antigen attacks, specificmemory cells already exist.They recognize the antigen andquickly overwhelm the invaderswith a massive production of lymphocytesand antibodies.Because the antigens used for immunizationor vaccination are producedby pathogenic organisms, theymust be altered so that they cannotcause disease but are still able to provokean immune response. There arethree principal ways to do this:• Inactivation involves killing thepathogen with heat or chemicals.• Attenuation involves reducingthe virulence of a virus by repeatedlyinfecting cells with it in the laboratory; this resultsin mutations in the virus that render it nontoxic but stillrecognized as nonself.• Recombinant DNA technology can be used to produce peptidefragments that bind to and activate lymphocytes butdo not have the harmful part of a protein toxin.For most of the 70 or so bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasitesknown to cause serious human diseases, vaccines are alreadyavailable or will be in the next few years (Table 42.2). Vaccinationhas completely or almost completely wiped out somedeadly diseases, including smallpox, diphtheria, and polio, inindustrialized countries.Animals distinguish self from nonself and toleratetheir own antigensNormally, the body is tolerant of its own molecules—the same moleculesthat would generate an immune response in another individual.This occurs primarily during the early differentiation of Tand B cells, when they encounter self antigens. Any immature Bor T cell that shows the potential to mount an immune responseagainst self antigens undergoes programmed cell death (apoptosis)within a short time. This process is called clonal deletion.42.3 RECAPThe specific immune system reacts against nonselfor altered self molecules called antigens. The systemgenerates amazing diversity. Immunological memoryarises from clonal selection.• How does an antigen initiate a specific immune response?See pp. 881–882• Describe clonal selection. How does it contribute toimmunological memory? See pp. 882–883 andFigure 42.7• How do vaccines make use of immunological memory?See pp. 883–884Now that we understand the general features of the specific immunesystem, let’s focus in more detail on the B lymphocytesand the humoral immune response.884 CHAPTER 42 | IMMUNOLOGY: ANIMAL DEFENSE SYSTEMSSome Human Pathogens for which Vaccines are AvailableINFECTIOUS AGENT DISEASE VACCINATED POPULATIONBacteriaBacillus anthracis Anthrax Those at risk in biological warfareBordetella pertussis Whooping cough Children and adultsClostridium tetani Tetanus Children and adultsCorynebacterium diphtheriae Diphtheria ChildrenHaemophilus influenzae Meningitis ChildrenMycobacterium tuberculosis Tuberculosis All peopleSalmonella typhi Typhoid fever People in areas exposed to agentStreptococcus pneumoniae Pneumonia Elderly peopleVibrio cholerae Cholera People in areas exposed to agentVirusesAdenovirus Respiratory disease Military personnelHepatitis A Liver disease People in areas exposed to agentHepatitis B Liver disease, cancer All peopleInfluenza virus Flu All peopleMeasles virus Measles Children and adolescentsMumps virus Mumps Children and adolescentsPoliovirus Polio ChildrenRabies virus Rabies People exposed to agentRubella virus German measles ChildrenVaccinia virus Smallpox Laboratory workers, military personnelVaricella-zoster virus Chicken pox ChildrenTABLE 42.2What Is the Humoral Immune 42.4 Response?Every day, billions of B cells survive the test of clonal deletionand are released from the bone marrow into the circulation. Bcells are the basis for the humoral immune response.Some B cells develop into plasma cellsAB cell begins by making a receptor protein on its cell surface.As we have seen, if a B cell is activated by antigen binding tothis receptor, it gives rise to clones of plasma cells and memorycells. The plasma (effector B) cells secrete antibodies into thebloodstream (see Figure 42.7).Usually, for a naïve B cell (one that has not yet been exposedto antigen) to develop into an antibody-secreting plasma cell,a T-helper cell (TH) with the same specificity must also bind tothe antigen (see Figure 42.6). The division and differentiation ofthe B cell is stimulated by the receipt of chemical signals fromthe TH cell. Thus, as we will see in Section 42.5, the B cell alsofunctions as an antigen-presenting cell.As plasma cells develop, the number of ribosomes and theamount of endoplasmic reticulum in their cytoplasms increasegreatly (Figure 42.8). These increases allow the cells to synthesizeand secrete large amounts of antibody proteins—up to 2,000per second! All the plasma cells arising from a given B cell produceantibodies that are specific for the antigen that originally bound to theparent B cell. Thus antibody specificity is maintained as B cellsproliferate.Different antibodies share a common structureAntibodies belong to a class of proteins called immunoglobulins.There are several types of immunoglobulins, but all containa tetramer consisting of four polypeptide chains (Figure42.9). In each immunoglobulin molecule, two of these polypeptidesare identical light chains, and two are identical heavy chains.42.4 | WHAT IS THE HUMORAL IMMUNE RESPONSE? 885HeterochromatinMitochondrion in nucleusRough endoplasmic reticulum42.8 A Plasma Cell A prominent nucleus with a large amount of heterochromatin(dark brown) and a cytoplasm crowded with rough endoplasmicreticulum (purple) are features of a cell that is actively synthesizingand exporting proteins. In this case, a B cell is making a specific antibody.Whole blocks of genes not needed for this specialized function arekept inactive in the heterochromatin.GO TO Animated Tutorial 42.3 • Humoral Immune ResponseyourBioPortal.comSSSSSSSSSS SSS SS SSSSSSSSS(A)(B)SSSS SSSSAntigenbindingsiteDisulfide bondsHeavy chainLightchainVariable regionof heavy chainVariableregion oflight chainAntigenHeavychainsLight chainsAntigenbindingsiteAntigenicdeterminantsConstantregion oflight chainConstant regionof heavy chainV VV VC CC C42.9 The Structure of An Immunoglobulin Four polypeptide chains(two light, two heavy) make up an immunoglobulin molecule. Here weshow both diagrammatic (A) and space-filling (B) representations ofimmunoglobulin.GO TO Web Activity 42.3 • Immunoglobulin StructureyourBioPortal.comDisulfide bonds hold the chains together. Each polypeptidechain has a constant region and a variable region:• The amino acid sequences of the constant regions are similaramong the immunoglobulins. They determine the destinationand function—the class—of each immunoglobulin.• The amino acid sequences of the variable regions are differentfor each specific immunoglobulin. Their three-dimensionalantigen-binding sites are determined by their secondarystructures, and are responsible for antibody specificity.The two antigen-binding sites on each immunoglobulin moleculeare identical, making the antibody bivalent (bi, “two”; valent,“binding”). This ability to bind two antigen molecules atonce, along with the existence of multiple epitopes on each antigen,permits antibodies to form large complexes with the antigens.For example, one antibody might bind two molecules ofan antigen. Another antibody might bind the same antigen ata different epitope. It may bind one of the antigen moleculesthat is already bound to the first antibody, along with a thirdantigen molecule. Athird antibody may bind one of the antigenmolecules that is already part of the complex, and a fourth antigenmolecule. This binding of multiple antigens and multipleantibodies can result in large complexes that are easy targets foringestion and breakdown by phagocytes.There are five classes of immunoglobulinsWhile the variable regions are responsible for the specificity of animmunoglobulin, the constant regions of the heavy chain determinethe class of the immunoglobulin—for example, whether itwill be an integral membrane receptor or a soluble antibody thatis secreted into the bloodstream. The five immunoglobulin classesare described in Table 42.3. The most abundant class is IgG; thesesoluble antibody proteins make up about 80 percent of the totalimmunoglobulin content of the bloodstream. They are made ingreatest quantity during a secondary immune response. IgG moleculesdefend the body in several ways. For example, after someIgG molecules bind to antigens, they become attached by theirheavy chains to macrophages. This attachment permits themacrophages to destroy the antigens by phagocytosis.Monoclonal antibodies have many usesThe specificity of antibodies suggested to scientists that theymight be useful for detecting specific substances in the laboratory.Suppose that a physician wishes to measure the level ofthe hormone estrogen in a woman’s blood. Because hormonesare present in such minute amounts, their concentrations cannotusually be measured effectively by conventional chemicalmethods. Amore sensitive method is needed. One way wouldbe to add an antibody specific for estrogen to a sample of thepatient’s blood and observe how much antigen–antibody complexformed.However, the immune response to a complex antigen is polyclonal—that is, most antigens carry many different antigenicdeterminants and will produce a complex mixture of antibodies,each made by a different clone of B cells. Furthermore, asemphasized in our study of biochemistry, many biological moleculesshare regions of similar structure—all human steroid hormones,for example, have a similar multi-ring structure (see Fig-886 CHAPTER 42 | IMMUNOLOGY: ANIMAL DEFENSE SYSTEMSTABLE 42.3Antibody ClassesCLASS GENERAL STRUCTURE LOCATION FUNCTIONIgG Monomer Free in blood plasma; about Most abundant antibody in primary and secondary80 percent of circulating immune responses; crosses placenta and provides passiveantibodies immunization to fetusIgM Pentamer Surface of B cell; free in Antigen receptor on B cell membrane; first class of antibodiesblood plasma released by B cells during primary responseIgD Monomer Surface of B cell Cell surface receptor of mature B cell;important in B cell activationIgA Dimer Saliva, tears, milk, and other Protects mucosal surfaces; preventsbody secretions attachment of pathogens toepithelial cellsIgE Monomer Secreted by plasma cells in Binds to mast cells and basophils to sensitize them toskin and tissues lining subsequent binding of antigen, which triggers release ofgastrointestinal and histamine that contributes to inflammation and somerespiratory tracts allergic responsesure 3.22). Apolyclonal group of antibodies targeted toestrogen might be uninformative because some of theantibodies would bind to any steroid hormone presentin the blood sample. More useful would be a clone ofB cells that produce large amounts of an antibody thatbinds to only one specific epitope—a monoclonal antibody.How could such a clone be produced?Aclone of cells that produce a single antibody canbe made artificially by fusing a single B cell (whichhas a finite lifetime and makes a lot of antibody) witha tumor cell (which has an infinite lifetime and canbe grown in culture). The resulting hybrid cell, calleda hybridoma, makes a specific monoclonal antibodyand proliferates in culture (Figure 42.10). In order toproduce useful monoclonal antibodies by this approach,the hybridoma clones must be screened toisolate those producing antibodies that are specificfor the target molecule. Recently, new methods havebeen developed for producing monoclonal antibodiesusing recombinant DNA technology. These approachesdo not require the injection of live animalswith antigen, the isolation of their B cells, or the productionand screening of hybridomas.Monoclonal antibodies have many applications:• Immunoassays use monoclonal antibodies to detecttiny amounts of molecules in tissues and fluids.For example, this technique is used in pregnancytests to detect human chorionic gonadotropin, thehormone made by the developing embryo.• Immunotherapy uses monoclonal antibodies targetedagainst antigens on the surfaces of cancercells. The coupling of a radioactive ligand or toxinto the antibody makes it into a medical “smartbomb.” In a related approach, binding of the antibodyitself is enough to trigger a cellular immuneresponse that destroys the cancer. This is the casewith trastuzumab (Herceptin®), a monoclonal antibodythat binds to a growth factor receptor onsome breast cancer cells.42.4 RECAPThe humoral immune response is based on the synthesisby B cells of specific antibodies directedagainst antigens. The specificity of an antibody derivesfrom the amino acid sequence of its variableregions. Monoclonal antibodies are specific to oneepitope on an antigen and can be produced artificiallyfor use in diagnostics and therapy.• How does a B cell respond to an antigen? See p. 885• How is the structure related to the function of an antibodymolecule? See pp. 885–886 and Figure 42.9• What are monoclonal antibodies? How are they used?See pp. 886–887 and Figure 42.10By making antibodies, B cells are the major players in the humoralimmune response. We now turn to the cellular immuneresponse, where T cells are active at all stages.What Is the Cellular Immune 42.5 Response?Two types of effector T cells (T-helper cells and cytotoxic T cells)are involved in the cellular immune response, along with proteinsof the major histocompatibility complex, the MHC proteins,which underlie the immune system’s tolerance for thebody’s own cells.42.5 | WHAT IS THE CELLULAR IMMUNE RESPONSE? 887TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE42.10 Creating Hybridomas for the Production ofMonoclonal AntibodiesCancerous myeloma cells and normal B cells can be fused so that theproliferative properties of the myeloma cells are combined with the abilityto produce specific antibodies.1 Inoculate amouse withantigen.Isolate B cellsfrom thespleen.B cells produceantibodies butdo not proliferatein culture.A myeloma cell isfused with a B cell toform a hybridoma.5Antibody-producinghybridomas proliferateindefinitely in culture.74A single hybridomacell is isolated andgrown in culture, andassayed for antibody.62Myeloma cellsgrow well inculture.3Myeloma cell cultureMyeloma cellsHybridomaB cellsAntigenGO TO Animated Tutorial 42.4 • Cellular Immune ResponseyourBioPortal.comT cell receptors bind to antigens on cell surfacesLike B cells, T cells possess specific membrane receptors. TheT cell receptor is not an immunoglobulin, however, but a glycoproteinwith a molecular weight of about half that of an IgG. Itis made up of two polypeptide chains, each encoded by a separategene (Figure 42.11). Thus the two chains have distinctregions with constant and variable amino acid sequences. As inthe immunoglobulins, the variable regions provide the site forspecific binding to antigens. But there is one major difference:whereas antibodies bind to an intact antigen such as a protein,T cell receptors bind to a piece of an antigen, such as a peptidefrom the protein displayed on the surface of an antigen-presentingcell.When a T cell is activated by contact with a specific antigen,it proliferates and forms a clone. Its descendants differentiateinto two types of effector T cells:• Cytotoxic T cells, or TC cells, recognize virus-infected or mutatedcells and kill them by inducing lysis (see page 890).• T-helper cells (TH cells, also called helper T cells) assist boththe cellular and the humoral immune responses.How do T lymphocytes recognize surface antigens on cellswithout attacking the body’s own cells? The answers to thesequestions involve a group of proteins encoded by the MHCgenes.MHC proteins present antigen to T cellsSince recognition between biological molecules involves threedimensionalstructure (think of enzymes, receptors, and antibodies),it makes sense that recognition at the cellular level mustalso involve structure—in this case, the cell surface. Severaltypes of mammalian cell surface proteins are involved in thisprocess, but we will focus here on the products of a cluster ofgenes called the major histocompatibility complex, or MHC.The MHC proteins are plasma membrane glycoproteins.Their major role is to present antigens or fragments of antigensto a T cell receptor in such a way that it can distinguish betweenself and nonself antigens. In humans, there are three geneticloci for MHC class I proteins and three for MHC class IIproteins. Each of these six loci has as many as 100 different alleles.With so many possible allele combinations, it is not surprisingthat different people are very likely to have differentMHC genotypes. So the unique three-dimensional structure ofthe MHC protein is important in self-tolerance: the T cell receptorbinds to the MHC and the antigen together.There are two classes of MHC proteins. Both function to presentantigens to the different T lymphocytes:• Class I MHC proteins are present on the surface of everynucleated cell in the animal body. When cellular proteinsare degraded into small peptide fragments by a proteasome(see Figure 16.24), an MHC I protein may bind to a fragmentand carry it to the plasma membrane. There, theMHC I protein is oriented in such a way that the boundfragment is exposed to the outside of the cell, where boththe MHC and the fragment can interact with TC cells. TheTC cells have a surface protein called CD8 that recognizesand binds to MHC I.• Class II MHC proteins are found mostly on the surfaces of Bcells, macrophages, and and other antigen-presenting cells(see Figure 42.2). When one of these cells ingests a nonselfantigen such as a virus, the antigen is broken down in aphagosome. An MHC II molecule may bind to one of thefragments and carry it to the cell surface, where it is presentedto a TH cell (Figure 42.12). TH cells have a surfaceprotein called CD4 that recognizes and binds to MHC II.The information on MHC proteins, the cellular origins of antigens,and T lymphocytes is summarized in Table 42.4. To accomplishtheir role in antigen presentation, both MHC I andMHC II proteins have an antigen-binding site, which can holda peptide of about 10–20 amino acids. The T cell receptor recognizesnot just the antigenic fragment, but the MHC I or MHCII molecule to which the fragment is bound.MHC proteins play a vital role in the selection of T cells duringtheir development:1. Binding to self MHC molecules. The ultimate goal is for the Tcell receptor to bind not to the antigen alone but to the antigen–MHC complex. Here, there is positive selection for T888 CHAPTER 42 | IMMUNOLOGY: ANIMAL DEFENSE SYSTEMSThe antigen and MHCmolecules bind here.A hydrophobic regionanchors the chain in theplasma membrane.α chainConstantregionsVariableregionsInside ofT cellOutsideof T cellβ chain42.11 A T Cell Receptor Thereceptors on T lymphocytes aresmaller than those on B lymphocytes,but their two polypeptidescontain both variable and constantregions. As with the B cellreceptors, the constant regionfixes the receptor in the plasmamembrane, while the variableregions establish the specificityfor binding to antigen.The Interaction between T Cells andAntigen-Presenting CellsT CELLPRESENTING ANTIGEN MHC SURFACECELL TYPE PRESENTED CLASS T CELL TYPE PROTEINAny cell Intracellular Class I Cytotoxic CD8protein T cell (TC)fragmentMacrophages Fragments from Class II Helperand B cells extracellular T cell (TH) CD4proteinsTABLE 42.4cells that bind. Any T cells that do not recognize self MHC(do not bind to the antigen-presenting cell) are eliminatedsoon after they develop; the rest of the T cells go on to thenext selection step.2. Binding to self peptides bound to self MHC. Here, there is negativeselection for T cells that bind, thereby eliminating thefurther production of T cells that react to self antigens. Bothof these selection events occur in the thymus gland (see Figure41.6).T-helper cells and MHC II proteins contribute to thehumoral immune responseWhen a TH cell survives the selection processes and binds to anantigen-presenting macrophage, it releases cytokines, which activatethe TH cell to proliferate, producing a clone of TH cellswith the same specificity. The steps to this point constitute theactivation phase of the humoral immune response, and they occurin the lymphoid tissues. Next comes the effector phase, inwhich the TH cells activate naïve B cells with the same specificityto produce antibodies.B cells are also antigen-presenting cells. B cells take up antigensbound to their surface immunoglobulin receptors by endocytosis,break them down, and display antigenic fragmentson class II MHC proteins. When a TH cell binds to the displayedantigen–MHC II complex, it releases cytokines that cause theB cell to produce a clone of plasma cells (Figure 42.13A). Finally,the plasma cells secrete antibodies, completing the effectorphase of the humoral immune response.Cytotoxic T cells and MHC I proteins contributeto the cellular immune responseClass I MHC proteins play a role in the cellular immune responsethat is similar to the role played by class II MHC proteinsin the humoral immune response. In a virus-infected ormutated cell, foreign or abnormal proteins or peptide fragmentscombine with MHC I molecules. The resulting complex is displayedon the cell surface and presented to TC cells. When a TCcell recognizes and binds to this antigen–MHC I complex, it isactivated to proliferate (Figure 42.13B).In the effector phase of the cellular immune response, TC cellsrecognize and bind to cells bearing the same antigen–MHC Icomplex. These bound TC cells produce a substance called perforin,which lyses the bound target cell. In addition, the TC cellscan bind to a specific receptor (called Fas) on the target cell thatinitiates apoptosis in that cell. These two mechanisms, cell lysisand programmed cell death, work in concert to eliminate theantigen-containing host cell. Because TC cells recognize selfMHC proteins complexed with nonself antigens, they help ridthe body of its own virus-infected cells.In addition to the binding of an antigen–MHC complex to itsreceptors, a T cell must receive a second signal for activation.This co-stimulatory signal occurs after the initial specific binding.It involves the interaction between another receptor on theT cell surface and a protein called B7 on certain antigen-presentingcells. This second binding event leads to T cell activation,including cytokine production and proliferation.Regulatory T cells suppress the humoral andcellular immune responsesAs we describe in Chapter 40, homeostasis—the maintenance ofinternal constancy—is a hallmark of animal biology. A thirdclass of T cells called regulatory T cells (Tregs) ensures thatthe immune response does not spiral out of control. Like THand TC cells, Tregs are made in the thymus gland, expressthe T cell receptor, and become activated if they bind to antigen–MHC complexes. But Tregs are different in one importantway: the antigens that Tregs recognize are self antigens. Theactivation of Tregs causes them to secrete the cytokine interleukin10, which blocks T cell activation and leads to apopto-42.5 | WHAT IS THE CELLULAR IMMUNE RESPONSE? 8891 Binding of antibody toa receptor activatesphagocytosis.3 The macrophage breaksdown the antigen intofragments in the lysosome.4 A class II MHCprotein binds anantigen fragment.5 The MHC presentsthe antigen to a TH cell.2 The macrophage takesup the antigen byphagocytosis.MacrophageLysosomeMacrophageClass II MHCproteinAntigenAntigenT cellreceptor TH cellReceptorAntibody42.12 Macrophages Are Antigen-Presenting Cells A fragment ofan antigen is displayed by MHC II on the surface of a macrophage. T cellreceptors on a specific T-helper cell can then bind to and interact furtherwith the antigen–MHC II complex.890 CHAPTER 42 | IMMUNOLOGY: ANIMAL DEFENSE SYSTEMS1 The antigen is taken upby phagocytosis anddegraded in a lysosome.4 A T cell receptor againrecognizes an antigenic fragmentbound to a class I MHC protein.5 The T cellreleasesperforin…3 A T cell receptor recognizesan antigenic fragmentbound to a class II MHCprotein on the macrophage.1 A viral protein madein an infected cell isdegraded into fragmentsand picked up by aclass I MHC protein.324 Cytokines releasedby theTH cell stimulateit to proliferate.2 Interleukin-1 (a cytokine)activates a TH cell.5B cells proliferateand differentiate.The TH cellproliferatesand formsa clone.6 The binding of antigen to aspecific IgM receptor triggersendocytosis, degradation, anddisplay of the processed antigen.7 A T cell receptor recognizes anantigenic fragment bound to aclass II MHC protein on a B cell.8 Cytokines activateB cell proliferation.9A T cell receptorrecognizes an antigenicfragment bound to aclass I MHC protein onan infected cell.The TC cellproliferatesand formsa clone.6The plasma cellproduces antibodies.10…which lysesthe infected cellbefore the virusescan multiply.ACTIVATION PHASEPlasma cellMemory cellMacrophageClass II MHCproteinAntigenT cellreceptorB cellTH cellT-helpercell(TH)CytotoxicT cell(TC)EFFECTOR PHASE EFFECTOR PHASEACTIVATION PHASEHUMORAL IMMUNE RESPONSE CELLULAR IMMUNE RESPONSEClass I MHCproteinAntigenT cellreceptorInfectedcellInfected cell(one of many)(A) (B)42.13 Phases of the Humoral and Cellular Immune ResponsesBoth the humoral and the cellular immune responses have activation andeffector phases, all of which involve T cells.sis of the TC and TH cells that are bound to the same antigenpresentingcell (Figure 42.14).The important role of Tregs is to maintain homeostasis bymediating tolerance to “self” antigens. Thus they constitute oneof the mechanisms for distinguishing self from nonself. Howdo we know this? There are two lines of evidence for the role ofTregs. As in many other biological studies, the cause-and-effectrelationships were worked out using experimental manipulationsand genetics:• If Tregs are experimentally destroyed in the thymus of amouse, the mouse grows up with an out-of-control immunesystem, mounting strong immune responses to self antigens(autoimmunity—see Section 42.7).• In humans, a rare X-linked inherited disease occurs when agene critical to Treg function is mutated. An infant with thisdisease, called IPEX (immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathyand enteropathy, X-linked), mounts an immuneresponse that attacks the pancreas, thyroid, and intestine.Most affected individuals die within the first fewyears of life.MHC proteins are important in tissue transplantsIn humans, one consequence of the major histocompatibility complexbecame important with the development of organ transplantsurgery. Because the proteins produced by the MHC are specificto each individual, they act as nonself antigens if transplantedinto another individual. An organ or a piece of tissue transplantedfrom one person to another is recognized as nonself by the hostbody and soon provokes an immune response; the tissue is thenkilled, or “rejected,” by the host’s cellular immune system. But ifthe transplant is performed immediately after birth, or if it comesfrom a genetically identical person (an identical twin), the materialis recognized as self and is not rejected.The rejection problem can be overcome by treating a patientwith a drug, such as cyclosporin, that suppresses the immunesystem. Cyclosporin blocks the activation of a transcriptionfactor that is essential for T cell development. However, thisapproach compromises the ability of transplant recipients to defendthemselves against pathogens. This problem must be managedby the use of antibiotics and other drugs to combat infectionsthat develop.42.5 RECAPThe cellular immune response acts against antigensexpressed on the surfaces of virus-infected or mutatedbody cells. Specific receptors on T cells bindto antigen–MHC complexes displayed on the cellsurface. During development, T cells are selectedthat recognize self MHC proteins. Tregs suppressimmune responses to self antigens.• What are the roles of a T cell receptor in cellular immunity?See p. 888• What parts do MHC proteins play in the cellular immuneresponse? See pp. 888–889• What occurs during the cellular immune response to avirus-infected cell? See p. 889 and Figure 42.13We have alluded to genes that encode various components ofthe immune system and to the tremendous diversity in thesecomponents. We will now consider the genetic mechanisms thatmake this diversity possible.How Do Animals Make So Many 42.6 Different Antibodies?Each mature B cell makes one—and only one—specific antibodywith a specific amino acid sequence targeted to a singleantigen. As we have seen, there are millions of possible epitopesto which a human is exposed or can be exposed. Withmillions of possible amino acid sequences in immunoglobu-42.6 | HOW DO ANIMALS MAKE SO MANY DIFFERENT ANTIBODIES? 8911 A self antigenbinds to MHCand is exposedon the cell surface.2 A Treg cellbinds to theantigen–MHCcomplex.3 Binding stimulates Treg to makeinterleukin–10, which suppresses the TH orTC cell and causes it to undergo apoptosis.A T cell has the T cell receptorfor the self antigen.TC orTH cellClass I MHCproteinT cellreceptorCell presentingself antigenInterleukin-10Treg cellT cellreceptor42.14 Tregs and Tolerance A special class of T cells called regulatoryT cells (Tregs) inhibit the activation of the immune system in response toself antigens.lins, the molecular genetic explanation would be that there aremillions of genes, each one coding for one antibody molecule.A simple calculation using approximate numbers shows thatthis is impossible:one immunoglobulin=500 amino acids codedheavy chain for by 1500 bp DNAone immunoglobulin=200 amino acids codedlight chain for by 600 bp DNAtherefore,one antibody (2 each identical lightand heavy chains) = 2100 bp DNA10 million different antibodies = 21 billion bp DNAThis is 7 times the size of the entire human genome! There mustbe another way to generate antibody diversity.It turns out that instead of a single gene encoding each immunoglobulin,the genome of the differentiating B cell has alimited number of alleles for several regions or domains of theprotein, and that combinations of these alleles generate diversity.In this section we will describe the unusual process ofshuffling this genetic deck to generate the enormous immunologicaldiversity that characterizes each individual mammal.Then we will see how similar events produce five classes of immunoglobulinswith different cellular locations or functions inthe body.Antibody diversity results from DNA rearrangementand other mutationsEach gene encoding an immunoglobulin chain is in reality a“supergene” assembled by means of genetic recombinationfrom several clusters of smaller genes scattered along part of achromosome (Figure 42.15). Every cell in the body has hundredsof immunoglobulin genes located in separate clusters thatare potentially capable of participating in the synthesis of boththe variable and constant regions of immunoglobulin chains. Inmost body cells and tissues, these genes remain intact and separatedfrom one another. But during B cell development, thesegenes are cut out, rearranged, and joined together in DNA recombinationevents. One gene from each cluster is chosen randomlyfor joining, and the others are deleted (Figure 42.16).In this manner, a unique immunoglobulin supergene is assembledfrom randomly selected “parts.” Each B cell precursorassembles two supergenes, one for a specific heavy chain andthe other, assembled independently, for a specific light chain.This remarkable example of irreversible cell differentiation generatesan enormous diversity of immunoglobulins from thesame starting genome. It is a major exception to the generalizationthat all somatic cells derived from the fertilized egg haveidentical DNA.In both humans and mice, the gene clusters encoding immunoglobulinheavy chains are on one pair of chromosomesand those for light chains are on two others. Two families ofgenes encode the variable region of the light chain, and threefamilies encode the variable region of the heavy chain.Figure 42.15 illustrates the gene families that encode the constantand variable regions of the heavy chain in mice. There aremultiple genes that encode each of three parts of the variableregion: 100 V, 30 D, and 6 J genes. Each B cell randomly selectsone gene from each of these clusters to make the final codingsequence (VDJ) of the heavy-chain variable region. So the numberof different heavy chains that can be made through this randomrecombination process is quite large:100 V × 30 D × 6 J = 18,000 possible combinationsNow consider that the light chains are similarly constructed,with a similar amount of diversity made possible by randomrecombination. If we assume that the degree of potential light-892 CHAPTER 42 | IMMUNOLOGY: ANIMAL DEFENSE SYSTEMSThe variable region for the heavy chain of a specificantibody is encoded by one V gene, one D gene, andone J gene. Each of these genes is taken from a poolof like genes.The constant region is selected from another pool ofgenes. The number of possible combinations to makean immunoglobulin heavy chain from these pools ofgenes is (100 V )(30 D)(6 J)(8 C) = 144,000.m d g3 g1 g2b g2a e aV1, V2…V~100(variable)genesJ1, J2…J6( j oining)genesGenes encoding variable region (V)DNA 1 2 3 4…100 1 2…30 1…6Genes encoding constant region (C)D1, D2…D~30(diversity)genes42.15 Heavy-Chain Genes Mouseimmunoglobulin heavy chains have fourdomains, each of which is coded for byone of a number of possible genesselected from a cluster of similar genes.GO TO Animated Tutorial 42.5 • A B Cell Builds an AntibodyyourBioPortal.comchain diversity is the same as that for heavy-chain diversity, thenumber of possible combinations of light- and heavy-chain variableregions is:18,000 different light chains × 18,000 different heavy chains =324 million possibilities!There are other mechanisms that generate even more diversity:• When the DNA sequences that encode the V, D, and J regionsare rearranged so that they are next to one another,the recombination event is not precise, and errors occur atthe junctions. This imprecise recombination can createframeshift mutations, generating new codons at the junctions,with resulting amino acid changes.• After the DNA sequences are cut out and before they arejoined, the enzyme terminal transferase often adds some nucleotidesto the free ends of the DNA pieces. These additionalbases create insertion mutations.• There is a relatively high spontaneous mutation rate in immunoglobulingenes. Once again, this process creates manynew alleles and adds to antibody diversity.When we include these possibilities with the millions of combinationsthat can be made by random DNA rearrangements, itis not surprising that the immune system can mount a responseto almost any natural or artificial substance.Once the pretranscriptional processing is completed, eachsupergene is transcribed and then translated to produce an immunoglobulinlight chain or heavy chain. These combine toform an active immunoglobulin protein.This genetic system is capable of still other kinds of changes.The B cell or plasma cell can switch the immunoglobulin classit produces while retaining its antigen specificity.The constant region is involved in immunoglobulinclass switchingTable 42.3 describes the different classes of immunoglobulinsand their functions. Generally, a B cell makes only one class ata time. But class switching can occur, in which a B cell changesthe immunoglobulin class it synthesizes. For example, a B cellmaking IgM can switch to making IgG.Early in its life, a B cell produces IgM molecules, which arethe receptors responsible for its recognition of a specific antigen.At this time, the constant region of the heavy chain is encodedby the first constant region gene, the μ gene (see Figure42.16). If the B cell later becomes a plasma cell during a humoralimmune response, another deletion occurs in the cell’s DNA,positioning the variable region genes (consisting of the same V,D, and J genes) next to a constant region gene farther away onthe original DNA molecule (Figure 42.17). Such a DNA deletionresults in the production of a new immunoglobulin witha different constant region of the heavy chain, and therefore adifferent function (see Table 42.3). However, this immunoglobulinhas the same variable regions, and therefore the same antigenspecificity, as the IgM produced by the parent B cell. Thenew immunoglobulin protein falls into one of the four classes(IgA, IgD, IgE, or IgG), depending on which of the constantregion genes is placed adjacent to the variable region genes.42.6 | HOW DO ANIMALS MAKE SO MANY DIFFERENT ANTIBODIES? 893After V, D, J, and C DNA segmentshave been joined, the resultingfunctional supergene is transcribed.Splicing of the primary RNA transcriptremoves the transcripts of anyintrons and of any extra J genes.J segments C segmentsVDJ joiningTranscriptionSplicingTranslationV D JEmbryonicDNAVariable regionB cell DNAPrimary RNA transcriptmRNAV D Jmm(B) Transcription andRNA splicing(A) DNA rearrangementLightchainHeavy chainV Dm dmConstant region42.16 Heavy-Chain Gene Recombination and RNASplicing Two types of rearrangement in the heavychaingene clusters are required for antibody formation.(A) Prior to transcription, DNA is rearranged to join oneeach of the V, D, and J genes into a variable regionsupergene. (B) After transcription, RNA splicing joins theVDJ region to the constant region.What triggers class switching, and what determines the classto which a given B cell will switch? T-helper (TH) cells direct thecourse of an immune response and determine the nature ofthe attack on the antigen. These T cells induce class switchingby sending cytokine signals. The cytokines bind to receptors onthe target B cells, generating signal transduction cascades thatresult in recombination and altered expression of the immunoglobulingenes.42.6 RECAPThe immune system can make millions of immunoglobulinswith different specificities by rearrangingthe genes that encode the variable regions of theheavy and light chains. Additional mechanisms createmutations that provide for further diversity in theimmunoglobulins. The class of the immunoglobulinmolecule can be changed by recombination of thegenes coding for the constant region of the heavychain.• How can millions of antibodies with different specificitiesbe generated from a relatively small number ofgenes? See pp. 892–893 and Figures 42.15 and 42.16• What is the role of the constant region of the immunoglobulinin class switching? See pp. 893–894and Figure 42.17Given the numerous and complex cellular interactions that activatethe immune system and generate antibody diversity, youmay have perceived many points at which the immune systemcould fail. We now turn to several situations in which oneor more components of this complex system malfunction.What Happens When the Immune 42.7 System Malfunctions?Sometimes the immune system fails us in one way or another.It may overreact, as in an allergic reaction; it may attack self antigens,as in an autoimmune disease; or it may function weaklyor not at all, as in an immune deficiency disease.Allergic reactions result from hypersensitivityAn allergic reaction arises when the human immune systemoverreacts to (is hypersensitive to) a dose of antigen. Althoughthe antigen itself may present no danger to the host, the inappropriateimmune response may produce inflammation andother symptoms, which can cause serious illness or even death.Allergic reactions are the most familiar examples of this phenomenon.Two types of allergic reactions involve immediate hypersensitivityand delayed hypersensitivity.IMMEDIATE HYPERSENSITIVITY Immediate hypersensitivity ariseswhen an allergic individual is exposed to an antigen (in this casereferred to as an allergen) from the environment, such as a food,pollen, or the venom of an insect. In response to the allergen,the individual makes large amounts of IgE. When this happens,mast cells in tissues and basophils in the blood bind the constantend of the IgE. If that individual is exposed to the same allergenagain, binding of the allergen to the IgE causes the mastcells and basophils to rapidly release a large amount of histamine(Figure 42.18). This results in symptoms such as dilationof blood vessels, inflammation, and difficulty breathing. If nottreated with antihistamines, a severe allergic reaction can leadto death. It is not known why some people produce excessiveamounts of IgE in response to allergens. There is some evidencefor genetic factors predisposing people to allergic responses.Allergy to pollen can be treated using a process called desensitization.The process involves injecting small amounts of theallergen (typically just an extract of the offending plant tissue)into the skin—enough to stimulate IgG production but notenough to stimulate IgE production. The next time the personis exposed to the allergen, IgG binds to it, tying it up before IgEcan bind it and exert its harmful effects.Desensitization does not work for food allergens because theIgE response to those substances is so strong that even a smallamount of antigen provokes it. The best approach for those withfood allergies—there are an estimated 3 million in the U.S.—isto avoid foods containing the allergens. This can be difficult, butfood labels listing all the ingredients are helpful. Molecular biologistsare beginning to identify the antigens that act as allergens,with the hope of developing vaccines or genetically modifiedfoods that lack the allergenic epitopes.894 CHAPTER 42 | IMMUNOLOGY: ANIMAL DEFENSE SYSTEMSDeletion of part ofthe constantregion causes anew C gene to beexpressed (IgGinstead of IgM).DNArearrangementTranslationTranscriptionand splicingmRNAIgM geneDNA VV D J g2bVariable regionConstant regionJg3g1D g2b g2a e aDNA V D J g2b g2a e adm42.17 Class Switching: Exchanging C Regions The supergene producedby joining V, D, J, and C genes (see Figure 42.16) may later bemodified, causing a different C region to be transcribed. This modification,known as class switching, is accomplished by deletion of part of the constantregion gene cluster. Shown here is class switching from IgM to IgG.42.7 | WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE IMMUNE SYSTEM MALFUNCTIONS? 8951 An allergen bindsto IgE on a B cell.2 This causes a clone of plasmacells to form, releasing IgE.4 The allergen binds toIgE on a mast cell.5 Mast cells quickly release histamine,resulting in an allergic reaction.3 IgE binds to receptors onmast cells or basophils.INITIAL RESPONSE: SENSITIZATIONLATER RESPONSEIgEantibody B cellMast cellReceptorHistamineDELAYED HYPERSENSITIVITY Delayed hypersensitivity is an allergicreaction that does not begin until hours after exposure to anantigen. In this case, the antigen is taken up by antigen-presentingcells and a T cell response is initiated. An example is the rashthat develops after exposure to poison ivy.Autoimmune diseases are caused by reactionsagainst self antigensErrors in the selection of T cells in the thymus can result in Tcells that bind to antigen–MHC complexes that carry self antigens.Although the precise origin of autoimmunity is not known,there are several hypotheses:• Failure of clonal deletion. Aclone of lymphocytes making antibodiesagainst self antigens that should have been destroyedby Tregs and apoptosis is not destroyed.• Molecular mimicry. T cells that recognize a nonself antigen,such as a virus, also recognize something on the self antigenthat has a similar structure.Autoimmunity does not always result in disease, but a numberof autoimmune diseases are common:• People with systemic lupus erythematosis (SLE) have antibodiesto many cellular components, including DNA and nuclearproteins. These antinuclear antibodies can cause seriousdamage when they bind to normal tissue antigens andform large circulating antigen–antibody complexes, whichbecome stuck in tissues and provoke inflammation.• People with rheumatoid arthritis have difficulty in shuttingdown a T cell response. An inhibitory protein called CTLA4blocks T cells from reacting to self antigens. People withrheumatoid arthritis may have low CTLA4 activity, whichresults in inflammation of the joints due to the infiltrationof excess white blood cells.• Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is the most common autoimmunedisease in women over 50. Immune cells attack thyroidtissue, resulting in fatigue, depression, weight gain, andother symptoms.• Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, or type I diabetes, occursmost often in children. It is caused by an immune reactionagainst several proteins in the cells of the pancreas thatmanufacture the protein hormone insulin. This reactionkills the insulin-producing cells, so people with type I diabetesmust take insulin daily in order to survive.AIDS is an immune deficiency disorderThere are a number of inherited and acquired immune deficiencydisorders. In some individuals, T or B cells never form; in others,B cells lose the ability to give rise to plasma cells. In eithercase, the affected individual is unable to mount an immune responseand thus lacks a major line of defense against pathogens.The TH cell is perhaps the most central component of the immunesystem because of its essential roles in both the humoraland cellular immune responses (see Figure 42.6). This cell is thetarget of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the retrovirus thatresults in acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS).HIV can be transmitted from person to person in body fluidscontaining the virus (such as blood, semen, vaginal fluid, orbreast milk). The recipient tissue is either blood (by transfusion)or a mucous membrane lining an organ (the mucus contains ahigh concentration of lymphocytes). HIV initially infectsmacrophages, TH cells, and antigen-presenting dendritic cellsin the blood and tissues. At first there is an immune responseto the viral infection, and TH cells are activated. But because HIV42.18 An Allergic Reaction An allergenis an antigen that stimulates B cells to makelarge amounts of IgE antibodies, which bindto mast cells and basophils. When the bodyencounters the allergen again, these cellsproduce large amounts of histamine, whichhave harmful physiological effects.infects the TH cells, they are killed both by HIVitself and by TC cells that lyse infected TH cells.Consequently, TH cell numbers decline after thefirst month or so of infection. Meanwhile, the extensiveproduction of HIV by infected cells activatesthe humoral immune system. Antibodiesbind to HIV and the complexes are removed byphagocytes. The HIV level in blood goes down.There is still a low level of infection, however,because of the depletion of TH cells (Figure42.19). This process reaches a low, steady-statelevel called the “set point.” This point variesamong individuals and is a strong predictor ofthe rate of progression of the disease. For mostpeople it takes 8–10 years, even without treatment, for the moresevere manifestations of AIDS to develop. In some it can takeas little as a year; in others, 20 years.During this dormant period, people carrying HIV generallyfeel fine, and their TH cell levels are adequate for them tomount immune responses. Eventually, however, the virus destroysthe TH cells, and their numbers fall to the point where theinfected person is susceptible to infections that the TH cellswould normally eliminate. These infections result in conditionssuch as Kaposi’s sarcoma, a skin tumor caused by a herpesvirus;pneumonia caused by the fungus Pneumocystis jirovecii; andlymphoma tumors caused by the Epstein–Barr virus. These conditionsresult from opportunistic infections because the pathogenstake advantage of the crippled immune system of the host. Theylead to death within a year or two.The molecular biology of HIV and its life cycle have been intensivelystudied (see Figure 16.6). Drug treatments are focusedon inhibiting the viral proteins, such as reverse transcriptase thatmakes cDNA from the viral RNA, and viral protease that cuts thelarge precursor viral protein into its final active proteins. Combinationsof such drugs result in long-term survival. Unfortunately,like many medical treatments, HIV drugs are not availableto all who need them—particularly in poor regions of theworld where AIDS is prevalent. As a result, there are about 2million deaths per year worldwide from AIDS.42.7 RECAPFailures of the immune system include allergic reactions(caused by hypersensitivity to antigens), autoimmunediseases (caused by reactions against selfantigens), and immune deficiency disorders.• How does immediate hypersensitivity develop?See p. 894 and Figure 42.18• What is an autoimmune disease? Give an example.See p. 895• Describe the course of events in the human immunesystem during HIV infection. See pp. 895–896 andFigure 42.19896 CHAPTER 42 | IMMUNOLOGY: ANIMAL DEFENSE SYSTEMSThe TH cell concentrationgradually falls andthe HIV concentrationrises.As TH cells are furtherreduced, immunefunction is impaired andopportunistic infectionsoccur.Almost allnatural immunityis lost.Soon after the initialHIV infection, theimmune systemdestroys most of thevirus.124This is the set point oflow-level HIV production.3Weeks Years6 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10HIV concentrationHIV and T cell concentrationTH cell concentration42.19 The Course of an HIV Infection AnHIV infection may be carried, unsuspected, formany years before the onset of symptoms.42.1 What Are the Major Defense Systems of Animals?• Animal defenses against pathogens are based on the body’sability to distinguish between self and nonself.• Nonspecific (innate) defenses are inherited mechanisms thatprotect the body from many kinds of pathogens. They typicallyact rapidly.• Specific defenses are adaptive mechanisms that respond tospecific pathogens. They develop more slowly than nonspecificdefenses but are long-lasting.• Many defenses are implemented by cells and proteins carried inthe blood plasma and lymph. Review Figure 42.1, WEBACTIVITY 42.1• White blood cells fall into two broad groups. Phagocytesinclude macrophages that engulf pathogens by phagocytosis.Lymphocytes, which include B cells and T cells, participate inspecific responses. Review Figure 42.2, ANIMATED TUTORIAL42.1CHAPTER SUMMARY
42.1 What Are the Major Defense Systems of Animals?• Animal defenses against pathogens are based on the body’sability to distinguish between self and nonself.• Nonspecific (innate) defenses are inherited mechanisms thatprotect the body from many kinds of pathogens. They typicallyact rapidly.• Specific defenses are adaptive mechanisms that respond tospecific pathogens. They develop more slowly than nonspecificdefenses but are long-lasting.• Many defenses are implemented by cells and proteins carried inthe blood plasma and lymph. Review Figure 42.1, WEBACTIVITY 42.1• White blood cells fall into two broad groups. Phagocytesinclude macrophages that engulf pathogens by phagocytosis.Lymphocytes, which include B cells and T cells, participate inspecific responses. Review Figure 42.2, ANIMATED TUTORIAL42.1
42.2 What Are the Characteristics of the NonspecificDefenses?• An animal’s nonspecific defenses include physical barriers suchas the skin, and competing resident microorganisms known asnormal flora. Review Table 42.1• The complement system consists of more than 20 differentantimicrobial proteins that act to alter membrane permeabilityand kill targeted cells.• Circulating defensive cells, such as phagocytes and naturalkiller cells, eliminate invaders.• The inflammation response activates several types of cells andproteins that act against invading pathogens. Mast cells releasehistamines, which cause blood vessels to dilate and become“leaky.” Review Figure 42.3, WEB ACTIVITY 42.2• A cell signaling pathway involving the toll-like receptor stimulatesthe body’s defenses. Review Figure 42.442.3 How Does Specific Immunity Develop?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 42.2• The specific immune response recognizes specific antigens,responds to an enormous diversity of antigenic determinants,distinguishes self from nonself, and remembers the antigens ithas encountered.• Each antibody and each T cell is specific for a single antigenicdeterminant. T cell receptors bind to antigens on the surfacesof virus-infected cells and abnormal cells.• The humoral immune response is directed against pathogensin the blood, lymph, and tissue fluids. The cellular immuneresponse is directed against an antigen established within ahost cell. Both responses are mediated by antigenic fragmentsbeing presented on a cell surface along with the proteins of themajor histocompatibility complex.• Clonal selection accounts for the specificity and diversity of theimmune response and for immunological memory. ReviewFigure 42.7• An activated B or T lymphocyte produces effector cells thatattack the antigen, and memory cells that are long-lived andrarely divide. Effector B cells are called plasma cells and secretespecific antibodies.• Vaccination is inoculation with modified pathogens or antigensthat provoke an immune response but are not pathogenic.42.4 What Is the Humoral Immune Response?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 42.3• B cells are the basis of the humoral immune response. Naïve Bcells are activated by binding of antigen and by stimulation byTH cells with the same specificity, and then form plasma cells.These cells synthesize and secrete specific antibodies.• The basic unit of an immunoglobulin is a tetramer of fourpolypeptides: two identical light chains and two identical heavychains, each consisting of a constant region and a variableregion. Review Figure 42.9, WEB ACTIVITY 42.3• The variable regions determine the specificity of animmunoglobulin, and the constant regions of the heavy chaindetermine its class. There are five classes of immunoglobulinswith different body locations and functions. Review Table 42.3• A monoclonal antibody can be made by fusing a B cell with atumor cell to form a hybridoma. Review Figure 42.1042.5 What Is the Cellular Immune Response?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 42.4• T cells are the effectors of the cellular immune response. T cellreceptors are somewhat similar in structure to theimmunoglobulins, having variable and constant regions.Review Figure 42.11• There are three types of T cells. Cytotoxic T cells recognize andkill virus-infected cells or mutated cells. T-helper cells directboth the cellular and humoral immune responses. Regulatory Tcells inhibit the other T cells from mounting an immuneresponse to self antigens.• The genes of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)encode membrane proteins that bind antigenic fragments andpresent them to T cells. Review Figures 42.12 and 42.13• Organ transplants are rejected when the host’s immune systemrecognizes MHC proteins on transplanted tissue as nonself andinitiates an immune defense attacking the foreign tissue.42.6 How Do Animals Make So Many DifferentAntibodies?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 42.5• B cell genomes undergo random recombinations of genes codingfor regions of the immunoglobulin polypeptide chains sothat each cell can produce a specific antibody protein. Theimmunoglobulin chains derive from “supergenes” that are constructedfrom different combinations of V, D, J, and C genes.This DNA rearrangement and rejoining yields millions of differentimmunoglobulin chains. Review Figures 42.15 and 42.16• Once a B cell becomes a plasma cell, it may undergo classswitching, in which a deletion of one or more constant regiongenes results in the production of an immunoglobulin with adifferent constant region and a different function. ReviewFigure 42.1742.7 What Happens When the Immune SystemMalfunctions?• An allergic reaction is an inappropriate immune responsecaused by immediate or delayed hypersensitivity to certainantigens. Review Figure 42.18• Autoimmune diseases result when the immune system producesB and T cells that attack self antigens.• Immune deficiency disorders result from failure of one or anotherpart of the immune system. AIDS is an acquired immunedeficiency disorder arising from depletion of the TH cells as aresult of infection with HIV. Review Figure 42.19