“Anew world record!” These words convey the thrillof world-class athletic competition. But asrecords are broken by mere centimeters or byfractions of a second, are we reaching absolute limits tohuman performance? We can assess many physiologicallimits to extreme performance—maximum breathingrate, for example, or the maximum rate at which the heartcan supply blood to the muscles. A less obvious physiologicallimit is temperature.The 2008 New York City Marathon took place on a cold,clear, windy day in November. For the third time, the firstplacewoman in this 41-km race was world record holderPaula Radcliffe. Radcliffe had also been expected to winthe women’s marathon back in the 2004 Olympics. Butthat race took place on a hot, humid day in Athens. Overcomeby heat stress, Radcliffe collapsed 6 km from thefinish line. The critical difference in the two races wasprobably temperature.Thermal stress can have more serious consequencesthan losing a race. Every year some athletes die of heatstroke, which can occur when internal body temperatureexceeds 41oC. This elevated internal temperature resultsin the failure of major organs and, in more than 20 percentof cases, death. Soldiers in the desert are at extremerisk of heat stroke, as are firefighters. Agricultural, industrial,and construction workers are also subject to theadverse affects of heat. Biologists at Stanford Universitydeveloped a technology to cool individuals in suchsituations, and in the process discovered a way toenhance athletic performance.Working muscles produce heat, which is carried by theblood to skin surfaces, where it is lost to the environment.Not all skin surfaces are equally good at dissipating heat,however. Because fur impedes heat loss, mammalsevolved efficient bare-skin heat-loss portals such as thenose, tongue, footpads, and parts of the face. These areashave specialized blood vessels that can act like radiatorsto disperse heat or close down to conserve heat. Humansare not furred, but we retain these ancestral blood vesselsin our hands, feet, and face (which is why we blush). TheStanford team designed a device to amplify heat extractionfrom these areas.The heat extractor is a chamber that encases the handand is sealed at the wrist. The hand is in contact with aCool it!40Limits to Performance Paula Radcliffe, photographed hereduring her winning performance at the 2008 New York CityMarathon, collapsed from heat stress during the 2004 Olympicmarathon. When the body’s internal temperature is subjected toextreme heat, its homeostatic mechanisms may fail.PART NINE ANIMALS: FORM AND FUNCTIONHow Do Multicellular Animals Supply 40.1 the Needs of Their Cells?All animal cells need nutrients and oxygen from the environmentand must eliminate carbon dioxide and other waste productsof metabolism to the environment. The cells of very smallor very thin aquatic animals meet these needs by direct exchangeswith the external environment. In such animals, no cellis far from direct contact with the water it lives in; the water containsnutrients, absorbs waste, and provides a relatively unchangingphysical environment. Most cells of larger animals donot have direct contact with the external environment, and theirneeds must be served by an environment that is wholly internalto the animal.An internal environment makes complexmulticellular animals possibleThe cells of multicellular animals exist within an internal environmentof extracellular fluid (ECF). A human, for example, isabout 60 percent water. Two-thirds of that water is containedwithin cells, and one-third makes up the ECF that is our internalenvironment. About 20 percent of that extracellular fluid, or3 liters, is the blood plasma that circulates in our blood vessels.The rest—about 11 liters—is the interstitial fluid that bathesevery cell of the body (Figure 40.1). Individual cells get theirnutrients from this interstitial fluid and dump their waste productsinto it. As long as conditions in this internal environmentare held within certain limits, the cells are protected fromchanges or harsh conditions in the external environment. Astableinternal environment makes it possible for an animal to occupyhabitats that would kill its cells if they were exposed to itdirectly. How is the internal environment kept constant?As multicellular organisms evolved, cells became specializedfor maintaining specific aspects of the internal environment.In turn, the internal environment enabled these specializations,since each cell did not have to provide for all of itsown needs. Some cells evolved to be the interface betweenthe internal and the external environments and to provide thenecessary transport functions to get nutrients in and movewastes out. Other cells became specialized to provide internalfunctions such as circulation of the extracellular fluids, energystorage, movement, and information processing. The evolutionof physiological systems to maintain the internal environmentmade it possible for multicellular animals to becomelarger, thicker, and more complex, and to occupy many differenthabitats.IN THIS CHAPTER we will explore the internal environmentthat serves the needs of all of the body’s cells. We willsurvey the cell and tissue types that make up physiologicalsystems and discuss how these systems maintain the internalenvironment within certain physiological limits, a conditioncalled homeostasis. Homeostasis will be described usingone important example, the regulation of body temperature.cooled surface. A mild vacuum in the chamber pullsmore blood into the hand, enabling the cool surface toextract more heat. With this device, an active individual’sbody temperature rises more slowly, and cools morerapidly during rest. An unexpected benefit is that coolingreduces fatigue and greatly increases exercise capacity.In one study, college freshmen improved their pushupperformance at a rate of 5 push-ups a day withoutcooling, but 9 push-ups a day with cooling. Some menand women in the study achieved more than 800 pushupsin a workout session.Human beings survive in environments that are extremelyhot or extremely cold because we have thephysiological and behavioral means of regulating ourinternal body temperature—an example of homeostasis,the maintenance of a “steady state” in our internalenvironment.CHAPTER OUTLINE40.1 How Do Multicellular Animals Supply the Needs ofTheir Cells?40.2 How Does Temperature Affect Living Systems?40.3 How Do Animals Alter Their Heat Exchange withthe Environment?40.4 How Do Mammals Regulate Their BodyTemperatures?A Cooling Glove The heat extractor increases heat loss andallows the body to perform at a higher level in severe conditions.The composition of the internal environment is constantlybeing challenged by the external environment and by the metabolicactivity of the cells of the body. The maintenance of stableconditions (within a narrow range) in the internal environmentis called homeostasis. If a physiological system fails tofunction properly, homeostasis is compromised and cells aredamaged and can die. To avoid the loss of homeostasis, physiologicalsystems must be controlled and regulated in responseto changes in both the external and internal environments.Physiological systems maintain homeostasisThe activities of all physiological systems are controlled—speeded up or slowed down—by actions of the nervous and endocrinesystems. But to regulate the internal environment, informationis required. As an analogy, think of driving a car (Figure40.2). To regulate the speed of your car, you have to know bothhow fast you are going and how fast you want to go. The desiredspeed is a set point, or reference point; the reading on yourspeedometer is feedback information. Any difference betweenthe set point and the feedback information is an error signal. Errorsignals suggest corrective actions, such as stepping on theaccelerator or brake.Some components of physiological systems are called effectorsbecause they effect changes in the internal environment. Effectorsare controlled systems because their activities are controlledby commands from regulatory systems. Regulatorysystems, in contrast, obtain, process, and integrate information,then issue commands to controlled systems.Important components of any regulatory system are the sensorsthat provide the feedback information to be comparedwith the internal set point. How is information from the sensorsused?Negative feedback is the most common use of sensory informationin regulatory systems. Negative feedback informationis used to counteract the influence that created an error signal.Whatever force is pushing the system away from its set pointmust be “negated.” In our car analogy, the recognition that youare going too fast is negative feedback that causes you to releasethe accelerator and press the brake.834 CHAPTER 40 | PHYSIOLOGY, HOMEOSTASIS, AND TEMPERATURE REGULATIONPlasma is the fluidportion of the bloodand is 20% of allextracellular fluid.Intracellular fluid is 66%of total body water.It exchanges moleculeswith the interstitial fluid.The remaining 80% ofextracellular fluid is theinterstitial fluid that bathesthe cells of the body.Red blood cell Blood vesselIntracellularfluidInterstitialfluid40.1 The Internal Environment The “internal environment” is theextracellular fluid, or ECF. ECF, which accounts for about one-third of totalbody water, is made of the blood plasma and the interstitial fluid. Thephysiological composition of the ECF must remain stable within narrowlimits, and maintaining that stability is the job of the body’s organ systems.SPEEDL I M I T65 1 The posted 2speed limit isthe set point……and the speedometerprovides feedback. Thedifference between thetwo is an error signal.3 Feedforward—sightingthe deer—changes theset point. Slow down!4 The driver acts as a regulatory system,using feedback information to controlthe brakes and accelerator.40.2 Control, Regulation, and Feedback The body uses information and control mechanisms tomaintain homeostasis, just as a driver uses them to regulate the speed of a car.Although not as common as negative feedback, positive feedbackis also seen in physiological systems. Rather than returninga system to a set point, positive feedback amplifies a response(i.e., it increases the deviation from the set point).Examples of regulatory systems that use positive feedback arethe responses that empty body cavities, such as urination anddefecation. Another example is sexual behavior, in which a littlestimulation causes more behavior, which causes more stimulation,and so on. Positive feedback responses tend to reach alimit and terminate rapidly. The birth process is a good example.Contractions of the uterus stretch the birth canal, whichstimulates more and stronger contractions until the baby is delivered,at which time contractions cease.Feedforward information is another feature of regulatory systems.The function of feedforward information is to change theset point. Seeing a deer in the road when you are driving is anexample of feedforward information; this information takesprecedence over the posted speed limit, and you slow down.Before the start of a race, hearing the command “on your mark”is feedforward information that raises your heart rate beforeyou begin to run. Feedforward information predicts a changein the internal environment before that change occurs.These principles of control and regulation help organize ourthinking about physiological systems. Once we understand howa system works, we can then ask how it is regulated. The examplewe will explore in this chapter is the regulation of body temperature.But first we need to become acquainted with the importantstructural features that all physiological systems havein common.Cells, tissues, organs, and systems are specializedto serve homeostatic needsEach physiological system is composed of discrete organs, suchas the liver, heart, lungs, and kidneys. These organs are madeup of assemblages of cells known as tissues. Although there aremany specialized cell types, there are only four kinds of tissues:epithelial, muscle, connective, and nervous.The word “tissue” is often used in a general way to refer toa piece of an organ, such as “lung tissue” or “kidney tissue.” Aswe will see, an organ always consists of more than one of thefour kinds of tissues.EPITHELIAL TISSUES Epithelial tissues are sheets of denselypacked, tightly connected epithelial cells (Figure 40.3). Epithelialcells create boundaries between the inside and the outside ofthe body and between body compartments; they line the bloodvessels and make up various ducts and tubules.Filtration and transport are important functions of epithelialcells; they both act as barriers and provide transport acrossthose barriers. They control what molecules and ions can movebetween the blood and the interstitial fluid. They can selectivelytransport ions and molecules from one side of an epithelialmembrane to the other. Examples are the absorption of nutrientmolecules from your gut and the secretion of acid into yourstomach. Some epithelial cells, like those in the lungs or at theskin’s surface, are extremely thin (squamous) to facilitate movementof substances across them.The skin is epithelial tissue that receives much wear and tear.Accordingly, epithelial cells in the deepest layer of the skin havea high rate of cell division, producing new cells that move progressivelyto the skin surface, die, and are shed. A cross sectionof the skin reveals the layering of cells, from the newlyformed ones on the innermost germinal layer to the dead oneson the surface. Because of this appearance, the skin is called astratified epithelium (see Figure 40.3A). In contrast, gut epitheliumconsists of a single layer of tall, closely packed cells calleda simple columnar epithelium. The epithelial cells of your gutare replaced about every 5 days; those in your skin are renewedevery 1 to 2 months.40.1 | HOW DO MULTICELLULAR ANIMALS SUPPLY THE NEEDS OF THEIR CELLS? 835(A) Squamous cells (C) Cuboidal epithelial cellsStratifiedepithelium(B) Columnar epitheliumCilia30 μm20 μm25 μm40.3 Epithelial Tissue (A) Epithelial cells make upthe outer layers of skin. They are stratified, fromextremely thin (squamous) older cells at the surface torapidly dividing new layers that will rise to the surfaceas older cells are shed. (B) Ciliated columnar epitheliumfrom the male reproductive duct (the vas deferens).(C) A single layer of cuboidal epithelial cells forms atubule in the kidney. These cells have many moleculartransport functions.Epithelial cells have many other roles. Some secrete hormones,milk, mucus, digestive enzymes, or sweat. Others havecilia that move substances over surfaces or through tubes (seeFigure 40.3B). Epithelial cells can also provide information tothe nervous system. Smell and taste receptors, for example,are epithelial cells that detect specific chemicals.MUSCLE TISSUES Muscle tissues consist of elongated cells thatcontract to generate forces and cause movement. Muscle tissuesare the most abundant tissues in the body, and they use most ofthe energy produced in the body. All muscle cells contain longprotein polymers called actin and myosin which interact tocause muscle cells to contract and exert force. There are threetypes of muscle tissues (Figure 40.4).• Skeletal muscles (so named because they mostly attach tobones) are responsible for locomotion and other bodymovements such as facial expressions, shivering, andbreathing.• Cardiac muscle makes up the heart and is responsible forthe beating of the heart and the pumping of blood. Individualcardiac muscle cells are branched, and the interweavingof these branches gives heart muscle structuralstrength.• Smooth muscle is responsible for involuntary generation offorces in many hollow internal organs such as the gut, bladder,and blood vessels.Skeletal muscles are under both voluntary and involuntary control,as will be described in detail in Section 48.1. Cardiac andsmooth muscles are under involuntary control; they are controlledby physiological regulatory systems.CONNECTIVE TISSUES In contrast to densely packed epithelialand muscle tissues, connective tissues are generally dispersedpopulations of cells embedded in an extracellular matrix that theysecrete (Figure 40.5). The composition and properties of the matrixdiffer among types of connective tissues.Protein fibers are an important component of the extracellularmatrix of connective tissue cells. The dominant protein inthe extracellular matrix is collagen (see Figure 5.25), which makesup about 25 percent of total body protein. Collagen fibers arestrong and resistant to stretch, giving strength to the skin andto the connections between bones and between bones and muscles.The fibers provide a netlike framework for organs, givingthem shape and structural strength.Elastin is another type of protein fiber in the extracellularmatrix of connective tissues. It is so named because it can bestretched to several times its resting length and then recoil.Fibers composed of elastin are most abundant in tissues thatare regularly stretched, such as the walls of the lungs and thelarge arteries.Cartilage and bone are connective tissues that provide rigidstructural support. In cartilage, a network of collagen fibers isembedded in a flexible matrix consisting of a protein–carbohydratecomplex, along with a specific type of cell called a chondrocyte.Cartilage, which lines the joints of vertebrates, is resistantto compressive forces. Since it is flexible, it providesstructural support for flexible structures such as external earsand noses. The extracellular matrix in bone also contains manycollagen fibers, but it is hardened by the deposition of the mineralcalcium phosphate. We discuss cartilage and bone in greaterdetail in Section 48.3.836 CHAPTER 40 | PHYSIOLOGY, HOMEOSTASIS, AND TEMPERATURE REGULATION(A)(B)(C)30 μm15 μm15 μm40.4 Muscle Cells Contain Protein Filaments The filaments of two specificproteins—actin and myosin—interact to cause contraction and generate force inmuscle tissue. (A) The regular arrangement of actin and myosin filaments results inthe striated (striped) appearance of skeletal muscle. (B) The individual cells of cardiacmuscle are branched and form a strong structural meshwork. (C) The actin andmyosin filaments of smooth muscle are not regularly arranged and thus it does nothave a striated appearance.Adipose cells form loose connective tissue that stores lipids.Adipose tissue, or “fat,” is a major source of stored energy. Italso cushions organs, and layers of adipose tissue under the skincan provide a barrier to heat loss.Blood is a connective tissue consisting of cells dispersed in anextensive liquid extracellular matrix, the blood plasma. We presentmany of the proteins and cellular elements of blood in Section42.1, and we will discuss blood again in Section 50.4.NERVOUS TISSUES The two basic cell types in nervous tissuesare neurons and glial cells (Figure 40.6). Neurons come in manyshapes and sizes, and all neurons encode information as electricalsignals. These signals can travel over long extensions calledaxons to communicate with other neurons, muscle cells, or secretorycells through the release of chemicals called neurotransmitters.Neurons control the activities of most organ systems. Glialcells do not generate or conduct electrical signals, but they providea variety of supporting functions for neurons. There aremore glial cells than neurons in the nervous system.Chapters 45, 46, and 47 detail the many fascinating propertiesof nervous tissues.Organs consist of multiple tissuesOrgans include more than one kind of tissue,and most organs include all four (Figure40.7). The wall of the gut is a good example.Its inner surface is lined with a sheetof columnar epithelial cells. Different epithelialcells secrete mucus, enzymes, orstomach acid. Beneath the epithelial liningis connective tissue. Within this connectivetissue are blood vessels, neurons,and glands (clusters of secretory epithelial40.1 | HOW DO MULTICELLULAR ANIMALS SUPPLY THE NEEDS OF THEIR CELLS? 837(A)MatrixCartilage cells(chondrocytes)Layers of mineralizedbone cells(B) Blood vessel (C)White cell types(see Chapter 42)Plasma (matrix)Red blood cells25 μm 250 μm40.5 Connective Tissues (A) Cartilage makes structures such as the 15 μmear stiff but flexible. Cartilage cells, or chondrocytes, secrete an extracellularmatrix rich in collagen and elastin fibers. In this micrograph, theelastin fibers are stained dark blue. (B) Bone is the mineral-rich connectivetissue of the vertebrate skeleton. (C) Blood is unique among the connectivetissues, consisting of blood cells floating in an extracellular matrixof plasma.Cell bodyof neuronAxon(A) (B) AstrocytesCapillaries20 μm 60 μm40.6 Nervous Tissue Includes Neurons andGlial Cells (A) This human neuron consists ofa cell body, a number of processes that receiveinput from other neurons, and one long axon thatsends information to other cells. (B) A sectionthrough human brain tissue shows astrocytes, atype of glial cell. Glial cells provide support andprotection for neurons, including creating a barrierthat protects the brain from many chemicalscirculating in the blood.cells). Concentric layers of smooth muscle tissue enable the gutto contract to mix food with digestive juices. Anetwork of neuronsbetween the muscle layers controls these movements.An individual organ is usually part of an organ system—a group of organs that work together to carry out certain functions.The stomach and small intestine, for example, are part ofthe digestive system. The digestive system is the subject ofChapter 51.40.1 RECAPThe internal environment provides for the needs ofall the cells that make up a complex animal. Organsand organ systems control the composition of theinternal environment. The activities of organs and organsystems are regulated to maintain homeostasisof the internal environment.• Explain the difference between negative and positivefeedback control mechanisms. See pp. 834–835 andFigure 40.2• Describe a key function of each of the four kinds of tissuefound in animals. See pp. 835–837 and Figures40.3–40.7Subsequent chapters will describe each of the organ systemsmentioned above in much greater detail. The remainder of thischapter focuses on the mechanisms of homeostasis, using oneimportant variable of the internal environment—its temperature—as our example.How Does Temperature Affect 40.2 Living Systems?Temperatures vary enormously over the face of Earth, from theboiling hot springs of Yellowstone National Park to the interiorof Antarctica, where the temperature can fall below –80°C. Cells,however, can function over only a narrow range of temperatures.If cells cool below 0°C, ice crystals form and damage cellstructures. Some animals have adaptations, such as antifreezemolecules in their blood, that help them resist freezing; otherscan survive freezing. Generally, however, cells must remainabove 0°C to stay alive.The upper temperature limit for survival in most cells is about45°C (although some specialized algae can grow in hot springsat 70°C, and some archaea live at near 100°C). In general, proteinsbegin to denature and lose their function as temperatures riseabove 40°C. Therefore, most cellular functions are limited to therange between 0°C and 40°C, which approximates the thermallimits for life. Each particular species, however, usually has muchnarrower limits. To stay within those limits in spite of environmentalconditions, animals have evolved thermoregulatory adaptationsthat give them certain thermal tolerances that determinetheir distribution ranges. When environments change rapidly, asmay be happening with global climate warming, animals mayfind themselves in situations that exceed their thermal tolerances.Q10 is a measure of temperature sensitivityEven between 0°C and 40°C, changes in tissue temperature createproblems for animals. Most physiological processes, like thebiochemical reactions that constitute them, are temperaturesensitive,going faster at higher temperatures (see Figure 8.21).The temperature sensitivity of a reaction or process is describedin terms of Q10, a factor calculated by dividing the rate of aprocess or reaction at a certain temperature, RT, by that rate ata temperature 10°C lower, RT–10:Q10 can be measured for a simple enzymatic reaction or for acomplex physiological process, such as rate of oxygen consumption.If a reaction or process is not temperature-sensitive, it hasa Q10 of 1. Most biological Q10 values are between 2 and 3. AQ10of 2 means that the reaction rate doubles as temperature increasesby 10°C, and a Q10 of 3 indicates a tripling of the rateover a 10° temperature range (Figure 40.8).Changes in body temperature can disrupt an animal’s physiologybecause not all of the biochemical reactions that constitutethe metabolism of an animal have the same Q10. These biochemicalreactions are linked together in complex networks. Theproducts of one reaction are the reactants for other reactions.QRRTT1010=−838 CHAPTER 40 | PHYSIOLOGY, HOMEOSTASIS, AND TEMPERATURE REGULATIONThe digestive tract is lined with epithelialcells. Some secrete digestive juices, somesecrete hormones, and some absorb nutrients.The mucosa underlies the epitheliumand contains much connective tissue.Smooth musclelayers move foodthrough the gut.An organ iscomposedof tissues.Epithelial cells and connectivetissue cover the abdominal organsand line the abdominal cavity.A network of nervous tissue controlsand coordinates contractions of thesmooth muscle.StomachSmallintestine40.7 Tissues Form Organs Most organs contain more than one ofthe four tissue types. The organs of the human digestive system, such asthe stomach and small intestine, are made up of all four.Because different reactions have different Q10’s, changes in tissuetemperature will shift the rates of some reactions more thanothers, disrupting the overall network. To maintain homeostasis,organisms must be able to compensate for or preventchanges in body temperature.Animals acclimatize to seasonal temperaturesThe body temperature of some animals (especially aquatic animals)is coupled to environmental temperature. The body temperatureof a fish in a pond, for example, will be the same as thewater temperature, which might range from 4°C in winter to24°C in summer. If we bring that fish into the laboratory in thesummer and measure its metabolism at different temperatures,we will demonstrate a Q10 relationship and can predict what thefish’s metabolic rate will be in its pond in the winter. However,if we bring that fish back into the laboratory in the winterand measure its metabolic rate at winter pond temperature,we will find the rate to be much higher than we predicted.The fish’s biochemistry and physiology have acclimatized to theseasonal change in water temperature so that the fish can remainactive at winter temperatures. For example, it may expressisozymes with different temperature optima. The ability to acclimatizemeans that metabolic functions are less sensitive tolong-term changes in temperature than to short-term changes.40.2 RECAPCells can survive only within a narrow range oftemperatures, but even changes within that rangecan be disruptive because different physiologicalprocesses have different temperature sensitivities.• Plot a Q10 = 2.5 curve for a physiological process.See p. 838 and Figure 40.8• Explain how a change in body temperature candisrupt physiological processes. See pp. 838–839We have seen how animals are affected by the temperature oftheir environment. Now let’s take a look at the adaptations thatallow animals to control and regulate their body temperatures.How Do Animals Alter Their Heat 40.3 Exchange with the Environment?Many of us learned to think of animals as being either “coldblooded”or “warm-blooded,” which implies a comparison withour own body temperature and sets mammals and birds apartfrom other animals. This simple classification breaks downwhen we realize that mammals that hibernate become cold, andthat many reptiles and insects can be quite warm when they areactive. Physiologists sometimes classify animals according towhether they have a constant body temperature (homeotherms)or a variable body temperature (poikilotherms). But a deep-seafish has a constant body temperature. Should it be classifiedwith mammals?A thermal classification system that avoids such irrationalresults is one based on the source of heat that predominantlydetermines the temperature of the animal. Ectotherms are animalswhose body temperatures are determined primarily by externalsources of heat. Endotherms regulate their body temperaturesby producing heat metabolically or by using activemechanisms of heat loss.Mammals and birds are endotherms most of the time; otheranimals are ectotherms most of the time. Like the homeotherm/poikilotherm classification, the endotherm/ectothermscheme is not perfect. Therefore we have a third category; a heterothermis an animal that behaves sometimes as an endothermand other times as an ectotherm. For example, a mammal thathibernates is a perfect endotherm over the summer, but duringthe winter it has bouts of hibernation during which its internalheat production falls and it behaves much like an ectotherm. Attimes some ectotherms can produce internal heat and act likeendotherms.Endotherms produce heat metabolicallySection 8.1 described how transfers of energy in biological systemsare always inefficient. With every transfer of energy—fromfood molecules to ATP, from ATP to biological work—some ofthe energy is lost as heat. This is true for both ectotherms andendotherms, so why do endotherms produce more heat? Theanswer is that the cells of endotherms are less efficient at usingenergy than are the cells of ectotherms.In a resting endotherm, most of the energy expended goesinto pumping ions across membranes. K+ is the dominant positiveion inside cells, and Na+ is the dominant positive ion outsidecells. To the extent that cell membranes permit, these ionsdiffuse down their concentration gradients. To maintain theirproper concentrations inside and outside cells, the ions must betransported back “uphill,” which requires expending energy.40.3 | HOW DO ANIMALS ALTER THEIR HEAT EXCHANGE WITH THE ENVIRONMENT? 839This reaction’s ratedoubles with each 10°Crise in temperature.This reaction is nottemperature-sensitive.The Q10’s of mostbiochemical reactions andphysiological processes fallwithin this range.This reaction’s ratetriples with each10°C rise intemperature.10 20 30 40Temperature (°C)Rate of reaction (arbitrary units)1234567895010Q10 = RTRT–106011(Q10 = 2)(Q10 = 3)(Q10 = 1)40.8 Q10 and Reaction Rate The larger the Q10 of a reaction orprocess, the faster its rate rises in response to an increase in temperature.While this is true for both ectotherms and endotherms, the cellsof endotherms tend to be more “leaky” to ions than are those ofectotherms. Thus endotherms must expend more energy (andthus release more heat) than do ectotherms to maintain ion concentrationgradients. This is akin to running on a treadmill:the faster the treadmill goes (analogous to leaking ions), thefaster you have to run (analogous to pumping ions) to remainin the same position.We can speculate that a mutation allowing seemingly faultyor leaky ion channels may have led to the evolution of endothermy.Such a mutation in a small ectotherm may have promotedsufficient heat production to allow this ectotherm to remainactive for a longer time after the sun went down. Thus,for the first endotherms an entirely new nocturnal world of ecologicalopportunities opened, one in which there was less competitionfrom similar-sized ectotherms. Major differences betweenendotherms and ectotherms are their resting metabolicrates—the sum total of all energy expenditures in their bodieswhen at rest—and their responses to changes in environmentaltemperature.Ectotherms and endotherms respond differentlyto changes in temperatureLet’s compare how two similar-sized animals, a lizard (an ectotherm)and a mouse (an endotherm) respond to changes intemperature. We put each animal in a closed chamber and measureits body temperature and metabolic rate as we change thetemperature of the chamber from 37°C to 0°C.The body temperature of the lizard equilibrates with that ofthe chamber, whereas the body temperature of the mouse remainsstable (Figure 40.9A). The metabolic rate of the lizard (alreadymuch lower than that of the mouse) decreases as the temperatureis lowered (Figure 40.9B). In contrast, the mouse’smetabolic rate increases as the chamber temperature falls below25°C. The increase in the mouse’s metabolism producesenough heat to prevent its body temperature from falling. Inother words, the mouse can regulate its body temperature byincreasing its metabolic rate; the lizard cannot.This experiment might lead us to conclude that the ectothermcannot regulate its body temperature, but observations of thelizard in nature do not support this conclusion. In nature, unlikein the laboratory, the lizard’s body temperature is sometimesconsiderably different than the environmental temperature.The desert habitat where the lizard lives can fluctuate by40°C in a few hours. During its daily activities, however, thelizard maintains a fairly stable body temperature by using behaviorto alter its heat exchange with the environment (Figure40.10A). Its behavioral strategies include spending time in a burrow,basking in the sun, seeking shade, climbing vegetation, andchanging its orientation with respect to the sun. While the lizardcan regulate its body temperature quite well, it does so by behavioralmechanisms rather than by altering its internal metabolicheat production.Behavioral thermoregulation is not the exclusive domain ofectotherms (Figure 40.10B). Endotherms usually select the mostcomfortable thermal environment possible. They may changeposture, orient to the sun, move between sun and shade, andmove between still air and moving air, the same as the ectothermin our field experiment. Examples of more complex840 CHAPTER 40 | PHYSIOLOGY, HOMEOSTASIS, AND TEMPERATURE REGULATION…while that of an ectothermequilibrates to theenvironmental temperature.Notice the difference in the two scales. Atall temperatures, the metabolic rate of thelizard is slower than that of the mouse.At colder environmentaltemperatures, metabolicheat production increasesin endotherms……but falls inectotherms.The body temperature of anendotherm remains constant…1020303740Body temperature (°C)0 10 20 30 40Mouse(endotherm)Lizard(ectotherm)(A)2345Metabolic rate of lizard (arbitrary units )0 10 20 30 40(B)12030405010Metabolic rate of mouse (arbitrary units )Environmental temperature (°C) Environmental temperature (°C)Thermoneutralzone40.9 Ectotherms and Endotherms React Differently toEnvironmental Temperatures (A) At the same environmental temperature,an ectotherm and an endotherm of approximately the same bodysize (here, a lizard and a mouse) have different body temperatures. (B)The metabolic rates of the lizard and mouse react in opposite manners tocooler temperatures. (The mouse’s metabolic rate rises again at highertemperatures because, after a certain point, it takes metabolic energy todissipate heat by sweating or panting.)thermoregulatory behaviors include nest construction andsocial behaviors such as huddling. Humans put on or removeclothing and burn fossil fuels to generate the energyto heat or cool buildings.Energy budgets reflect adaptations for regulatingbody temperatureBoth ectotherms and endotherms can influence their bodytemperatures by altering four avenues of heat exchange betweentheir bodies and the environment (Figure 40.11):• Radiation: Heat transfers from warmer objects to coolerones via the exchange of infrared radiation (what youfeel when you stand in front of a fire).• Convection: Heat transfers to a surrounding mediumsuch as air or water as that medium flows over a surface(the wind-chill factor).• Conduction: Heat transfers directly when objects of twodifferent temperatures come into contact (think of puttingan icepack on a sprained ankle).• Evaporation: Heat transfers away from a surface whenwater evaporates on that surface (the effect of sweating).40.3 | HOW DO ANIMALS ALTER THEIR HEAT EXCHANGE WITH THE ENVIRONMENT? 841A lizard basks inthe sun when airtemperature is cold.During the day the lizard shuttlesbetween sun and shade, spending moretime in shade as air temperature rises.The lizard returns to theconstant temperature ofits burrow at night.(A)6 AM 8 AM 10 AM Noon 2 PM 4 PM 6 PM 8 PM10203040Temperature (°C)SunriseSunsetBody temperatureof lizardAir temperaturenear ground surfaceLizardreturns toburrowTemperature of burrow (C) Maccaca fuscata(B) Loxodonta africanaEvaporation of waterfrom body surfacesor breathing passagescools the body.Warmer objectslose heat to coolerobjects by radiation.Conduction is the direct transferof heat when objects of differenttemperatures come into contact.Heat is lost by convectionwhen a stream of air (wind)is cooler than body surfacetemperature.Solar radiationDirectradiationReflectedradiationWindDiffusedradiation40.10 Using Behavior to Regulate Body Temperature (A) The body temperatureof a lizard (an ectotherm) depends on environmental heat, but the lizard canregulate its temperature by moving from place to place within its environment.(B) When air temperatures on the African savanna soar, an elephant (an endotherm)may thermoregulate by showering itself with water. (C) Japanese macaques aresocial primates and will huddle together for warmth.40.11 Animals Exchange Heat with the Environment An animal’sbody temperature is determined by the balance between internalheat production and four avenues of heat exchange with the environment:radiation, convection, conduction, and evaporation.The total balance of heat production and heat exchange can beexpressed as an energy budget, based on the simple fact that ifthe body temperature of an animal is to remain constant, theheat entering the animal must equal the heat leaving it. The heatcoming in usually comes from metabolism and solar radiation(Rabs, for radiation absorbed). Heat leaves the body via the fourmechanisms listed above: radiation emitted (Rout), convection,conduction, and evaporation. The energy budget takes the followingform:Anyone who has experienced a very hot environment knowsthat heat can also enter the body through convection (e.g., thehot desert wind) and conduction (e.g., a hot car seat). In thatcase, the values of those factors become negative in the energybudget equation.The energy budget is a useful concept because any adaptationthat influences the ability of an animal to deal with its thermalenvironment must affect one or more components of thebudget. So the energy budget gives us the ability to quantifyand compare the thermal adaptations of animals. One interestingobservation is that all of the componentson the right side of the energybudget equation—that is, the heat-lossside—depend on the surface temperatureof the animal. One way surface temperaturecan be controlled is by altering theflow of blood to the skin.Both ectotherms and endothermscontrol blood flow to the skinHeat exchange between the internal environmentand the skin occurs largelythrough blood flow. As described at the beginningof this chapter, when body temperaturerises because of exercise, bloodflow to the skin increases, and the skin surfacebecomes warm. The heat that theblood brings from the body core to the skinis lost to the environment through the fouravenues listed above, which helps bringthe body temperature back to normal. Incontrast, when body temperature is toolow or the environment is too cold, theblood vessels supplying the skin constrict,reducing heat loss to the environment.The control of blood flow to the skincan be an important adaptation for an ectothermsuch as the marine iguana (a reptile)of the Galápagos archipelago (Figure40.12). The Galápagos are volcanic islandsthat lie on the equator but are bathed bycold ocean currents. The iguanas bask onhot black lava rocks on the shore, then enterthe cold ocean water to feed on seaweed. When the iguanasare feeding, they cool to the temperature of the sea. Thiscooling lowers their metabolism, making them slower, morevulnerable to predators, and incapable of efficient digestion.They therefore alternate between feeding in the cold sea andbasking on the hot rocks. It is advantageous for iguanas to retainbody heat as long as possible while swimming and to warmup as fast as possible when basking. They can accomplish thesechanges in heat transfer rates by changing their heart rate andthe rate of blood flow to their skin.What about furred mammals? Fur acts as insulation to keepbody heat in, making it possible for mammals to live in verycold climates. When they are active, however, mammals stillmust get rid of excess heat, and it does little good to transportthat heat to the skin under the fur. Thus, as mentioned at the beginningof this chapter, mammals have special blood vessels fortransporting heat to their hairless skin surfaces. Heat loss fromthese areas of skin is tightly controlled by the opening and closingof these special blood vessels. When you are cold, the bloodflow to your hands and feet decreases and they can feel verycold, but when you exercise, these same surfaces can get veryhot quickly.metabolism + Rabs = Rout + convection + conduction + evaporationheatin = heatout842 CHAPTER 40 | PHYSIOLOGY, HOMEOSTASIS, AND TEMPERATURE REGULATIONAs soon as the iguana enters theocean, it begins to cool.The rate of warming is greater thanthe rate of cooling.The iguana’s heart raterises rapidly when itleaves the ocean tobask on the hot rocks.At the same bodytemperature, the heart rateis higher during warmingthan during cooling.The iguana’s heart ratedrops rapidly when itis cooling.10020304050607080901000 10 20 30 40 50 60010203040Body temperature (°C )Time (min)Body temperatureHeart rateHeart rate (beats/minute )IN OCEAN ON SHOREAmblyrhynchus cristatus40.12 Some Ectotherms Regulate Blood Flow to the Skin Galápagos marine iguanas controlblood flow to the skin to alter their heating and cooling rates.Some fishes elevate body temperature byconserving metabolic heatActive fishes can produce substantial amounts of metabolicheat, but they have difficulty retaining any of that heat. Bloodpumped from the heart goes directly to the gills, where it comesvery close to the surrounding water to exchange respiratorygases. So any heat that the blood picks up from metabolicallyactive muscles is lost to the surrounding water as it flowsthrough the gills. It is thus surprising that some large, rapidlyswimming fishes, such as bluefin tuna and great white sharks,can maintain temperature differences as great as 10° to 15°C betweentheir bodies and the surrounding water. The heat comesfrom their powerful swimming muscles, and the ability of these“hot” fishes to conserve that heat is based on the remarkablearrangements of their blood vessels.In the usual (“cold”) fish circulatory system, oxygenatedblood from the gills collects in a large dorsal vessel, the aorta,which travels through the center of the fish, distributing bloodto all organs and muscles (Figure 40.13A). “Hot” fishes havea smaller central dorsal aorta, and most of their oxygenatedblood is transported in large vessels just under the skin (Figure40.13B). The cold blood from the gills is thus kept close tothe surface of the fish. Smaller vessels transporting this coldblood into the muscle mass run parallel to vessels transportingwarm blood from the muscle mass back toward the heart. Sincethe vessels carrying the cold blood into the muscle are in closecontact with the vessels carrying warm blood away, heat flowsfrom the warm to the cold blood by conduction and is thereforeretained in the muscle mass.Because heat is exchanged between blood vessels carryingblood in opposite directions, this adaptation is called a countercurrentheat exchanger. It keeps the heat within the musclemass, enabling these fishes to have an internal body temperatureconsiderably higher than the water temperature. Why isit advantageous for the fish to be warm? Each 10°C rise in muscletemperature increases the fish’s sustainable power outputalmost threefold, giving it a faster foraging capability!Some ectotherms regulate heat productionSome ectotherms raise their body temperature by producingheat. For example, the powerful flight muscles of many insectsmust reach 35° to 40°C before the insects can fly, and they mustmaintain these high temperatures during flight. Such insectsproduce the required heat by contracting their flight muscles ina manner analogous to shivering in mammals. The heat-producingability of insects can be quite remarkable. Probably themost impressive case is a species of scarab beetle that livesmostly underground in mountains north of Los Angeles, California.To mate, these beetles come aboveground, and males flyin search of females. They undertake this mating ritual at night,in winter, and only during snowstorms.Honey bees regulate temperature as a group. They live inlarge colonies consisting mostly of female worker bees thatmaintain the hive and rear the larval offspring of the singlequeen bee. During winter, worker bees cluster around the broodof larvae. They adjust their individual metabolic heat productionand density of clustering so that the brood temperature remainsremarkably constant, at about 34°C, even as the outsideair temperature drops below freezing (Figure 40.14).40.3 | HOW DO ANIMALS ALTER THEIR HEAT EXCHANGE WITH THE ENVIRONMENT? 8431 In the gills, blood isoxygenated and cooledto seawater temperature.1 Blood is oxygenatedin the gills.5 The heart pumpsblood to the gills.The major vein and arteryjust under the skin are atthe same cool temperature.5 The heart pumpsblood to the gills.2 Cold blood flows throughthe center of the fish inthe large dorsal aorta. 2 Cold blood flows from thegills to the body in arteries3 Arteries carry blood just under the skin.to the tissues.3 In the countercurrentheat exchangers, arterialblood flowing into themuscle is warmed byvenous blood flowingout of the muscle.4 Veins return bloodto the heart. 4 Veins under the skinreturn blood to the heart.Vein(A) “Cold” fish (B) “Hot” fishCountercurrentheat exchangerCapillary bed (musclesgenerate heat)ArteryHeart40.13 “Cold” and “Hot” Fishes (A) Most fish species are “cold” fish.Their circulatory systems conduct cool, oxygenated blood from the gillsthrough a large dorsal aorta to the rest of the body. (B) The anatomy of“hot” fish species includes a mechanism—the countercurrent heatexchanger—that allows heat to pass into cold arterial blood from venousblood that has been warmed by the metabolism of the muscles.40.3 RECAPAnimals that metabolically produce their own heatare called endotherms. Those that depend on environmentalsources of heat are called ectotherms.Heat exchange between an animal and its environmentoccurs via radiation, convection, conduction,and evaporation.In terms of the energy budget relationship, why is thecontrol of blood flow to the skin so important forthermoregulation? See p. 842Explain how countercurrent heat exchange makes it possiblefor some fishes to have a body temperaturehigher than that of the surrounding water. See p. 843and Figure 40.13Endotherms must keep their body temperatures within a criticalphysiological range. Let’s look more closely at the evolutionaryadaptations that enable endothermic mammals to maintainthis optimal temperature range.How Do Mammals Regulate 40.4 Their Body Temperatures?As we saw in Figure 40.9, endotherms can respond to changesin environmental temperature by changing their metabolic rate.Physiologists determine metabolic rate by measuring the rateat which an animal consumes O2 and produces CO2. Within anarrow range of environmental temperatures, called the thermoneutralzone (see Figure 40.9B), the metabolic rate of endothermsis low and independent of temperature. The metabolicrate of a resting animal at a temperature within the thermoneutralzone is known as the basal metabolic rate, or BMR.It is usually measured in animals that are quiet but awake andnot using energy for digestion, reproduction, or growth. Thusthe BMR is the rate at which a resting animal is consumingjust enough energy to carry out its minimal body functions.Basal metabolic rates are correlated with body sizeand environmental temperatureAs you might expect, the BMR of an elephant is greater thanthat of a mouse. After all, the elephant is more than 100,000times larger than the mouse. However, the BMR of the elephantis only about 7,000 times greater than that of the mouse. Thatmeans that a gram of mouse tissue uses energy at a rate 15 timesgreater than a gram of elephant tissue (Figure 40.15). Across allof the endotherms, BMR per gram of tissue increases as animalsget smaller.Why should this disproportionate difference exist? We don’tknow for sure. As animals get bigger, they have a smaller ratioof surface area to volume (see Figure 5.2). Since heat productionis related to the volume, or mass, of the animal, but its capacityto dissipate heat is related to its surface area, it was once reasonedthat larger animals evolved lower metabolic rates to avoidoverheating. This explanation is insufficient because the relationshipbetween body mass and metabolic rate holds for even verysmall organisms and for ectotherms, in which overheating is nota problem. Other hypotheses have also been advanced. For example,a larger animal has a greater proportion of support tissue(skin, bone), which is not as metabolically active. The realanswer is probably a mixture of different causative factors.In an endotherm, the metabolic rate versus environmentaltemperature curve represents the integrated response of all ofthe animal’s thermoregulatory adaptations (Figure 40.16). The844 CHAPTER 40 | PHYSIOLOGY, HOMEOSTASIS, AND TEMPERATURE REGULATIONBody surface temperature (°C)40353025201510540.14 Bees Keep Warm in Winter Honey bee colonies survive wintercold because workers generate metabolic heat. In this infrared photographof the center of an overwintering hive, individual bees are discernible bythe heat their bodies produce as they cluster around their queen.Shrew0.01 0.1 1 10 100 1000Body mass, kg (log scale)Metabolic rate (LO2 /kg/hr)01234567DogSheep HumanHorseRat Cat ElephantMouse840.15 The Mouse-to-Elephant Curve On a weight-specific basis, themetabolic rate of small endotherms is much greater than that of largerendotherms. This graph plots O2 consumption per kilogram of body mass(a measure of metabolic rate) against a logarithmic plot of body mass.thermoneutral zone is bounded by a lower and an upper criticaltemperature. Within its thermoneutral zone, an endotherm’s thermoregulatoryadaptations do not require much energy andcould be considered passive; such adaptations include changingposture, fluffing fur, and controlling blood flow to the skin.Outside its thermoneutral zone, however, an endotherm’s thermoregulatoryresponses are active and require considerablemetabolic energy, as shown on the left side of Figure 40.16.Endotherms respond to cold by producing heat andadapt to cold by reducing heat lossWhen environmental temperatures fall below the lower criticaltemperature, endotherms must produce heat to compensate forthe heat they lose to the environment. Mammals can accomplishthis in two ways: shivering and nonshivering heat production.Birds use only shivering heat production.Shivering uses the contractile machinery of skeletal musclesto consume ATP without causing large movements. Shiveringmuscles pull against each other so that little movement otherthan a tremor results. The energy from the conversion of ATPto ADP in this process is released as heat. “Shivering heat production”is perhaps too narrow a term, however; increased muscletone and increased body movements also contribute to increasedheat production in cold environments.Most nonshivering heat production occurs in a specialized adiposetissue called brown fat (Figure 40.17). This tissue looksbrown because of its abundant mitochondria and rich bloodsupply. In brown fat cells, a protein called thermogenin uncouplesproton movement from ATP production, allowing protonsto leak across the inner mitochondrial membrane rather thanhaving to pass through the ATP synthase and generate ATP (reviewthe discussion of the chemiosmotic mechanism and Figure9.9). As a result, metabolic fuels are consumed without producingATP, but heat is still released. Brown fat is abundant innewborns of many mammalian species (including humans),in some adult mammals that are small and acclimatized to cold,and in mammals that hibernate.In spite of their ability to produce heat, endotherms in coldclimates have evolved adaptations to reduce their heat loss andtherefore remain within their thermoneutral zones as muchas possible. Heat is lost from the body surface, and cold-climatespecies have anatomical adaptations that give them smallersurface-to-volume ratios than their warm-climate relatives.These adaptations include rounder body shapes and shorterappendages (Figure 40.18).The most significant means of decreasing heat loss is to increasethermal insulation. Animals adapted to cold climateshave much thicker layers of fur, feathers, or fat than do theirwarm-climate relatives. Fur and feathers are good insulators becausethey trap a layer of still, warm air close to the skin surface.If that air is displaced by water, insulation is drastically reduced.In many species, oil secretions spread through fur or40.4 | HOW DO MAMMALS REGULATE THEIR BODY TEMPERATURES? 845Within the thermoneutral zone,body temperature is regulated bypassive mechanisms, such as heatloss through the skin.Below the lower criticaltemperature, the animalexpends energy to producemetabolic heat.Above the upper criticaltemperature, the animal mustexpends energy to lose heatby panting or sweating.0 10 20 30 40393735Metabolic rateAmbient temperature (ºC)(ºC)RIP0 10 20 30 40 (ºC)RIPMetabolic rateUppercriticaltemperatureLowercriticaltemperatureBasalmetabolicrate (BMR)Body temperature40.16 Environmental Temperature and Mammalian MetabolicRates Outside the thermoneutral zone, maintaining a constant bodytemperature requires expending energy. Outside extreme limits (0°C and40°C in this instance), the animal cannot maintain its body temperatureand dies.GO TO Web Activity 40.1 • Thermoregulation in an EndothermyourBioPortal.comBrown fat occurs inspecific anatomicallocations.VertebralcolumnHeartKidneyWhite fat Brown fat80 μm 80 μmBlood vessel40.17 Brown Fat In many mammals, specialized brown fat tissue producesheat. When looking through a microscope at similar magnifications,we see that white fat cells (left) contain large droplets of lipid but have feworganelles and limited blood supply, whereas brown fat cells (right) arepacked with mitochondria and richly supplied with blood.feathers by grooming are critical for resisting wetting and maintaininga high level of insulation.Decreasing blood flow to the skin is an important thermoregulatoryadaptation in the cold. Constriction of blood vessels inthe skin, and especially in the appendages, greatly improves ananimal’s ability to conserve heat. Countercurrent heat exchangelike we saw in the “hot” fishes is also an important adaptation inthe appendages of endotherms. Blood flowing out to the paw ofa wolf, the hoof of a caribou, or the foot of a bird parallels the flowof the blood returning. Heat is transferred from the outgoing tothe returning blood, thus retaining heat in the animal’s core.Evaporation of water can dissipate heat, but at a costAs environmental temperature rises within an endotherm’sthermoneutral zone, the animal dissipates more of its metabolicheat by increasing blood flow to the skin. When the temperatureexceeds the upper critical temperature, however, overheatingbecomes a problem. For an exercising animal, overheatingcan occur even at low environmental temperatures. Large mammals,especially those in hot habitats such as elephants, rhinoceroses,and water buffaloes, have little or no insulating fur andseek out water to wallow in when the air temperature is high(see Figure 40.10B). Having water in contact with the skingreatly increases heat loss because the heat-absorbing capacityof water is much greater than that of air.Evaporation from external or internal body surfaces throughsweating or panting can also cool an endotherm. Agram of waterabsorbs about 580 calories of heat when it evaporates. If thisevaporation occurs on the skin, most of that heat is absorbedfrom the skin and the underlying blood. Sweat and saliva thatfall off of the body, however, provide no cooling. Thus when theneed for heat loss is greatest, water from the internal environmentcan be squandered with no cooling benefit. Water is heavy,so animals do not carry an excess supply of it, and many hot environmentsare also arid. In habitats that are both hot and dry,sweating and panting are cooling adaptations of last resort.Sweating and panting are active processes that require expendingmetabolic energy. That is why the metabolic rate increaseswhen the upper critical temperature is exceeded (seeFigure 40.16). Asweating or panting animal is generating heatin the process of dissipating heat, which can be a losing battle.The mammalian thermostat uses feedback informationThe thermoregulatory mechanisms and adaptations we havejust discussed work through a regulatory system that integratesinformation from environmental and physiological sources andthen issues commands that control body temperature. Such aregulatory system is based on feedback information, and can bethought of as a thermostat like the one in your home.The major thermoregulatory integrative center of mammalsis at the bottom of the brain in a structure called the hypothalamus.If you slide your tongue back as far as possible along theroof of your mouth, it will be just a few centimeters below yourhypothalamus. The hypothalamus is a key part of many regulatorysystems, including thermoregulation in all vertebrates.In many vertebrates and all mammals, the temperature ofthe hypothalamus itself is the major negative feedback signal,and damage to the hypothalamus can disrupt thermoregulation.The hypothalamus generates a set point like a setting on ahome thermostat. When the temperature of the hypothalamusexceeds or drops below that set point, thermoregulatory responses(the controlled system) are activated to reverse the directionof temperature change.In mammals, experiments show that directly cooling the hypothalamusincreases metabolic heat production and stimulatesconstriction of the blood vessels that supply the skin, thus causingbody temperature to rise. Conversely, mild warming ofthe hypothalamus stimulates dilation of the blood vessels, whilestronger hypothalamic heating stimulates sweating or panting.Consequently, heating the hypothalamus causes the overallbody temperature to fall (Figure 40.19).The mammalian thermoregulatory system has adjustable setpoints and integrates sources of information in addition to hypothalamictemperature. For example, temperature sensors inthe skin register environmental temperature; change in skin tem-846 CHAPTER 40 | PHYSIOLOGY, HOMEOSTASIS, AND TEMPERATURE REGULATION(B) Lepus arcticus(A) Lepus alleni 40.18 Adaptations to Hot and Cold Climates (A) The antelope jackrabbit is found in theSonoran Desert of Arizona. Its large ears serve as heat exchangers, passing heat from the animal’sblood to the surrounding air. (B) The thick fur of the Arctic hare provides insulation in thefrigid winter. This species’ ears and extremities are smaller than those of the jackrabbit.GO TO Animated Tutorial 40.1 • The HypothalamusyourBioPortal.comperature is feedforward information that shiftsthe hypothalamic set point for thermoregulatoryresponses. The set point for metabolic heat productionis higher when skin is cold and lowerwhen skin is warm.Hypothalamic set points are higher duringwakefulness than during sleep, and they arehigher during the active part of the daily cyclethan during the inactive part, even if the animalis awake at both times. Even when an endothermis kept under constant environmental conditions,its body temperature displays a daily cycle ofchanges in set point. This kind of cycle is controlledby an internal circadian rhythm; we discussthese endogenous bodily rhythms in Chapter 54.Fever helps the body fight infectionsFever is an adaptive response that helps the bodyfight pathogens. Afever is a rise in body temperaturein response to molecules called pyrogens.Exogenous pyrogens come from foreign substancessuch as bacteria or viruses that invade the body.Endogenous pyrogens are produced by cells of theimmune system in response to infection.The presence of a pyrogen in the body causesa rise in the hypothalamic set point for the metabolicheat production response. As a result, youshiver, put on a sweater, or crawl under a blanket,and your body temperature rises until it matchesthe new set point. At the higher body temperatureyou no longer feel cold, and you may not feel hot,but someone touching your forehead will say thatyou are “burning up.” Taking aspirin lowers yourset point to normal. Now you feel hot, take offclothes, and even sweat until your elevated bodytemperature returns to normal. Although modestfevers help the body fight infections, extremefevers can be dangerous and must be controlled,usually with fever-reducing drugs.Turning down the thermostatHypothermia is a below-normal body temperature.It can result from starvation (lack of metabolicfuel), exposure to extreme cold, serious illness,or anesthesia. In each of these cases, the dropin body temperature is unregulated. However,many birds and mammals undergo regulateddrops in body temperature to survive periods ofcold and food scarcity, an adaptation known as regulatedhypothermia.Hummingbirds, for example, are very smallendotherms with a high metabolic rate. Just gettingthrough a single day without food could exhausttheir metabolic reserves. Hummingbirdsand other small endotherms can extend the pe-40.4 | HOW DO MAMMALS REGULATE THEIR BODY TEMPERATURES? 847CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE40.19 The Hypothalamus Regulates Body TemperatureIn this laboratory experiment, a mammal’s hypothalamus was subjecteddirectly to temperature manipulation. The body’s responses to theexperimenters’ manipulations were as expected if the hypothalamus isindeed the mammalian “thermostat.”HYPOTHESIS Heating or cooling the mammalian hypothalamus results incorresponding and predictable changes in body temperature.The ground squirrel’s hypothalamus acts as a thermostat.When cooled it activates metabolic heat production;when warmed, it suppresses metabolic heat productionand favors heat loss.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTS3. Measure the animal’s metabolic rate and body temperaturethroughout the period of hypothalamic manipulation.…as did its bodytemperature.When the hypothalamuswas cooled,metabolic heat productionincreased…13…and the animal’s bodytemperature rose.2When thehypothalamus washeated, thesquirrel’s metabolicrate fell…4Ground squirrelGround squirrel brain(sagittal section)HypothalamusMetabolic rateBasalmetabolic rate40350.5 1.0Time (hours)0.5 1.0Time (hours)Bodytemperature (ºC)1. Implant a probe that directly heats or cools the hypothalamus.2. Manipulate the hypothalamic temperature.4035CoolWarmCoolWarmTemperature ofhypothalamus (ºC)riod over which they can survive without food by droppingtheir body temperature during the portion of day or night whenthey are normally inactive. This adaptive hypothermia is calleddaily torpor. Body temperature can drop 10° to 20°C during dailytorpor, lowering metabolic rate and saving energy.Regulated hypothermia that lasts for days or even weeks,with body temperature falling close to the ambient temperature,is called hibernation (Figure 40.20). Many species of mammals,including bats, bears, and ground squirrels, hibernate, butonly one species of bird (the poorwill) has been shown to hibernate.The metabolic rate needed to sustain a hibernating animalmay be only one-fiftieth its basal metabolic rate, and many animalsmaintain body temperatures close to the freezing point.Arousal from hibernation occurs when the hypothalamic setpoint returns to the normal level for a mammal.The ability of hibernators to reduce their thermoregulatoryset point so dramatically probably evolved as an extension ofthe set point decrease that accompanies sleep even in nonhibernatingspecies of mammals and birds.40.4 RECAPWithin the thermoneutral zone, an endotherm controlsits body temperature by altering insulation andblood flow to the skin. When the temperature dropsbelow the thermoneutral zone, the animal increasesmetabolic heat production. Above this zone, itdissipates heat by panting or sweating.• Describe how endotherms produce heat. How doesheat production change with body size? See p. 844and Figure 40.15• Why is dependence on evaporative water loss a dangerousstrategy for dealing with hot environments?See p. 846• What is the nature of negative feedback informationand feedforward information used by the mammalianthermostat? See pp. 847–848 and Figure 40.19848 CHAPTER 40 | PHYSIOLOGY, HOMEOSTASIS, AND TEMPERATURE REGULATIONArousal from hibernationbegins with a large rise inmetabolic heat production,followed by body warming.Entrance into hibernation 3begins with a drop inmetabolic rate followed by adrop in body temperature.1A bout of hibernationmay last several daysto a week or more.20 6 12 18 0 6 12Time (hours)Metabolic rate ( —)Body temperature ( —)(°C)Onset of hibernation Onset of arousal Reentry200One bout of hibernation40Awakeground squirrelHibernatingground squirrel40.20 Repeated Bouts of Hibernation Atthe beginning of each bout of its winter hibernation,the ground squirrel’s metabolic rate andbody temperature fall. Its body temperature maycome into equilibrium with the temperature of itsnest and stay at that level for days. The bout isended by a rise in metabolic heat production thatreturns body temperature to a normal level.40.1 How Do Multicellular Animals Supply the Needs ofTheir Cells?• Multicellular animals provide for the needs of all their cells bymaintaining a stable internal environment, which consists ofthe two types of extracellular fluid: the interstitial fluid, and theplasma of blood. Review Figure 40.1• The regulation of physiological systems is mostly through negativefeedback. Feedforward information functions to changeset points. Review Figure 40.2• The four types of tissues are assemblages of cells. Epithelial tissuesprovide barriers and have secretory and transport functions.The three types of muscle tissue (skeletal, cardiac, andsmooth muscle) are able to contract and are the source bothvoluntary and involuntary movement. Connective tissues,including cartilage, bone, adipose tissue, and blood, are supportivetissues made up of cells embedded in an extracellularmatrix. Nervous tissues process and communicate information;they contain two cell types, neurons and glial cells.Organs are made up of tissues, and most organs contain all fourkinds of tissue. Organs are grouped into organ systems.Review Figure 40.7CHAPTER SUMMARY
40.1 How Do Multicellular Animals Supply the Needs ofTheir Cells?• Multicellular animals provide for the needs of all their cells bymaintaining a stable internal environment, which consists ofthe two types of extracellular fluid: the interstitial fluid, and theplasma of blood. Review Figure 40.1• The regulation of physiological systems is mostly through negativefeedback. Feedforward information functions to changeset points. Review Figure 40.2• The four types of tissues are assemblages of cells. Epithelial tissuesprovide barriers and have secretory and transport functions.The three types of muscle tissue (skeletal, cardiac, andsmooth muscle) are able to contract and are the source bothvoluntary and involuntary movement. Connective tissues,including cartilage, bone, adipose tissue, and blood, are supportivetissues made up of cells embedded in an extracellularmatrix. Nervous tissues process and communicate information;they contain two cell types, neurons and glial cells.Organs are made up of tissues, and most organs contain all fourkinds of tissue. Organs are grouped into organ systems.Review Figure 40.7
40.2 How Does Temperature Affect Living Systems?• Life is sustained within a narrow range of environmental temperatures.Q10 is a measure of the sensitivity of a life process totemperature. A Q10 of 2 means that the reaction rate doubles astemperature increases by 10°C. Review Figure 40.8• Animals can acclimatize to seasonal changes in temperaturethrough biochemical and physiological adaptations.40.3 How Do Animals Alter Their Heat Exchange withthe Environment?• Endotherms can produce considerable metabolic heat to compensatefor heat loss to the environment. Ectotherms generallydo not. Review Figure 40.9• Energy budgets describe all pathways for heat exchangebetween an organism and its environment. The four avenues ofheat exchange are radiation, convection, conduction, andevaporation. Review Figure 40.11• Skin temperature is an important variable, and it can be influencedby blood flow. Circulatory system adaptations such ascountercurrent heat exchange can conserve metabolic heat.Review Figures 40.12 and 40.1340.4 How Do Mammals Regulate Their BodyTemperatures?• Within the thermoneutral zone, mammals have a basal metabolicrate (BMR) that scales with body size. Review Figures40.15 and 40.16, WEB ACTIVITY 40.1• In mammals, control of thermoregulatory effectors relies oncommands from a regulatory center in the hypothalamus. Thisthermostat uses its own temperature as a major negative feedbacksignal, and skin temperature as a feedforward signal.Review Figure 40.19, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 40.1