54 PART TEN ECOLOGYIn 1788, eleven ships carrying settlers from Great Britainlanded on the shores of Australia (then called New SouthWales), laden with all the supplies the settlers anticipatedwould be needed to found a new European colonyon that continent. The arriving cargo included two bullsand five cows, which would provide the foundation of animportant livestock industry. The settlers, however, made agrievous error by failing to bring along dung beetles.Dung beetles are beetle species that during their larvallife consume the dung, or excrement, of vertebrates, primarilygrazing mammals. Some species lay eggs directlyinto the dung pat where it was deposited; others carve upthe dung pat and form the pieces into balls, which arethen rolled away and buried. Australia’s native dungbeetles, accustomed to processing and burying the dry,fibrous dung pats of kangaroos, wombats, and otherindigenous marsupial mammals, were unable to handlethe copious quantities of wet manure produced by therapidly expanding numbers of cattle and sheep.A cow can drop 10 to 12 dung pats every day and, in theabsence of dung beetles to break up and bury the dung,thousands of acres of Australian pasture were renderedunusable for grazing livestock.In addition, the cattle dung proved an exceptionallysuitable habitat for the larvae of the bush fly, Musca vetustissima,so fly populations exploded. The flies becameso pestiferous, flying into people’s faces, that eating,drinking, and even breathing were rendered nearly impossiblein some parts of Australia at certain times of year.In 1964, Australia’s national science organization tackledthe dung problem. Entomologists traveled to Africaand other parts of the world to find dung beetle speciesthat could process and bury cattle dung. The first suchspecies, Onthophagus gazella, was imported from SouthAfrica in 1968. Four more species arrived the next year,and by 1984, over 50 dungbeetle species from aroundthe world had been broughtto Australia to take up thetask of cattle dung cleanup.Multiple species with differenthabitat and climate requirementswere needed tocover the different environmentsacross the Australiancontinent. The project,deemed a resounding success,not only reduced bushDung happensOnthophagus gazella inAustralia Dung beetles fromAfrica are capable of processingthe moist manure of introducedmammals such as cattle.54.1 What Is Ecology?Ecology is the scientific investigation of interactions amongorganisms and between organisms and their physical environment.Ecology is a relatively new branch of the biological sciences;in fact, it did not even have a formal name until 1866. Likeevolutionary biology, ecology owes its existence to Charles Darwin,who described the focus of The Origin of Species as “thecoadaptation of organic beings to each other and to their physicalconditions of life.” Ernst Haeckel, a German biologist whowas profoundly influenced by Darwin, constructed a new wordfor this new enterprise: ecology, from the Greek root oikos,“house,” where “house” embraces all of an organism’s environment.As Haeckel explained, “Ecology is the study of all thosecomplex interrelations referred to by Darwin as ‘the conditionsof the struggle for existence.’”Ecology provides explanations of the perceptible, palpableworld. Although the consequences of enzyme–substrate interactionscan be visible, the reactions themselves are not readilyvisible to the casual observer. In contrast, interactions amongorganisms, and between organisms and their environment, can,with persistence and ingenuity, be observed. Analysis of thoseobservations, however, often requires additional investigation.That butterflies visit flowers has been observed, and admiredaesthetically, for centuries; that butterflies perform a useful serviceto the flowers they visit by transporting pollen is an ecologicalinsight less than 250 years old.The need for sound science in making decisions about ourown interactions with the environment is another importantreason for studying ecology. Humans are part of the biotic environmentof a tremendous variety of organisms, and our activitieshave profound effects on energy flow and nutrient cyclingthrough the physical environment. Ecologists can provideobjective data on the consequences of human activities. Anunderstanding of ecology greatly improves our ability to growfood sustainably; to manage pests and diseases safely and effectively;and to deal with natural disasters such as floods andfires. The greater our understanding of ecological interactions,the greater the likelihood that we can accomplish these thingswithout causing a cascade of unanticipated consequences forourselves and other organisms.Ecology is not the same as environmentalismIn defining what ecology is, it is important to emphasize whatecology is not. “Ecology” is sometimes equated with “environmentalism,”but the two terms are not equivalent. Ecology is ascience that generates knowledge about interactions in the nat-IN THIS CHAPTER we will introduce and define thefield of ecology. We will see how the physical features of theenvironment, including climate and geological history, influencethe distribution and abundance of organisms. Nextwe will introduce and describe the major biomes, biogeographicregions, and aquatic environments across whichEarth’s organisms are distributed.fly populations, but had other desirable effects. The beetlesreduced the incidence of parasitic infections in cattleby roundworms, hookworms, and other dung-breedingworms, and they increased pastureland productivity byreleasing nitrogen from the dung into the soil.The passengers and crew of the ships that broughtcattle to Australia had no idea that they were carryingout a massive ecological experiment. By intent or by accident,people have been moving all kinds of organismsfrom their native habitats to places they have never livedbefore. It is now abundantly clear that introducing organismsinto existing communities can have unanticipatedrepercussions and that even small organisms canhave large effects on energy flow and nutrient cycling inecosystems.CHAPTER OUTLINE54.1 What Is Ecology?54.2 Why Do Climates Vary Geographically?54.3 What Is a Biome?54.4 What Is a Biogeographic Region?54.5 How Is Life Distributed in Aquatic Environments?Freed from Bush Flies The importation of dung beetlesessentially saved the livestock industries of Australia fromplagues of bush flies breeding in the moist dung of cattle andother imported mammals.ural world; as a field of inquiry, it is not inherently focused onhuman concerns. Environmentalism is the use of ecologicalknowledge, along with economics, ethics, and many other considerations,to inform both personal decisions and public policyrelating to stewardship of natural resources and ecosystems.Ecologists study biotic and abiotic componentsof ecosystemsFrom its beginnings, ecology has encompassed both the living,or biotic, components and the abiotic, or physical and chemical,components of the environment. But the field has advancedand diversified considerably since Haeckel’s time. A continuousinflux of new tools—mathematical models, molecular techniques,and satellite imaging, to name just a few—as well asnew connections to other fields, particularly the physical sciences—have dramatically changed ecological research. Its ultimategoal, however, remains the same: to identify and understandthe biotic and abiotic forces that influence thedistribution and abundance of organisms.54.1 RECAPEcology is the scientific investigation of interactionsamong organisms and between organisms and theirphysical environment.• What are some reasons to consider ecology a usefulscientific enterprise? See p. 1141• How does ecology differ from environmentalism?See pp. 1142–1143Climate is one of the abiotic factors that determine the kindsof organisms that can survive and reproduce in a particularplace. Because climates set limits on the distribution and abundanceof organisms, understanding Earth’s climates is a goodplace to begin our study of ecology.54.2 Why Do Climates Vary Geographically?The terms weather and climate both refer to atmospheric conditions—temperature, humidity, precipitation, wind directionand velocity—but they refer to different timescales. Weather is the short-term state of atmosphericconditions at a particular place and time,whereas climate refers to the average atmosphericconditions, and the extent of their variation, at aparticular place over a longer time. In other words,climate is what you expect; weather is what youget. The responses of organisms to weather areusually short-term—seeking shelter from a suddenrainstorm, for example, or shivering to keepwarm when the temperature drops. Responses toclimate, on the other hand, tend to be adaptationsthat affect physiology, morphology, and behavior.These adaptations are among the forces driving speciationover evolutionary time.Global climates are solar poweredSolar energy input, which determines air temperature, is themajor determinant of climates on Earth. The intensity of solarradiation varies from place to place due to the shape of Earthand the tilt of its axis, and its orbit around the sun. The amountof solar energy reaching a given unit of Earth’s surface dependsprimarily on the angle of the sun’s rays (Figure 54.1). At highlatitudes (areas close to the poles), sunlight strikes Earth’s surfaceat an angle, so the incoming solar energy is distributed overa larger area (and is thus less intense) than at the Equator, wheresunlight strikes Earth’s surface perpendicularly. Moreover,when coming in at an angle, the sun’s rays must pass throughmore of Earth’s atmosphere, so more of their energy is absorbedand reflected before it reaches the ground. Because of this differencein solar energy input, air at the poles is colder than airat the Equator. The average temperature of the air over thecourse of the year decreases about 0.4°C for every degree of latitude(about 110 km) at sea level. In addition, because of the tiltof Earth’s axis relative to the sun, higher latitudes experiencegreater variation in both day length and the angle of arrivingsolar energy over the course of a year, leading to more seasonalvariation in temperature.In the atmosphere closest to Earth’s surface, air temperaturesalso decrease with elevation, so temperatures at sea level arewarmer than temperatures on mountaintops at the same latitude.Solar energy input determines atmosphericcirculation patternsWhen a parcel of air is warmed, it expands (that is, its moleculesmove farther apart) and, because it is less dense than cool air,1142 CHAPTER 54 | ECOLOGY AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LIFEAt and near theEquator, sunlighthits Earth directly,delivering moreheat and light atany given spot.Toward the poles, the sun’s rayshit Earth at an oblique angle andare spread over a larger area,diffusing their energy.EquatorNorthPoleSouthPoleConstanttilt of 23.5°54.1 Solar Energy Input Varies with Latitude The angleof incoming sunlight affects the amount of solar energy thatreaches a given unit of Earth’s surface. This view shows earlysummer in the Northern Hemisphere; the angle of sunlight onthe hemispheres will shift as the seasons change.the warm air rises. As it rises, however, it cools because thereare fewer molecules to retain heat. Cool air cannot hold as muchmoisture as warm air, so the expanding cooling air releasesmoisture in the form of precipitation. Air in the region surroundingthe equator receives the greatest input of solar energy. Asthis tropical air warms, it rises, cools, and releases large amountsof rainfall. And, as this warm air rises into the atmosphere, itis replaced by surface air flowing in from the north and south(Figure 54.2).The air that moves from the north and south into the equatorialtropics is replaced by air from aloft that descends at latitudesof roughly 30°N and 30°S, having traveled away from theequator high in the atmosphere. This air, which cooled and lostits moisture as it rose, now descends, warms, and takes up moisturerather than releasing it. Earth’s great deserts, such as theSahara of Africa, the Gobi of China, and the deserts of Australiaand the American southwest are located at these latitudes.At about 60° latitude, air rises again and moves either towardor away from the Equator. At the poles, where there is little solarenergy input, air descends again. These cyclic movementsof air masses are largely responsible for the prevailing wind patternsat Earth’s surface.Global oceanic circulation is driven by wind patternsThe rotation of Earth on its axis also influences prevailingwinds. The velocity of rotation is fastest at the equator, whereEarth’s diameter is greatest, and slowest close to the poles. Astationary air mass has the same rotational velocity as doesthe Earth at the same latitude. As an air mass moves toward theequator, however, its rotational movement becomes slower thanthat of Earth beneath it. Conversely, the rotational movementof an air mass moving poleward is faster than that of the surfacebeneath it. Therefore, moving air masses are deflected tothe right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in theSouthern Hemisphere. Air masses moving toward the equatorfrom the north and south veer to become the northeast andsoutheast trade winds, respectively. Air masses moving awayfrom the equator also veer, becoming the westerly winds thatprevail at mid-latitudes (Figure 54.3A).Incoming solar radiation also affects patterns of water movementin Earth’s oceans. Solar energy heats the atmosphere andpowers the wind, which in turn, through frictional drag, movesthe water it blows over (Figure 54.3B). Thus global air circulationpatterns drive the circulation patterns of surface ocean waters,known as currents. The trade winds, for example, cause currentsto converge at the equator and move westward until theyencounter a continental land mass. At that point, the currentsdivide, with some water moving north and some moving southalong continental shores. As these currents move toward thepoles, the water veers right in the Northern Hemisphere andleft in the Southern Hemisphere, just as the winds do.Ocean currents transport heat, and thus have a large effecton Earth’s climates. The poleward movement of water that haswarmed while in the tropics transfers large amounts of heat tohigh latitudes. The Gulf Stream, for example, brings warm waterfrom the tropical Atlantic Ocean (including the Gulf of Mexico)north across the Atlantic to northern Europe, making theclimate there considerably milder than that of correspondinglatitudes in North America.In addition to moving water laterally, the trade winds canalso cause water to move vertically to influence climate. As tradewinds pull surface water away from an area, deeper colder watercan rise to replace it. An upwelling is an area where waterfrom depths below 50 meters rises to mix with and replacewarmer surface waters. The trade winds drive upwellings atthe equator; other wind-driven currents create upwellings alongcoastlines.54.2 | WHY DO CLIMATES VARY GEOGRAPHICALLY? 1143Rising air releasesmoisture; forestecosystem.Descending air absorbsmoisture from the land;desert latitude. Cold desertsForestsForestsTropical forestsHot desertsHot desertsCold deserts90°90°60°60°30°30°0°RisingairRising airDescendingairDescending air30°N30°S0°Sunlight54.2 Air Circulation in Earth’sAtmosphere Solar energy drivessurface air patterns. Moist, warm airrises and releases moisture as precipitation.Cool, dry air descends,absorbing moisture from the atmosphereand surface.Organisms adapt to climatic challengesThe climatic conditions in a region—especially temperature andwater availability— act as selective agents on the organisms thatlive there. As a consequence, many organisms display adaptationsto climatic conditions that can involve physiological, morphological,and/or behavioral specializations.Metabolic specializations help many organisms cope with anenvironment that periodically becomes too hot, too cold, toodry, or short of food. These specializations are manifested invarious forms of resting states that can become a programmedpart of the organism’s life cycle. Estivation (torpor or dormancyduring summer), hibernation (torpor or dormancy during winter),and diapause (the invertebrate equivalent of hibernation)are such states, characterized by dramatically reduced metabolicactivity and enhanced physiological resistance to the adverseconditions (see Section 40.4). These states persist until environmentalsignals indicate that conditions are again conduciveto growth.1144 CHAPTER 54 | ECOLOGY AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LIFEThe EquatorialCountercurrentarises between thehemispheric currents.The continentsdeflect oceancurrents.Winds at Earth’s surface aredeflected clockwise in theNorthern Hemisphere…… and counterclockwisein the Southern Hemisphere.90°(A)(B)90°60°EasterliesEasterlies60°30°30°0°WesterliesWesterliesNE Trade WindsSE Trade WindsHigh pressureHigh pressureLow pressureAtmosphericcirculation(see Figure 54.2) Wind patternsLatitude90°60°30°0°30°60°90°KuroshioCurrentBenguelaCurrentGulfStreamLabradorCurrentNorthAtlanticDriftWest Wind Drift West Wind DriftN. Pacific Drift54.3 Global Winds and Oceanic Circulation (A) The speed ofEarth’s rotation combines with air circulation patterns to create a globalpattern of wind directions. (B) The surface currents of the ocean are drivenprimarily by wind patterns.To deal with extremely low temperatures, cold-hardy organismsare capable of surviving by a variety of strategies, chiefamong which is producing antifreezes. Microbes, sponges, Arcticfishes, and many temperate-zone insects are among the organismsthat produce antifreezes to lower the freezing pointof their cell contents or body fluids. One of only two floweringplant species native to Antarctica, the freeze-tolerant hairgrass(Deschampsia antarctica) survives by producing proteins that inhibitthe formation of damaging large ice crystals. In Alaska, thewood frog (Rana sylvatica), the only amphibian found north ofthe Arctic Circle, survives temperatures of –6˚C for over a monthwith up to 65 percent of its body fluid frozen solid (Figure54.4A). The frog avoids damage to its cells by allowing fluidsto freeze in extracellular spaces.Adaptation to climatic conditions is often reflected in differencesin morphology. For example, some endotherms living incold climates have proportionally rounder shapes and shorterappendages than their relatives adapted to warmer climates,which gives them a smaller surface area and allows them to conserveheat more easily (see Figure 40.14). Pigmentation can alsoinfluence rates of heat loss and gain. The larvae of some hornwormmoths of the genus Manduca are black if they hatch attemperatures below 20˚C but are green if the temperature isabove that threshold. Black individuals absorb more sunlightand survive at temperatures likely to be lethal to their greenconspecifics. When temperature is not an issue, the cryptic greenpigmentation is favored because it provides protection frompredators (Figure 54.4B).Behavioral mechanisms for temperature regulation oftencomplement physiological and morphological adaptations, particularlyamong ectotherms. Basking by lizards and evaporativecooling by honeybees are just two examples. Another importantbehavioral adaptation to climatic conditions is changingone’s location to find a more suitable microclimate. A microclimateis a subset of climatic conditions in a small specific areathat generally differ from those in the environment at large. Forexample, desert lizards maintain their body temperature byspending time in an underground burrow and moving aboutthe surface only as dictated by environmental conditions (seeFigure 40.10). While surface temperatures may fluctuate wildly,the microclimate of the burrow is buffered against such changes.In addition to such localized movements, long-distancemovements can be key adaptations to climatic challenges. Manyorganisms seek new places to live when local conditions deteriorate.If repeated seasonal changes alter an environment inpredictable ways, organisms may evolve life cycles that appearto anticipate those changes. Migration, one response to suchcyclic environmental changes is discussed in Section 53.5.Most changes in the abiotic environment, both short-termand long-term, happen independently of anything organismsdo. Storms rage, the seasons come and go, and glaciers advanceand retreat uninfluenced by the organisms that must deal withtheir effects. Other environmental changes, however, are influencedby the activities of organisms. As we will see in subsequentchapters, many significant changes in the environmentto which organisms must adapt are caused by other organisms,and many characteristics of organisms have been shaped by thehistory of such interactions.54.2 RECAPLatitudinal differences in solar energy input createpatterns of atmospheric circulation, and those prevailingwinds drive oceanic circulation. Organismsdeal with climatic challenges by means of physiological,morphological, and behavioral adaptations.• How does latitudinal variation in solar energy inputdrive global air circulation patterns? See pp. 1142–1143and Figure 54.2• How do global air circulation patterns drive oceancurrents? See p. 1143 and Figure 54.3The tremendous variation in Earth’s climates has given rise tomany different assemblages of organisms. Ecologists havefound it useful to classify and name environments based ontheir ecological similarities.54.2 | WHY DO CLIMATES VARY GEOGRAPHICALLY? 1145(A) Rana sylvatica (B) Manduca quinquemaculata54.4 Evolutionary Adaptationsto Climate (A) Wood frogs cansurvive frigid Alaskan winters byallowing up to 65 percent of theirbody fluids to freeze. (B) The larvaeof some hornworm moths(genus Manduca) have adaptivepigmentation. The black phenotypeallows the caterpillar toabsorb sunlight more efficientlyand survive at cooler temperatures;the cryptic green phenotypeis favored if temperature isnot an issue.54.3 What Is a Biome?A biome is an environment that is defined by its climatic andgeographic attributes and characterized by ecologically similarorganisms, particularly its dominant plants. By providing threedimensionalstructure and by modifying microclimates near theground, the dominant plants of a terrestrial environmentstrongly influence the lives of the other organisms living there.In contrast, aquatic environments, discussed in Section 54.5, areless dependent on plants for their structure.The same biome may be present in several widely separatedplaces across the globe, depending in large part on the distributionof suitable climatic conditions (Figure 54.5). The identitiesof the species in geographically separate regions may differ,but through convergent evolution in response to similarselective forces (see Section 22.1), organisms in similar biomesare likely to share many physiological, morphological, and behavioraladaptations.The distributions of biomes are determined largely by annualpatterns of temperature and rainfall. In some biomes, suchas temperate deciduous forest, precipitation is relatively constantthroughout the year, but temperature varies strikingly betweensummer and winter. In other biomes, both temperatureand precipitation change seasonally. In the tropics, seasonal temperaturefluctuations are small and annual cycles are dominatedby wet and dry seasons. Tropical biome types are determinedprimarily by the length of the dry season.The descriptions of biomes presented here are very generaland fall far short of encompassing the variation that can be foundwithin each biome. Furthermore, the boundaries between biomestend to be arbitrary. Although sometimes an abrupt changeis apparent in a landscape, more often one biome graduallymerges into another. Despite these uncertainties, recognizing themajor biomes of the world is useful inasmuch as these environmentsshare ecological attributes irrespective of their location.1146 CHAPTER 54 | ECOLOGY AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LIFE30ºN30ºSEquatorTropical evergreen forestTropical deciduous forestThorn forestTropical savannaHot desertChaparralCold desertTemperate grasslandTemperate evergreen forestTemperate deciduous forestBoreal forestHigh mountains Arctic tundra(boreal forest and tundra)Polar ice capGO TO Animated Tutorial 54.1 • BiomesyourBioPortal.com54.5 The Global Distribution of Biomes The distribution of biomes isbased primarily on vegetation patterns and is strongly influenced byannual patterns of temperature and precipitation.Tundra is found at high latitudes and high elevationsThe tundra biome is found in the Arctic and at high elevationsin mountains at all latitudes. In Arctic tundra, the vegetationconsists of low-growing perennial plants and is underlain bypermafrost—soil permeated with permanently frozen water. Thetop few centimeters of the soil thaw during the short summers,when the sun may be above the horizon 24 hours a day. Eventhough there is little precipitation, lowland Arctic tundra is wetbecause water cannot drain through the permafrost.Alpine tundra is found at high elevations outside polar regions.Tropical alpine tundra is not underlain by permafrost, sophotosynthesis and most other biological activities continue (albeitslowly) throughout the year. A variety of plant growthforms are present in tropical alpine tundra, including low-growingshrubs, rosette perennials, and grasses.Many tundra plants have hairy leaves that trap heat; theflowers of some species move over the course of the day, trackingthe sun’s warmth. Most animals are either summer migrantsor are dormant for much of the year. Resident birds and mammals,such as the ptarmigan and Arctic fox, have thick fur orfeathers that may change color from brown in summer to whitein winter.54.3 | WHAT IS A BIOME? 1147Arctic tundra: Denali National Park, AlaskaAlpine tundra: Giant groundsel (Senecio brassica) on the slopesof Mt. Kilimanjaro, TanzaniaThe feathery feet and white plumage of thewillow ptarmigan (Lagopus lagopus) areadaptations to the snows of the Arctic tundrain Manitoba.TUNDRADominant plantsSpecies richnessSoil biotaCommunity compositionPerennial herbs and small shrubsPlants: Low; higher in tropical alpineAnimals: Low; many birds migrate in forsummer; a few species of insectsabundant in summerFew species5 cm equalsjust over 2inches.Summer is cooland short.0°C is thefreezing pointof water(=32°F).20°C is a“comfortable”68°F.Winter isvery coldand long.05Jan Jul DeccmAnnual total: 23 cmPrecipitationJan Jul DecTemperatureUpernavik, Greenland 73°N–25–20–15–10–51520°C0510Range 28°CEquatorEvergreen trees dominate boreal forestsThe boreal forest biome (also known as taiga) occurs at latitudesbelow Arctic tundra and at elevations below alpine tundra ontemperate-zone mountains. Winters are long and very cold;summers are short, although often relatively warm. The shortsummer favors trees with evergreen leaves that are ready tophotosynthesize as soon as temperatures warm.The evergreen forests of the Northern Hemisphere are dominatedby coniferous gymnosperm species such as spruce andfir. The leaves of conifers are needlelike rather than flat; theirreduced surface area cuts down on evaporative water loss. Inthe Southern Hemisphere forests, the dominant trees are southernbeeches (Nothofagus), some of which are evergreen.The dominant mammals of the boreal forest, such as mooseand hares, eat leaves, but the seeds in conifer cones support avariety of rodents, birds, and insects. While some small mammalshibernate in winter, voles, lemmings, and mice remain activein snow tunnels, providing food for predators such as foxesand owls.Temperate evergreen forests grow along the coasts of continentsin both hemispheres at middle to high latitudes, wherewinters are mild but wet and summers are cool and dry.1148 CHAPTER 54 | ECOLOGY AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LIFEBOREAL and TEMPERATE EVERGREEN FORESTBull moose (Alces alces) in boreal forest,Alberta, CanadaSouthern beech (Nothofagus) forest, Fiordland National Park,New ZealandEquatorWinter isvery coldand dry.Summer is mildand humid.Jan Jul Dec–30Temperature–25–20–15–10–5051015°CRange 41°CFt. Vermillion, Alberta 58°NPrecipitation05cmJan Jul DecAnnual total: 31 cmDominant plantsSpecies richnessSoil biotaCommunity compositionTrees, shrubs, and perennial herbsPlants: Low in trees, higher in understoryAnimals: Low, but with summer peaks inmigratory birdsVery rich in deep litter layerThe boreal owl (Aegolius funereus) feeds oninsects and small birds and mammals of theconiferous evergreen forests of Europe andNorth America. The owl lives in the forestsyear-round, dispersing occasionally whenfood becomes extremely scarce.Temperate deciduous forests change with the seasonsThe temperate deciduous forest biome is found in eastern NorthAmerica, eastern Asia, and Europe. Temperatures in these regionsfluctuate dramatically between summer and winter, althoughprecipitation is fairly evenly distributed throughout theyear. Deciduous trees, which dominate these forests, lose theirleaves during the cold winters and produce new leaves thatphotosynthesize rapidly during the warm, moist summers.Many more tree species live here than in boreal forests. Thetemperate forests richest in species are those of the southern AppalachianMountains of the United States and the ones foundin eastern China and Japan—areas that were not covered by glaciersduring the Pleistocene. Many plant genera are sharedamong the three geographically separate regions with a deciduousforest biome.Although many animals are permanent residents of deciduousforests, some (including many birds) migrate to escape thewinter cold. Others that remain through the winter acquire massivefat stores in fall and hibernate, often in underground burrows.Many resident insects pass the winter in a state of diapause,the onset of which is triggered by a decreasing numberof daylight hours, a reliable predictor of the onset of winter.54.3 | WHAT IS A BIOME? 1149Fallen oak leaves on the winter forest floor, New York StateBlack bears (Ursus americanus) are commonin North American deciduous forestsMourning cloak butterflies (Nymphalis antiopa)overwinter as adults, settled in crevices andunder tree bark in the deciduous forests ofeastern North America. Their early appearanceis a harbinger of spring.TEMPERATE DECIDUOUS FORESTDominant plantsSpecies richnessSoil biotaCommunity compositionTrees and shrubsPlants: Many tree species in southeasternU.S. and eastern Asia, rich shrub layerAnimals: Rich; many migrant birds,richest amphibian communities on Earth,rich summer insect faunaRichWinter iscold andsnowy.Summer is warmand moist.PrecipitationTemperature–5051015510cm2025–10°CMadison, Wisconsin 43°NAnnual total: 81 cm0Jan Jul DecJan Jul DecRange 31°CEquatorTemperate grasslands are widespreadTemperate grasslands are found in many parts of the world, allof which are relatively dry for much of the year. Most grasslands,such as the pampas of Argentina, the veldt of SouthAfrica, and the Great Plains of North America, have hot summersand relatively cold winters. In some grasslands, most ofthe precipitation falls in winter (as in California grasslands); inothers, the majority falls in summer (as in the Great Plains andthe Russian steppe).Grassland vegetation is structurally simple but rich in speciesof perennial grasses and forbs (herbaceous plants other thangrasses). This abundance of plant biomass supports herds oflarge grazing mammals. Grassland plants are adapted to grazingand to fire. They store much of their energy undergroundand sprout quickly after being burned or grazed. There are comparativelyfew trees in temperate grasslands because they cannotsurvive the periodic fires.The topsoil of grasslands is usually rich and deep, and thusexceptionally well suited to growing crops, particularly grainssuch as corn and wheat. As a consequence, most of the world’stemperate grasslands have been turned over to agriculture andno longer exist in their natural state.1150 CHAPTER 54 | ECOLOGY AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LIFEAmerican bison herd grazing shortgrassprairie, North DakotaPrzewalski’s horse in Khustain Nuruu NationalPark, MongoliaThe flightless Darwin’s rhea (Rhea pennata) isadapted to grazing the grasslands of the Andeanplateau (the Altiplano) of Chile and Peru. It is alsofound on the pampas of Argentina.TEMPERATE GRASSLANDSPlants: Fairly highAnimals: Relatively few birds because ofsimple structure; mammals fairly richDominant plantsSpecies richnessSoil biotaCommunity compositionPerennial grasses and forbsRichWinter iscold anddry.Summer is warmand wetter.Precipitation0510cmJan Jul DecAnnual total: 31 cmTemperature–5051015202530°CJan Jul DecRange 24°CPueblo, Colorado 38°NEquatorHot deserts form around 30° latitudeThe hot desert biome is found in two belts, centered around latitudes30°N and 30°S (see Figure 54.2). The driest regions, whererains rarely penetrate, are far from the oceans. Examples of thisare in the center of Australia and the middle of the Sahara inAfrica.The structural features of desert plants reflect the need toconserve water. These include taproots that reach water far belowthe surface; a shallow but extensive root system that absorbswater quickly after rare rain events; and small, waxcoveredleaves that open their stomata only at night. Mostperennials go dormant during dry seasons, growing quickly assoon as rains return. Their seeds tend to be heat- and droughtresistantand accumulate in a dormant state in the soil.Small animals are inactive during the hottest part of the day,remaining in underground burrows. When the heat becomesextreme, many small invertebrates estivate. Desert mammalshave physiological adaptations for conserving water, includingreduced number of sweat glands and kidneys that producehighly concentrated urine. Many desert animals require no waterbeyond what they can extract from the carbohydrates intheir food.54.3 | WHAT IS A BIOME? 1151Gemsbok (Oryx gazella) on the dunes,Namib-Naukluft National Park, NamibiaSucculents such as agave, candelabra, and cardon characterize thedeserts of the North American southwestThe fog-basking beetle (Onymacris unguicularis)retrieves the water it needs to survive from themorning fogs of Africa’s Namib Desert.HOT DESERTCommunity compositionDominant plantsSpecies richnessSoil biotaMany different growth formsPlants: Moderately rich; many annualsAnimals: Very rich in rodents; richest beecommunities on Earth; very rich in reptilesand butterfliesFew speciesWinter isvery warmand dry.Summer is verywarm and less dry.PrecipitationTemperature05cmJan Jul DecJan Jul Dec°C100203040Khartoum,Sudan 15.5°NAnnual total: 15 cmRange 9.5°CEquator1152 CHAPTER 54 | ECOLOGY AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LIFECold deserts are high and dryThe cold desert biome is found in dry regions at mid- to highlatitudes, especially in the interiors of continents in the rainshadows of mountain ranges. Seasonal changes in temperatureare great.Cold deserts are dominated by a few species of low-growingshrubs. The surface layers of the soil are recharged withmoisture in winter, and plant growth is concentrated in spring.Cold deserts are relatively poor in species diversity, but theplants that do grow there tend to produce large numbers ofseeds, supporting many species of seed-eating birds, ants, androdents. Burrowing behavior is widespread among cold desertdwellers, but, in contrast with hot desert animals, they burrowto escape cold temperatures, not excessive heat.Plants: Few speciesAnimals: Rich in seed-eating birds, ants,and rodents; low in all other taxaDominant plantsSpecies richnessSoil biotaCommunity compositionLow-growing shrubs and herbaceousplantsPoor in speciesWinter is cold andvery dry.Summer ismuch warmer,but still dry.TemperatureJan Jul Dec–10–50°C30201510525Precipitation05cmJan Jul DecAnnual total: 38 cmCheyenne, Wyoming 41°NIntroduced wild donkeys (Equus africanus asinus) thrive in the high deserts of Utah Range 23°CVicuña (Vicugna vicugna) family herd in Andean desert,Lauca National Park, ChileLiving in a cold desert presents specialchallenges to a poikilotherm. This collaredlizard (Crotaphytus sp.) in Bluff, Utah, iswarming itself by basking on a rock.EquatorCOLD DESERTChaparral has hot, dry summers and wet, cool wintersThe chaparral biome is found on the western sides of continentsat mid-latitudes (around 40°) where cool ocean currents flowoffshore. Winters in this biome are cool and wet; summers arewarm and dry. Such climates are found in the Mediterraneanregion of Europe, coastal California, central Chile, extremesouthern Africa, and southwestern Australia.The dominant plants of chaparral vegetation are low-growingshrubs and trees with tough evergreen leaves that conserve water.The shrubs carry out most of their growth and photosynthesisin early spring, when insects are active and birds breed. Manychaparral species produce strong-smelling defensive chemicalsto reduce losses of hard-to-replace foliage to herbivores. Annualplants are abundant and produce large quantities of seeds thatfall onto the soil, supporting many small rodents, most of whichstore seeds in underground burrows. Burrowing to avoid middayheat and nocturnal foraging are strategies used by manychaparral animals. Chaparral vegetation is adapted to periodicfires; the seeds of some species do not germinate until after theyhave survived a fire. Many shrubs of Northern Hemisphere chaparralproduce bird-dispersed fruits that ripen in late fall, whenlarge numbers of migrant birds arrive from the north.54.3 | WHAT IS A BIOME? 1153CHAPARRALA coyote (Canis latrans) in the chaparral ofCalifornia’s Santa Cruz MountainsFynbos in the spring, a unique chaparral vegetation of SouthAfrica’s Cape PeninsulaTwo fynbos species, the Cape sugarbird(Promerops caffer) and its nectar source, thepincushion protea (Leucospermum cordifolium)in the Helderberg Nature Reserve, South AfricaDominant plantsSpecies richnessSoil biotaCommunity compositionLow-growing shrubs and herbaceousplantsPlants: Extremely high in South Africaand AustraliaAnimals: Rich in rodents and reptiles;very rich in insects, especially beesModerately richWinter ismild andhumid.Summer ismild andvery dry.Temperature5010152025°CRange 7°CPrecipitation0510cmJan Jul DecJan Jul DecAnnual total: 42 cmMonterey, California 36°NEquator1154 CHAPTER 54 | ECOLOGY AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LIFEThorn forests and tropical savannas havesimilar climatesThe thorn forest and tropical savanna biomes are found at latitudesbelow the hot deserts of Africa, South America, and Australia.Little or no rain falls in winter, but rainfall may be heavyduring summer. Thorn forests contain many plants similar tothose found in hot deserts. The dominant plants are spinyshrubs and small trees, many of which drop their leaves duringthe long, dry winter. Trees of the genus Acacia are common inthorn forests and savannas worldwide. In Africa, Andansonia(baobob) trees are also a hallmark of this biome.Savanna is characterized by expanses of grasses and grasslikeplants with scattered individual trees. The largest tropical savannasare found in central and eastern Africa, where they arepopulated by herds of grazing and browsing mammals and thelarge carnivores that prey on them. Grazers and browsers maintainthe savannas. If savanna vegetation is not grazed, browsed,or burned, it typically reverts to dense thorn forest. The migrationof vast herds of African herbivores in search of “greenerpastures” during the dry season is another characteristic of thisimpressive region.Ocotillo species native to Madagascardominate this thorn forestPlains zebra (Equus quagga) in large herd of blue wildebeest(Connochaetes taurinus) on the Tanzania savanna, AfricaTermite colonies build huge mounds on the Africansavanna, providing a food source for mammals suchas this baboon (Papio sp.).THORN FOREST and TROPICAL SAVANNACommunity compositionDominant plantsSpecies richnessSoil biotaShrubs and small trees; grassesPlants: Moderate in thorn forest; low insavannaAnimals: Rich mammal faunas; moderatelyrich in birds, reptiles, and insectsRichWinter is mild and very dry.Summer is verywet, but not muchwarmer than winter.PrecipitationTemperatureJan Jul Dec05101520cmAnnual total: 74 cmJan Jul Dec20253035°CRange 10.7 °CKayes, Mali 14°NEquatorTropical deciduous forests occur in hot lowlandsAs the length of the rainy season increases toward the Equator,the tropical deciduous forest biome replaces thorn forest.Tropical deciduous forests have taller trees and fewer succulentplants than thorn forests, and they support a much greater numberof plant and animal species. Most of the trees, except forthose growing along rivers, lose their leaves during the long,hot dry season. Activity picks up in the rainy season; manyplants flower while they are still leafless.Most plant species in this biome are pollinated by animals.In the Sierra Madre Occidental, a mountain range in the extremesouthwestern United States extending into western Mexico,tropical deciduous forests are part of a “nectar corridor”: a seriesof patches of flowering plants that provide refueling stopsfor long-distance migrants traveling north from overwinteringsites to breeding sites in the Rocky Mountains. Among the migratorypollinators that fly this corridor are lesser long-nosedbats, white-winged doves, and rufous hummingbirds.The soils of this biome are among the best in the tropics foragriculture because they contain more nutrients than the soilsof wetter areas. As a result, most tropical deciduous forestsworldwide have been cleared for agriculture and grazing.54.3 | WHAT IS A BIOME? 1155Bengal tiger (Panthera tigris tigris) in theforests of Bandhavgarh, India.A forest canopy of pijio trees (Cavanillesia platanifolia) during the dryseason in Cerro Blanco on the Ecuadoran coastThe rufous hummingbird (Selasphorus rufus) isa seasonal migrant that spends winters in thetropical deciduous forests of Guerrero, Mexico.TROPICAL DECIDUOUS FORESTDominant plantsSpecies richnessSoil biotaCommunity compositionDeciduous treesPlants: Moderately rich in tree speciesAnimals: Rich mammal, bird, reptile, andamphibian communities; rich in insectsRich, but poorly knownWinter is veryhot and dry.Summer is hotand wet.Temperature202530°CRange 5.4°CJan Jul DecTimbo,Guinea 10°NPrecipitation0510152025Jan Jul Dec3035cmAnnual total: 163 cmEquatorTropical evergreen forests are rich in speciesThe tropical evergreen forest biome (commonly called the rainforest)is found in Equatorial regions where total rainfall exceeds250 centimeters annually and the dry season lasts no longer than2 or 3 months. With no seasons unsuitable for growth, it is themost species-rich of all biomes, with up to 500 species of treesper km2. Although these forests cover less than 2 percent ofEarth’s surface, they are home to over half of all known species.Along with the immense number of species they support, tropicalevergreen forests have the highest overall productivity of allecological communities. However, most mineral nutrients are tiedup in the vegetation. The soils usually cannot support agriculturewithout massive applications of fertilizers. These forests are hometo many epiphytes, plants that grow on other plants, deriving theirnutrients and moisture from air and water rather than soil.Tropical evergreen forests provide humans with a dazzlingrange of products, including fruits, nuts, medicines, fuel, pulp,and furniture wood. Many more useful species undoubtedlyawait discovery, as only a small proportion of this biome’sspecies have been inventoried. The rainforests, however, arecurrently being deforested or converted to agriculture at a rateof almost 20 million hectares per year.1156 CHAPTER 54 | ECOLOGY AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LIFEA golden lion tamarin (Leontopithecusrosalia) in tropical forest near Rio deJaneiro, BrazilThe canopy of an Ecuadoran tropical forest, seen from aboveThe three-toed sloth (Bradypus variegatus) is almosttotally arboreal, spending its life in the rainforestcanopies of Central and South America.TROPICAL EVERGREEN FORESTDominant plantsSpecies richnessSoil biotaCommunity compositionTrees and vinesPlants: Extremely highAnimals: Extremely high inmammals, birds, amphibians, andarthropodsVery rich but poorly knownThe weather is warmand rainy all year.Precipitation0510152025Jan Jul DecJan Jul Dec30cmTemperature10152025°CRange 2.2°C Iquitos, Peru 3°SAnnual total: 262 cmEquatorMajor topographic features, such as mountains or large lakes,may have regional effects on temperature and precipitation.When prevailing winds bring air masses into contact with amountain range, for example, the air rises to pass over themountains, expanding and cooling as it does so. Thus cloudsfrequently form on the windward side of mountains (the sidefacing into the winds) and release moisture as rain or snow. Onthe leeward side (opposite from the direction of the winds), thenow-dry air descends, warms, and once again picks up moisture.This pattern often results in a dry area called a rain shadowon the leeward side of a mountain range (Figure 54.6).Biome distribution is not determined solelyby temperatureAlthough warm temperatures and high precipitation supportgreater numbers of species than do colder, drier conditions,other climatic factors—particularly soil characteristics and theoccurrence of wildfires—also influence the structure and life cyclesof the dominant vegetation in an area and, consequently,the ecological attributes of the other organisms living there. Forexample, the plants of Australian deserts grow on extremely nutrient-poor soils and thus have difficulty growing new foliage.Such plants often protect their leaves against consumers by producinglarge quantities of digestibility-reducing chemicals. Suchleaves are generally left uneaten, and when they senesce theydrop to the ground, providing an abundance of highly flammablelitter to feed the intense fires that periodically sweep acrossthe landscape. As a result, succulent plants, which are easilykilled by fires, are not found in Australia, although they arecommon in deserts on other continents (see p. 1151).54.3 RECAPEcologists recognize a number of terrestrial environmenttypes called biomes. The geographic distributionof biomes is determined primarily by temperatureand precipitation, but is also influenced by soilcharacteristics and fire.• How do temperate grasslands differ from tropicalsavannas? See pp. 1150 and 1154• What primary factor distinguishes a tropical biome?See pp. 1154–1156Climatic conditions explain why chaparral vegetation is confinedto the western coasts of continents at mid-latitudes, but itcannot explain why the chaparral in California and the chaparralin South Africa have no species in common. To explain thedistribution of species on Earth, another aspect of the abioticenvironment—geological history—must be taken into account.54.4 What Is a Biogeographic Region?Climate interacts with local abiotic features to influence whereand how organisms live, but these are not the only factors thatdetermine where organisms can be found. Evolutionary history—where and when groups of organisms originated and diverged—is key to determining the distributions of organisms,which in turn is profoundly influenced by geological history.Geological history influenced the distributionof organismsUntil European naturalists traveled the globe, they had no wayof knowing how organisms were distributed elsewhere. AlfredRussel Wallace, who along with Charles Darwin advanced theidea that natural selection could account for the evolution of lifeon Earth (see Section 21.1), was one of those global travelers.Wallace returned to England in 1862 after seven years in theMalay Archipelago, where he noticed some remarkable patternsin the distributions of organisms. For example, he described thedramatically different birds that inhabited the adjacent islandsBali and Lombok:In Bali we have barbets, fruit-thrushes and woodpeckers; on passing overto Lombock these are seen no more, but we have an abundance of cockatoos,honeysuckers, and brush-turkeys, which are equally unknown inBali, or any island further west. The strait here is fifteen miles wide, so thatwe may pass in two hours from one great division of the earth to another,differing as essentially in their animal life as Europe does from America.Wallace pointed out that these differences could not be explainedby climate or by soil characteristics, because in those respectsBali and Lombok are essentially identical.Wallace saw that, based on the distributions of plant and animalspecies, he could draw a line that divided the Malay Archipelagointo two distinct halves (Figure 54.7). He correctly de-54.4 | WHAT IS A BIOGEOGRAPHIC REGION? 1157Prevailing windspick up moistureover water bodies.On the windward side of the mountain,air rises and cools, releasing moisturein the form of rain or snow and leadingto lush vegetation.On the leeward side of themountain, air descends, warms, andpicks up moisture, which results inlittle rain and arid conditions.32154.6 A Rain Shadow Mean annual precipitation tends to be lower onthe leeward side of a mountain range than on the windward side.GO TO Animated Tutorial 54.2 • Rain ShadowyourBioPortal.comduced that the dramatic differencesin flora and fauna were related tothe depth of the channel separatingBali and Lombok. This channel is sodeep that it would have remainedfull of water, and thus would havebeen a barrier to the movement ofterrestrial animals, even during theglaciations of the Pleistocene era,when sea level dropped more than100 m and Bali and the islands tothe west were connected to theAsian mainland.With these insights, Wallace establishedthe conceptual foundationsof biogeography, the scientificstudy of the patterns of distributionof populations, species, and ecologicalcommunities across Earth. In The Geographical Distributionof Animals, published in 1876, he detailed the factors known atthe time that influence the distributions of animals, includingpast glaciation, land bridges, deep ocean channels, and mountainranges. He earned some measure of scientific immortalityin that the Malay discontinuity that first piqued his curiosityis known to this day as “Wallace’s line.”The biotas of different parts of the world differ enough to allowus to divide Earth into several continental-scale areas, calledbiogeographic regions (Figure 54.8), each containing characteristicassemblages of species occupying many different biomes.The boundaries of these biogeographicregions are drawn where assemblages ofspecies change dramatically over shortdistances. Wallace’s line, for example,separates the Oriental biogeographic regionfrom the Australasian biogeographicregion. The biotas of biogeographicregions differ because oceans,mountains, deserts, and other barriersrestrict the dispersal of organisms fromone region to another. Although organismsdo disperse between adjacent biogeographicregions, such interchanges have not been frequentor massive enough to eliminate the striking differences betweenthem.Most species are confined to a single biogeographic region.A species found only within a certain region is said to be endemicto that region. Remote islands typically have distinctiveendemic biotas because water barriers limit opportunities for1158 CHAPTER 54 | ECOLOGY AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LIFEThe species living on Bali aresimilar to those in Thailandand the islands to the west.The species living on Lombokare similar to those inAustralia and New Guinea.Wallace’s line separatestwo distinct modernterrestrial faunas.Current land surfaceContinental shelf exposed(during the Pleistocene)Deep water(≥ 200 m below current sea level)ThailandBorneoSumatraSunda ShelfJavaNew GuineaArafura BasinAustraliaPhilippines54.7 Wallace’s Line Wallace’s linecorresponds to a deep-water channelbetween the islands of Bali and Lombok.This channel would have blocked themovement of terrestrial organisms evenduring the Pleistocene glaciations, whensea level was 100 meters lower than it istoday.NEARCTICNEOTROPICALANTARCTICPALEARCTICETHIOPIANANTARCTICORIENTALBorder ofMexican Plateauand tropical lowlandsArabian DesertSahara DesertHimalayasWallace’s line54.8 Earth’s Biogeographic Regions The AUSTRALASIANmajor biogeographic regions are separated byclimatic, topographic, and/or aquatic barriersto dispersal that cause their biotas to differstrikingly from one another.GO TO Web Activity 54.1 • Major Biogeographic RegionsyourBioPortal.commost species to colonize them. For example, nearly all thespecies of vascular plants and vertebrates on Madagascar, alarge island 400 km off the eastern coast of Africa, are endemicto that island (Figure 54.9). Regions like Madagascar that arehome to large numbers of endemics are classified as “biodiversityhotspots” (see Section 59.4).Two scientific advances changed the fieldof biogeographyFor many decades after observing that the biotas of the majorbiogeographic regions are strikingly different, biogeographersspeculated about the causes of these differences but the field remainedprimarily descriptive. It was not until the second halfof the twentieth century that two scientific advances transformedbiogeography into a dynamic, multidisciplinary field:the acceptance of the theory of continental drift, and the developmentof phylogenetic taxonomy.CONTINENTAL DRIFT Prior to the mid-nineteenth century, mostpeople believed that Earth was young and had changed littleover time. No one at that time imagined that organisms—muchless the continents themselves—had moved. But that continentscan and do move was confirmed when geological evidence ofcontinental drift was eventually discovered (see Section 25.2).During the Triassic period, the supercontinent Pangaea brokeinto two great land masses, Laurasia and Gondwana (see Figure25.12), which subsequently separated into the continents weknow today. Those groups of organisms that are represented ontwo or more continents are believed to be ancient groups whoseancestors were distributed widely over these great landmassesbefore they broke apart. After the breakup, however, their de-54.4 | WHAT IS A BIOGEOGRAPHIC REGION? 1159Lemur catta (ring-tailed lemur)climbing Alluaudia procera (Madagascar ocotillo)Adansonia grandidieri (giant baobab tree)Trachelophorus giraffa (giraffe-necked weevil)Chamaeleo parsonii(chameleon)54.9 Madagascar’s Endemic Species The majority of the vascular plant and vertebratespecies found on the island of Madagascar are found nowhere else on Earth. Unique reptileand insect species also abound there.scendants evolved independently, so groups that did not originateuntil after that time have more discrete distributions. Thuscontinental drift is at least partly responsible for the existenceof the seven regions shown in Figure 54.8.Continental drift also explains certain biogeographic distributionsthat would otherwise be difficult to understand. For example,the southern beeches—trees of the genus Nothofagus—are found in both the Neotropical and the Australasian biogeographicregions. Their distribution suggests that the genus originatedin Gondwana during the Cretaceous period and was geographicallyseparated by the breakup of that land mass(Figure 54.10).What evidence do we have that Nothofagus did not simplyleapfrog from one biogeographic region to another? FossilizedNothofagus pollen from 55–34 million years ago has been foundin Australia, New Zealand, western Antarctica, and SouthAmerica, suggesting that Nothophagus was once continuouslydistributed across a single land mass. Moreover, the moderndistribution of aphid genera that feed exclusively on Nothofagusparallels the distribution of the trees. There are no air or watercurrents between Chile and New Zealand that would belikely to disperse insects, indicating that the aphids arose at atime when their host plants grew on a common land mass.PHYLOGENETIC TAXONOMY As we saw in Chapter 22, taxonomistshave developed powerful methods of reconstructing the phylogeneticrelationships among organisms. Biogeographers haveadapted these methods to help them answer biogeographic questions.Biogeographers can transform phylogenetic trees into areaphylogenies by replacing the names of the taxa on a tree with thenames of the places where those taxa now live or once lived.Suppose, for example, we wonder why zebras, which aremembers of the horse family (Equidae), live in Africa whenthe fossil record indicates that the Equidae evolved in NorthAmerica. An area phylogeny of living species suggests thatthe ancestors of today’s horses dispersed from North Americato Asia, and then from Asia to Africa, and that the subsequentspeciation of zebras took place entirely in Africa (Figure 54.11).Biotic interchange follows fusion of land massesGeological events not only separate land masses, but may alsobring them together. When formerly separated land massesfuse, as may happen through sea level changes or continentaldrift, species from two different biotas may disperse into a regionthey had not previously inhabited. This phenomenon iscalled biotic interchange.A great biotic interchange of mammals occurred when theCentral American land bridge formed about 4 million years ago,connecting North and South America for the first time in about65 million years. While the two continents were separated, theirmammalian faunas had diverged greatly. Many of these divergentspecies dispersed across the newly established land bridge.Only a few South American species—the porcupine, ninebandedarmadillo, and Virginia opossum—became establishednorth of the tropical forests of Mexico. However, many NorthAmerican mammals—rabbits, mice, foxes, bears, raccoons,weasels, cats, tapirs, peccaries, camels, and deer—successfullycolonized South America (Figure 54.12).1160 CHAPTER 54 | ECOLOGY AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LIFEDistributionof NothofagusThe southmost land mass in Gondwanaseparated from South America and driftedacross the South Pole, to become Antarcticaand the South Pacific land masses.AustraliaNew GuineaNew CaledoniaTazmania New ZealandSouthAmericaPresent(B)Cretaceous(A)54.10 Nothofagus Has a Gondwanan Distribution The modernrange of southern beeches is best explained by their origin in Gondwanaduring the Cretaceous. Continental drift resulted in the distribution ofNothofagus in South America, New Zealand, and the islands of theSouth Pacific.Vicariant events influence distribution patternsThe appearance of a physical barrier to dispersal that splits therange of a species is called a vicariant event. A vicariant eventdivides the species into two or more discontinuous populations,even though no individuals have dispersed to new areas. If,however, members of a species cross an existing barrier and establisha new population, the discontinuous range of the speciesis considered to be the result of dispersal.Given that these two major processes—vicariance and dispersal—both influence distribution patterns, how can biogeographersdetermine the role of each process when reconstructingthe evolutionary history of a particular distribution? By54.4 | WHAT IS A BIOGEOGRAPHIC REGION? 1161Speciation of zebrashas taken placeentirely in Africa.Horses speciated as theymoved from Asia to Africa.This lineage leads tothe modern horse.Przewalski’shorseAfricanassMountainzebraGrevy’s zebraOnager3.9 3 2 1 0Time (Mya)Central AsiaNorth AfricaSouth West AfricaEast AfricaEastern andSouthern AfricaMiddle East andCentral AsiaOriginin NorthAmericaPrzewalski’s horseAfrican assMountain zebraGrevy’s zebraPlains zebraOnagerAncestralhorsePhylogenetic treeArea phylogenyPlains zebra54.11 Taxonomic Phylogeny to AreaPhylogeny The conversion of a phylogenetictree to an area phylogeny helpsbiogeographers explain how the currentdistribution of a taxon came about.(A) Dasypus novemcinctus (B) Catagonus wagneri Lama guanicoe54.12 Results of a Biotic Interchange (A) The nine-banded armadillois among only a handful of mammalian species that colonized NorthAmerica from South America when the Central American land bridgeformed. (B) Some species that exist today only in South America aredescended from ancestors that dispersed across the land bridge fromNorth America, including the Chacoan peccary and the guanaco (amember of the camel family).studying area phylogenies, a biogeographer may discover evidencesuggesting that the distribution of an ancestral specieswas influenced by a vicariant event, such as continental drift ora change in sea level (see Figure 23.3). If that inference is correct,it is reasonable to assume that ancestral species in other lineageshave been affected by the same event and that similar distributionpatterns should therefore be seen in other taxonomicgroups. Differences in distribution patterns among taxonomicgroups may indicate that they responded differently to the samevicariant events, that they diverged at different times, or thatthey had very different dispersal histories. By analyzing suchsimilarities and differences, biogeographers seek to discover therelative roles of vicariant events and dispersal in determiningtoday’s distribution patterns.The parsimony principle, used to great effect in the reconstructionof phylogenies (see Section 22.2), can also be helpfulin biogeographic studies. For example, the New Zealand flightlessweevil Lyperobius huttoni is found in the mountains of SouthIsland and on sea cliffs at the extreme southwestern corner ofNorth Island (Figure 54.13). At first glance, its distributionmight suggest that, even though this weevil cannot fly, some individualsin the distant past managed to cross Cook Strait, the25-km body of water that separates the two islands. However,more than 60 other animal and plant species, including otherflightless insects, are found on both sides of Cook Strait. Irrespectiveof their ability to fly, wade, or swim, it is unlikely thatall 60 of these species made the same ocean crossing independentlyat different times over the course of their evolutionary history.In fact, geological evidence indicates that the present-daysouthwestern tip of North Island was once united with SouthIsland. Thus a single vicariant event—the separation of thenorthern tip of South Island from the remainder of the islandby the newly formed Cook Strait—could have produced the distributionpattern shared by all 60 species today.While the concept of vicariance is easily applied in cases attributableto continental drift (due to the ease with which continentalmovements can be correlated with biological patterns),vicariance patterns on a smaller scale are difficult to identify unequivocallybecause the underlying geologic events, such asmountain uplift or glacial ice sheet movement, may have beenless dramatic than continental movements. In other cases, thevicariance approach is conceptually inappropriate simply becauseno separation of continuous populations ever took place.There are, for example, more than 135 species of long-hornedbeetles endemic to the Hawaiian Islands. The islands have neverbeen attached to any continent (they arose by volcanism fromthe deep ocean floor), so this distribution must have been theresult of long-distance dispersal. The beetles, which are mostclosely related to a genus found in North and Central America,probably colonized the islands and subsequently speciated asa consequence of specializing on different host plants on differentislands (see Chapter 23). Founder events must have been infrequent,because the beetles are short-lived and vulnerable todesiccation.In fact, the present distributions of some mammalian groupsprovide little hint of their evolutionary origins. Canids (membersof the dog family), for example, originated in North Americabut experienced greater evolutionary success after movinginto South America; today, only four canid genera are found inNorth America, but there are six in South America—more thanon any other continent.Humans exert a powerful influence onbiogeographic patternsOne more force capable of generating unusual distribution patternsis human activity. Of the insects found both in Europe andin North America, it has been estimated that over half have beentransported between the continents by humans. Some speciesintroductions, such as those of dung beetles to Australia, havebeen deliberate. That introduction turned out to be beneficial,but many others have not. Species that have been introduced tonew regions inadvertently include disease vectors (such as themosquito that transmits yellow fever), household pests (includingat least four cockroach species), and crop pests that can resultin economic disaster. The effects of such introductions byhumans is an important topic and will be discussed at length inChapter 59.1162 CHAPTER 54 | ECOLOGY AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LIFECookStraitFuturelocationof CookStraitModerngeographyL. huttoniPlioceneSouth geographyIslandNorthIslandNEW ZEALAND54.13 A Vicariant Distribution Explained Yellow circles indicate thecurrent distribution of the flightless weevil Lyperobius huttoni. A comparisonof New Zealand’s present-day geography with its geography in thePliocene, when the southern part of today’s North Island was part ofSouth Island, suggests that a vicariant event—a physical split separatingpopulations—explains this distribution.54.4 RECAPBiogeographers divide Earth into seven regions, eachcontaining unique assemblages of species. Vicariantevents may generate distribution patterns by splittingthe ranges of species; distribution patterns may alsochange when species disperse across barriers.• What determines the boundaries of Earth’s major biogeographicregions? How are these boundaries differentfrom those of the biomes described in Section54.3? See p. 1146, p. 1158, and Figures 54.5 and 54.8• Explain how the concepts of continental drift and phylogenetictaxonomy transformed the field of biogeography.See pp. 1159–1160• How do vicariance and dispersal interact to generatemajor biogeographic patterns? See pp. 1161–1162As described in Chapter 25, life originated in the oceans. Todaythe three-quarters of the planet’s surface that is covered withwater sustains abundant life as well.How Is Life Distributed in Aquatic 54.5 Environments?Most of Earth’s aquatic environments are oceans. However, thesmall percentage of the watery world that consists of freshwaterlakes and streams also hosts a significant proportion ofEarth’s aquatic organisms.The oceans can be divided into several life zonesEarth’s oceans form one large, interconnected water mass, interruptedin places by continents. Even organisms with limited swimmingabilities can travel long distances simply by floating with thegreat currents depicted in Figure 54.3. Even though the oceans haveno physical barriers to dispersal, however, most marine organismshave restricted ranges. Water temperature, salinity, and food supplyall vary spatially. Changes in water temperature, for example,can be barriers to dispersal because many marine organisms functionwell in only a narrow range of temperatures.The striking physical and biological discontinuities within theoceans divide them into several distinct “life zones.” These zonesare identified principally by their distance from the surface, becausedepth determines how much light is available to sustain thephotosynthetic organisms that make chemical energy availableto consumer organisms. In both marine and freshwater environments,the depth of water reached by enough sunlight to supportphotosynthesis is called the photic zone (Figure 54.14). Approximately90 percent of all aquatic life is found in the photic zone.The coastal zone, extending from the shoreline to the edge ofthe continental shelf, is characterized by relatively shallow, welloxygenatedwater and relatively stable temperatures and salinities.These conditions support high densities of phytoplankton,which in turn support some of the world’s most important fisheries.Structure in coastal-zone communities can be provided bya variety of organisms. In warmer coastal waters, corals generatecomplex reef structures that support ecosystems rivaling therainforest in diversity, and “forests” of the multicellular algalspecies (seaweeds and giant kelps) form along many coasts.Near the shoreline, the area of the coastal zone that is affectedby wave action is called the littoral zone. The principal autotrophsin this zone—sea grasses and algae—support a diversityof invertebrates as well as small fishes. The portion ofthe coastal zone lying between high- and low-tide levels is theintertidal, where tidal movements create highly variable conditionsof temperature and salinity. Intertidal organisms, includingclams, mussels, copepods, and burrowing worms, are alternatelyexposed to air or submerged on a regular basis.Throughout most of the oceans, the dominant autotrophs arephytoplankton (photosynthetic floating protists; see Chapter27). In the open ocean, referred to as the pelagic zone, the principalconsumers of phytoplankton are zooplankton—mainlysmall crustaceans and larval stages of marine animals—which54.5 | HOW IS LIFE DISTRIBUTED IN AQUATIC ENVIRONMENTS? 1163The coastal zone extends from the shorelineto the edge of the continental shelf. The areaaffected by wave action is the littoral zone.The open water abovethe ocean floor is thepelagic zone.The deepest ocean floor iscalled the abyssal zone orabyssal plain.The ocean floorconstitutes thebenthic zone.Water depth (m)10,0008,0006,0004,0002,000200Intertidal Coastal zone Pelagic zonePhotic zone(limit ofsunlightpenetration)AphoticzoneBenthiczoneContinental shelfContinental slopeTrenchAbyssal plain54.14 Oceanic Life Zones Theocean’s life zones are in large partdetermined by sunlight penetration.More than 90 percent of oceandwellingspecies live in the sunlitphotic zone, which comprises lessthan 2 percent of the open water.in turn support many larger free-swimming vertebrate and invertebratespecies.The ocean bottom is referred to as the benthic zone. Many benthicorganisms are adapted to life on the seafloor substrate. Theyinclude sessile animals such as sponges, bryozoans, ribbon worms,and brachiopods (see Chapters 31 and 32), as well as motile bottomfeeders such as crabs and sea slugs (see Figure 32.15C).Where water is too deep for light to penetrate, little photosynthesiscan take place, and both plant and animal diversityare low. Depths reached by less than 1 percent of incoming sunlightconstitute the aphotic zone (including the abyssal plain ofthe deep ocean floor). Many of the organisms inhabiting theseregions subsist on decaying organic matter that sinks downfrom the photic zone. Some produce their own light by way ofbioluminescent organs (see Figure 33.13D). Even deep-oceantrenches and rift valleys support ecosystems, often sustainedby chemosynthetic microbes that can metabolize the nutrientsin seawater without the aid of sunlight (see Section 26.2).Freshwater environments may be rich in speciesIn contrast to the vast oceans, the world’s freshwater environmentscover less than 3 percent of Earth’s surface. However,they are home to about 10 percent of all aquatic species. Freshwaterenvironments may be found in running water (streamsand rivers) or in standing water (lakes and ponds). Like theoceans, bodies of standing water can be divided into zonesbased on depth and light penetration, with a littoral zone closeto shore characterized by warm temperatures and high speciesdiversity, a pelagic zone with its upper layers teeming with phytoplankton,and deeper waters below, where little light penetratesand oxygen levels are low, characterized by low diversity.Discontinuities in the ranges of aquatic organisms are seen becausemost animals that live in the oceans cannot survive in freshwater, and vice versa. For example, most groups of freshwaterfishes cannot tolerate salt water, so they are restricted to a singlecontinent. They can disperse only within the connected riversand lakes of a drainage basin or in brackish coastal waters.Estuaries have characteristics of both freshwater andmarine environmentsEstuaries are bodies of water that form where rivers meet theocean, in which salt water mixes with fresh water. Having characteristicsof both freshwater and marine systems, estuaries arehome to many unique species, and they play an important rolefor other species as a conduit between marine and freshwaterenvironments. Some salmon species that hatch in rivers, for example,spend many months in estuaries adjusting to highersalinities before swimming out to sea to grow into adults. Diversitywithin estuaries tends to be very high. Estuarine environmentshave long been an important source of human resources,not the least of which is their role in purifyinggroundwater. In many places around the world, however, overfishingand pollution threaten estuarine viability.54.5 RECAPDespite being connected, the oceans are dividedinto distinct regions that generate striking physicaland biological discontinuities. Oceanic life zones aredetermined by distance from the surface, which influenceshow much light is available to sustain photosynthesis.Fresh waters, comprising river basinsand thousands of relatively isolated lakes, are alsodivided into life zones according to the depth andlight penetration. Estuaries are bodies of waterwhere salt water mixes with fresh water and supportmany unique species.• How does light penetration affect diversity in differentlife zones of the oceans? See p. 1163 and Figure 54.14• How do estuaries link freshwater and marine systems,and why are these ecosystems so important? Seep. 1164The physical environment exerts a tremendous influence on thedistribution of organisms on Earth, but to understand how andwhere life flourishes on Earth, it is also important to understandthe influence of organisms on one another. In Chapter 55 wewill consider the dynamics of populations. Chapters 56 and 57describe how populations interact and form ecological communities.The final two chapters in the book describe global ecologicalpatterns and emphasize the importance of ecology bothto humans and to our planet as a whole.1164 CHAPTER 54 | ECOLOGY AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LIFE54.1 What Is Ecology?• Ecology is the scientific investigation of interactions amongorganisms and between organisms and their physical environment.• An organism’s environment encompasses both abiotic (physicaland chemical) and biotic components (other living organisms).• The science of ecology generates knowledge about interactionsin the natural world.• In addition to observations of visible phenomena, ecology relieson a diversity of tools, including mathematical models, moleculartechniques, and satellite imagingCHAPTER SUMMARY
54.1 What Is Ecology?• Ecology is the scientific investigation of interactions amongorganisms and between organisms and their physical environment.• An organism’s environment encompasses both abiotic (physicaland chemical) and biotic components (other living organisms).• The science of ecology generates knowledge about interactionsin the natural world.• In addition to observations of visible phenomena, ecology relieson a diversity of tools, including mathematical models, moleculartechniques, and satellite imaging
• Environmentalism is the use of ecological knowledge to informour decisions about the stewardship of natural resources andecosystems.54.2 Why Do Climates Vary Geographically?• Weather refers to atmospheric conditions at a particular placeand time. Climate is the average of atmospheric conditions, andthe variation in those conditions, found in a particular placeover time.• The solar energy that reaches a given unit of Earth’s surfacedepends primarily on the angle of the sun’s rays, which in turnis a function of latitude. Latitudinal variation in air temperaturedrives atmospheric circulation patterns of precipitation. SeeFigures 54.1 and 54.2• Global atmospheric circulation patterns are also driven by theEarth’s rotation; these wind patterns in turn drive ocean surfacecurrents. Review Figure 54.3• Organisms respond to climatic challenges with physiological,morphological, and behavioral adaptations.54.3 What Is a Biome?• A biome is an environment that is defined by its climatic andgeographic attributes and characterized by ecologically similarorganisms, particularly its dominant vegetation. Review Figure54.5, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 54.1• The distribution of biomes is determined primarily by climate,but other factors, such as soil characteristics and fire, also influencevegetation. Terrestrial biomes include Arctic and alpinetundra, boreal forest, temperate evergreen and temperatedeciduous forests, temperate grasslands, hot and cold deserts,chaparral, thorn forest and savanna, tropical deciduous forest,and tropical evergreen forest. SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 54.254.4 What Is a Biogeographic Region?• Biogeography is the scientific study of the patterns of distributionof populations, species, and ecological communities.• The boundaries of biogeographic regions are drawn whereassemblages of species change dramatically over short distances.These boundaries generally correspond to present orpast barriers to dispersal. Review Figures 54.7 and 54.8, WEBACTIVITY 54.1• A species that is found only in a certain region is said to beendemic to that region.• The theory of continental drift explains some discontinuous distributionsthat include multiple biogeographic regions. ReviewFigure 54.10• Biogeographers can transform phylogenetic trees into areaphylogenies that show where organisms now live or once lived.Review Figure 54.11• When formerly separated land masses come together, speciesfrom both biotas may disperse into the other region, a phenomenonknown as biotic interchange.• Both vicariant events and dispersal across boundaries generatedistinctive patterns of species distributions. Review Figure54.1354.5 How Is Life Distributed in Aquatic Environments?• Oceanic life zones are determined by the distance from the surface,which in turn influences how much light is available tosustain photosynthetic organisms. Review Figure 54.14• Fresh waters—river basins and lakes—are also divided into lifezones according to depth and light penetration.• Estuaries are bodies of water where salt and fresh water mix.This globally small but crucial life zone supports many uniquespecies