The use of performance-enhancing drugs—particularlyanabolic steroids—has become a scandal in athletics.Olympic champions have lost medals, professionalathletes have been suspended, coaches have losttheir jobs, and exceptional performances have been expungedfrom the record books. The recent history ofbaseball in the United States has been termed “the steroidera” because of the huge impact the extensive use of performance-enhancement drugs has had on the game andthe controversy this has created. Gains in performanceand new records raise the question of whether an aspiringathlete can succeed without using performance-enhancingdrugs. The U.S. Congress has passed laws against nonmedicaluse of steroids, and Major League Baseball has institutedpenalties for players who break the law. To date,over 100 Major League players have admitted to or beenimplicated in the use of steroids, and many have beensuspended for up to 80 games.You have probably heard of one anabolic steroid:testosterone, the male sex hormone. Shortly before puberty,the male reproductive system increases its productionof this important chemical signal. Testosterone enterscells, where it binds to receptors and alters gene expression.Cells that have these receptors are those involved inthe development of male secondary sexual characteristics,such as a deep voice, facial and body hair, and increasedmuscle and bone mass. Anabolic steroids areused therapeutically to treat conditions such as delayedpuberty, erectile dysfunction, and the loss of muscle massthat occurs with certain diseases.When a muscle is exercised, an interaction between theexercise and the steroids results in growth of that muscle.Body builders who abuse anabolic steroids typically usethem in doses 10 to100 times greater than normal levelsor therapeutic doses. The resulting extreme growth ofskeletal muscle mass occurs in women as well as men.Both sexes have receptors for testosterone, but womennormally have much lower concentrations of testosteronein their blood than men do. When female body buildersuse these hormones, they develop male muscle patterns.They also develop deep voices and body and facial hair,and because these steroids generate negative feedbackJuiced41How Baseball Got Big Jose Canseco was the AmericanLeague Rookie of the Year in 1986. In 1988, he became the firstmajor league player to hit 40 home runs and steal 40 bases in aseason and was named the American League’s Most ValuablePlayer. In 2005 he wrote a book called Juiced: Wild Times,Rampant ‘Roids, Smash Hits, and How Baseball Got Big inwhich he admitted to using anabolic steroids and implicatedmany other players.What Are Hormones and 41.1 How Do They Work?In multicellular animals, physiological control and regulationrequire information and cell-to-cell communication. Most intercellularcommunication is by means of chemical signals thatbind to receptors, as described in Chapter 7. Hormones arechemical signals that are released by certain types of cells andthat influence the activities of other cells at a distance. In thisand subsequent chapters you will learn about hormones andother examples of chemical signals, including growth factors,morphogens, cytokines, and neurotransmitters. These generalnames come from the context in which the chemical signal operates—endocrine system, growth and development, immunesystem, or nervous system—but the principles of their functionare the same: one cell releases a chemical signal that travels toand binds to a receptor, causing a cellular response.The information that animals use to develop, grow, and functioncomes from four major sources: the genome, the endocrinesystem, the immune system, and the nervous system. In each ofthese systems, information is encoded in the specificity of chemicalsignals and their receptors. In earlier chapters we learned alot about genetic information. In this and following chapters wediscuss the endocrine, immune, and nervous systems. Lest youthink that all signaling is chemical, however, keep in mind thatthere are also receptors in the nervous system that encode physicalsources of information, such as temperature, pressure, andlight. And the nervous system uses electrical signals called actionpotentials to get information from place to place in the body.Regardless of the system, the processing of information dependson which cells have receptors for the signals and how those cellsrespond and interact with other cells.Some analogies might help distinguish how the immune, endocrine,and nervous informational systems operate. The immunesystem (the topic of Chapter 42) operates like an armyof private security guards. The various cellular agents maketheir rounds of the body, and when they detect a security breach,they sound their alarms—cytokines—which activate the body’sdefenses. The nervous system (see Chapters 45–47) operates likea telephone system with a central integration and commandcenter that sends signals along specific wires to specific receivers.The endocrine system is more like a radio or TV networkthat broadcasts signals that can be picked up by anyonewho has an appropriate receiver that is turned on and tuned in.In this chapter we focus on the endocrine system, which includesa variety of cells that produce and release hormonalchemical signals into the extracellular fluid.IN THIS CHAPTER we will examine how hormonescontrol and regulate anatomical, developmental, physiological,and behavioral changes in animals. First we examinehormonal control of invertebrate life cycles. Next we discussthe general characteristics of hormones and theirreceptors. Then we describe the functions, control, andmechanisms of action of mammalian hormones.information that controls female reproductive physiology,their breast tissue diminishes, they stop menstruating,and they become infertile. Similar negative feedbackin males causes infertility. Behavioral changes—“roidrage”—are also common. The most serious side effects,for both men and women, are greatly increased risks ofcancer and of heart, liver, and kidney diseases.Despite the risks, athletes seeking an advantage havefrequently turned to anabolic steroids. Athletic governingorganizations administer blood and urine tests to detecttheir use; in their turn, illicit drug makers constantlyseek to design new forms of anabolic steroids that producethe desired physical results but are not detectable.CHAPTER OUTLINE41.1 What Are Hormones and How Do They Work?41.2 How Do the Nervous and Endocrine SystemsInteract?41.3 What Are the Major Mammalian Endocrine Glandsand Hormones?41.4 How Do We Study Mechanisms of HormoneAction?Anabolic Steroids Build Big Muscles Anabolic steroidsgreatly enhance the development of skeletal muscle in responseto exercise. Steroids have this effect on women as well as men.Chemical signals can act locally or at a distanceEndocrine cells secrete chemical signals; target cells have receptorsfor those signals. Chemicals secreted into the extracellularfluid diffuse locally and may diffuse into the blood. Endocrinesignals that enter the blood are called hormones, and they canactivate target cells far from their site of release (Figure 41.1A).Testosterone is an example of a hormone.Some endocrine signals are released in such tiny quantities,or are so rapidly inactivated by enzymes, or are taken up soefficiently by local cells that they never diffuse into the blood insufficient amounts to act on distant cells. Because these signalsaffect only target cells near their release site, they are calledparacrines (para, “near”; Figure 41.1B). An example of a paracrineis histamine, one of the mediators of inflammation. Themost local action an endocrine signal can have is when it bindsto receptors on or in the same cell that secreted it. When a chemicalsignal influences the cell that secreted it, it has autocrinefunction (Figure 41.1C). Hormones and paracrines can have autocrinefunctions as a means of providing negative feedback tocontrol their rates of secretion.Some endocrine cells exist as single cells within a tissue. Hormonesof the digestive tract, for example, are secreted by isolatedendocrine cells in the walls of the stomach and small intestine.Many hormones, however, are secreted by aggregationsof endocrine cells forming secretory organs called endocrineglands. The name “endocrine” reflects the fact that these glandssecrete their products directly into the extracellular fluid, whichthey pass into the blood. In contrast, exocrine glands, such assweat glands or salivary glands, have ducts that carry theirproducts to the surface of the skin or into a body cavity suchas the gut. A single endocrine gland may secrete multiple hormones.To complete our overview of intercellular chemical communication,we must mention neurotransmitters, which we discussin detail in Chapters 45–47, and pheromones, which wediscuss in Chapter 54. Neurons, the cells of the nervous system,conduct information over long distances as electrical signals,but where a neuron communicates that information to anothercell, be it another neuron, a muscle cell, or a secretory cell, itdoes so by releasing chemical signals called neurotransmitters.Most neurotransmitters act very locally and frequently act onthe neuron that released them. Some neurotransmitters, however,diffuse into the blood and are therefore referred to as neurohormones.Pheromones are chemical signals that an animalreleases into the environment to communicate information toother individuals of the same species.Hormonal communication has a long evolutionary historyIntercellular chemical signaling was critical for the evolution ofmulticellularity. A protist, the slime mold Dictyostelium, uses achemical signal (cAMP) to coordinate the aggregation of individualcells to form a multicellular fruiting structure (see Figure27.32). The most primitive of the multicellular animals—thesponges—do not have nervous systems, but they do have intercellularchemical communication. And as discussed in Chapter37, plant growth is regulated by a variety of hormones.Studying the evolution of hormonal signalingreveals an interesting generalization: the signalmolecules themselves are highly conserved. Wefind the same chemical compounds over broadgroups of organisms, but their functions differ.As organisms have evolved to occupy differentenvironments and have different lifestyles, hormone–receptor systems have evolved to servedifferent functions—for example, the hormoneprolactin (Figure 41.2). Another important exampleis the hormonal control of molting andmetamorphosis—critical events in the lives ofarthropods, the most diverse animal group onEarth (see Chapter 32). The hormones involvedrepresent an ancient system of hormonal communicationthat is genetically related to the anabolicsteroid system discussed at the openingof this chapter.HORMONAL CONTROL OF MOLTING IN ARTHROPODSInsects, like all arthropods, have a rigid exoskeleton.Therefore, their growth is episodic, punctu-41.1 | WHAT ARE HORMONES AND HOW DO THEY WORK? 853Only cells that posessreceptor molecules thatrecognize and bind aspecific hormone willrespond to that hormone.Hormones travel in theblood throughout thebody to exert effects atdistant sites on manytarget cells.Paracrinesinfluencefunctions ofnearby cells. Autocrines influencefunctions of the samecell that secretes them.(A) Hormones(B) ParacrinesTarget cellsLargerbloodvesselsCapillary nearsecreting cellSecretingendocrinecell Capillary neartarget cellReceptormolecules(C) Autocrines41.1 Chemical Signaling Systems Hormones (A) are distributedthroughout the body by the blood. Paracrines and autocrines do notenter the bloodstream; paracrines (B) simply diffuse to nearby cells,while autocrines (C) influence the cells that release them.ated with molts (shedding of the exoskeleton). Each growthstage between two molts is called an instar.The British physiologist Sir Vincent Wigglesworth was a pioneerin the study of the hormonal control of growth and developmentin insects. Wigglesworth conducted a series of experimentson the bloodsucking bug Rhodnius prolixus. Upon hatching, Rhodniuslooks like a miniature adult but lackscertain adult features. The juvenile bugmolts five times before developing intoa mature adult; a blood meal triggers eachepisode of molting and growth.Rhodnius is an amazingly hardy experimentalanimal—it survives for quite along time even after its head is cut off.Wigglesworth’s studies revealed that, ifdecapitated within an hour after a bloodmeal, Rhodnius can survive for up to a year,but it never molts. If decapitated a weekafter its blood meal, however, it does molt.Wigglesworth hypothesized that the timelag meant that the substance that triggersmolting diffuses slowly from the head. Hetested this hypothesis with the experimentdescribed in Figure 41.3.We now know that two hormonesworking in sequence regulate molting inarthropods: prothoracicotropic hormone(PTTH) and ecdysone. Cells in the brainproduce PTTH, which is why it has alsobeen called “brain hormone.” PTTH istransported to and stored in paired structurescalled the corpora cardiaca attachedto the brain. After appropriate stimulation(which for Rhodnius is a blood meal),PTTH is released and diffuses throughthe extracellular fluid to an endocrinegland, the prothoracic gland. PTTH stimulatesthe prothoracic gland to release thehormone ecdysone. Ecdysone diffuses totarget tissues and stimulates molting.Ecdysone is a lipid-soluble steroidthat readily passes through the plasmamembrane of its target cells (mostlycells of the epidermis). In the target cells, ecdysone binds to areceptor that is probably related to the vertebrate testosteronereceptor. The hormone–receptor complex acts as a transcriptionfactor that induces expression of the genes encoding enzymesinvolved in digesting the old cuticle and secreting a newone. The related testosterone receptor, when bound to testos-854 CHAPTER 41 | ANIMAL HORMONESFishRequired for osmoregulation in freshwaterspecies. In saltwater species that return tofresh water to spawn (e.g., salmon), prolactinproduction in adults may play a role ingenerating the drive to return to natal streams.MammalsIn females, stimulates growth of the mammaryglands and milk production. In humans, it isresponsible for the sensation of sexualgratification as well as the male refractoryperiod following sexual intercourse.BirdsIn some species, stimulates nesting activity,incubation behavior, and parental care in bothsexes. Stimulates the epithelial cells of theupper GI tract to proliferate and slough off toform “crop milk” to nourish the young.AmphibiansAlters the osmoregulatory properties of theskin for animals that enter fresh water. In somespecies, creates a “water drive” that returnsadults to breeding locations. Stimulatesoviduct development and production of eggjelly in females. In some species, controlsdevelopment of sexual characteristics.The structure of prolactin is similar in allvertebrate groups.41.2 Prolactin’s Structure Is Conserved,but Its Functions Have Evolved Thehormone prolactin is found in all vertebrategroups and has a long evolutionary history.Its probable function in early vertebrates wasin regulating the body’s salt and water balance(osmoregulation). It maintains thisfunction in some species, and has evolved inothers to control a number of physiologicalprocesses, most of which are associated withreproduction.terone, also plays important roles in development and growth,illustrating the evolutionary conservatism of both the chemicalsignal and its general domain of function.The control of molting by PTTH and ecdysone is ageneral arthropod hormonal control mechanism, and itexemplifies how the endocrine system works with thenervous system to integrate diverse information and inducelong-term effects. The nervous system of an arthropodreceives various types of information about the animal’senvironment (such as day length, temperature,social cues, and nutrition) that help determine the optimaltiming for the stages of growth and development.When conditions are right, the brain (part of the nervoussystem) signals the prothoracic gland (part of the endocrinesystem), which produces the hormone (ecdysone)that orchestrates the physiological processes involvedin development and molting. Later in this chapter we willsee similar links between the nervous system and endocrineglands in vertebrates.HORMONAL CONTROL OF MATURATION IN ARTHROPODSWigglesworth’s experiments with Rhodnius yielded anothercurious result: regardless of the instar used, decapitatedbugs that molted always molted directly into anadult. Additional experiments by Wigglesworth demonstratedthat another hormone determines whether a bugmolts into another juvenile instar or into an adult.Because the head of Rhodnius is long, it is possible toremove just the front part of it, which contains the brain,while leaving the rear part intact. When fourth-instar bugsthat had had a blood meal a week earlier were partly decapitatedin this way, they molted into fifth-star juveniles,not into adults.This experiment was followed by more experimentsusing glass tubes to connect individual bugs. When an unfed,completely decapitated fifth-instar bug was connectedto a fed, partly decapitated fourth-instar bug (withonly the front part of its head removed), both bugs moltedinto juvenile forms. Asubstance from the rear part of thehead of the fourth-instar bug prevented both bugs frommolting into adults.The substance responsible for preventing maturationis juvenile hormone, which is released continuously fromthe corpora allata (structures that are attached to the corporacardiaca, which release PTTH). As long as juvenilehormone is present, Rhodnius molts into another juvenileinstar. Normally Rhodnius stops producing juvenile hormoneduring the fifth instar, then molts into an adult.The control of development by juvenile hormone ismore complex in insects, such as butterflies, that undergocomplete metamorphosis. These animals undergo dramaticdevelopmental changes in their life cycles. The fertilizedegg hatches into a larva, which feeds and molts severaltimes, becoming bigger each time. After a fixednumber of molts, it enters an inactive stage called pupation.The pupa undergoes major body reorganization andfinally emerges as an adult.An excellent example of complete metamorphosisis provided by the silkworm moth Hyalophora cecropia41.1 | WHAT ARE HORMONES AND HOW DO THEY WORK? 855CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE41.3 A Diffusible Substance Triggers MoltingThe bloodsucking bug Rhodnius prolixus develops from hatchling toadult in a series of five molts (instars) that are triggered by ingestingblood. Sir Vincent Wigglesworth’s experiments demonstrated thata blood meal stimulates production of some molt-inducing substancein the insect’s head.HYPOTHESIS The substance that controls molting in R. prolixus isproduced in the head segment and diffuses slowlythrough the body.OBSERVATIONA blood meal stimulates production of somesubstance within the insect’s head that thendiffuses slowly through the body, triggering a molt.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSTubing allows bodyfluids to pass fromone bug to anotherR. prolixus can survivefor up to a year after itshead segment is removed.Juvenile bug (third instar)Decapitation 1 hourafter blood mealDoes not molt(remains a juvenile)Molts intoan adultDecapitation 1 weekafter blood mealBoth bugs molt into adults1 hour after blood meal 1 week after blood meal2. Join bugswith glass tube1. Decapitate third-instar juveniles at differenttimes after blood meal.(Figure 41.4). As long as juvenile hormone is present in highconcentrations, larvae molt into larger larvae. When the levelof juvenile hormone falls, larvae spin cocoons and molt intopupae. Because no juvenile hormone is produced in pupae,they molt into adults.The existence and function of insect hormones were experimentallydemonstrated many years before the hormones wereidentified chemically. That is not surprising when you considerthe tiny amounts of certain hormones that exist in an organism.In one of the earliest studies of ecdysone, biochemists producedonly 250 milligrams of pure ecdysone (about one-fourth theweight of an apple seed) from 4 tons of silkworms!Hormones can be divided into three chemical groupsNow that we have seen examples of the roles hormones canplay in long-term physiological and developmental processes,we can step back and ask some general questions about them.What kinds of hormones exist? What is their chemical nature,and what is their mode of action? There is enormous diversityin the chemical structure of hormones, but most of them can beclassified into three groups:• The majority of hormones are peptides or proteins. Thesehormones (insulin is an example) are water-soluble andthus are easily transported in the blood without carriermolecules. Peptide and protein hormones are packaged invesicles within the cells that make them; they are releasedby exocytosis. Their receptors are on cell surfaces.• Steroid hormones (such as testosterone) are synthesized fromthe steroid cholesterol, are lipid-soluble, and easily passthrough cell membranes. Steroid hormones diffuse out ofthe cells that make them and are usually bound to carriermolecules in the blood. Their receptors are mostly intracellular• Amine hormones are mostly synthesized from the amino acidtyrosine (thyroxine is one example). Some amine hormonesare water-soluble and others are lipid-soluble; their modesof release differ accordingly.Hormone receptors can be membrane-boundor intracellularWater-soluble hormones cannot pass readily through plasmamembranes, so their receptors are located on the surfaces oftarget cells. These receptors are large transmembrane glycoproteincomplexes with three domains: a binding domain thatprojects outside the plasma membrane, a transmembrane domainthat anchors the receptor in the membrane, and a cytoplasmicdomain that extends into the cytoplasm of the cell.When a hormone binds to the binding domain, the cytoplasmicdomain initiates the target cell’s response through a secondmessenger-activated cascade, eventually activating proteinkinases or protein phosphatases (see Figures 7.7 and 7.8).In most cases these protein kinases and phosphatases activate856 CHAPTER 41 | ANIMAL HORMONESEndocrine cells in thebrain produce PTTH,which is transported tothe corpus cardiacum,where it is released.PTTH stimulatesthe prothoracicgland to secreteecdysone (red).The corpus allatumproduces juvenilehormone (blue) indeclining amounts.Each release ofecdysonestimulates a molt.When juvenilehormone reachesa low level, thelarva spins acocoon and moltsinto a pupa.The pupa does notproduce juvenilehormone, so itmetamorphosesAdult into an adult.BrainCorpuscardiacumCorpusallatumPupaPupationCocoonMetamorphosisMoltMoltMoltMoltFirst-instarlarvaProthoracicglandSecond-instarlarvaThird-instarlarvaFourth-instarlarvaFifth-instarlarva41.4 Hormonal Control of Metamorphosis Three hormones controlmolting and metamorphosis in the silkworm moth Hyalophora cecropia.GO TO Animated Tutorial 41.1 • Complete MetamorphosisyourBioPortal.comor inactivate enzymes in the cytoplasm, which leads to thecell’s response, but the signaling cascade initiated by the receptorcan also generate signals that enter the nucleus andalter gene expression (see Figure 7.12).Lipid-soluble hormones can diffuse through plasma membranes,and therefore their receptors are usually inside cells, ineither the cytoplasm or the nucleus (although some membraneboundreceptors for lipid-soluble hormones have recently beendescribed). In most cases, the complex formed by the lipid-solublehormone and its receptor acts by altering gene expressionin the cell’s nucleus (see Figure 7.9).Hormone action depends on the nature ofthe target cell and its receptorsWherever a hormone encounters a cell with a receptor to whichit can bind, it binds to that receptor and triggers a response. Thenature of the response depends on the responding cell and itsreceptors. Thus the same hormone can cause different responsesin different types of cells.Consider the amine hormone epinephrine. Suppose you arewalking in the forest and almost trip over a rattlesnake. Youjump back. Your heart starts to thump, and an entire set of protectiveactions are set in motion. The jump and the initial heartthumping are driven by your nervous system, which reactsvery quickly. Simultaneously with these muscular responses,however, your nervous system stimulates endocrine cells in theadrenal glands just above your kidneys to secrete epinephrine.Within seconds, epinephrine is diffusing into your blood andcirculating around your body to activate the many componentsof the fight-or-flight response (Figure 41.5).Epinephrine binds to receptors in your heart, causing a fasterand stronger heartbeat. Your heart is now pumping more blood.Epinephrine also binds to receptors in certain blood vessels. Bycausing constriction of blood vessels supplying your skin, kidneys,and digestive tract (digesting lunch can wait!), the hormonediverts more blood to the muscles needed for your escapefrom danger.Epinephrine also binds to cells in the liver and to receptorson fat cells. In the liver, epinephrine stimulates the breakdownof glycogen into glucose for a quick energy supply (see Figure7.20). In fatty tissue, it stimulates the breakdown of fats to yieldfatty acids—another source of energy. These are just some ofthe many actions that are triggered by one hormone; they allcontribute to increasing your chances of surviving a dangeroussituation. In each case the cellular response dependson the cell’s receptors and associated intracellular signalingcascade.41.1 RECAPHormones are chemical signals released by endocrinecells into the extracellular fluid, where theydiffuse into the blood and travel to distant targetcells. The receptors for water-soluble hormones areon the surfaces of target cells; receptors for mostlipid-soluble hormones are inside the target cells.• What is the role of juvenile hormone in metamorphosis?See pp. 855–856 and Figures 41.3 and 41.4• Describe the different methods by which watersolubleand lipid-soluble hormones reach theirreceptors. See p. 856• Do you understand why a single hormone can havediverse effects in the body?Since the nervous system and the endocrine system are the twomajor information systems of the body, it is not surprising thattheir activities are coordinated. Let’s look next at how this coordinationworks.41.1 | WHAT ARE HORMONES AND HOW DO THEY WORK? 8571 The brain detects dangerand signals the legmuscles to jump back…2 …and signals the adrenalglands to releaseepinephrine into theblood, triggering a numberof effects.The liver breaksdown glycogento supply glucose(fuel) to the blood.Blood vessels to thegut and skin constrict,shunting more bloodto the muscles.The heart beatsfaster and stronger.Blood pressure rises.Fat cells releasefatty acids (fuel)to the blood.Adrenal gland41.5 The Fight-or-Flight Response When a person is suddenlyfaced with a threatening situation, the brain sends a signal to the adrenalglands, which almost instantaneously release the hormone epinephrine.Epinephrine circulates around the body and induces the various componentsof the fight-or-flight response in different tissues.How Do the Nervous and Endocrine 41.2 Systems Interact?The list of hormones known to exist is long and growing longer.To make the subject manageable, we will focus primarily onthe endocrine system of humans and other mammals (Figure41.6). We will begin our survey by considering the hormonesinvolved in the integration of nervous system and endocrinesystem functions.The pituitary connects the nervous andendocrine systemsThe pituitary gland sits in a depression at the bottom of the skull,just over the back of the roof of the mouth (Figure 41.7A). It isattached by a stalk to a part of the brain called the hypothalamus,which is involved in many physiological regulatory systems.Through its close connection with the hypothalamus, thepituitary serves as the interface between the nervous systemand the endocrine system and is involved in the hormonal controlof many physiological processes.858 CHAPTER 41 | ANIMAL HORMONESOther organs include cells thatproduce and secrete hormonesOrgan HormoneAdipose tissue LeptinHeart Atrial natriuretic peptideKidney ErythropoietinStomach GastrinIntestine Secretin, cholecystokininSkin Vitamin D (cholecalciferol)Liver Somatomedins,insulin-like growth factorsHypothalamus (see Figure 41.7)Release and release-inhibiting neurohormonescontrol the anterior pituitary;ADH and oxytocin are transported to andreleased from the posterior pituitaryAnterior pituitary (see Figure 41.8)Thyrotropin (TSH): activates the thyroid glandFollicle-stimulating hormone (FSH): in females,stimulates maturation of ovarian follicles; inmales, stimulates spermatogenesisLuteinizing hormone (LH): in females, triggersovulation and ovarian production of estrogensand progesterone; in males, stimulatesproduction of testosteroneCorticotropin (ACTH): stimulates adrenalcortex to secrete cortisolGrowth hormone (GH): stimulates proteinsynthesis and growthProlactin: stimulates milk productionMelanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH)Endorphins and enkephalins: pain controlPosterior pituitary (see Figure 41.7)Receives and releases two hypothalamichormones:Oxytocin: stimulates contraction of uterus,flow of milk, interindividual bondingAntidiuretic hormone (ADH; also known asvasopressin): promotes waterconservation by kidneysThymus (diminishes in adults)Thymosin: activates immune system T cellsPancreas (islets of Langerhans)Insulin: stimulates cells to take up and useglucoseGlucagon: stimulates liver to release glucoseSomatostatin: slows release of insulin andglucagon and digestive tract functionsPineal glandMelatonin: regulates biological rhythmsThyroid gland (see Figures 41.10 and 41.11)Thyroxine (T3 and T4 ): increases cellmetabolism; essential for growth and neuraldevelopmentCalcitonin: stimulates incorporation ofcalcium into boneAdrenal gland (see Figure 41.12)CortexCortisol: mediates metabolic responses tostressAldosterone: involved in salt and water balanceSex steroidsMedullaEpinephrine (adrenaline) and norepinephrine(noradrenaline): stimulate immediate fight orflight reactionsGonads (see Chapter 43)Testes (male)Testosterone: developmentand maintenance of male sexualcharacteristicsOvaries (female)Estrogens: development andmaintenance of female sexualcharacteristicsProgesterone: supports pregnancyParathyroid glands (on posterior surfaceof thyroid; see Figure 41.10)Parathyroid hormone (PTH): stimulates releaseof calcium from bone and absorption ofcalcium by gut and kidney41.6 The Endocrine System of Humans Cells that produce andsecrete hormones may be organized into discrete endocrine glands, orthey may be embedded in the tissues of other organs, such as the digestivetract or kidneys. The hypothalamus is part of the brain, but it includescells that secrete neurohormones into the extracellular fluid.GO TO Web Activity 41.1 • The Human Endocrine GlandsyourBioPortal.comThe pituitary has two parts with different developmental origins.The anterior pituitary originates as an outpocketing of theroof of the embryonic mouth cavity, whereas the posterior pituitaryoriginates as an outpocketing of the floor of the developingbrain. Thus the anterior pituitary originates from gut epithelialtissue and the posterior pituitary from neural tissue.Both parts interact with the nervous system but in differentways. The anterior pituitary contains endocrine cells controlledby neurohormones secreted by the hypothalamus. The posteriorpituitary contains axons from hypothalamic neurons.THE POSTERIOR PITUITARY Long axons extend into the posteriorpituitary from neurons in the hypothalamus. The ends (terminals)of those axons release two hormones produced by the neurons,antidiuretic hormone and oxytocin (Figure 41.7B). Theseneurohormones are packaged in vesicles that are transporteddown the axons. The vesicles are stored until an action potentialstimulates their release.The main action of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) in mammalsand birds is to increase the amount of water conserved by thekidneys. When ADH secretion is high, the kidneys produce onlya small volume of highly concentrated urine. When ADH secretionis low, the kidneys produce a large volume of diluteurine. The posterior pituitary increases its release of ADH whenblood pressure falls or the blood becomes too salty. ADH is alsoknown as vasopressin because at high concentrations it causesthe constriction of peripheral blood vessels as a means of elevatingblood pressure.When a woman is about to give birth, her posterior pituitaryreleases oxytocin, which stimulates the uterine contractions thatdeliver the baby (see Figure 44.16). Oxytocin also brings aboutthe flow of milk from the mother’s breasts. The baby’s sucklingstimulates neurons in the mother’s brain that cause the secretionof oxytocin. Even the sight and sound of a baby can causea nursing mother to secrete oxytocin and release breast milk.This is a good example of how the nervous system integratesinformation and contributes to the control of hormonally mediatedprocesses.Hormones, in turn, can influence the nervous system. Oxytocin,for example, promotes bonding (see the story that opensChapter 7). If oxytocin release is experimentally blocked, mammalianmothers, from rats to sheep, will reject their newbornoffspring, but if a virgin rat is given a dose of oxytocin, she willadopt strange pups as if they were her own. Oxytocin promotespair bonding and trust in a variety of animals. In humans, itssecretion rises with intimate sexual contact. Not surprisingly,oxytocin has been nicknamed the “cuddle hormone.”THE ANTERIOR PITUITARY The anterior pituitary releases fourpeptide and protein hormones that act as tropic hormones,meaning they control the activities of other endocrine glands41.2 | HOW DO THE NERVOUS AND ENDOCRINE SYSTEMS INTERACT? 859The human pituitarygland is the size of ablueberry, yet it secretesmany hormones.The neurohormones arereleased in the posteriorpituitary and diffuse intocapillaries......then leave the posteriorpituitary via the blood.Hypothalamic neuronsproduce antiduretichormone and oxytocinand transport them tothe posterior pituitary.Stalk ofpituitaryCapillariesAxons ofhypothalamicneuronsAnteriorpituitaryPosteriorpituitaryInflowingbloodHypothalamusHypothalamus(A)(B)12341.7 The Posterior Pituitary Releases NeurohormonesNeurons in the hypothalamus produce two peptide neurohormones,which are stored and released by the posterior pituitary.GO TO Animated Tutorial 41.2 • The Hypothalamic–Pituitary–Endocrine AxisyourBioPortal.com(Figure 41.8). These four hormones are thyrotropin, luteinizinghormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and corticotropin. Each tropichormone is produced by a different type of pituitary cell. Wewill say more about the tropic hormones when we describe theirtarget glands (thyroid, testes, ovaries, and adrenal cortex) laterin this chapter and in Chapter 43.Other peptide and protein hormones produced by the anteriorpituitary are growth hormone, prolactin (see Figure 41.2)melanocyte-stimulating hormone, enkephalins, and endorphins.Growth hormone (GH) acts on a wide variety of tissues to promotegrowth. One of its important effects is to stimulate cells totake up amino acids. Growth hormone also promotes growthby stimulating the liver to produce chemical signals called somatomedinsor insulin-like growth factors (IGFs), which stimulatethe growth of bone and cartilage. Thus growth hormone can beconsidered a tropic hormone because it stimulates endocrinecells in the liver.Overproduction of growth hormone in children causes gigantism,in which affected individuals may grow to nearly 8 feettall. Underproduction causes pituitary dwarfism, in which individualsfail to reach normal adult height. Beginning in the late1950s, children with serious growth hormone deficiencies weretreated with growth hormone extracted from pituitaries of humancadavers. The treatment was successful in stimulating substantialgrowth, but a year’s supply of the hormone for one individualrequired up to 50 cadaver pituitaries. In the 1980s,scientists using recombinant DNA technology isolatedthe gene for human growth hormone and introducedit into bacteria that could be grown inlarge quantities, making it possible to purifyenough of the hormone to make it widely available.Endorphins and enkephalins are the body’s naturalpainkillers. In the brain, these molecules act asneurotransmitters in pathways that control pain.Their production in the anterior pituitary is normallyquite small and probably has no significanteffect. They are a by-product of the production oftwo other anterior pituitary hormones. One gene encodes alarge parent molecule called pro-opiomelanocortin, or POMC,which is cleaved to produce several peptides. Corticotropin,melanocyte-stimulating hormone, endorphins, and enkephalinsall result from the cleavage of POMC.The anterior pituitary is controlled byhypothalamic neurohormonesIn contrast to the posterior pituitary, the anterior pituitary makesand secretes its own hormones, but its secretion of hormones isunder the control of neurohormones from the hypothalamus.The hypothalamus senses and receives information about conditionsin the body and in the external environment, and it communicatesthat information to the anterior pituitary by releasingneurohormones. If the connection between the hypothalamusand the pituitary is experimentally cut, the release of pituitaryhormones no longer changes when conditions in the internalor external environment change. In experiments in which pituitarycells were maintained in culture, adding extracts of hypothalamictissue stimulated some of those cells to release theirhormones into the culture medium. Therefore, scientists hypothesizedthat secretions from hypothalamic cells control the activitiesof anterior pituitary cells.Hypothalamic neurons do not extend into the anterior pituitaryas they do into the posterior pituitary. Remember thatthe posterior pituitary develops from neural tissue whereas theanterior pituitary develops from gut tissue. Aspecial set of portalblood vessels bridges the gap between the hypothalamusand the anterior pituitary (see Figure 41.8). It was thus proposedthat secretions from neurons in the hypothalamus enter theblood and are conducted down the portal vessels to the anteriorpituitary, where they stimulate the release of anterior pituitaryhormones.In the 1960s, two large teams of scientists, led by RogerGuillemin and Andrew Schally, initiated the search for thesehypothalamic secretions. Because the amounts of such neurohor-860 CHAPTER 41 | ANIMAL HORMONESAxon terminals ofhypothalamic neuronsrelease neurohormonesnear capillaries that giverise to portal vessels.Neurohormones from portalvessels stimulate or inhibitthe release of hormonesfrom anterior pituitary cells.Anterior pituitary hormonesleave the gland via the blood.AnteriorpituitaryPosteriorpituitaryPortalbloodvesselsHypothalamusInflowingbloodHypothalamic neurons41.8 The Anterior Pituitary Is Controlled by the HypothalamusCells of the anterior pituitary produce four tropic hormones that controlother endocrine glands, as well as several other peptide and protein hormones.These cells are controlled by neurohormones produced in thehypothalamus and delivered through portal blood vessels that run betweenthe hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary through the pituitary stalk.mones in any individual mammal would be tiny, massive numbersof hypothalami from pigs and sheep were collected fromslaughterhouses and shipped to laboratories in refrigeratedtrucks. One extraction effort began with the hypothalami from270,000 sheep and yielded only 1 milligram of purified thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH). TRH was the first hypothalamicreleasing hormone (that is, release-stimulating hormone) to beisolated and characterized. It turned out to be a simple tripeptideconsisting of glutamine, histidine, and proline. It causes certainanterior pituitary cells to release the tropic hormone thyrotropin,which in turn stimulates the activity of the thyroid gland.Soon after discovering TRH, Guillemin’s and Schally’s teamsidentified gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which stimulatescertain anterior pituitary cells to release the tropic hormonesthat control the activity of the gonads (the ovaries andthe testes). For these discoveries, Guillemin and Schally receivedthe 1977 Nobel Prize in Medicine. Many other hypothalamicneurohormones, including both releasing hormones and release-inhibiting hormones, are now known. The major hypothalamicneurohormones that control anterior pituitary functionare:• Thyrotropin-releasing hormone• Gonadotropin-releasing hormone• Prolactin-releasing and release-inhibiting hormones• Growth hormone–releasing hormone• Growth hormone release-inhibiting hormone (somatostatin)• Corticotropin-releasing hormoneNegative feedback loops regulate hormone secretionAs well as being controlled by hypothalamic releasing and release-inhibiting hormones, the endocrine cells of the anteriorpituitary are also under direct and indirect negative feedbackcontrol by the hormones of the target glands they stimulate(Figure 41.9). For example, the hormone cortisol, produced bythe adrenal gland in response to corticotropin secreted by theanterior pituitary, reaches the pituitary in the circulating bloodand inhibits further release of that tropic hormone. Cortisol alsoacts as a negative feedback signal to the hypothalamus, inhibitingthe release of corticotropin-releasing hormone. In somecases, a tropic hormone also exerts negative feedback controlon the hypothalamic cells that produce the corresponding releasinghormone.41.2 RECAPThe pituitary is the interface between the nervoussystem and the endocrine system. The posteriorpituitary releases two neurohormones. The anteriorpituitary, under the control of other neurohormonesfrom the hypothalamus, releases hormones thatcontrol other endocrine glands.• Describe the anatomical and functional relationshipsbetween the brain and the two parts of thepituitary.• What are the tropic hormones of the anterior pituitary,and how do they influence the endocrine system?See pp. 859–860 and Figure 41.8Now that we know some of the mechanisms by which endocrinesystems are controlled, we will take a more detailedlook at the functions of the major endocrine glands of the mammalianbody.What Are the Major Mammalian 41.3 Endocrine Glands and Hormones?Hormones help regulate functions in all mammalian physiologicalsystems. In this section we will examine a few major examplesof hormonal action in physiological processes. We willsee many more in the chapters that follow.The thyroid gland secretes thyroxineThe thyroid gland wraps around the front of the windpipe (trachea)and expands into a lobe on either side (see Figure 41.6).There are two cell types in the thyroid gland, each of which producesa specific hormone. Thyroxine is produced, stored, andreleased by epithelial cells that make up round, colloid-contain-41.3 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR MAMMALIAN ENDOCRINE GLANDS AND HORMONES? 861EndocrineglandAnteriorpituitary“Long loop”negativefeedback“Short loop”negativefeedbackReleasinghormoneTropic hormoneHormone= Stimulates= InhibitsExternal or internalconditionsorHypothalamus41.9 Multiple Feedback Loops Control Hormone SecretionMultiple negative feedback loops regulate the chain of command fromhypothalamus to anterior pituitary to endocrine glands.ing structures called follicles (Figure 41.10A and B). Calcitoninis produced in cells in spaces between the follicles.Thyroxine begins as the glycoprotein thyroglobulin, whichthe follicle cells synthesize as long chains consisting largely oftyrosine residues. As these thyroglobulin molecules are exportedinto the follicle for storage, the tyrosine residues are iodinatedwith one or two atoms of iodine. When the thyroidgland is stimulated to release thyroxine, the follicle cells take upthyroglobulin from the follicle by endocytosis. These bits of thyroglobulinare then cleaved to form smaller molecules consistingof only two tyrosine residues, and these molecules leave thefollicle cells. If these molecules are iodinated at the maximumof four sites on the tyrosine residues, the hormone istetraiodothyronine, or T4;and if they are iodinated at only three sites,they are triiodothyronine, or T3:The thyroid usually releases about four timesas much T4 as T3; however, T3 is the more activehormone in the cells of the body. CirculatingT4 can be converted to T3 by an enzymewithin target cells. Therefore, eachtarget cell can set its own sensitivity to thyroidhormones by controlling the conversionof T4 to the more active T3. When you readabout thyroxine, keep in mind that the actionsdiscussed are primarily those of T3.THYROXINE REGULATES CELL METABOLISMThyroxine in mammals plays many roles inregulating cell metabolism. Thyroxine islipid-soluble, so it enters cells readily andbinds to receptors in the nucleus. The receptoris found in most cells of the body, and when combined withthyroxine, it acts as a transcription factor that stimulates thetranscription of numerous genes whose products are enzymesinvolved in energy metabolic pathways, transport proteins, andstructural proteins. As a result, thyroxine elevates the metabolicrates of most cells and tissues. Exposure to cold for several daysleads to an increased release of thyroxine, an increased conversionof T4 to T3, and therefore an increased basal metabolicrate (see Section 40.4). Thyroxine is especially crucial during developmentand growth, as it promotes amino acid uptake andprotein synthesis. Insufficient thyroxine in a human fetus orgrowing child greatly retards physical and mental development,resulting in a condition known as cretinism.The tropic hormone thyrotropin, or thyroid-stimulating hormone(TSH), produced by the anterior pituitary, activates the thyroxine-producing follicle cells in the thyroid. Thyrotropin-releasinghormone (TRH), produced in the hypothalamus andtransported to the anterior pituitary through the portal blood vessels,activates the TSH-producing pituitary cells. The hypothalamususes environmental information, such as temperature orNH2CH C OHOHO O CH2I IICH2NH2CH C OHOHO OI II I862 CHAPTER 41 | ANIMAL HORMONES1 An epithelial cell takes upiodine from the blood.The cell synthesizesthyroglobulin fromtyrosine residues.Thyroglobulin is secretedinto the follicle lumenand iodinated.Thyroglobulin is takenup by endocytosis.Lysosomal enzymesdigest thyroglobulininto T3 and T4…4325…which are secretedinto the blood.6FollicleFollicle lumen(A)(B)Epithelial cellsof folliclesEpithelialcellFollicle lumenCapillaryIodinatedthyroglobulinTy ro sinemoleculesIodineT3T4LysosomeEndosome(C)Calcitoninproducingcells41.10 The Thyroid Gland Consists of ManyFollicles (A) Cross section through a thyroidgland, showing numerous follicles bounded byepithelial cells. Calcitonin-secreting cells are locatedin the spaces between the follicles. (B) The epithelialcells of the follicle synthesize thyroglobulin andsecrete it into the lumen of the follicle, where it isiodinated and stored until it is processed by theepithelial cells to generate T3 and T4. (C) Iodinedeficiency can result in hypothyroid goiter. In thiscondition, a lack of functional thyroxine results inoversynthesis of thyroglobulin and subsequentenlarged follicles.day length, to determine whether to increase or decrease its secretionof TRH. This sequence of steps is regulated by a negativefeedback loop like the one described earlier for cortisol (seeFigure 41.9). Circulating thyroxine inhibits the response of pituitarycells to TRH, so less TSH is released when thyroxine levelsare high, and more TSH is released when thyroxine levels are low.Circulating thyroxine also exerts negative feedback on the productionand release of TRH by the hypothalamus.Agoiter is an enlarged thyroid gland (Figure 41.10C) that canbe associated with either hyperthyroidism (excess production ofthyroxine) or hypothyroidism (thyroxine deficiency). The negativefeedback loop whereby thyroxine controls TSH releasehelps explain how two very different conditions can result inthe same symptom.The most common cause of hyperthyroid goiter is an autoimmunedisease involving an antibody to the TSH receptor. Thisantibody binds to and activates the TSH receptors on the folliclecells, causing uncontrolled production and release of thyroxine.Blood levels of TSH are quite low because of the negativefeedback from high levels of thyroxine, but thethyroid remains maximally stimulated and grows bigger.People with hyperthyroidism have high metabolicrates, are jumpy and nervous, usually feel hot, and maydevelop a buildup of fat behind the eyeballs, whichcauses their eyes to bulge.Hypothyroid goiter results when there is not enoughcirculating thyroxine to turn off TSH production. Themost common cause of this condition is a deficiency ofdietary iodine, without which the follicle cells cannotmake thyroxine. Without sufficient thyroxine, TSH levelsremain high, and the thyroid continues to producelarge amounts of thyroglobulin. Because sufficient iodineis not available, however, the thyroglobulin is poorly iodinated.When it is broken down by the follicle cells, itdoes not yield functional thyroxine (T3 or T4). TSH levelsremain high and stimulate more and more synthesis ofthyroglobulin, and the thyroid gets bigger. The symptomsof hypothyroidism are low metabolism, intoleranceof cold, and general physical and mental sluggishness.Goiter affects about 5 percent of the world’s population.The addition of iodine to table salt has greatly reducedthe incidence of hypothyroid goiter in industrializednations, but the condition is still common in theother parts of the world.Three hormones regulate blood calciumconcentrationsThe regulation of calcium concentration in the blood is acrucial and difficult task. It is crucial because shifts inblood calcium concentration above or below a narrowrange can cause serious problems. When blood calciumfalls below this range, the nervous system becomes overlyexcited, resulting in muscle spasms and even seizures.When blood calcium rises above this range, the nervoussystem becomes depressed and muscles—including theheart—weaken. Regulation of blood calcium is difficultbecause only about 0.1 percent of the calcium in the body is locatedin the extracellular fluid. About 1 percent is in cells, and almost99 percent is in the bones. Therefore, the body must maintaina tiny pool of calcium in the blood at a precise concentration,and that tiny pool can be influenced greatly by relatively smallshifts in the much larger pools of calcium in the cells and bones.The body has multiple mechanisms for changing blood calciumlevels, including:• Deposition or absorption of bone• Excretion or retention of calcium by the kidneys• Absorption of calcium from the digestive tractThese mechanisms are controlled by the hormones calcitonin,parathyroid hormone, and calcitriol (synthesized from vitamin D).CALCITONIN REDUCES BLOOD CALCIUM Calcitonin released bythe thyroid lowers the concentration of calcium in the blood,mainly by regulating bone turnover (Figure 41.11). Bone is continuouslyremodeled through a dynamic process that involves41.3 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR MAMMALIAN ENDOCRINE GLANDS AND HORMONES? 863ThyroidcartilageThyroid gland(front view)Ca2+ concentration high(>11 mg/100 ml blood)Ca2+ concentration low(<9 mg/100 ml blood)Blood Ca2+ level falls Blood Ca2+ level risesParathyroid glands(rear view of thyroid)Thyroid secretescalcitoninParathyroidssecrete PTHVitamin DCacitriolCalcitonin inhibits osteoclastsand shifts balance to Ca2+uptake by osteoblasts, whichuse Ca2+ from the blood tobuild new bones.PTH increases bone turnoverby activating both osteoblastsand osteoclasts; its net effectshifts calcium from bone to theblood. It also stimulates calciumretention by the kidneys.Increased Ca2+absorption inkidneys and gutIMBALANCEHOMEOSTASISCa2+ concentration between9 and 11 mg/100 ml blood41.11 Hormonal Regulation of Calcium Calcitonin, parathyroid hormone(PTH), and vitamin D regulate calcium levels in the blood.GO TO Animated Tutorial 41.3 • Hormonal Regulation of CalciumyourBioPortal.comboth resorption of old bone and synthesis of new bone, as wediscuss in Section 48.3. Cells called osteoclasts break down boneand release calcium into the blood, and cells called osteoblaststake up calcium from the blood and deposit it in new bone. Calcitonindecreases the activity of osteoclasts and thereby favorsremoval of calcium from the blood and its deposition in boneby osteoblasts. The turnover of bone in adult humans is not veryhigh, so calcitonin does not play a major role in calcium homeostasisin adults. It is probably more important in young individualswhose bones are actively growing.PARATHYROID HORMONE INCREASES BLOOD CALCIUM The parathyroidglands are four tiny structures embedded in the posteriorsurface of the thyroid gland (see Figure 41.11). Their singlehormone product, parathyroid hormone (also called PTH orparathormone), is the most important hormone in the regulationof blood calcium levels. Circulating calcium activates receptorsin the plasma membrane of the parathyroid cells. When thesereceptors are active, they inhibit the synthesis and release ofPTH. A fall in blood calcium removes this inhibition and triggersthe synthesis and release of PTH.PTH stimulates bone turnover by actions on both osteoclastsand osteoblasts. The end result of these actions of PTH is a netincrease of calcium in the blood.Another mechanism by which PTH raises blood concentrationsof calcium is by stimulating the kidneys to reabsorb itrather than excrete it in the urine. In addition, PTH activates thesynthesis of calcitriol from vitamin D, which in turn causes thedigestive tract to increase its absorption of calcium from food.VITAMIN D IS A HORMONE Avitamin is a substance that the bodyrequires in small quantities but cannot synthesize, and musttherefore obtain from the diet. By this definition, vitamin D isnot a vitamin, because the body can and does synthesize it.It had long been known that fragile bones were commonamong people living at high latitudes, where winter days areshort and the winter diet often lacked meat, fish, dairy products,and fresh vegetables. Since the condition could be reversedby taking cod-liver oil (which, as it turned out, containslarge amounts of vitamin D), scientists assumed that a dietaryvitamin was involved. We now know that vitamin D is synthesizedin skin cells, where cholesterol is converted into vitaminD (also called calciferol) by ultraviolet light. Vitamin D circulatesin the blood and acts on distant cells; thus it is actually ahormone.PTH lowers blood phosphate levelsBone minerals are made up primarily of calcium and phosphate.Thus, when PTH stimulates the release of calcium from bone,it also causes the release of phosphate. Excessive blood concentrationsof both elements can be dangerous. The normal concentrationsof calcium and phosphate in the blood are just belowthe levels at which they precipitate out of solution ascalcium phosphate salts. Thus even a small rise may cause suchprecipitation, leading to maladies such as kidney stones and calciumdeposits in the arteries (hardening of the arteries). To reducethis risk, PTH acts on the kidneys to increase the eliminationof phosphate via the urine.Insulin and glucagon regulate blood glucoseconcentrationsBefore the 1920s, diabetes mellitus was a fatal disease, characterizedby weakness, lethargy, and a dramatic loss of body mass.The disease was known to be connected somehow with the pancreas—a large gland located just below the stomach (see Figure41.6)—and with abnormal glucose metabolism, but the linkswere not clear.Today we know that diabetes mellitus is caused by a lack ofthe protein hormone insulin (in type I or juvenile-onset diabetes)or by a lack of insulin responsiveness in target tissues (in typeII or adult-onset diabetes). Glucose enters cells by diffusion, notactive transport, but cell membranes are not very permeableto glucose. Therefore there are proteins called glucose transportersin cell membranes that facilitate the movement of glucoseinto cells. The glucose transporters that are most commonin muscle and adipose tissue are controlled by insulin. Wheninsulin binds to its receptor on the cell membrane, it causes theseglucose transporters to move from cytoplasmic vesicles to thecell membrane, making the cell more permeable to glucose.When insulin is not present, these transporters are returned tothe cytoplasmic pool through endocytosis.In the absence of insulin or insulin responsiveness, glucoseentry into cells is impaired, and so much glucose accumulatesin the blood that it starts to spill over into the urine; urine productionalso goes up. A high concentration of glucose in theblood increases urine output by two mechanisms. First, itcauses water to move from cells into the blood by osmosis, andthis increase in blood volume results in increased urine production.Second, the increased glucose in the tubules of the kidneyspulls more water into the urine by osmosis. Thus diabeticindividuals can become dehydrated, but more importantly theysuffer from a lack of metabolic fuel. Because glucose uptake bymuscle and adipose tissue is impaired in the absence of insulin,muscle cells must depend on fat and protein for fuel and adiposetissue cannot replenish its stores of triglycerides. As a result,the body of the untreated diabetic can waste away.For centuries, the prospects for diabetics were bleak. Achange came almost overnight in 1921, when the physicianFrederick Banting and a medical student, Charles Best, at theUniversity of Toronto, discovered that they could reduce thesymptoms of diabetes by injecting an extract prepared frompancreatic tissue. The active component of this extract wasfound to be a small protein hormone—insulin—consisting ofjust 51 amino acids. In the United States today, insulin replacementtherapy, using manufactured insulin, allows 1.5 millionpeople with type I diabetes to lead almost normal lives.ISLETS OF LANGERHANS Insulin is produced in clusters of endocrinecells in the pancreas. These clusters are called islets ofLangerhans after the German medical student who discoveredthem. They contain three types of cells, each of which producesa specific hormone:864 CHAPTER 41 | ANIMAL HORMONES• Beta (β) cells produce and secrete insulin.• Alpha (α) cells produce and secrete glucagon, a hormonethat has effects mostly opposite from those of insulin.• Delta (δ) cells produce a hormone called somatostatin.The rest of the pancreas is made up of exocrine tissue, whichproduces enzymes and other secretions that travel throughducts to the gut, where they participate in digestion.After a meal, the concentration of glucose in the blood risesas glucose is absorbed from the food in the gut. This increasestimulates the β cells of the islets to release insulin, which causestarget cells throughout the body to use the circulating glucoseas fuel and to convert it into storage products, such as glycogenand fat. When the gut contains no more food, the glucose concentrationin the blood falls and the islets stop releasing insulin.As a result, most cells shift to using glycogen and fat, rather thanglucose, as fuel. If the concentration of glucose in the blood fallssubstantially below normal, the islet α cells release glucagon,which stimulates the liver to break down stored glycogen andrelease glucose into the blood. These actions are discussed ingreater detail in Section 51.4.SOMATOSTATIN Somatostatin is released from the δ cells of thepancreas in response to rapid increases of glucose and aminoacids in the blood. This hormone has paracrine functions withinthe islets: it inhibits the release of both insulin and glucagon. Itsactions outside the pancreas slow the digestive activities of thegut, extending the period during which nutrients are absorbed.Somatostatin is also produced in very small amounts by cellsin the hypothalamus. This somatostatin is transported in theportal blood vessels to the anterior pituitary, where it acts as aneurohormone to inhibit the release of growth hormone andthyrotropin.The adrenal gland is two glands in oneAn adrenal gland sits above each kidney, just below the middleof your back. Functionally and anatomically, each adrenalgland consists of a gland within a gland (Figure 41.12). The core,or adrenal medulla, produces two hormones: epinephrine (alsoknown as adrenaline) and, to a lesser degree, norepinephrine(or noradrenaline). The medulla develops from nervous tissueand is under the control of the nervous system. Surroundingthe medulla is the adrenal cortex, which produces steroid hormones.The cortex is under hormonal control, largely by corticotropinproduced by the anterior pituitary.THE ADRENAL MEDULLA The adrenal medulla produces epinephrineand norepinephrine in response to stressful situations,arousing the body to action. As we saw earlier in this chapter,epinephrine increases heart rate and blood pressure and divertsblood flow to active muscles and away from the gut and skin.Norepinephrine has similar functions.Epinephrine and norepinephrine are both water-soluble, andboth bind to the same set of receptors on the surfaces of targetcells. These adrenergic receptors are of two general types, a-adrenergicand b-adrenergic; each type stimulates different actionswithin cells (Figure 41.13). The α-adrenergic receptors are themost common on target cells of the sympathetic nervous system,and they respond more strongly to norepinephrine than toepinephrine. The β-adrenergic receptors respond about equallyto both epinephrine and norepinephrine. One class of the β-adrenergic receptors are found on cells not innervated by thesympathetic fibers, so they are positioned to respond to circulatingepinephrine. Therefore, drugs called beta blockers (sonamed because they selectively block β-adrenergic receptors)can reduce the fight-or-flight response to epinephrine withoutdisrupting the physiological regulatory functions of norepinephrine.Beta blockers are commonly prescribed to reduce thesymptoms of anxiety, such as dry mouth and elevated heart rate(palpitations).THE ADRENAL CORTEX The cells of the adrenal cortex use cholesterolto produce three classes of steroid hormones, collectivelycalled corticosteroids:• The glucocorticoids influence blood glucose concentrationsas well as other aspects of fat, protein, and carbohydratemetabolism.• The mineralocorticoids influence the salt and water balanceof the extracellular fluid.• The sex steroids play roles in sexual development, sexual behavior,and anabolism.In adults, the adrenal cortex secretes sex steroids in only negligibleamounts. The major producers of sex steroids are the gonads,as we will see in the following section.Aldosterone, the main mineralocorticoid (Figure 41.14A),stimulates the kidneys to conserve sodium and excrete potas-41.3 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR MAMMALIAN ENDOCRINE GLANDS AND HORMONES? 865The adrenal cortexproduces glucocorticoids,mineralocorticoids, andsex steroids.The adrenal medullaproduces epinephrineand norepinephrine.Adrenal glandKidney41.12 The Adrenal Is a Gland withina Gland An adrenal gland, consistingof an outer cortex and an inner medulla,sits above each kidney. The medulla andthe cortex produce different hormones.sium, as we discuss in Chapter 51. If the adrenal glands are removedfrom an animal, sodium must be added to its diet, or itssodium will be depleted and it will die.The main glucocorticoid in humans is cortisol (Figure41.14B), which is critical for mediating the body’s metabolic responsesto stress. Within minutes of a stressful stimulus (oneprovoking fear or anger, for example), your blood cortisol levelrises. Cells not critical for your fight-or-flight responses are stimulatedby cortisol to decrease their use of blood glucose and shiftinstead to using fats and proteins for energy. This is no time tofeel sick, have allergic reactions, or heal wounds, so cortisol alsoblocks immune system reactions. That is why cortisol and drugsthat mimic its action are useful for reducing inflammation andallergic responses.Cortisol release is controlled from the anterior pituitary bycorticotropin (also called adrenocorticotropic hormone, or ACTH),whose release is controlled in turn by corticotropin-releasinghormone from the hypothalamus. Because the cortisol responseto stress has this chain of steps, each involving secretion, diffusion,circulation, and cell activation, it is much slower than theepinephrine response to stress. Furthermore,in many cases cortisol actsas a transcription factor to changegene expression, and those changestake time.Turning off the responses tostress activated by cortisol is as importantas turning them on. Astudyof stress in rats showed that old ratscould turn on these stress responsesas effectively as young rats, but theyhad lost the ability to turn them offas rapidly. As a result, they sufferedfrom the well-known consequencesof stress seen in humans: digestivesystem problems, cardiovascular866 CHAPTER 41 | ANIMAL HORMONESβ-Adrenergic receptors act through a G protein thatstimulates adenylyl cyclase, increasing cAMP in the cell.The α2 receptor acts through a G protein that inhibitsadenylyl cyclase, decreasing cAMP in the cell.The α1 receptor activates phospholipase C, increasingthe production of several second messengers.EpinephrineReceptorβ1 or β2γβα1 α1Activatedadenylyl cyclasePhospholipase CSecondmessengersPrecursormolecules(A) EpinephrineOutside of cellInside of cellActivatedG protein 1 ATP cAMP PPi +NorepinephrineReceptor α2γβα2 α2Adenylyl cyclase(B) NorepinephrineActivatedG protein 2NorepinephrineReceptor α1γβα3 α3ActivatedG protein 3CCH2OHOHOO(B) Cortisol, a glucocorticoidOHCCH2OHOHCO(A) Aldosterone, a mineralocorticoidOHOCholesterolHOCHH H C2 2CCH2H2 CCHCH3CH3TestosteroneEstradiolOHOHOHOSterol backbone(C) Sex steroids41.14 Corticosteroids Are Built from Cholesterol Side groupson the sterol backbone give different properties to the different corticosteroidhormones. Examples from each of the three classes ofthese hormones are shown here.41.13 Hormones Can Activate a Variety of Signal Transduction PathwaysEpinephrine and norepinephrine bind to G protein-linked adrenergic receptors that actthrough different signal transduction pathways. Epinephrine acts equally on both α-and β-adrenergic receptors; norepinephrine acts mostly on α-adrenergic receptors.problems, strokes, impaired immune system function, and increasedsusceptibility to cancers and other diseases. Further researchshowed that these stress responses are turned off by thenegative feedback action of cortisol on the hypothalamus, whichcauses a decrease in the release of corticotropin-releasing hormone(see Figure 41.9). Repeated activation of this negativefeedback mechanism, either through repeated stress or prolongedmedical use of cortisol, leads to a gradual loss of cortisol-sensitive cells in the hypothalamus, and therefore to a decreasedability to terminate the stress response.Sex steroids are produced by the gonadsThe gonads—the testes of the male and the ovaries of the female—produce hormones as well as sperm and ova. The malesteroids are collectively called androgens, and the dominant oneis testosterone. The female steroids are estrogens and progesterone.The dominant estrogen is estradiol, which is synthesizedfrom testosterone. Males and females both synthesize testosterone,but females have an enzyme (aromatase) that convertstestosterone to estradiol (Figure 41.14C).The sex steroids have important developmental effects: theydetermine whether a mammalian embryo develops into a phenotypicfemale or male. After birth, the sex steroids control thematuration of the reproductive organs and the developmentand maintenance of secondary sexual characteristics, such asbreasts and facial hair. The roles they play in adult sexual behaviorand reproduction are described in Chapter 43.EARLY DEVELOPMENT Sex steroids begin to exert their effects inthe human embryo in the seventh week of development. Untilthat time, the embryo has the potential to develop into eithersex. In mammals and birds, the instructions for sex determinationreside in the genes. In mammals, individuals that receivetwo X chromosomes normally become females, and individualsthat receive an X and a Y chromosome normally becomemales (see Section 12.4).These genetic instructions are carried out through the productionand action of the sex steroids. In humans, the presenceof a Y chromosome normally causes the undifferentiatedembryonic gonads to begin producing androgens in the seventhweek of development. In response to those androgens, the reproductivesystem develops into that of a male. If androgensare not produced at that time, female reproductive structuresdevelop (Figure 41.15). In other words, androgens are requiredto trigger male development in humans, and the default conditionis female.INITIATION OF PUBERTY Sex steroids have dramatic effects at puberty—the time of sexual maturation in humans. Sex steroidsare produced at low levels by the juvenile gonads, but their productionincreases rapidly at the beginning of puberty—aroundthe age of 12 to 13 years. Why does this sudden increase occur?In the juvenile, as in the adult, the production of sex steroidsby the gonads is controlled by the tropic hormones luteinizinghormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), which togetherare called the gonadotropins. The production of thesetropic hormones by the anterior pituitary is under the controlof the hypothalamic neurohormone gonadotropin-releasinghormone (GnRH). Before puberty, the gonads can respond togonadotropins and the anterior pituitary can respond to GnRH,but the hypothalamus produces only very low levels of GnRH.Puberty is initiated by a reduction in the sensitivity of hypothalamicGnRH-producing cells to negative feedback from sexsteroids and from gonadotropins. As a result, GnRH release increases,stimulating increased production of gonadotropins andhence increased production of sex steroids.In females, increasing levels of LH and FSH at puberty stimulatethe ovaries to increase their production of the female sexhormones. The increased circulating levels of these hormonesinitiate the development of the traits of a sexually mature41.3 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR MAMMALIAN ENDOCRINE GLANDS AND HORMONES? 867These folds of tissuewill form the penis inthe male or the labiaminora in the female.Under the influence ofandrogens, a penisand scrotum form.Without the influence ofandrogens, femaleexternal organs develop.The gonads of geneticmales begin to secreteandrogens when theembryo is about 7weeks old.This tissue will form thescrotum in males orlabia majora in females.MALE FEMALE5 months6 weeksBirthUrogenitalgrooveAnal foldGlanspenisGlans ofclitorisUrethralgrooveGenitalswellingHymenLabiaminoraLabiamajoraUrethralopeningGlans ofclitorisGenitaltubercleUrethralgrooveUrethralopeningGlanspenisShaft ofpenisScrotumScrotalswellingAnusAnusPerineumMale Female41.15 Sex Steroids Direct the Development of Human Sex OrgansThe sex organs of early human embryos are undifferentiated. Androgenspromote the development of male sex organs. In the absence of androgens,female sex organs form.woman: enlarged breasts, vagina, and uterus; broadened hips;increased subcutaneous fat; pubic hair; and initiation of themenstrual cycle.In males, an increasing level of LH stimulates groups of cellsin the testes to increase their synthesis of testosterone, which inturn initiates the physiological, anatomical, and psychologicalchanges associated with adolescence. The voice deepens, hairbegins to grow on the face and body, and the testes and penisgrow larger. As we saw at the beginning of this chapter, testosteronealso help bones and skeletal muscles grow. FSH in malesstimulates production of sperm.Melatonin is involved in biological rhythmsand photoperiodicityThe pineal gland is situated between the two hemispheres of thebrain and is connected to the brain by a stalk. It produces theamine hormone melatonin from the amino acid tryptophan. Thepineal gland releases melatonin in the dark and therefore marksthe length of the night. Exposure to light inhibits the release ofmelatonin.In vertebrates, melatonin is involved in biological rhythms,including photoperiodicity—the phenomenon whereby seasonalchanges in day length cause physiological changes. Manyspecies, for example, come into reproductive condition whenthe days begin to lengthen (Figure 41.16). Humans are notstrongly photoperiodic, but melatonin in humans may play arole in synchronizing daily biological rhythms to the daily cycleof light and dark.Many chemicals may act as hormonesWe have discussed the major endocrine glands and their hormonesin this chapter, but many more hormones exist. As wediscuss the organ systems of the body in the chapters that follow,we will frequently describe hormones that their tissues produceas well as hormones that control their functions.41.3 RECAPIn mammals, the major endocrine glands include thehypothalamus, pituitary gland, thyroid gland, parathyroidglands, pancreas, adrenal glands, gonads,and pineal gland. Each of these glands secretes, andresponds to, hormones that play crucial roles in controllingphysiology and development.• Describe how thyroxine is produced and how its productionand release are controlled. See pp. 861–862and Figure 41.10• How is the concentration of calcium in the blood regulated?See pp. 863–864 and Figure 41.11• What are the hormonal bases for the two forms ofdiabetes? See p. 864• What changes in the feedback control of sex steroidsresult in puberty? See pp. 867–868Studying endocrine systems is not easy. Many hormones arereleased in very small quantities, and some disappear from theextracellular fluid rapidly. Ahormone’s receptors may be foundon diverse cells around the body, and those cells can respondin different ways to the same hormone. How have we overcomethese difficulties to learn how hormones work?How Do We Study Mechanisms of 41.4 Hormone Action?We can break the study of hormone actions into different setsof problems. First, we must be able to detect, identify, and measurehormones. Second, we must be able to identify and characterizethe receptors for hormones. Third, we must understandthe signal transduction pathways activated by hormones in differenttissues.Hormones can be detected and measured withimmunoassaysAs we have seen, testosterone has many dramatic and diverseeffects, yet its concentration in the blood of adult human malesis only about 30 to 100 billionths of a gram per milliliter. Measuringhypothalamic neurohormones requires calibrations inthe range of trillionths of a gram per milliliter.The ability to detect and measure minute quantities of hormonewas an important breakthrough. Rosalyn Yalow developeda method called radioimmunoassay because it used radioactive la-868 CHAPTER 41 | ANIMAL HORMONES(B)Plasma melatonin ( )Time of dayLight Dark LightWinter(long nights)Summer(short nights)(A)Light Dark LightWinterSummer41.16 Melatonin Regulates Seasonal Changes (A) Melatoninrelease occurs in the dark and is inhibited by exposure to light. The durationof daily melatonin release thus changes as day length (photoperiod)changes, inducing dramatic seasonal physiological changes in some animals.(B) In winter, these Siberian hamsters are white and do not reproduce.In summer, they are mottled brown and breed.bels (she used radioactive isotopes of iodine) to track interactionsbetween an antigen (the hormone or other substance of interestto be measured) and an antibody made to that antigen. Today weare more likely to use nonradioactive labels, so the technique iscalled simply immunoassay (Figure 41.17). Being able to measurehormones in the blood made it possible to study many importanthormonal mechanisms.Hormones are not simple on–off switches,and an important characteristic of a hormone isthe time course over which it acts. This timecourse can be measured by the hormone’s halflifein the blood (defined as the length of time ittakes for one-half of the hormone molecules todisappear). Soon after endocrine cells are stimulatedto secrete their hormone, the hormonereaches its maximum concentration in the blood.By taking a series of blood samples and using immunoassays,researchers can determine howlong it takes for the circulating hormone to dropto half of that maximum concentration. The fightor-flight response to epinephrine, as we haveseen, is relatively quick in its onset and termination;the half-life of epinephrine in the bloodis only 1 to 3 minutes. The effects of other hormones,such as cortisol and thyroxine, are expressedover much longer periods, and their halflivesare on the order of days or weeks.Immunoassays have also facilitated the measurementof dose–response relationships. To evaluatea drug or a natural hormone for therapeuticuse, it is critical to know the sensitivity of thebody to that drug or hormone. Being able tomeasure the concentrations of drugs or hormonesin the blood makes it possible to constructdose–response curves that help physicians adjustdosages appropriately (Figure 41.18).A hormone can act throughmany receptorsDifferent receptors may be involved in mediatingthe actions of a single hormone. Because thereare slight differences among the receptors for aparticular hormone, it is possible to create drugsthat are very selective in blocking or stimulatingspecific responses. Anumber of receptors havebeen identified, isolated, and purified throughbiochemical separation techniques. For example,a hormone can be bound to a substrate such as41.4 | HOW DO WE STUDY MECHANISMS OF HORMONE ACTION? 869TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE41.17 An Immunoassay Allows Measurement of Small ConcentrationsAn immunoassay uses labeled and unlabeled samples of a purified hormone(or other substance to be measured) and an antibody to that hormone todevelop a standard curve against which a sample of unknown concentrationcan be measured.1 Produce an antibody to the hormone ofinterest. Prepare a number of vials containinga known amount of the antibody.Label a sample of the hormone of interest.To the first vial, add enough labeled hormoneto occupy all antibody-binding sites.432Wash away unboundhormone and recordthe amount of labeledhormone bound tothe antibody.Add known quantities ofunlabeled hormone of interest tosubsequent vials in whichreceptors are saturated withlabeled hormone. The unlabeledmolecules displace some of thelabeled molecules at antibodybindingsites. Repeat withdifferent known amounts ofunlabeled hormone.5 Repeating Step 4 resultsin a standard curve thattells us the relationshipbetween the concentrationof unlabeled hormone andthe amount of labeledhormone that remainsbound to antibody. Thisstandard curve relationshipis then applied to a clinicalsample to determine theconcentration of the hormoneof interest in the sample.Antibodysaturated withlabeled hormoneUnlabeledhormoneaddedLabeled hormone bound to antibody (amount)001 2 3 4 5 6Total unlabeled hormone (concentration)10203040506070Unlabeledhormone boundto antibodyThe dose that stimulates half the maximumresponse is a measure of sensitivity to the hormone.Response to hormoneHormone doseMaximum responseDecreasesensitivityDecreaseresponsivenessThresholddose (minimum41.18 Dose-Response Curves Quantify the Body's Response to a response)Hormone Between the threshold and maximum doses, a dose-response curvefrequently has an S shape. Anything that changes the responsiveness of asystem—such as an increase or decrease in the number of receptors in targetcells—affects the position of the curve.resin beads packed into a glass column. When an extract of cellssuspected of containing receptors to that hormone is added tothe column, the receptors bind to the hormone molecules on thebeads. The hormone–receptor complexes can then be washedoff the beads and the receptors isolated. This technique is calledaffinity chromatography.As more receptors are isolated and characterized, researchersdiscover that they frequently exist in families with commonstructural features. These common features result from commonnucleotide sequences in the receptors’ genes. Genomicanalyses have led to the discovery of many new receptors. Investigators“scan” the genome for sequences that bear homologiesto known receptor gene sequences; when they get a “hit,”they have found a candidate gene for a new receptor. They canthen identify the molecule to which that receptor binds (its ligand),describe where the receptor occurs within the body, andcharacterize the receptor’s physiological effects.Knowing the molecular identity of a receptor and being ableto measure its concentration makes it possible to study that receptor’sregulation. We saw above that the release of hormonescan be under negative feedback control. Similarly, the abundanceof receptors for a hormone can be under feedback control.In some cases, continuous high concentrations of a hormonecan decrease the number of its receptors, a process knownas downregulation. Upregulation of receptors can occur whenhormone secretion is suppressed. The regulation of receptorabundance is an important mechanism controlling the sensitivityof the body to hormonal signaling.An example of downregulation occurs in type II diabetesmellitus, which is characterized by elevated insulin concentrationsin the blood and a loss of insulin receptors. Although geneticfactors are probably involved, a possible immediate causeof the disease is an overstimulation of pancreatic release of insulinby excessive carbohydrate intake, which leads to downregulationof the insulin receptors. An example of upregulationmay be seen in people who have been on a regular dose of betablockers (see page 865). As the activity of the β-adrenergic receptorsis blocked over time, more receptors are produced. Ifthe person goes off the medication suddenly, the effects of thereceptors are amplified, resulting in heightened anxiety.Changes in dosage in the long-term use of such medicationsthus are usually gradual and carefully supervised.41.4 RECAPStudying the mechanisms of hormone action requiresthe ability to measure hormone concentrations andto identify and characterize hormone receptors.• Describe how an immunoassay is performed. Seep. 869 and Figure 41.17• How are receptors for a particular hormone identified?See pp. 869–870870 CHAPTER 41 | ANIMAL HORMONES41.1 What Are Hormones and How Do They Work?• Endocrine cells secrete chemical signals that induce responsesin other cells that have receptors for those molecules. In somecases endocrine cells are aggregated into endocrine glands.• Hormones are endocrine signals that are secreted from a cell,circulate in the blood, and bind to target cells distant from thesecreting cell. Review Figure 41.1• The chemical structures of hormones are highly conserved, butthrough evolution, hormones have acquired different functionsin different animal groups. Review Figure 41.2• Two hormones, PTTH and ecdysone, control molting in arthropods.A third hormone, juvenile hormone, prevents maturation.When an insect stops producing juvenile hormone, it molts intoan adult. Review Figures 41.3 and 41.4, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 41.1• Most hormones are either peptides, proteins, steroids, oramines. Peptide and protein hormones and some amines arewater-soluble; steroids and some amines are lipid-soluble.• Receptors for water-soluble hormones are located on the cellsurface. Receptors for most lipid-soluble hormones are insidethe cell.• Hormones can cause different responses in different targetcells. Review Figure 41.541.2 How Do the Nervous and Endocrine SystemsInteract?• In humans, the major endocrine glands are distributed aroundthe body. Review Figure 41.6, WEB ACTIVITY 41.1• The pituitary gland is the interface between the nervous andendocrine systems. The anterior pituitary develops fromembryonic mouth tissue; the posterior pituitary develops fromthe developing brain.• The posterior pituitary secretes two neurohormones: antidiuretichormone (ADH) and oxytocin. The anterior pituitarysecretes tropic hormones (thyrotropin, corticotropin, luteinizinghormone, and follicle-stimulating hormone) as well asgrowth hormone, prolactin, melanocyte-stimulating hormone,endorphins, and enkephalins.• The anterior pituitary is controlled by neurohormones producedby cells in the hypothalamus and transported throughportal blood vessels to the anterior pituitary. Review Figures41.7 and 41.8, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 41.2• Hormone release is controlled by negative feedback loops.Review Figure 41.9CHAPTER SUMMARY
41.1 What Are Hormones and How Do They Work?• Endocrine cells secrete chemical signals that induce responsesin other cells that have receptors for those molecules. In somecases endocrine cells are aggregated into endocrine glands.• Hormones are endocrine signals that are secreted from a cell,circulate in the blood, and bind to target cells distant from thesecreting cell. Review Figure 41.1• The chemical structures of hormones are highly conserved, butthrough evolution, hormones have acquired different functionsin different animal groups. Review Figure 41.2• Two hormones, PTTH and ecdysone, control molting in arthropods.A third hormone, juvenile hormone, prevents maturation.When an insect stops producing juvenile hormone, it molts intoan adult. Review Figures 41.3 and 41.4, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 41.1• Most hormones are either peptides, proteins, steroids, oramines. Peptide and protein hormones and some amines arewater-soluble; steroids and some amines are lipid-soluble.• Receptors for water-soluble hormones are located on the cellsurface. Receptors for most lipid-soluble hormones are insidethe cell.• Hormones can cause different responses in different targetcells. Review Figure 41.541.2 How Do the Nervous and Endocrine SystemsInteract?• In humans, the major endocrine glands are distributed aroundthe body. Review Figure 41.6, WEB ACTIVITY 41.1• The pituitary gland is the interface between the nervous andendocrine systems. The anterior pituitary develops fromembryonic mouth tissue; the posterior pituitary develops fromthe developing brain.• The posterior pituitary secretes two neurohormones: antidiuretichormone (ADH) and oxytocin. The anterior pituitarysecretes tropic hormones (thyrotropin, corticotropin, luteinizinghormone, and follicle-stimulating hormone) as well asgrowth hormone, prolactin, melanocyte-stimulating hormone,endorphins, and enkephalins.• The anterior pituitary is controlled by neurohormones producedby cells in the hypothalamus and transported throughportal blood vessels to the anterior pituitary. Review Figures41.7 and 41.8, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 41.2• Hormone release is controlled by negative feedback loops.Review Figure 41.9
41.3 What Are the Major Mammalian Endocrine Glandsand Hormones?• The thyroid gland is controlled by thyrotropin and secretes thyroxine,which controls cell metabolism. Review Figure 41.10• The level of calcium in the blood is regulated by three hormones.Calcitonin from the thyroid lowers blood calcium by promotingbone deposition. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) raises blood calciumby promoting bone turnover and decreasing calcium excretion.Vitamin D promotes calcium absorption from the digestivetract. Review Figure 41.11, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 41.3• The pancreas secretes three hormones. Insulin stimulates glucoseuptake by cells and lowers blood glucose, glucagon raisesblood glucose, and somatostatin slows the rate of nutrient processing.• The adrenal gland has two portions, one within the other. Theinner portion, the adrenal medulla, releases epinephrine andnorepinephrine in response to stress. The outer portion, theadrenal cortex, produces three classes of corticosteroids: glucocorticoids,mineralocorticoids, and small amounts of sexsteroids. Review Figures 41.12 and 41.13• Aldosterone is a mineralocorticoid that stimulates the kidneysto conserve sodium and excrete potassium. Cortisol is a glucocorticoidthat is released in response to stressful stimuli but actsmore slowly than the hormones of the adrenal medulla. ReviewFigure 41.14• Sex hormones (androgens in males, estrogens and progesteronein females) are produced by the gonads in response totropic hormones. Sex hormones control sexual development,secondary sexual characteristics, and reproductive functions.Review Figures 41.14 and 41.15• The pineal gland releases melatonin, which is involved in controllingbiological rhythms. Review Figure 41.1641.4 How Do We Study Mechanisms of HormoneAction?• Immunoassay techniques are used to measure concentrationsof hormones and other substances. Review Figure 41.17• The sensitivity of a cell to hormones can be altered by downregulationor upregulation of the receptors in that cell.SEE WEB ACTIVITY 41.2 for a concept review of this chapter.