The tropical rainforest of the eastern slopes of the Andesteems with plant life. This region of the AmazonBasin is host to about 40 species of Cinchona, agenus of trees that grow to a height of about 20 meters.In this moist environment, Cinchona trees grow rapidlyand thrive, despite the many natural enemies thatthreaten their survival and growth.Unlike animals, which can sometimes escape their enemies,plants must confront their enemies in place. Overevolutionary time, plants with the ability to fight off attackershave survived and passed on that ability to theiroffspring. In many instances, that ability comes in theform of defensive chemicals. In the case of Cinchona, oneof those chemicals is quinine, a bitter molecule that istoxic to insects. It may be familiar to you as an ingredientin tonic water.The Quechua, a group of people native to the Andesforests, have a long history of putting local plants to medicinaluse. In the tropics, malaria has long been, and stillis, a common and lethal disease. Even today, about 400million cases arise worldwide, and over 1.5 million peopledie from malaria each year. Centuries ago, the Quechuafound that a tea made from the bark of Cinchona treeswas highly effective in treating malaria. Legend has it thatthe tree got its name from the Peruvian countess of Cinchon,who was cured of malaria in 1638 when her physiciangot some bark from the Quechua. Use of the barkextract quickly spread around the world.In 1820, the active ingredient of Cinchona bark, quinine,was isolated and became the mainstay of malariatreatment. Malaria is caused by an apicomplexan parasitethat infects red blood cells. Quinine kills the parasite by interferingwith its ability to break down hemoglobin. Unfortunately,mutations render some parasites resistant toquinine and its chemical derivatives. Over time, treatmentof billions of people with quinine drugs has selected forparasites with genes for quinine resistance.An urgent need for alternative treatmentshas led scientists to another plant and itsdefensive chemical.Artemisia annua, or sweet wormwood,grows in forests all over the world. It synthesizesa molecule called artemisinin thathelps defend the plant against insects. Forover 3000 years, people in Asia have made acurative tea from sweet wormwood. In 1972Japanese chemists isolated artemisinin andfound that it works by reacting with iron inred blood cells to form free radicals, whichdamage lipids and DNA in the infecting par-Sharing plants’ defensive strategies39The Source of Quinine Cinchona trees fromthe Amazon rainforest synthesize a defensivechemical, quinine, that has been used to treatpeople with malaria.39.1 How Do Plants Deal with Pathogens?Botanists know of dozens of diseases, with many different geneticstrains, that can kill a wheat plant, each of them caused bya different pathogen. Plant pathogens—which include bacteria,fungi, protists, and viruses—are part of nature, and for that reasonalone they merit our study in biology. Because we humansdepend on plants for our food, however, the stakes in our effortto understand plant pathology are especially high. That is why,just as medical schools have departments of pathology, manyuniversities in agricultural regions have departments of plantpathology.Successful infection by a pathogen can have significant effectson a plant, reducing photosynthesis and causing massivecell and tissue death. Like the responses of the human immunesystem (see Chapter 42), the responses by which plants fight offdisease are varied and fascinating. Plants and pathogens haveevolved together in a continuing “arms race”: pathogens haveevolved mechanisms with which to attack plants, and plantshave evolved mechanisms for defending themselves againstthose attacks. Each set of mechanisms uses information fromthe other. For example, the pathogen’s enzymes may breakdown the plant’s cell walls, and the breakdown products maysignal to the plant that it is under attack. In turn, the plant’s defensesalert the pathogen that it, too, is under attack.An arms race of global importance is under way to combatwheat rust, a fungus that can devastate wheat crops (Figure39.1). In 1999, a new genetic strain of the wheat rust fungus Pucciniagraminis was identified in a wheat field in Uganda. Althoughmany strains of wheat have natural resistance to otherstrains of rust, the new fungal strain, called Ug99, overcomesresistance in almost all of them. It has spread to the Middle East,and there is a good probability that it has already reached Asia.Over 90 percent of the wheat strains in its path are susceptible.Scientists are racing to discover wheat genes that confer resistanceto Ug99 and to implement genetic crosses to get this resistanceinto the wheat strains under widespread cultivation. Failurein this arms race could have disastrous consequences forthe global food supply.What determines the outcome of a battle between a plant anda pathogen? The key to success for the plant is to respond to informationfrom the pathogen quickly and massively. Plants useboth mechanical and chemical defenses in this effort. These defensescan either be constitutive, always present in the plant,or induced, produced in reaction to damage or stress.Mechanical defenses include physical barriersAplant’s first line of defense is its outer surfaces, which can preventthe entry of pathogens. As Section 34.3 describes, the or-IN THIS CHAPTER we describe the biological (biotic)and nonbiological (abiotic) environmental challenges facedby plants and how plants deal with them. We begin by examininginteractions between plants and plant pathogens,such as fungi, and then consider plant interactions with herbivores.The chapter concludes by considering plant adaptationsto abiotic factors such as water, temperature, salinity,and heavy metals.asite. Since this mechanism of action differs from that ofquinine, it was thought that artemisinin might be effectivein treating quinine-resistant malaria—and it is. Indeed,during the Vietnam War, drinking Artemisia teahelped Vietnamese soldiers cope with the quinine-resistantmalaria that struck American soldiers. Since 2000,artemisinin has become a mainstay of malaria treatment.Millions of people take it every day.Until recently, hundreds of such plant chemicals werecontemplated only in the context of plant biochemistry.Today we view them as adaptations arising from aplant’s interactions with its environment.CHAPTER OUTLINE39.1 How Do Plants Deal with Pathogens?39.2 How Do Plants Deal with Herbivores?39.3 How Do Plants Deal with Climatic Extremes?39.4 How Do Plants Deal with Salt and Heavy Metals?A Substitute for Quinine Sweet wormwood (Artemisiaannua) grows in forests throughout the world. It synthesizes adefensive chemical, called artemisinin, that is now being usedto treat people with malaria whose infection is resistant toquinine drugs.gans of a growing plant that are exposed to the outside environmentare covered with cutin, suberin, and waxes. These substancesnot only prevent water loss by evaporation, but can alsoprevent fungal spores and bacteria from entering the underlyingtissues. Some fungi get around this defense, however, by secretingenzymes that hydrolyze components of these substances,breaking them down to gain entry.Much more important to the plant are the induced resistancemechanisms initiated when a pathogen lands on a plant. As wediscuss these mechanisms, refer to the overview in Figure 39.2.Plants can seal off infected parts to limit damageWhile animals generally repair tissues that have been damagedby pathogens, plants do not. Instead, plants seal off and sacrificedamaged tissues so that the rest of the plant does not becomeinfected. Plants have the option of discarding damagedtissues because most plants, unlike most animals, can replacedamaged parts by growing new ones.Before we look at the details of the defensive process, notethat a key response by plant cells to invasion by pathogens isthe rapid deposition of additional polysaccharides, as well asa cell wall protein called extensin, on the inside of the cell wall.These macromolecules not only reinforce the mechanical barrierformed by the cell wall, but also block the plasmodesmata,816 CHAPTER 39 | PLANT RESPONSES TO ENVIRONMENTAL CHALLENGES1 Some elicitors from the pathogenare recognized directly.2 When certain pathogenic enzymesattack the plant cell wall, thebreakdown products are recognizedas elicitors by a membrane receptor.5 Some PR proteins serveas “alarm signals” to cells thathave not yet been attacked.3 Signaling molecules trigger cellularresponses, including the productionof defensive molecules.4 Defensive molecules such asphytoalexins and PR proteinsattack the pathogen directly.6 Polysaccharides andextensin strengthenthe cell wall and blockplasmodesmata.PhytoalexinsPlant cellCell wallReceptors inplasma membraneNucleusPR proteinsPolysaccharidesPathogenPlasmodesmaPolysaccharideExtensin39.1 Wheat Rust A field of wheatinfected with the wheat rust fungus(right) has a much reduced growthrate and has produced much lessgrain than an uninfected field ofwheat that is resistant to the fungus(left). Inset: Wheat rust causes celldeath in leaves.39.2 Signaling between Plants andPathogens Molecular interactionsbetween plants and pathogens arehighly coevolved. The presence of apathogen stimulates the plant to producedefensive molecules that work inmany different ways.GO TO Animated Tutorial 39.1 • Signalingbetween Plants and PathogensyourBioPortal.comlimiting the ability of viral pathogens to move from cell to cell.The polysaccharides also serve as a base on which lignin maybe laid down. Lignin enhances the mechanical barrier, and thetoxicity of lignin precursor chemicals makes the cell inhospitableto some pathogens. These lignin building blocks are only oneexample of the toxic substances that plants use as chemical defenses.Plant responses to pathogens may begenetically determinedPlant pathogens cause the host plant to activate various chemicaldefense responses. Several distinctive molecules called elicitorshave been identified that trigger these plant defenses. Thesemolecules vary in character, from peptides made by bacteriato cell wall fragments from fungi. Elicitors can also be derivedfrom fragments of plant cell wall components broken downby pathogens (see Figure 39.2, labels 1 and 2). Pathogen genesthat code for elicitors are called avirulence genes (Avr); there arehundreds of such genes. When an elicitor enters a plant cell, itmay encounter a receptor protein in the cytoplasm. If the receptorbinds to the elicitor, a signal transduction pathway is set inmotion that leads to the plant’s defensive response. If the planthas no receptor to bind to the elicitor, the plant does not defenditself.Over 50 years ago, plant pathologist Harold Flor at NorthDakota State University studied the susceptibility of various geneticstrains of cereal grain plants to various strains of rust fungus.He proposed that susceptibility is determined by a geneticrelationship between the pathogen and the plant (Figure 39.3).Today we know that plants have resistance genes (R), and weknow that these resistance genes code for receptors. We alsoknow that pathogens have Avr genes that code for elicitors. Ifthe R and Avr genes match, there is resistance: the moleculesthey encode will bind to each other and set off a response. Flor’sidea, known as gene-for-gene resistance, has been borne out bymolecular studies, and it has had a great influence on crop plantbreeding for resistance to pathogens.The signal transduction pathway started byreceptor–elicitor binding is mediated by theproduction of nitric oxide and the toxic peroxideH2O2. Together, these substances initiate localdefenses and, later, systemic defenses (defensesin parts of the plant distant from theattack site).Receptor–elicitor binding evokes thehypersensitive responseWhen infected by certain fungi and bacteria, plants try to containthe infection locally by what is called the hypersensitive response.This three-pronged response involves the productionof defensive compounds as well as physical isolation of the infectionsite (see Figure 39.2, labels 3 and 4).PHYTOALEXINS Phytoalexins are antibiotics produced by infectedplants that are toxic to many fungi and bacteria. Mostare small molecules, and each is made by only a few plantspecies. They are produced by infected cells, and by their immediateneighbors, within hours of the onset of infection. Becausetheir antimicrobial activity is nonspecific, phytoalexinscan destroy many species of fungi and bacteria in addition tothe one that originally triggered their production. Phytoalexinsalso kill the plant cells that produced them, thus sealing offthe infection.Phytoalexins are an example of an induced plant defense: theyare not normally present in plants, but are synthesized rapidlywhen a bacterial or fungal infection occurs. Physical injuries andviral infections can also induce the production of phytoalexins.Neither the mechanism of phytoalexin induction by pathogens,nor the specific effects of phytoalexins on invading organisms,is clear. Camalexin, a phytoalexin made by the modelorganism Arabidopsis thaliana, is being used to investigate thesephenomena. It is synthesized by the plant from the amino acidtryptophan:PATHOGENESIS-RELATED PROTEINS Plants produce several typesof pathogenesis-related proteins, or PR proteins. Some are enzymesthat break down the cell walls of pathogens. Chitinase,for example, is a PR protein that breaks down chitin, which isfound in many fungal cell walls. In some cases, the breakdownCOOHNHNNSHTryptophan Camalexin39.1 | HOW DO PLANTS DEAL WITH PATHOGENS? 817SUSCEPTIBLESUSCEPTIBLERESISTANTSUSCEPTIBLE1 If the host and pathogenhave matching R and Avrgenes, the plant will resistthe pathogen…2 …but if either half of theR–Avr pair is missing,gene-for-gene resistanceis not elicited.Plant membrane receptor encoded by R geneH2O2,Pathogen NOavirulencesignal (elicitor)encoded byAvr geneLocalresponsesSystemicresponses39.3 Gene-for-Gene Resistance If a gene in apathogen that codes for an elicitor “matches” a genein a plant that codes for a receptor, the receptor bindsthe elicitor, and a defensive response results.products of the pathogen’s cell walls serve as elicitors that triggerfurther defensive responses. Other PR proteins may serveas alarm signals to plant cells that have not yet been attacked(Figure 39.2, label 5). In general, PR proteins appear not to berapid-response weapons; rather, they act more slowly, perhapsafter other mechanisms have blunted the pathogen’s attack.PHYSICAL ISOLATION A third component of the hypersensitiveresponse seals off the damage and the pathogen from the rest ofthe plant. Cells around the site of infection undergo apoptosis,preventing the spread of the pathogen by depriving it of nutrients.Some of these cells produce phytoalexins and other chemicalsbefore they die. The dead tissue, called a necrotic lesion, containsand isolates what is left of the infection (Figure 39.4). Therest of the plant remains free of the infecting pathogen.Systemic acquired resistance is a form oflong-term “immunity”The hypersensitive response is not the only defensive responseinitiated by receptor–elicitor binding. Systemic acquired resistanceis a general increase in the resistance of the entire plantto a wide range of pathogens. It is not limited to the pathogenthat originally triggered it, or to the site of the original infection,and its effect may last as long as an entire growing season.This defensive response is initiated by salicylic acid, a defensivechemical produced during the local hypersensitive response.Since ancient times, people in Asia, Europe, and theAmericas have used willow (Salix) leaves and bark to relievepain and fever. The active ingredient in willow is salicylic acid,the substance from which aspirin is derived. It now appears thatall plants contain at least some salicylic acid.Systemic acquired resistance is accompanied by the synthesisof PR proteins. Treatment of plants with salicylic acid or aspirinleads to the production of PR proteins and to resistance topathogens. It provides substantial protection, for example,against tobacco mosaic virus (a well-studied plant pathogen)and some other viruses. In some cases salicylic acid inhibitsvirus replication, and in others it interferes with the movementof viruses out of the infected area.Salicylic acid also acts as a hormone. In some cases, infectionin one part of a plant leads to the export of salicylic acid to otherparts, where it triggers the production of PR proteins before theinfection can spread. Infected plant parts also produce theclosely related compound methyl salicylate (also known as oilof wintergreen). This volatile substance travels to other plantparts through the air and may trigger the production of PR proteinsin neighboring plants that have not yet been infected.Plants develop specific immunity to RNA virusesBefore we leave the topic of plant defenses against pathogens,let’s consider a recently discovered defense mechanism directedagainst a specific pathogen type: RNA viruses (viruses that haveRNA instead of DNA as their hereditary material). The plantuses its own enzymes to convert some of the single-strandedRNA of the invading virus into double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)and to chop that dsRNA into small pieces called small interferingRNAs (siRNAs). Some of the viral RNA is transcribed, formingmRNAs that advance the infection. However, the siRNAsinteract with another cellular component to degrade thosemRNAs, blocking viral replication. This phenomenon is an exampleof RNA interference (RNAi) (see Section 18.4).The immunity conferred by RNAi spreads quickly throughoutthe entire plant through plasmodesmata. However, the establishmentof immunity depends on the extent of the originalinfection and the speed of the plant’s response. Plant viruses arecontinuing their side of the arms race: most have evolved mechanismsto confound RNA interference.39.1 RECAPIn the hypersensitive response to infection bypathogens, plants produce two types of chemicaldefenses and seal off infected areas. Systemic acquiredresistance, providing a longer-lasting, moregeneral immunity, may follow.• Name two types of defensive compounds producedby plant cells when they are infected by bacteria orfungi. See p. 817 and Figure 39.2• How do R and Avr genes determine which pathogensa plant can resist? See p. 817 and Figure 39.3• How do infected plant cells signal infection to otherparts of the plant, or other plants? See p. 818818 CHAPTER 39 | PLANT RESPONSES TO ENVIRONMENTAL CHALLENGES39.4 Sealing Off the Pathogen and the Damage These necroticlesions on the leaves of a broad bean plant are a response to “chocolatespot” fungus, Botrytis fabae.Not all biological threats to plants come from pathogens. Anotherthreat comes from the many animals, from inchwormsto elephants, that eat plants.39.2 How Do Plants Deal with Herbivores?Herbivores—animals that eat plants—depend on plants for energyand nutrients. Their foraging activities cause physical damageto plants, and they often spread disease among plants aswell. While the majority of herbivores are insects (Figure 39.5),every major class of vertebrates includes at least a few herbivores(see also Section 56.2, which discusses herbivory in theecological context of species interactions). Plants cannot evadetheir consumers by running away, but they have many otherways of protecting themselves against herbivory.While in most cases, the physical damage caused by herbivoresis severe, sometimes limited herbivory may be harmlessor even beneficial. Before turning to the ways that plants resistherbivory, let’s examine those few cases in which herbivory enhancesplant growth.Herbivory increases the growth of some plantsHow detrimental is herbivory to plants? How well have plantsadapted to their place in the food web? Like plants and pathogens,plants and herbivores have evolved together, each actingas an agent of natural selection on the other. This coevolutionhas led to arms races in some cases, but it has favored increasedphotosynthetic production in some plant species subjected toherbivory.Removal of some leaves from a plant usually increases the rateof photosynthesis in the remaining leaves for several reasons:• Nitrogen obtained from the soil by the roots no longerneeds to be divided among as many leaves.• The export of sugars and other photosynthetic productsfrom the leaves may be enhanced because the demand forthose products in the roots is undiminished, while thesources for those products—leaves—have been decreased.• The removal of older or dead leaves makes more lightavailable to the younger, more active leaves or leaf parts.Grasses are especially tolerant of herbivory because, unlike mostother plants, which grow from shoot apical meristems, grassesgrow from the base of the shoot and leaf, so their growth is notcut short by grazing.In western North America, mule deer and elk graze manyplants, including a wildflower called scarlet gilia (Ipomopsisaggregata). Although grazing removes about 95 percent of theaboveground plant, the scarlet gilia quickly regrows not one,but up to four replacement stems (Figure 39.6). Grazed individualsproduce three times as many fruits by the end of the growingseason as do ungrazed plants.Mechanical defenses against herbivores are widespreadAll parts of the plant body offer some resistance against herbivores.In addition, plants have a number of constitutive anatom-(A) Locusta migratoria(B) Manduca sexta39.5 Insect Herbivores The great majority of herbivores are insects.(A) Some herbivores, such as this locust, are generalists that will attacknearly any plant. (B) Others are specialists, like this tobacco hornworm,which feeds only on tobacco plants.39.2 | HOW DO PLANTS DEAL WITH HERBIVORES? 8191 Cropping of scarletgilia triggered theemergence of newbuds.2 Cropped plants grew fournew stems and producedthree times more fruits…3 …than uncroppedcontrol plants.39.6 Overcompensation for Being Eaten Experiments confirm thatherbivory increases the growth of some plants.ical features, such as trichomes, thorns, spines, or hairs, that arespecialized for defense. An example of an induced mechanicaldefense is the production of latex. When they are injured byan herbivore attack, some plants, such as Euphorbia species, producea thick, white aqueous suspension of cellular debris, oils,and resins called latex. Insects trapped by this sticky substancestarve to death.Plants produce chemical defenses against herbivoresMany plants attract, resist, and inhibit other organisms withspecial chemicals known as secondary metabolites. You learnedabout two of these chemicals, quinine and artemisinin, in theopening of this chapter.Primary metabolites are substances—such as proteins, nucleicacids, carbohydrates, lipids, and their building blocks—that are produced and used by all living organisms, includingplants. They and their metabolic products are used in basic cellularprocesses such as photosynthesis, respiration, and nutrientuptake. Secondary metabolites are substances that are notused for basic cellular processes. Each is found in only certainplants or plant groups.The more than 10,000 known secondary metabolites rangein molecular mass from about 70 to more than 390,000 daltons,but most have a low molecular mass (Table 39.1). Some are producedby only a single plant species, while others are characteristicof entire genera or even families. The effects of defensivesecondary metabolites on animals are diverse. Some act onthe nervous systems of herbivorous insects, mollusks, or mammals.Others mimic the natural hormones of insects, causingsome larvae to fail to develop into adults. Still others damagethe digestive tracts of herbivores. Some secondary metabolitesare toxic to fungal pests. As we saw at the opening of this chapter,humans make use of many secondary metabolites as pharmaceuticalsand pesticides.The secondary metabolite nicotine was one of the first insecticidesto be used by farmers and gardeners. This molecule killsinsects by acting as an inhibitor of nervous system function. Yetcommercial varieties of tobacco and related plants that producenicotine are still attacked, with moderate damage, by pests suchas the tobacco hornworm (see Figure 39.5B). Given that observation,does nicotine really deter herbivores? Biologists answeredthis question conclusively with a study that used tobaccoplants in which an enzyme involved in nicotine biosynthesis had820 CHAPTER 39 | PLANT RESPONSES TO ENVIRONMENTAL CHALLENGESTABLE 39.1Secondary Metabolites Used in DefenseCLASS TYPE ROLE EXAMPLENitrogen-containing Alkaloids Neurotoxin Nicotine in tobaccoGlycosides Inhibit electron transport Dhurrin in sorghumNonprotein amino acids Disrupt protein structure Canavanine in jack beanNitrogen–sulfur-containing Glucosinolates Inhibit respiration Methylglucosinolate in cabbagePhenolics Coumarins Block cell division Umbelliferone in carrotsFlavonoids Phytoalexins Capsidol in peppersTannins Inhibit enzymes Gallotannin in oak treesTerpenes Monoterpenes Neurotoxins Pyrethrin in chrysanthemumsDiterpenes Disrupt reproduction and Gossypol in cottonmuscle functionTriterpenes Inhibit ion transport Digitalis in foxgloveSterols Block animal hormones Spinasterol in spinachPolyterpenes Deter feeding Latex in EuphorbiaCH3CH3OHN HH3CS-glucoseN—O—SO3–HO OH3COOORCOEphedrine (an alkaloid)MethylglucosinolideUmbelliferonePyrethrinbeen silenced, lowering the nicotine concentration in theplants by more than 95 percent. These low-nicotine plantssuffered much more damage from insect herbivory thannormal plants did (Figure 39.7).Some secondary metabolites play multiple rolesCanavanine is a secondary metabolite that has two importantroles in the plants that produce it. The first is as a nitrogen-storing compound in seeds. The second role is defensive,and is based on its chemical structure. Canavanineis an amino acid that is not found in proteins, but is verysimilar to the amino acid arginine, which is found in almostall proteins:When an insect larva consumes canavanine-containingplant tissue, the canavanine is incorporated into theinsect’s proteins in some of the places where the mRNAcodes for arginine, because the enzyme that charges thetRNAspecific for arginine fails to discriminate accuratelybetween the two amino acids (see Section 14.5). The structureof canavanine, however, is different enough from thatof arginine that some of the resulting proteins end upwith a modified tertiary structure, and hence reduced biologicalactivity. These defects in protein structure andfunction lead to developmental abnormalities that kill theinsect.In plants that produce them, canavanine and other secondarymetabolites are constitutive defenses—that is, theyare present regardless of whether the plant is under attack.Other chemical defenses come into play only when an herbivorestrikes.Plants respond to herbivory with induced defensesThe first step in a plant’s response to herbivory is to somehowsense the event. Two mechanisms for plant perceptionof herbivore damage have been described: membranesignaling and chemical signaling.MEMBRANE SIGNALING The plasma membrane is the partof the plant cell that is in contact with the environment.Within the first minute after an herbivore strikes, changesN HH C HH C HH C HC HCOO HH2NCNH2NHNH2CNOHH C HH C HC HCOO HH2NNHA seeminglyslightchemicaldifference……producesan inactiveprotein.Arginine Canavanine39.2 | HOW DO PLANTS DEAL WITH HERBIVORES? 821HYPOTHESIS Nicotine helps protect tobacco plants against insects.INVESTIGATING LIFEMETHODRESULTS39.7 Nicotine Is a Defense against HerbivoresThe secondary metabolite nicotine, made by tobacco plants, is aninsecticide, yet most commercial varieties of tobacco are susceptible toinsect attack. Ian Baldwin demonstrated that a tobacco strain with areduced nicotine concentration was more susceptible to insect damage.CONCLUSION Nicotine provides tobacco plants with at leastsome protection against insects.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: Treatment of tobacco plants with jasmonate(a hormone) elicits the production of nicotineand other compounds. How would youmodify this experiment to determine whethernicotine is the only insecticidal compoundproduced by tobacco?Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.In the experimental plants,a gene coding for a key enzymein the biosynthetic pathway tonicotine was silenced.Nicotine concentrationswere 95% lower in themodified plants.The low-nicotine plants suffered more than twice as muchleaf damage as did the wild-type controls.Leaf area damaged (% of total)4 6 8 10 12 14 16Days after plantingLow-nicotine plant50101520Normal (control)Create a strainof low-nicotinetobacco plants.Plant normal(control) and lownicotine(mutant)plants together ina field where theyare accessibleto insects.Assess the extentof leaf damage at2-day intervals.Normal (control) Low-nicotine plantsHornwormin the electrical potential of the plasma membrane occur in thedamaged area. As you will see later when you study the animalnervous system (see Section 45.2), such changes can be rapidlytransmitted as a signal along the plasma membrane. In the caseof plants responding to herbivory, the continuity of the symplast(see Figure 35.6) ensures that the signal travels over muchof the plant within 10 minutes.CHEMICAL SIGNALING When an insect chews on a plant, substancesin the insect’s saliva combine with fatty acids derivedfrom the consumed plant tissue. The resulting compounds actas elicitors (see Section 39.1) to trigger both local and systemicresponses to the herbivore. In corn, the herbivore-produced elicitorhas been named volicitin for its ability to induce productionof volatile signals that can travel to other plant parts—and to neighboring corn plants—and simulate their defenseresponses.SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION PATHWAY The perception of damagefrom herbivory initiates a signal transduction pathway in theplant that involves the plant hormone jasmonic acid ( jasmonate)(Figure 39.8):When the plant senses an herbivore-produced elicitor, it makesjasmonate, which triggers many plant defenses, including thesynthesis of a protease inhibitor. The inhibitor, once in an insect’sgut, interferes with the digestion of proteins and thusstunts the insect’s growth. Jasmonates also “call for help” bytriggering the formation of volatile compounds that attract insectsthat prey on the herbivores attacking it.Why don’t plants poison themselves?Why don’t the chemicals that are so toxic to herbivores andpathogens kill the plants that produce them? Plants that producetoxic defensive chemicals generally use one of the followingmeasures to protect themselves:• The toxic substance is isolated in a special compartmentwithin the cell.• The toxic substance is produced only after the plant’s cellshave already been damaged.• The plant uses modified enzymes or modified receptorsthat do not react with the toxic substance.Isolation of the toxic substance is the most common meansof avoiding exposure. Plants store their toxins in vacuoles if thetoxins are water-soluble. If they are hydrophobic, the toxins maybe dissolved in latex and stored in specialized tubes calledCOOHOJasmonic acid822 CHAPTER 39 | PLANT RESPONSES TO ENVIRONMENTAL CHALLENGES1 Perception of tissue damageby an herbivore causes formationand release of elicitor.2 Elicitor binds to a receptoron phloem companion cells.3 Receptor activation causeshydrolysis of a membranelipid, forming jasmonate.4 Jasmonate travels through plasmodesmatafrom companion cell to sieve tube element.5 Jasmonate enters mesophyllcells in the damaged shoot.6 Jasmonate binds to JAZ,an inhibitor, releasing atranscription factor.7 The transcription factorenters the nucleus,causing expression of agene that codes for aprotease inhibitor.CompanioncellMesophyllPlasmodesma cellSieve tubeelement(phloem)Sieve tubeelement(phloem)Outside of cellOutside of cellReceptorElicitorJasmonatePlasmamembraneTranscriptionfactorJAZDNAProtease inhibitorNucleus39.8 A Signal Transduction Pathway for Induced Defenses Thechain of events initiated by herbivory that leads to the production of adefensive chemical can consist of many steps. These steps may includethe synthesis of one or two hormones, binding of receptors, gene activation,and, finally, synthesis of defensive compounds.laticifers, or dissolved in waxes on the epidermal surface. Suchcompartmentalized storage keeps the toxins away from the mitochondria,chloroplasts, and other parts of the plant’s metabolicmachinery.Some plants store the precursors of toxic substances in onetype of tissue, such as the epidermis, and store the enzymes thatconvert those precursors into the active toxin in another type,such as the mesophyll. When an herbivore chews part of theplant, cells are ruptured, the enzymes come into contact withthe precursors, and the toxin is produced. The only part of theplant that is damaged by the toxin is that which was alreadydamaged by the herbivore. Plants such as sorghum and somelegumes, which respond to herbivory by producing cyanide—an inhibitor of cellular respiration—are among those that usethis type of protective measure.The third protective measure is used by the canavanine-producingplants described earlier. In these plants, unlike mostother plants, the enzyme that charges the arginine tRNA discriminatescorrectly between arginine and canavanine, so canavanineis not incorporated into their proteins. Some herbivores,however, can evade canavanine poisoning in a similar manner,demonstrating that no plant defense is perfect. Like plantsand pathogens, plants and herbivores evolve together in a continuingarms race, which the plants don’t always win.The plant doesn’t always win the arms raceMilkweeds such as Asclepias syriaca store their defensive chemicalsin laticifers. When damaged, a milkweed releases copiousamounts of toxic latex from its laticifers, which run alongsidethe veins in its leaves. Field studies have shown that mostinsects that feed on neighboring plants of other species do notattack laticiferous plants, but there are exceptions. One populationof beetles that feeds on A. syriaca exhibits a remarkable prefeedingbehavior: these beetles cut a few veins in the leavesbefore settling down to dine (Figure 39.9). Cutting the veins,with their adjacent laticifers, causes massive latex leakage andinterrupts the latex supply to a downstream portion of the leaf.The beetles then move to the relatively latex-free portion andeat their fill.Does this behavior of the beetles negate the adaptive valueof latex protection? Not entirely. Great numbers of potential insectpests are still effectively deterred by the latex. And evolutionproceeds. Over time, milkweed plants producing higherconcentrations of toxins may be selected by virtue of their abilityto kill even the beetles that cut their laticifers.39.2 RECAPMany plants use secondary metabolites as defensesagainst herbivory. Other defenses are induced byherbivory through a signal transduction pathway involvingthe hormone jasmonate.• Describe one example of a secondary metabolite andhow it affects herbivores. See pp. 820–821• What role does jasmonate play in plant defense?See p. 822 and Figure 39.8• What are three ways in which a plant avoids being poisonedby its own defensive chemicals? See pp. 822–823A plant’s survival depends not only on successful defensesagainst pathogens and herbivores, but also on coping with asometimes hostile physical environment. In the next section weconsider how plants deal with climate-imposed stresses.How Do Plants Deal with 39.3 Climatic Extremes?Plants are threatened by many aspects of the physical environment,such as drought, waterlogged soils, and extreme temperatures.How do plants survive these environmental challenges?Plants cope with environmental stresses through adaptation oracclimation.• Adaptation is genetically encoded resistance to stress. Aplant may have structures or biochemical properties thataid in its survival in the face of environmental challenges.• Acclimation is increased tolerance for environmental extremesbecause of prior exposure to them. An individualplant previously exposed to extreme cold, for example, maybe more likely to survive the subsequent winter.Let’s begin by describing some adaptations of plants to extremesof water availability and temperature.Desert plants have special adaptations to dry conditionsMany plants, especially those living in deserts, must cope withextremely limited water supplies. Some desert plants have no spe-39.9 Disarming a Plant’s Defenses This beetle is inactivating a milkweed’sdefense system by cutting its laticifer supply lines.39.3 | HOW DO PLANTS DEAL WITH CLIMATIC EXTREMES? 823cial structural adaptations for water conservation. Instead, thesedesert annuals, called drought avoiders, simply evade periods ofdrought. Drought avoiders carry out their entire life cycle—fromseed to seed—during a brief period in which rainfall has madethe surrounding desert soil sufficiently moist (Figure 39.10). Deciduousplants, particularly in Africa and South America, shedtheir leaves in response to drought as a way to conserve water.LEAF STRUCTURES Most desert plants grow in their dry environmentyear-round. Plants adapted to dry environments arecalled xerophytes (from the Greek xeros, “dry”). Three structuraladaptations are found in the leaves of many xerophytes:• Specialized leaf anatomy that reduces water loss• Athick cuticle and a profusion of trichomes over the leafepidermis, which retard water loss• Diffraction and reflection of sunlight by trichomes, whichdecrease the intensity of the light impinging on the leaves,thus decreasing the risk of damage to the photosyntheticapparatus by excess lightIn some species the stomata are strategically located insunken cavities below the leaf surface (known as stomatalcrypts), where they are sheltered from the drying effects of aircurrents (Figure 39.11). Hairs surrounding the stomata slow aircurrents as well.Cacti and similar plants have spines rather than typicalleaves, and photosynthesis is confined to the fleshy stems. Thespines may help plants cope with desert condidtions by reflectingincident radiation, or by dissipating heat.WATER-STORING STRUCTURES Succulence—the possession offleshy, water-storing leaves or stems—is an adaptation to dryenvironments (Figure 39.12). Other adaptations of succulentsinclude a reduced number of stomata and CAM photosynthesis,which separates the light-requiring and CO2-assimilatingreactions of photosynthesis to conserve water (see Section 10.4).824 CHAPTER 39 | PLANT RESPONSES TO ENVIRONMENTAL CHALLENGESA section througha leaf’s surfaceshows stomatasunken in cryptsprotected by hairs.Protective hairs Lower surface of leafStomata39.11 Stomatal Crypts Stomata in the leaves of some xerophytes arelocated in sunken cavities called stomatal crypts. The hairs coveringthese crypts trap moist air.39.10 Desert Annuals Avoid Drought The seeds of many desert annuals lie dormant forlong periods awaiting conditions appropriate for germination. When they do receive enoughmoisture to germinate, they grow and reproduce rapidly before the short wet season ends.During the long dry spells, only dormant seeds remain alive.39.12 Succulence The Aloe plant stores waterin its fleshy leaves.ROOT SYSTEMS THAT MAXIMIZE WATER UPTAKE Roots may alsobe adapted to dry environments. Cacti have shallow but extensivefibrous root systems that effectively intercept water atthe soil surface following even light rains. Mesquite trees(Prosopis; Figure 39.13) obtain water through taproots that growto great depths, reaching water supplies far underground, aswell as from condensation on their leaves. The Atacama Desertin northern Chile often goes several years without measurablerainfall, but the landscape there has many surprisingly largemesquite trees.One of the most successful desert plants of the southwesternUnited States, creosote bush (Larrea tridentata), displays a rangeof xerophytic features. It has a deep taproot, a shallow and extensiveroot system that can absorbwater quickly after rare rain events,and small wax-covered leaves. Theplant owes its name to its ability toproduce noxious resins that smelllike the wood preservative creosote.These natural resins not only helpto seal in water, but also render theleaves virtually indigestible to browsingmammals—another adaptationto the stresses of desert life.CHANGES IN WATER POTENTIAL Xerophytesand other plants that mustcope with inadequate water suppliesmay accumulate high concentrations of the amino acid prolineor of secondary metabolites in their vacuoles. These accumulationslower the water potential in the plant’s cells below thatin the soil, which results in the uptake of water by the cells viaosmosis (see Section 35.1). Plants living in salty environmentsshare this and several other adaptations with xerophytes, as wewill see shortly.In water-saturated soils, oxygen is scarceFor some plants, the environmental challenge is the opposite ofthat faced by xerophytes: too much water. Some plants live inenvironments so wet that the diffusion of oxygen to their rootsis severely limited. Since most plant roots require oxygen to supportrespiration and ATP production, most plants cannot toleratesaturated soil conditions for long.Some species, however, are adapted to life in a water-saturatedhabitat. Their roots grow slowly and hence do not penetratedeeply. Because the oxygen concentration in saturated soilis too low to support aerobic respiration, their roots carry on alcoholicfermentation (an anaerobic process; see Section 9.4),which provides ATP for the activities of the root system. Thisadaptation explains why their growth is slow: fermentation ismuch less efficient in producing ATP than aerobic respiration.The root systems of some plants adapted to swampy environments,such as cypresses and some mangroves, have pneumatophores,which are extensions that grow out of the water andup into the air (Figure 39.14). Pneumatophores have lenticelsthat allow oxygen to diffuse through them, aerating the submergedparts of the root system.39.3 | HOW DO PLANTS DEAL WITH CLIMATIC EXTREMES? 82539.13 Mining Water with DeepTaproots In Death Valley, California, theroot of this mesquite tree must reach farbeneath the dunes for its water supply.Pneumatophores are root extensions that grow out of thewater, under which the rest of the roots are submerged. 39.14 Coming Up for Air The roots of these mangroves obtain oxygenthrough pneumatophores.Large air spaces are found in the leaf parenchyma and in thepetioles of many submerged or partly submerged aquaticplants. Tissue containing such air spaces is called aerenchyma(Figure 39.15). Aerenchyma stores oxygen produced by photosynthesisand permits its ready diffusion to parts of the plantwhere it is needed for cellular respiration. Aerenchyma also impartsbuoyancy. Furthermore, because it contains far fewer cellsthan most other plant tissues, metabolism in aerenchyma proceedsat a lower rate, so the need for oxygen is much reduced.Many plants, rather than facing continual water deficits orexcesses, live in fluctuating environments with unpredictablerainfall. We now turn to the mechanisms plants use to respondto those challenges.Plants can acclimate to drought stressWhen the weather is abnormally dry, the water content of thesoil is reduced, and less water is available to plants. Waterdeficits in plant cells have two major effects: a reduction inmembrane integrity as the polar–nonpolar forces that orient thelipid bilayer proteins are reduced, and changes in the threedimensionalstructures of proteins. Plant growth is reducedwhen the structure of plant cells is compromised in these ways.Indeed, inadequate water supply is the single most importantfactor that limits production of our most important food crops.Plants can, however, acclimate to drought stress to maintaintheir structure and function. How do they do it? When plantssense a water deficit in their roots, a signal transduction pathwayis set in motion that initiates several measures to conservewater and maintain cellular integrity. This signal transductionpathway begins with the production of a hormone, abscisic acid,in the roots. This hormone travels from the roots to the shoot,where it causes stomatal closure and initiates gene transcriptionthat leads to other physiological events that conserve waterand cellular integrity (Figure 39.16).Plant genes whose expression is altered by drought stresshave been identified, largely through research using DNAmicroarrays (see Figure 18.9), proteomics (see Figure 17.17), andother molecular approaches. One group of proteins whose productionis upregulated during drought stress is the late embryogenesisabundant (LEA; pronounced “lee-yuh”) proteins. Thesehydrophobic proteins accumulate in maturing seeds as they dryout. The LEA proteins bind to membranes and other cellularproteins to stabilize them, preventing their aggregation duringdesiccation. The importance of LEA proteins in coping withdrought stress was demonstrated by Ray Wu and his colleaguesat Cornell University, who showed that transgenic rice plantsexpressing a high level of a LEA protein in their leaves and rootsgrew better than normal plants under drought conditions (Figure39.17). Genes that code for LEA proteins are widely distributedamong plants, bacteria, and invertebrates; in all these organisms,high-level expression results in drought tolerance.As described at the opening of Chapter 35, which discusses thediscovery of HARDY, another gene that promotes water use efficiencyin plants, genetic research holds the promise of solutionsto many agricultural problems, including those that maybe presented by global climate change.Plants have ways of coping with temperature extremesTemperatures that are too high or too low can stress plants andeven kill them. Plants differ in their sensitivity to heat and cold,but all plants have their limits. Any temperature extreme candamage cellular membranes.1 Drought stress causes anincrease in abscisic acid.2 Abscisic acid travelsthrough the xylem tothe leaves.4 Abscisic acid binds to atranscription factor to upregulateexpression of genes coding forLEA proteins, which stabilizeother proteins.3 Abscisic acid causes thestomata to close, conservingwater in leaves.DNATranscriptionLEA proteinsTranscriptionfactorAbscisicacid39.16 A Signal Transduction Pathway in Response to DroughtStress Acclimation to drought stress begins in the root with the productionof the hormone abscisic acid.Cells obtain oxygenthrough projections intothe open channels of airfilledaerenchyma tissue.Vascular bundleOpen channel75 μm39.15 Aerenchyma Lets Oxygen Reach Submerged Tissues Thisscanning electron micrograph of a cross section of a petiole of the yellowwater lily shows the structure of the air-filled channels that make upaerenchyma tissue.826 CHAPTER 39 | PLANT RESPONSES TO ENVIRONMENTAL CHALLENGES• High temperatures destabilize membranes and denaturemany proteins, especially some of the enzymes of photosynthesis.• Low temperatures cause membranes to lose their fluidityand alter their permeabilities to solutes.• Freezing temperatures may cause ice crystals to form, damagingmembranes.Therefore, it is not surprising that many plants living in hotenvironments have adaptations similar to those of xerophytes.These adaptations include hairs and spines that dissipate heat,leaf forms that intercept less direct sunlight, and CAM photosynthesis,which allows plants to perform some metabolicprocesses in the cool of night (see Section 10.4).The plant response to heat stress is similar to the response todrought stress in that new proteins are made, often under thedirection of an abscisic acid–mediated signal transduction pathway.Within minutes of experimental exposure to raised temperatures(typically a 5°C–10°C increase), plants synthesize severalkinds of heat shock proteins. Among these proteins arechaperonins (see Figure 3.12), which help other proteins maintaintheir structures and avoid denaturation. Threshold temperaturesfor the production of heat shock proteins vary, but 39°Cis sufficient to induce them in most plants.Low temperatures above the freezing point can cause chillinginjury in many plants, including crops such as rice, corn,and cotton, as well as tropical plants such as bananas. Manyplant species can acclimate to cooler temperatures through aprocess called cold-hardening, which requires repeated exposureto cool, but not injurious, temperatures over many days.A key change during the hardening process is an increase inthe proportion of unsaturated fatty acids in membranes, whichallows them to retain their fluidity and function normally atcooler temperatures. Plants have a greater ability to modify thedegree of saturation of their membrane lipids than animals do.In addition, low temperatures induce the formation of proteinssimilar to heat shock proteins, which protect against chillinginjury.If ice crystals form within plant cells, they can kill the cellsby puncturing organelles and plasma membranes. Furthermore,the growth of ice crystals outside the cells can draw water fromthe cells and dehydrate them. Freeze-tolerant plants have avariety of adaptations to cope with these problems, includingthe production of antifreeze proteins that slow the growth of icecrystals.39.3 RECAPPlants that live in continually dry or water-saturatedenvironments have structural adaptations to copewith those conditions. Mechanisms that protectplants from drought stress are initiated by a signaltransduction pathway involving abscisic acid. Heatshock proteins help plants acclimate to high and lowtemperatures.• Describe two structural adaptations for growth in watersaturated soils. See pp. 825–826• What is the role of abscisic acid in acclimation todrought stress? See p. 826 and Figure 39.16• What environmental conditions induce the formationof heat shock proteins, and what functions do thoseproteins serve? See p. 82739.3 | HOW DO PLANTS DEAL WITH CLIMATIC EXTREMES? 827CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE39.17 A Molecular Response to Drought StressUnderstanding the responses of plants to drought conditionsis vital for agriculture. Ray Wu and colleagues transformedrice cells with a gene that codes for a LEA protein that isexpressed in seeds as they mature and dry out. Theinvestigators then measured the response of the transgenicrice plants to 28 days of drought.HYPOTHESIS LEA proteins protect plants from the effectsof drought stress.Plants with higher concentrations of a LEAprotein grow better under drought conditions.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTS1 Introduce a LEA gene with ahigh-expressing promoter intorice cells using a callus culture.5 The transgenic seedlingsgrow much more rapidlythan control seedlingsunder drought conditions.2 Select transgeniccells.3 Grow transgenic andcontrol plants; collectand plant seeds.4 Expose seedlings to droughtconditions for 28 days.DNAPromoterTransgenic cells Control cells33 cm2.1 gHeightRoot wt22 cm0.9 gLEA geneJust as climatic extremes can limit plant growth, the presence ofcertain substances, such as salt and heavy metals, can make anenvironment inhospitable to plant growth.How Do Plants Deal with Salt 39.4 and Heavy Metals?Anumber of toxic solutes are found in soils, but worldwide, notoxic substance restricts angiosperm growth more than salt(sodium chloride). Saline—salty—habitats support, at best, limitedtypes of vegetation. Saline habitats are found in diverse locales,from hot, dry, deserts to moist, cool coastal marshes.Along the seashore, saline environments are created by oceanspray. The ocean itself is a saline environment, as are estuaries,where fresh and salt water meet and mingle. Salinization of agriculturalland is an increasing global problem. Even where cropsare irrigated with fresh water, sodium ions from the water accumulatein the soil to ever greater concentrations as the waterevaporates.Saline environments pose an osmotic challenge for plants.Because of its high salt concentration, a saline environment hasan unusually negative water potential. To obtain water fromsuch an environment, a plant must have an even more negativewater potential; otherwise, water will diffuse out of its cells, andthe plant will wilt and die. Plants in saline environments arealso challenged by the potential toxicity of sodium, which inhibitsenzymes and protein synthesis.Most halophytes accumulate saltHalophytes—plants adapted to saline habitats—are found in awide variety of flowering plant groups. Most halophytes shareone adaptation: they take up sodium and, usually, chloride ionsand transport those ions to their leaves. The accumulated ionsare stored in the central vacuoles of leaf cells, away from moresensitive parts of the cells. Nonhalophytes accumulate relativelylittle sodium, even when placed in a saline environment; ofthe sodium that is absorbed by their roots, very little is transportedto the shoot. The increased salt concentration in the tissuesof halophytes lowers their water potential and allows themto take up water from their saline environment.Some halophytes have other adaptations to life in saline environments.Some, for example, have salt glands in their leaves.These glands excrete salt, which collects on the leaf surfaceuntil it is removed by rain or wind (Figure 39.18). This adaptation,which reduces the danger of poisoning by accumulatedsalt, is found in some desert plants, such as Frankenia palmeri,and in some mangroves growing in seawater.Salt glands can play multiple roles, as in the desert shrubAtriplex halimus. This shrub has glands that secrete salt intosmall bladders on the leaves. By lowering the water potentialof the leaves, this salt not only helps them obtain water fromthe roots, but also reduces their transpirational loss of water tothe atmosphere.The adaptations we have just discussed are specific to halophytes.Several other adaptations are shared by halophytes andxerophytes, including thick cuticles, succulence, and CAMphotosynthesis.Some plants can tolerate heavy metalsSalt is not the only toxic solute found in soils. High concentrationsof some heavy metal ions, such as chromium, mercury,lead, and cadmium, are toxic to most plants; many of these ionsare more toxic than sodium at equivalent concentrations.Some geographic sites are naturally rich in heavy metals asa result of normal geological processes. In other places, acid rainleads to the release of toxic aluminum ions in the soil. Humanactivities, notably the mining of metallic ores, leave localizedareas—known as tailings—with high concentrations of heavymetals and low concentrations of nutrients. Such sites are hostileto most plants, and seeds falling on them generally do notproduce adult plants.Most mine tailings rich in heavy metals, however, are notcompletely barren. They may support healthy plant populationsthat differ genetically from populations of the same species onthe surrounding normal soils. How do these plants survive?Initially, botanists believed that some plants were able to tolerateheavy metals by excluding them: that by not taking up themetal ions, the plants avoided being poisoned. Further investigationshave shown, however, that tolerant plants growing onmine tailings do take up heavy metals, accumulating concentrationsthat would kill most plants. Over 200 plant species havebeen identified as hyperaccumulators that store large quantitiesof metals such as arsenic (As), cadmium (Cd), nickel (Ni), aluminum(Al), and zinc (Zn).Perhaps the best-studied hyperaccumulator is alpine pennycress(Thlaspi caerulescens). Before the advent of chemical analysis,miners used to use the presence of this plant as an indicatorof mineral-rich deposits. A Thlaspi plant may accumulateas much as 30,000 ppm Zn (most plants contain 100 ppm) and1,500 ppm Cd (most plants contain 1 ppm). Studies of Thlaspi828 CHAPTER 39 | PLANT RESPONSES TO ENVIRONMENTAL CHALLENGES39.18 Excreting Salt This saltwater mangrove plant has special saltglands that excrete salt, which appears here as crystals on the leaves.and other hyperaccumulators have revealed the presence of severalcommon mechanisms:• Increased ion transport into the roots• Increased rates of translocation of ions to the leaves• Accumulation of ions in vacuoles in the shoot• Resistance to the ions’ toxicityKnowledge of these hyperaccumulation mechanisms andthe genes underlying them has led to the emergence of phytoremediation,a form of bioremediation (see Section 18.6) thatuses plants to clean up environmental pollution. Some phytoremediationprojects use natural hyperaccumulators, whileothers use genes from hyperaccumulators to create transgenicplants that grow more rapidly and are better adapted to a particularpolluted environment. In either case, the plants aregrown in the contaminated soil, where they act as natural“vacuum cleaners” by taking up the contaminants (Figure39.19). The plants are then harvested and disposed of to removethe contaminants. Perhaps the most dramatic use of phytoremediationoccurred after an accident at the nuclear powerplant at Chernobyl, Ukraine (then part of the Soviet Union),in 1986, when sunflower plants were used to remove uraniumfrom the nearby soil. Phytoremediation is now widely used incleaning up land after strip mining.After finding plants that accumulate valuable metals suchas Ni, cobalt (Co), and silver (Ag), some scientists have proposedusing those plants for phytomining. As in phytoremediation,the plants would be used to take up metals from the soil,but the metals would be extracted from the plants after theyare harvested.39.4 RECAPHalophytes have a number of adaptations to salinehabitats, most of which involve mechanisms thatlower their water potential. Some plants can tolerateheavy-metal-rich soils that are toxic to most otherplants.• What are some of the roles of salt glands in halophyteleaves? See p. 828• How are plants used for phytoremediation? See p. 82939.4 | HOW DO PLANTS DEAL WITH SALT AND HEAVY METALS? 82939.19 Phytoremediation Plants that accumulate heavy metals can beused to clean up contaminated soils. Here, poplars are being used toremove contaminants from an air base.39.1 How Do Plants Deal with Pathogens?• Plants and pathogens have evolved together in a continuing“arms race”: pathogens have evolved mechanisms for attackingplants, and plants have evolved mechanisms for defendingthemselves against those attacks. Review Figure 39.2,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 39.1• Plants strengthen their cell walls and block plasmodesmatawhen attacked, limiting the ability of viral pathogens to movefrom cell to cell.• Gene-for-gene resistance depends on a match between aplant’s resistance (R) genes and a pathogen’s avirulence (Avr)genes. Review Figure 39.3• In the hypersensitive response to infection by bacteria or fungi,cells produce two kinds of defensive molecules: phytoalexinsand PR proteins. Some cells around the infected area die, sealingoff the pathogens and the damage they have caused.• The hypersensitive response is often followed by systemicacquired resistance, in which salicylic acid activates further synthesisof defensive compounds.• Plants use RNA interference to develop specific immunity toinvading RNA viruses.39.2 How Do Plants Deal with Herbivores?• Herbivory increases the productivity of some plants. ReviewFigure 39.6• Some plants produce secondary metabolites as defensesagainst herbivores. Review Table 39.1, Figure 39.7• Hormones, including jasmonates, participate in signal transductionpathways leading to the production of defensive compounds.Review Figure 39.8• Plants protect themselves against their own toxic defensivechemicals by isolating them in specialized compartments, byproducing them only after the plant has already been damaged,or by using modified enzymes or receptors that are not affectedby the toxic substance.CHAPTER SUMMARY
39.1 How Do Plants Deal with Pathogens?• Plants and pathogens have evolved together in a continuing“arms race”: pathogens have evolved mechanisms for attackingplants, and plants have evolved mechanisms for defendingthemselves against those attacks. Review Figure 39.2,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 39.1• Plants strengthen their cell walls and block plasmodesmatawhen attacked, limiting the ability of viral pathogens to movefrom cell to cell.• Gene-for-gene resistance depends on a match between aplant’s resistance (R) genes and a pathogen’s avirulence (Avr)genes. Review Figure 39.3• In the hypersensitive response to infection by bacteria or fungi,cells produce two kinds of defensive molecules: phytoalexinsand PR proteins. Some cells around the infected area die, sealingoff the pathogens and the damage they have caused.• The hypersensitive response is often followed by systemicacquired resistance, in which salicylic acid activates further synthesisof defensive compounds.• Plants use RNA interference to develop specific immunity toinvading RNA viruses.39.2 How Do Plants Deal with Herbivores?• Herbivory increases the productivity of some plants. ReviewFigure 39.6• Some plants produce secondary metabolites as defensesagainst herbivores. Review Table 39.1, Figure 39.7• Hormones, including jasmonates, participate in signal transductionpathways leading to the production of defensive compounds.Review Figure 39.8• Plants protect themselves against their own toxic defensivechemicals by isolating them in specialized compartments, byproducing them only after the plant has already been damaged,or by using modified enzymes or receptors that are not affectedby the toxic substance.
39.3 How Do Plants Deal with Climatic Extremes?• Plants cope with environmental stresses by adaptation (geneticallyencoded resistance) or acclimation (increased tolerance).• Xerophytes are plants that are adapted to dry environments.• Some xerophytic adaptations are structural, including thickenedcuticles, specialized trichomes, stomatal crypts, succulence,and long taproots.• Some plants accumulate solutes, making their water potentiallower so they can tolerate drought.• Adaptations to water-saturated habitats include pneumatophores,extensions of roots allow oxygen uptake from the air,and aerenchyma, in which oxygen can be stored and diffusethroughout the plant.• A signal transduction pathway involving abscisic acid initiates aplant’s response to drought stress. Review Figures 39.16 and39.17• Membranes and proteins can be damaged by extremely high orlow temperatures. Plants respond to extreme temperatures byproducing heat shock proteins.• Some plants undergo cold-hardening, an acclimation processthat includes changes in membrane lipids and production ofheat shock proteins.• Some plants resist freezing by producing antifreeze proteins.39.4 How Do Plants Deal with Salt and Heavy Metals?• Most halophytes accumulate salt. Some have salt glands thatexcrete salt to the leaf surface.• Some plants living in soils that are rich in heavy metals arehyperaccumulators that take up large amounts of those metalsinto their tissues.• Phytoremediation is the use of hyperaccumulating plants ortheir genes to clean up environmental pollution.SEE WEB ACTIVITY 39.1 for a concept review of thischapter.