46Arattlesnake can see to strike and kill a running rodentin complete darkness. How can this be,when “seeing” means using the eyes to detectlight, and “complete darkness” means the absence of anylight? It is possible because these definitions are based onhuman capabilities. What we call “light” is actually only asmall portion (red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, andviolet) of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation.Other animals see wavelengths we cannot. Insects andbirds see patterns on flowers that reflect ultraviolet wavelengthsinvisible to us. Similarly, rattlesnakes can “see” infraredwavelengths that are invisible to us (although athigh enough levels of intensity, humans feel these wavelengthsas heat).It is not the snake’s eyes that perceive infrared wavelengths.Rattlesnakes and their relatives have pit organscontaining high densities of infrared-sensitive neurons.The two pits, located between the nostrils and the eyeson each side of the skull, are positioned in such a way thatsensory receptor cells in the pits receive directional information.The fields of “view” of the bilateral pits are overlappingand thus convey a three-dimensional perspective.Information from the pit organs goes to the same regionof the brain as information from the eyes, so rattlesnakesactually do “see” the world in a range of electromagneticradiation that is different from the human visual spectrum.Our definition of silence is as arbitrary as our definitionof darkness. “Sound” is actually pressure waves in the environment,and many animals are sensitive to pressurewaves with frequencies (pitches) we cannot hear. Elephantscommunicate in sound waves that are belowhuman hearing range; such long waves travel great distances,an advantage to large animalsthat roam over extensive areas.Bats emit incredibly loud, briefsound pulses, the frequencies of whichare above our range of hearing, and aflying bat hears echoes of these pulsesbouncing off objects in the environment.The pulses are so loud and theechoes so weak that it is rather like aconstruction worker trying to overhearOut of rangeSensing Infrared Radiation The “hole”to the right of this diamondback rattlesnake’seye is one of its bilateral pitorgans. Pit organs detect infrared radiationfrom the snake’s preferred prey—smallrodents—with unerring precision, even intotal darkness. The forked tongue alsoprovides positional information, picking upmolecular signals that are transmitted tothe brain by a specialized organ in the roofof the snake’s mouth.How Do Sensory Cells Convert Stimuli 46.1 into Action Potentials?Sensory receptor cells, sometimes simply called sensors or receptors,transduce (convert) physical and chemical stimuli such as lightand sound waves, touch, and odorant and taste molecules intoneural signals. These signals are then transmitted to the centralnervous system for processing and interpretation. We will examineseveral sensory systems. In each case, we ask the samegeneral question: How do sensory receptor cells transduce energyfrom a stimulus into a change in membrane potential?Sensory receptor proteins act on ion channelsAs discussed in Section 45.2, cells use energy to create gradientsof charged ions across their plasma membranes. In this way,cells are like batteries: batteries store potential energy by separatingelectrical charges between their poles, and cells store potentialenergy in the ionic gradients across their plasma membranes.If the two poles of a battery are connected by a wire anda switch, current flows through the wire when the switch isclosed. Ion channels are like switches. When they open, chargedions can flow down their electrochemical gradient. When theion channel is selective for one type of ion, the flow of thatcharged ion creates a change in the electrical potential acrossthe membrane.Sensory transduction begins with a receptor protein or someother mechanism in a sensory cell that can detect a specific stimulusmodality such as heat, light, chemicals, mechanical force(including sound waves), or electrical fields. The receptor proteinthen directly or indirectly opens or closes ion channels inthat sensory cell, leading either to an action potential or to therelease of neurotransmitter.Section 45.3 notes that synaptic receptor proteins are eitherionotropic or metabotropic; the same distinction can be applied tosensory receptor proteins. Ionotropic sensory receptor proteinsare either ion channels themselves or directly affect the openingof an ion channel. Examples are receptors that respond tophysical force (mechanoreceptors) and those that respond to temperature(thermoreceptors). Electrosensors most likely have no receptorprotein at all, but they are grouped with the ionotropicreceptors; the plasma membrane of electrosensory cells is sensitiveto the voltage across it and releases neurotransmitter inresponse to slight changes in membrane potential. Metabotropicsensory receptor proteins influence ion channels indirectly,through G proteins and second messengers as described inChapter 7. Examples are most chemoreceptors and photoreceptors(Figure 46.1).IN THIS CHAPTER we will examine how sensory receptorcells convert environmental stimuli into the electrochemicalsignals of nervous systems. We will examine indetail the diversity of cells responsible for our senses andsee how they are incorporated into sensory systems thatprovide the central nervous system with information aboutthe world around and within us. We will also learn about theunusual sensory abilities of other animals.a whispered conversation while using a pneumatic drill.Why don’t the loud pulses “drown out” the weak echoesfor the bat? Small muscles in the bat’s ears contract todampen their hearing sensitivity while the sounds arebeing emitted, but relax in time for the bat to hear theecho—a truly remarkable ability, since the pulses areemitted at rates of 20 to 80 per second.Our senses are our windows on the world. “Reality” iswhat our eyes see, our ears hear, our noses smell, andwhat we touch and taste. But human beings sense onlya limited range of the information available. Animalswith different ranges of sensitivity process differentsources of information and may perceive “reality” quitedifferently.CHAPTER OUTLINE46.1 How Do Sensory Cells Convert Stimuli into ActionPotentials?46.2 How Do Sensory Systems Detect Chemical Stimuli?46.3 How Do Sensory Systems Detect MechanicalForces?46.4 How Do Sensory Systems Detect Light?Echolocating around an Obstacle Course A bat’s abilityto echolocate using sound waves is so precise that, in a totallydark room strung with fine wires, bats can capture smallinsects while avoiding the wires.Sensory transduction involves changes inmembrane potentialsAchange in the resting membrane potential of a sensory receptorcell in response to a stimulus is called a receptor potential.Receptor potentials are graded membrane potentials that spreadover only short distances. To travel long distances in the nervoussystem, receptor potentials must generate action potentials,which they can do in two ways:• The receptor potential may generate action potentialswithin the receptor cell itself.• The receptor potential may trigger the release of a neurotransmitterthat induces a postsynaptic neuron to generateaction potentials.A good example of a sensory receptor cell that can generateaction potentials is the stretch receptor of a crayfish (Figure46.2). By placing an electrode in the cell body of a crayfishstretch receptor, we can record the receptor potential that resultsfrom stretching the muscle to which the cell’s dendrites are attached.These receptor potentials spread to the base of the cell’saxon (the axon hillock), which contains voltage-gated Na+ channels.Action potentials generated here travel down the axon tothe central nervous system (CNS). The rate at which action potentialsare fired by the axon depends on the magnitude of thereceptor potential; that, in turn, depends on how much the muscleis stretched.In a receptor cell that does not fire action potentials, thespreading receptor potential reaches a presynaptic patch ofplasma membrane and induces the release of a neurotransmitter.The intensity of the stimulus influences how much neurotransmitteris released. That neurotransmitter binds to receptorproteins on an associated sensory neuron, altering its membrane966 CHAPTER 46 | SENSORY SYSTEMSMechanoreceptorPressure opens anion channel.ElectroreceptorAn electric chargeopens an ion channel.ThermoreceptorTemperature influencesa membrane proteinthat is a cation channelor is closely associatedwith the channel.ChemoreceptorA molecule binds to areceptor, initiating a signalthat controls the ionchannel via secondmessenger cascade.PhotoreceptorLight alters a receptorprotein, initiating asignaling cascade thatcontrols an ion channel.Pressure-sensitivecation channel Voltage-gatedCa2+ channelNa+ or K+channelcGMP-gatedLight Na+ channelPressure WarmthProtein+ + +++++++++++ ++ + ++ ++ +++++++++++++++ ++ + ++ ++ + ++ ++ ++ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –+Outside of cellInside of cellTaste/smellmoleculeReceptorG proteinIonotropic sensory receptors Metabotropic sensory receptorsEffector molecule SecondmessengerSecondmessengerTemperature-sensitive G proteincation channelThe actionpotentials traveldown the axon.5…which spreads tothe axon hillock,stimulating actionpotentials.4Stretching a muscle isthe stimulus…1The resulting depolarizationspreads to thecell body, creating areceptor potential…3…that activates theopening of ionchannels in stretchreceptor dendrites.2MuscleDendritesAxonAxon hillockCell bodyStretchreceptorneuronStretchVoltage46.1 Sensory Cell Membrane Receptor Proteins Respond toStimuli The receptor proteins in mechanoreceptors are ion channels.The activated receptor proteins of metabotropic chemoreceptors andphotoreceptors initiate signal transduction cascades that eventually openor close ion channels.46.2 Stimulating a Sensory Cell Produces a Receptor PotentialSignal transduction in the stretch receptor of a crayfish can be investigatedby measuring the membrane potential at different places on thestretch receptor neuron while stretching the muscle innervated by thatsensory neuron.potential and causing it to increase or decrease its rate of firingaction potentials. In a few cases, this second cell also respondsby changing the rate at which it releases neurotransmitter ontoanother neuron. Eventually, however, the stimulation of the sensorycell is coded as a change in firing of action potentials in asensory circuit.Sensation depends on which neurons receive actionpotentials from sensory cellsAll sensory systems process information in the form of actionpotentials. But the sensations we perceive—such as heat,pressure, light, smell, and sound—differ because the messagesfrom different kinds of sensory cells arrive at different placesin the CNS. Action potentials arriving in the visual cortex ofthe brain are interpreted as light, in the auditory cortex assound, in the olfactory bulb as smell, and so forth.Asmall patch of skin on your arm contains some sensory receptorcells that increase their firing rates when the skin iswarmed and others that increase their activity when the skinis cooled. Other types of sensory cells in the same patch of skinrespond to touch, movement of hairs, irritants such as mosquitobites, and painful stimuli. These receptor cells transmit theirmessages through axons that enter the CNS at the spinal cord.The synapses made by those axons in the spinal cord and thesubsequent pathways of transmission determine whether thestimulation of the patch of skin on your arm is perceived aswarmth, cold, touch, tickle, itch, or pain. So even though the actionpotentials carried by all of these sensory axons look thesame, the connectivity of each axon is specific for a given sensorymodality.How is the intensity of the stimulus encoded if, as Section 45.2describes, each action potential is an all-or-none event? Intensityof sensation is coded as the frequency of the action potentials.Some sensory cells transmit information about internal conditionsin the body, but we may not be consciously aware ofthat information. The brain continuously receives informationabout body temperature, blood carbon dioxide and oxygenconcentrations, arterial pressure, muscle tension, and the positionsof the limbs—all of which are important for homeostasis.All sensory cells produce information that the nervous systemcan use, but that information does not always result inconscious sensation.Some sensory receptor cells are assembled with other typesof cells into sensory organs, such as eyes, ears, and noses, that enhancethe ability of the sensory cells to collect, filter, and amplifystimuli. We therefore refer to sensory systems, which includethe sensory cells, the associated structures, and the neuralnetworks that process the information.Many receptors adapt to repeated stimulationSome sensory cells give gradually diminishing responses tomaintained or repeated stimulation. This phenomenon isknown as adaptation, and it enables an animal to ignore backgroundor unchanging conditions while remaining sensitiveto changes or to new information. (Note that this use of the term“adaptation” is different from its application in an evolutionarycontext.) When you dress, you feel each item of clothingtouch your skin, but the sensation of clothes touching your skinis not constantly on your mind throughout the day. You are immediatelyaware, however, when a seam rips, your shoe comesuntied, or someone touches your back.Animals can discriminate between continuous and changingstimuli partly because some sensory cells adapt; it is alsoa result of information processing by the CNS. Some sensorycells adapt very little or very slowly; examples are some typesof pain receptors and the mechanoreceptors for balance. Youdo not want to ignore pain that is signaling that something iswrong in your body, and to maintain equilibrium you mustcontinuously know the tensions and forces on all of your jointsand muscles.46.1 RECAPSensory receptor cells have receptor proteins thatrespond to specific stimuli from the external or internalenvironment by opening or closing ion channels,which results in the generation of action potentials insensory neurons.• Explain the difference between ionotropic andmetabotropic sensory receptor proteins. See p. 965and Figure 46.1• How are we able to perceive action potentials—whichare all essentially the same—as different sensations?See p. 967Now that we have a general view of how sensory systems codeand process information, we will discuss how sensory systemsgather and filter stimuli, transduce specific stimuli into actionpotentials, and transmit action potentials to the central nervoussystem. We will look in more depth at specific sensorymodalities, beginning with chemosensation, the basis of smelland taste.How Do Sensory Systems Detect 46.2 Chemical Stimuli?A colony of corals responds to a small amount of meat extractin seawater by extending bodies and tentacles and searching forfood; a solution of a single amino acid can stimulate this response.Conversely, a small amount of seawater in which coralswere crushed will stimulate a defensive retraction of the coralpolyps. Humans also react strongly to certain chemical stimuli.When we smell freshly baked bread, we salivate and feel hungry;when we smell rotting meat, we feel nauseated.All animals receive information about chemical stimulithrough chemoreceptors, which are receptor proteins that bindto various molecules — their ligands—and are responsible forsmell and taste. Chemoreceptors are also responsible for monitoringaspects of the internal environment such as the levelof carbon dioxide in the blood. Information from chemore-46.2 | HOW DO SENSORY SYSTEMS DETECT CHEMICAL STIMULI? 967ceptors can cause powerful physiological and behavioral responsesduring activities such as feeding, mating, fighting, andrecognizing individuals.Arthropods are good models for studyingchemoreceptionA chemical signal used in communication among members ofa species is a pheromone. Arthropods use pheromones to attractmates. These signals demonstrate the sensitivity of chemosensorysystems, and one of the best-studied examples is that ofthe silkworm moth Bombyx mori.To attract a mate, the female silkworm moth releases apheromone called bombykol from a gland at the tip of her abdomen.The male silkworm moth has receptors for this moleculeon his antennae (Figure 46.3). Each feathery antenna carriesabout 10,000 bombykol-sensitive hairs. A single moleculeof bombykol may be sufficient to generate action potentials inthe antennal nerve that transmits the signal to the CNS. Becauseof the male’s great sensitivity, the sexual message of a femalemoth is likely to reach any male within a huge downwind area.When approximately 200 hairs per second are activated, themale orients upwind in search of the female. Because the rateof firing in the male’s sensory nerves is proportional to the bombykolconcentration in the air, he can follow the airborne concentrationgradient and home in on the signaling female.Olfaction is the sense of smellThe sense of smell, olfaction, depends on chemoreceptors. Invertebrates, the olfactory sensors are neurons embedded in alayer of epithelial tissue at the top of the nasal cavity. The axonsfrom these neurons extend to the olfactory integration area ofthe brain (the olfactory bulb), whereas their dendrites end in olfactorycilia on the surface of the nasal epithelium. Aprotectivelayer of mucus covers the epithelium. Molecules from the environmentmust diffuse through this mucus to reach the receptorproteins on the olfactory cilia. When you have a cold, theamount of mucus in your nose increases, and the epitheliumswells. With this in mind, study Figure 46.4, and you will easilyunderstand why respiratory infections can cause you to loseyour sense of smell.Humans have a sensitive olfactory system, but we are unusualamong mammals in that we depend more on vision than on olfaction.A typical dog’s nasal epithelium is 15 to 20 times largerthan a human’s and has around 1 billion receptors, comparedwith around 20 million in humans. For some scents, the thresholdsensitivity of the dog is 100 million times lower. Adog’s nosereveals a huge amount of information not available to us.An odorant is a molecule that activates an olfactory receptorprotein. Odorants bind to receptor proteins on the olfactory ciliaof the olfactory neurons. Olfactory receptor proteins are specificfor particular odorant molecules. When an odorant moleculebinds to its receptor on an olfactory neuron, it activates a G protein.The G protein in turn activates an enzyme that causes anincrease of a second messenger (cAMP in vertebrates) in the cytoplasm(see Figure 7.19). The second messenger binds to cationchannels in the sensory cell’s plasma membrane and opensthem, causing an influx of Na+. The sensory neuron depolarizesto threshold and fires action potentials.The olfactory world has an enormous number of odors, andaccordingly, there are a large number of olfactory receptor proteins.In the 1990s, Linda Buck and Richard Axel discovered inmice a family of about 1,000 genes (about 3 percent of thegenome) that code for olfactory receptor proteins. Humans haveabout one-third that number of functional olfactory receptorgenes. Each receptor protein that is expressed is found in a limitednumber of receptor cells in the olfactory epithelium, andeach cell expresses just one receptor type. Using a combinationof patch clamping (see Figure 45.8) and molecular techniques,the investigators were able to match specific gene prod-968 CHAPTER 46 | SENSORY SYSTEMS(A) (B)A male moth detectsthis pheromone in theair passing over hisantennae, which arecovered with chemosensitivehairs.The female moth releasesa pheromone from a glandat the tip of her abdomen.The pheromone can travelthousands of metersdownwind.46.3 Some Scents Travel Great Distances Mating in silkwormmoths of the genus Bombyx is coordinated by a pheromone calledbombykol.Olfactory cilia havereceptors that bind specificodorant molecules.1Neurons in a glomerulusreceive input only fromreceptor cells expressingthe same receptor gene.3Action potentialsgenerated by odorantbinding are transmittedto glomeruli in theolfactory bulb.2Nasal cavityOlfactory bulbOdorantmoleculesBasal cellOlfactory receptor cellDendriteSupporting cellConnective tissueBoneGlomeruli Olfactory bulbMucus filmOdorant moleculesNasalcavityucts with the odorants they detect. For their discoveriesof the molecular nature of the olfactory system, Buck andAxel received the Nobel prize in 2004.Olfactory sensitivity enables discrimination of manymore odorants than there are olfactory receptors. An odorantmolecule can be quite complex, and different regionsof that molecule may bind to different receptor proteins.The next stage of processing olfactory information is in the olfactorybulb, where axons from neurons expressing the same receptorprotein cluster together on olfactory bulb neurons, formingstructures called glomeruli (see Figure 46.4). Therefore, a complexodorant molecule can activate a unique combination of glomeruliin the olfactory bulb, so an olfactory system with hundreds of differentreceptor proteins can discriminate an astronomically largenumber of smells. How does the olfactory receptor cell signal theintensity of a smell? The more odorant molecules that bind to receptors,the greater the frequency of action potentials and thegreater the intensity of the perceived smell.In vertebrates, odorants and other chemoreceptor moleculescan stimulate strong responses. Many vertebrate species haveseparate olfactory epithelia that are dedicated to the detectionof pheromones.The vomeronasal organ contains chemoreceptorsThe vomeronasal organ (VNO) is a small, paired tubular structureembedded in the nasal epithelium of amphibians, reptiles,and many mammals (although probably not humans). In mammals,the VNO is located on the septum dividing the two nostrils(see Figure 53.5).The vomeronasal organ has a pore that opens into the nasalcavity. When the animal sniffs, the VNO pulsates and draws asample of nasal fluid over the chemoreceptors embedded inits walls. The information from these chemoreceptors goes toan accessory olfactory bulb in the brain, and information fromthere goes to brain regions involved in sexual and other instinctivebehaviors.In snakes, the VNO opens into the roof of the mouth cavity.Each time the snake’s forked tongue darts in and out, the forksfit into the VNO openings and present the chemoreceptors locatedthere with a sample of molecules from the surroundingair (see the chapter-opening photo). Thus the snake uses itstongue to smell its environment, not to taste it. Why doesn’t thesnake simply use the flow of air to and from its lungs, as we do,to smell the environment? In reptiles, air flows to and from thelungs slowly (and can even stop entirely for long periods oftime), but the tongue can dart in and out many times in a second.It is a quick source of olfactory information.Studies on mice have led to the hypothesis that the mammalianVNO is a specialized olfactory organ that detectspheromones. Lawrence Katz and his colleagues at Duke Universityrecorded the activity of neurons in the mouse accessoryolfactory bulb, which receives input from chemosensors in theVNO. These accessory olfactory neurons were activated whena mouse attached to recording electrodes sniffed another mouseplaced in the same cage. However, the neurons fired differentially,depending on the gender and strain of the “intruder”mouse. Other studies on mouse behavior have supported a rolefor the VNO in gender identification and sexual behaviors thatare linked to pheromone perception (see Section 53.2).Gustation is the sense of tasteThe sense of taste, or gustation, in humans and other vertebratesdepends on clusters of chemoreceptors called taste buds. Thetaste buds of terrestrial vertebrates are confined to the mouthcavity, but some fishes have taste buds in the skin that enhancetheir ability to sense their environment. Some fishes living inmurky water are very sensitive to small amounts of amino acidsin the water around them and can find food without the use ofvision. The duck-billed platypus, a prototherian mammal (seeFigure 33.24), has similar talents as a result of taste buds onthe sensitive skin of its bill.A human tongue has approximately 10,000 taste buds. Thetaste buds are embedded in the epithelium, and most are foundon the papillae (Figure 46.5). (Look at your tongue in a mirror—the papillae make it look fuzzy.) Each papilla has many taste46.4 Olfactory Receptors Communicate Directly with theBrain The receptor cells of the human olfactory system areembedded in epithelial tissues lining the nasal cavity and sendtheir axons to the olfactory bulb of the brain.buds, mostly on the sides. The outer surface of a taste bud hasa pore that exposes the tips of the sensory receptor cells. Microvilli(tiny hairlike projections) increase the surface area ofthese cells where their tips converge at the pore. These sensorycells generate action potentials and release neurotransmitter attheir bases, where they form synapses with sensory neuronsthat convey the signals into the central nervous system.The tongue does a lot of hard work, so its epithelium, alongwith cells of its taste buds, are shed and replaced at a rapid rate.Individual taste bud cells last about 10 days before they are replaced,but the sensory neurons associated with them live on,always forming new synapses as new taste buds form.You may have heard that humans can perceive only fourtastes: sweet, salty, sour, and bitter. However, taste buds can distinguishamong a variety of sweet-tasting molecules and a varietyof bitter-tasting molecules. Recently, small families of genesfor receptor proteins responding to sweet and bitter tastes havebeen discovered. In addition, we now recognize a fifth taste,umami, which is a savory, meaty taste that originates from receptorsfor amino acids, including monosodium glutamate(MSG). The full complexity of the chemosensitivity that enablesus to enjoy the subtle flavors of food comes from the combinedactivation of gustatory and olfactory receptors, which is whyyou lose much of your sense of taste when you have a cold.Gustation begins with receptor proteins in the membranesof the microvilli of the taste bud sensory cells (see Figure 46.5).The nature of these proteins and the mechanisms by which theydepolarize the sensory receptor cell differ for the different basictastes. Saltiness receptors are ionotropic and simply respondto Na+ diffusing through open Na+ channels depolarizing thesensory cell. Sourness receptors are also probably ionotropic.Depolarization of these receptors is similarly due to a directeffect of H+ ions on Na+ channels. In contrast, sweetness andbitterness involve families of receptor proteins similar to thoseinvolved in olfaction, and they are metabotropic. The bitter tasteprobably evolved as a protective mechanism enabling animalsto detect and avoid toxic plant compounds such as quinine, caffeine,and nicotine. Since plants have evolved many such moleculesto repel herbivorous predators, a variety of receptors isessential. Similarly, a large number of molecules in food couldindicate nutritional value, so a variety of receptors is of value.The diversity of sweet receptors helps explain why it has beenpossible to invent many different artificial sweeteners.Regardless of the mechanism of taste transduction by thesensory cells of the taste buds, all these cells release neurotransmitteronto sensory neurons. These neurons then conduct thatinformation to the CNS, where it is interpreted as specific tastesensations.46.2 RECAPAll animals receive information about chemical stimulithrough chemoreceptors, which have diversestructures and bind to a tremendous variety of stimulusmolecules. Chemoreceptors are the basis of thesensations of olfaction and gustation and the receptionof pheromones. They also monitor some aspectsof an animal’s internal environment.• Why are we able to distinguish so many differentsmells? Why do some people and some animalsexperience more or different odors than others?See pp. 968–969 and Figure 46.4• Describe how different substances in food aretransduced into action potentials in taste buds.See pp. 969–970 and Figure 46.5How Do Sensory Systems Detect 46.3 Mechanical Forces?Let’s turn now to mechanoreceptors, the sensory cells that respondto mechanical forces. Physical distortion of a mechanoreceptor’splasma membrane causes ion channels to open, alteringthe membrane potential of the cell to create a gradedpotential, which in turn leads to the release of neurotransmitteror the generation of action potentials. The rate of action potentialstells the CNS the strength of the stimulus to the mechanoreceptor.A considerable diversity of mechanosensory cells andmechanisms has evolved. Involved in many sensory systems,their functions range from interpreting skin sensations to sensingblood pressure to hearing and maintaining balance.Many different cells respond to touch and pressureHuman skin (and that of other mammals) is packed with diversemechanoreceptors that generate varied sensations (Figure46.6). The most important tactile receptors, found in bothhairy and nonhairy skin, are Merkel’s discs, which adapt rather970 CHAPTER 46 | SENSORY SYSTEMS1 Molecules bind to receptorson the microvilli of sensory cells.2 Sensory cells release neurotransmitters thatdepolarize the dendrites of sensory neurons.Taste budsensory cellMicrovilli Taste porePapillaSupportingcell DendriteSensoryneuronAxon to centralnervous system46.5 Taste Buds Are Clusters of Sensory CellsA human tongue has approximately 10,000 tastebuds, most of which are found on the papillae.1 Muscle spindles are stretchreceptors. When musclespindles are stretched…1 Golgi tendon organs sense load andmeasure the force of muscle contraction.When contraction becomes too forceful…2 …sensory neurons associated with themtransmit action potentials to the CNS.These signals stimulate motor neuronsthat initiate muscle contraction.2 …the sensory neuronssend action potentialsto the CNS that inhibitmotor neurons, andthe muscle relaxes.TendonMuscleTimeStretchTimeTendonLoadLoad on muscleMuscleGolgitendonorganMusclespindleSensoryneuronSensory neuronMuscle(A) Muscle spindles(B) Golgi tendon organsFiring ofsensory neuronFiring ofsensory neuronslowly and provide continuous information about things touchingthe skin. Meissner’s corpuscles, found primarily in nonhairyskin, are very sensitive but adapt rapidly, so they provide informationabout changes in things touching the skin. The rapidadaptation of Meissner’s corpuscles is why you roll a small objectbetween your fingers (rather than holding it still) to discernits shape and texture: as you roll it, the object continues to stimulateMeissner’s corpuscles.Two other kinds of mechanoreceptors are found deeper inthe skin. Ruffini endings adapt slowly and are good at providinginformation about vibrating stimuli of low frequencies.Pacinian corpuscles, which adapt rapidly, provide informationabout vibrating stimuli of higher frequencies. Evendeeper in the skin, dendrites of sensory neurons wraparound hair follicles. When the surface hairs aredisplaced, those neurons are stimulated.Atwo-point spatial discrimination test reveals that the densityof tactile mechanoreceptor cells varies across the body’s surface.By touching someone’s skin with two toothpicks simultaneously,you can determine how far apart two stimuli have to bebefore the person can tell whether the sensations are producedby one toothpick or by two. On the back, the stimuli have tobe relatively far apart before they are perceived as two discretestimuli. But when the same test is applied to the person’slips or fingertips, the person can identify as separate two stimulithat are quite close together, meaning receptor density ismuch greater in these regions.Mechanoreceptors are found in muscles, tendons,and ligamentsAn animal receives information from mechanoreceptors aboutthe position of its limbs and the stresses on its muscles andjoints. These mechanoreceptors supply information continuouslyto the CNS, and this information is essential for posturalcontrol and the coordination of movements.The mechanoreceptors found in skeletal muscle are calledmuscle spindles. These are stretch receptors, modified muscle cellsthat are embedded in connective tissue in muscles and innervatedby sensory neurons (Figure 46.7). Whenever the muscleis stretched, muscle spindles are also stretched, and the neuronsMeissner’scorpuscleSensitive touch,rapidlyadaptingRuffiniendingTouch, pressure,slowly adaptingMerkel’sdiscsTouch,slowlyadaptingFree nerveendingsPain, itch,temperatureEpidermisDermisSweatglandPacinian corpusclePressure, rapidly adaptingNerves46.6 The Skin Feels Many Sensations Even a very small patch ofskin contains a variety of sensory cells, making the skin a multi-modal receptorthat can sense temperature, pressure, texture, pain, touch, and itch.46.7 Stretch Receptors Stretch receptors provide information about thestresses on muscles and joints in an animal’s limbs. (A) Signals from musclespindles to the CNS initiate muscle contraction. (B) Golgi tendon organs in tendonsand ligaments inhibit a contraction that becomes too forceful, triggering areduction in muscle tension and protecting the muscle from tearing.46.3 | HOW DO SENSORY SYSTEMS DETECT MECHANICAL FORCES? 971(A)(C)(B)(D)Sound waves travel through theauditory canal and vibrate thetympanic membrane.1Vibrations at oval window createpressure waves in fluid-filledcochlear canals.The ossicles transmit vibrations of 3the tympanic membrane to theoval window of the cochlea.2Pressure waves flexmembranes incochlear canals.4When basilar membrane isflexed, it bends stereocilia onhair cells in the organ of Corti.5The movements of stereocilia aretransduced into action potentialsin the auditory nerve.6PinnaAuditorycanalTympanicmembrane(“eardrum”)Oval window(under stapes)RoundwindowEustachiantubeCochleaAuditorynerveSemicircularcanal of thevestibularsystemStapesOssicles IncusMalleusOuterearMiddleearInnerearVestibular canalTympaniccanalBasilar membraneTectorialmembraneHair cellOrganof CortiAuditorynerveCross sectionof cochleaMiddle canalReissner’smembraneAuditory nerveStereociliatransmit action potentials to the central nervous system. TheCNS uses this information to adjust the strength of the musclecontraction to match the load put on the muscle. Thus a bartendercan hold a beer mug in the same position as he fills it fromthe tap, as seen in Figure 46.7A. In Figure 46.2, we saw how crayfishstretch receptors transduce physical force into action potentials.The actions of muscle spindles are similar.Another type of mechanoreceptor, the Golgi tendon organ, isfound in tendons and ligaments and provides informationabout the force generated by a contracting muscle (see Figure46.7B). When a contraction becomes too forceful, action potentialsfrom the Golgi tendon organ inhibit the spinal cord motorneurons innervating that muscle, causing it to relax and protectingit from tearing. (You may recall a cell organelle called theGolgi apparatus. What these two cellular structures have incommon is their discovery by the Italian anatomist CamilloGolgi, who received a Nobel prize in 1906.)Auditory systems use hair cells to sense sound wavesThe stimuli that animals perceive as sounds are pressure waves.Auditory systems use mechanoreceptors to convert pressurewaves into receptor potentials. Auditory systems include specialstructures that gather sound waves, direct them to the sensoryorgan, and amplify their effect on the mechanoreceptors.Human hearing provides a good example of an auditory system.The organs of hearing are the ears. The two prominent structureson the sides of our heads are the pinnae. The pinna of an earcollects sound waves and directs them into the auditory canal,which leads to the actual hearing apparatus in the middle earand the inner ear (Figure 46.8A). If you have ever watched a cator dog change the orientation of its ears to focus on a particularsound, then you have witnessed the role of pinnae in hearing.972 CHAPTER 46 | SENSORY SYSTEMS46.8 Structures of the Human Ear (A) The pinnae direct sound wavesdown the auditory canal to impinge on the tympanic membrane. The tympanicmembrane mechanically transmits these pressure waves into movementsof the ossicles in the middle ear. (B) The ossicles transmit their movementinto pressure waves in the fluid of the cochlea at the oval window.(C) The cochlea is divided into fluid-filled chambers; pressure waves from theossicles cause the membranes between the chambers to flex. (D) Flexing ofthe basilar membrane bends stereocilia on hair cells in the organ of Corti.GO TO Web Activity 46.1 • Structures of the Human EaryourBioPortal.comThe eardrum, or tympanic membrane, covers the end of theauditory canal. The tympanic membrane vibrates in responseto pressure waves traveling down the auditory canal. The middleear, an air-filled cavity, lies on the other side of the tympanicmembrane.MIDDLE EAR The middle ear is open to the throat at the backof the mouth through the eustachian tube. Because the eustachiantube is also filled with air, pressure equilibrates between themiddle ear and the outside world. When you have a cold orallergy, the tube can become blocked by mucus or by tissueswelling, so you have difficulty “clearing your ears,” or equilibratingthe pressure in the middle ear with the outside air pressure,which you have to do when ascending or descending ina plane or when scuba diving.The middle ear contains three delicate bones called the ossicles,individually named the malleus (Latin, “hammer”), incus(“anvil”), and stapes (“stirrup”) (Figure 46.8B). The ossiclestransmit the vibrations of the tympanic membrane to anotherflexible membrane called the oval window. The ossicles act as alever—like a hammer pulling out a nail—translating a largemovement of the tympanic membrane into a smaller movementof the oval window, but a movement of greater force. Also, becausethe oval window is much smaller than the tympanicmembrane, the pressure the stapes transmits to the oval windowis more than 20 times greater than the pressure exertedby the sound wave on the tympanic membrane. Behind the ovalwindow lies the fluid-filled inner ear. Movements of the ovalwindow impart pressure changes to that enclosed fluid. Thesepressure waves are transduced into action potentials. To seehow, let’s take a closer look at the inner ear.INNER EAR The inner ear is a bony structure consisting of twosets of canals. One is the organ of balance, the vestibular system,and the other is the organ of hearing, the cochlea. Thecochlea (Latin and Greek, “snail” or “spiral shell”) is a long,tapered, coiled canal. Across section of the cochlea reveals thatit is composed of three parallel canals separated by two membranes:Reissner’s membrane and the basilar membrane (Figure46.8C). Sitting on the basilar membrane is the organ of Corti,which transduces pressure waves into action potentials. The organof Corti contains hair cells with stereocilia. The tips of the haircells are embedded in a gelatinous overhanging shelf called thetectorial membrane (Figure 46.8D).Stereocilia are fingerlike extensions of the cell plasma membranethat are stiffened by cross-linked actin filaments. They arenot motile, but because their tips are attached to the more rigidtectorial membrane, stereocilia bend when the basilar membraneflexes. The response of the hair cell is a graded membranepotential. The hair cells do not fire action potentials, but thechanges in their membrane potential alter the rate at whichthe hair cells release neurotransmitter onto sensory neuronswhose axons make up the auditory nerve and transmit actionpotentials to the brain.What causes the basilar membrane to flex, and how does thismechanism distinguish sounds of different frequencies? In Figure46.9, the cochlea is shown uncoiled to make it easier to understandits structure and function. The upper and lower canalsseparated by the basilar membrane are joined at the distal endof the cochlea (the end farthest from the oval window), makingone continuous canal that turns back on itself. Just as the ovalwindow is a flexible membrane at the beginning of the uppercanal of the cochlea, the round window is a flexible membraneat the end of the lower canal.Air is highly compressible but fluids are not. Therefore, apressure wave can travel through air without much displacementof the air, whereas a pressure wave in fluid displaces that46.3 | HOW DO SENSORY SYSTEMS DETECT MECHANICAL FORCES? 973Low pitch: Pressure wavestravel far down the upper canaland flex the basilar membrane,activating action potentials inlow-frequency sensors.Medium pitch: Pressurewaves travel only part of theway down the upper canalbefore flexing the basilarmembrane and activatingmid-frequency sensors.High pitch: Pressure wavestravel a short distance beforeflexing the basilar membraneand activating high-frequencysensors.RoundwindowOval window(under stapes)Vibrations fromthe tympanicmembraneAuditorynerve fibersPressure wavesUppercanalLowercanalBasilarmembrane400 Hz3,000 Hz22,000 HzHypotheticaluncoiling ofcochlea46.9 Sensing Pressure Waves in the Inner Ear Pressure wavesof different frequencies flex the basilar membrane at different locations.Information about sound frequency is specified by which hair cells areactivated. For simplicity, this representation illustrates the cochlea asuncoiled, and leaves out the middle ear.GO TO Animated Tutorial 46.1 • Sound Transductionin the Human EaryourBioPortal.comfluid. When the stapes pushes on the oval window, the fluidin the upper canal of the cochlea is displaced. If this movementof the oval window occurs slowly, the cochlear fluid pressurewave travels down the upper canal, around the bend, andback through the lower canal. At the end of the lower canal, thedisplacement pressure is dissipated by the outward bulging ofthe round window.BASILAR MEMBRANE AND PITCH If the oval window vibrates inand out rapidly, the waves of fluid pressure create travelingwaves, or flexions, in the basilar membrane. The basilar membraneis not uniform; it is thicker and stiffer at its base and widerand thinner at its apical end. Pressure waves in the cochlearfluid have different frequencies and set up different patterns oftraveling waves. High-frequency waves cause maximal flexionat the basal end of the basilar membrane, whereas low-frequencypressure waves result in maximal flexion at its apicalend. Thus different pitches of sound flex the basilar membraneat different locations and activate different sets of hair cells. Actionpotentials stimulated by the mechanoreceptors at differentpositions along the organ of Corti travel to different regions ofthe auditory cortex along the auditory nerve.HEARING LOSS There are two general types of hearing loss, ordeafness. Conduction deafness is caused by the loss of functionof the tympanic membrane and/or the ossicles of the middleear. Repeated infections of the middle ear can cause scarringof the tympanic membrane and stiffening of the connections betweenthe ossicles. The consequence is less efficient conductionof sound waves from the tympanic membrane to the oval window.With increasing age, the ossicles stiffen, resulting in a gradualloss of the ability to hear high-frequency sounds.Nerve deafness is caused by damage to the inner ear or the auditorypathways. Acommon cause of nerve deafness is damageto the hair cells of the delicate organ of Corti by exposure to loudsounds such as jet engines, pneumatic drills, or highly amplifiedmusic. Consistent exposure to sounds above 85 decibels candamage hearing; this damage is cumulative and irreversible.Even using earphones can put you at risk for hearing loss becausethey generate high-pressure sound waves close to thetympanic membrane. Personal stereo earphones can reach 120decibels, and people commonly use them at 100 decibels (equivalentto being at a rock concert).Hair cells are sensitive to being bentHair cells are the mechanoreceptors in both the organs of hearingand equilibrium. Stereocilia project from the surface of eachhair cell like a set of organ pipes (Figure 46.10A). The bendingof stereocilia alters ion channels in the hair cell’s plasma membrane.Bending in one direction causes the plasma membraneto depolarize, and bending in the other direction causes it to hyperpolarize(Figure 46.10B). Graded potentials in the hair cellplasma membrane control its release of neurotransmitter ontothe sensory neuron associated with it, and the sensory neuronsends action potentials to the CNS.How does the bending of the stereocilia open ion channels?The ion channels that are opened are at the ends of the stereocilia.This was discovered by exploring the areas around thestereocilia with microelectrodes, and seeing that local currentswere created near the tips of the stereocilia when they were bent.Then, careful electron microscopic work revealed minute filamentsthat connected the tip of each stereocilium to its tallerneighbor. It is hypothesized that these filaments are fine molecularattachments to the ion channels in the stereocilium plasmamembrane, and they act like springs that open the channels. Ifthe taller neighboring stereocilium is bent away, the spring tightensand the ion channel is opened. If the taller neighbor bendstoward its shorter neighbor, the spring is relaxed and the channelcloses (see Figure 46.10B).974 CHAPTER 46 | SENSORY SYSTEMSIon channelsopen whenstereocilia arebent in onedirection……and closewhen they arebent in theoppositedirection.Membrane depolarizationopens voltage-gatedCa2+ channels, causingneurotransmitter release.The stereocilia projectinto the middle canal,which contains a fluidhigh in K+ and low inNa+. Thus, when K+channels open, K+enters and depolarizesthe cell.12K+Filaments linkingstereociliaStereociliaHair cellHair cellVesiclesStereocilia(A) (B)Sensory neuronsK+Ca2+Ca2++++++++++++ +++++ –––––– ––––––46.10 Hair Cells Have Mechanosensors on TheirStereocilia (A) Hair cells have stereocilia that are connectedwith each other by small filaments. (B) When acilium is bent in one direction, the filament opens amechanosensory ion channel at the tip of the neighboringcilium. The depolarized hair cell releases neurotransmitteronto a sensory neuron.Hair cells detect forces of gravity and momentumIn the mammalian inner ear, the vestibular system consists ofthree bony semicircular canals and two bony chambers calledthe saccule and the utricle. Hair cells in the vestibular system detectthe position and movement of the head—information thatis essential for maintaining balance (equilibrium). The informationfrom the vestibular system is also crucial for the control ofeye movements. When you look at something, you can moveyour head while staying focused on the object because of yourvestibulo-ocular reflex.The entire vestibular system is filled with a fluid called endolymph.In the semicircular canals, the endolymph shifts whenthe head changes position. Since the three semicircular canalshave different orientations, they respond differentially to the directionof movement. Projecting into the base of each canal is agelatinous swelling called a cupula (plural cupulae) that enclosesa cluster of hair cell stereocilia. When the shifting endolymphpushes on the cupulae, it bends the stereocilia and causes agraded potential in their hair cell plasma membranes (Figure46.11A). The stereocilia in the saccule and utricle are bent in adifferent way. These stereocilia are embedded in otoliths (Latinfor “ear stones”), gelatinous structures containing crystals ofcalcium carbonate. When the head changes position or whenit accelerates or decelerates, gravitational forces are exerted onthe otoliths and bend the stereocilia (Figure 46.11B).As in the cochlea, the hair cells of the vestibular systemdo not fire action potentials, but they release neurotransmitterat synapses with sensory neurons, which in turn fireaction potentials.Hair cells are evolutionarily conservedAn early evolutionary use of hair cells to measure movementcan be seen in the lateral line sensory system of fishes. The lateralline is a canal just under the surface of the skin that runsdown each side of the fish (Figure 46.12). Hair cells line thecanal, and their stereocilia, protected by cupulae, project intothe stream of water that flows through the lateral line canalwhen the fish moves through the water. Forward movement ofthe fish puts pressure on the cupulae, causing the stereocilia tobend in the direction that depolarizes the hair cells. Since wateris incompressible, disturbances in the water around the fishare translated into pressure waves that can be picked up bythe lateral line stereocilia. Thus, the lateral line system provides46.3 | HOW DO SENSORY SYSTEMS DETECT MECHANICAL FORCES? 975(A) In a semicircular canalOtoliths (“ear stones”) are granules of calciumcarbonate on the top surface of a gelatinoussubstance (the otholith membrane).Due to inertial mass of otholiths, when head changes position, accelerates,or decelerates, the gelatinous otholithic membrane bends hair cells.In the semicircular canals, the gelatinous cupulae of hair cellsare pushed one way or the other when changes in the positionof the head causes the fluid in the canals to shift.Direction ofbody movementForce of gravity Force of gravityDirection of body movementFlow of fluid throughsemicircular canalCupulaStereociliaSupport cellSensorynerve fibersStereociliaHair cell Sensory Support cellnerve fibersVestibuleSacculeUtricleSemicircularcanalsMacula(B) In the vestibule46.11 Organs of Equilibrium The vestibular system consists of bonychambers and fluid-filled canals. (A) Each semicircular canal has a cupulacontaining stereocilia. When fluid moves against the cupula, the stereociliabend. (B) In the saccule and utricle, stereocilia are bent by gravitationalforces on the otoliths.information about the fish’s movements as well as about othermoving objects, such as predators or prey.46.3 RECAPSensations that derive from mechanoreceptorsinclude touch, tickle, pressure, joint position, muscleload, hearing, and equilibrium.• Describe some of the different mechanoreceptorsin the skin and their properties. See pp. 970–971 andFigure 46.6• How do different frequencies of sound result in actionpotentials being fired in different acoustic neurons?See pp. 972–973 and Figures 46.8 and 46.9• How do hair cells transduce force into actionpotentials? See p. 974 and Figure 46.10Chemoreception gave us good examples of metabotropic sensoryreceptors, and mechanoreception has given us good examplesof ionotropic sensory receptors. Now let’s turn to anotherexample of metabotropic sensory reception—one in which lightis the stimulus. We will see how light energy is converted intoaction potentials.How Do Sensory Systems 46.4 Detect Light?Sensitivity to light—photosensitivity—confers on the simplestanimals the ability to orient to the sun and sky and gives morecomplex animals rapid and extremely detailed informationabout objects in their environment. It is not surprising that bothsimple and complex animals can sense and respond to light.What is remarkable is that across the entire range of animalspecies, evolution has conserved the same basis for photosensitivity:a family of pigments called rhodopsins.In this section we will learn how rhodopsin molecules respondwhen stimulated by light energy and how that responseis transduced into neural signals. We will also examine the structuresof eyes, the organs that gather light energy and focus itonto photoreceptor cells, the metabotropic sensory receptorsthat transform light energy into action potentials, and the routesthose impulses travel to the brain.Rhodopsins are responsible for photosensitivityPhotosensitivity depends on the ability of rhodopsins to absorbphotons of light and to undergo a change in conformation. Arhodopsin molecule consists of a protein, opsin (which alone isnot photosensitive), and an associated nonprotein light-absorbinggroup, 11-cis-retinal, cradled in the center of the opsin andbound covalently to it. The entire rhodopsin molecule sits withinthe plasma membrane of a photoreceptor cell.When 11-cis-retinal absorbs a photon of light energy, itchanges into a different isomer of retinal, called all-trans-retinal.This change puts a strain on the bonds between retinal andopsin, changing the conformation of opsin. This change signalsthe detection of light. In vertebrate eyes, the retinal and theopsin eventually separate from each other—a process calledbleaching, which causes the molecule to lose its photosensitivity.Aseries of enzymatic reactions is then required to return theall-trans-retinal to the 11-cis isomer, which then recombines withopsin so that it once again becomes the photosensitive pigmentrhodopsin (Figure 46.13).How does the conformational change of rhodopsin transducelight into a cellular response? After retinal is convertedfrom the 11-cis to the all-trans form, its interactions with opsinpass through several unstable intermediate stages. One of thesestages triggers a cascade of reactions involving a G protein signalingmechanism that results in the alteration of membranepotential that is the photoreceptor cell’s response to light.Rod cells respond to lightTo get a better idea of how rhodopsin alters the membrane potentialof a photoreceptor cell and how that photoreceptor cellsignals that it has been stimulated by light, let’s look at one typeof vertebrate photoreceptor cell, the rod cell. The rod cell, namedfor its shape, is a modified neuron that does not produce actionpotentials. Rod cells release neurotransmitter from their bases976 CHAPTER 46 | SENSORY SYSTEMSA lateral line canal lies justbelow the skin surface.1Stereocilia on hair cells inthe cupula bend, creatinga signal that causesdepolarization of thedendrites of associatedneurons.3Structures calledcupulae project into thecanal. As the fish movesthrough the water, fluidin the canal pushesagainst the cupulae.2Lateralline canalLateral lineorganCupulaHair cellsDendriteLateral linenerveScaleDirection of water flowWater flowStereocilia46.12 The Lateral Line Acoustic System ContainsMechanosensors Hair cells in the lateral line of a fish detect movementof the water around the animal, giving the fish information about itsown movements and the movements of objects nearby.GO TO Animated Tutorial 46.2 • PhotosensitivityyourBioPortal.comwhere they form synapses with the next neurons in the visualpathway (Figure 46.14). Each rod cell has an outer segment,an inner segment, and a synaptic terminal. The outer segmentis highly specialized and contains a stack of discs of plasmamembrane densely packed with rhodopsin. The function of thediscs is to capture photons of light passing through the rod cell.The inner segment contains the cell nucleus, mitochondria, andother organelles. The synaptic terminal is where the rod cellcommunicates with other neurons.To see how a rod cell responds to light, we can penetrate asingle rod cell with an electrode and record its membrane potentialin the dark and in the light. From what we have learned aboutother types of sensory receptors, we might expect stimulation ofthe rod cell by light would make its membrane potential less negative.But the opposite is true—it becomes more negative.When a rod cell is kept in the dark, it has a relatively depolarizedresting potential compared with other neurons. In fact,the plasma membrane of the rod cell is almost as permeable toNa+ as to K+. In the dark, Na+ continually enters the outer segmentof the cell—the dark current. When light is flashed on thedark-adapted rod cell, its membrane potential becomes morenegative—it hyperpolarizes (see Figure 46.14). The rate of neu-46.4 | HOW DO SENSORY SYSTEMS DETECT LIGHT? 977aGTPb agbgGDPGTP11-cis-retinalis sensitive tolight…1...and when it absorbs a photon itbecomes all-trans-retinal. Afterpassing through unstable intermediates,all-trans-retinal activates a G proteincascade that results in a change inmembrane potential.2When all-trans-retinalreturns to 11-cisconformation, it isphotoresponsive again.311-cis-retinalAll-trans-retinal11121112LightPlasmamembrane Opsin11-cis-retinal covalentlybound to proteinActivatedtransducinTransducin(G protein)46.13 Light Changes the Conformation of Rhodopsin The lightabsorbingmolecule 11-cis-retinal bonds with the protein opsin to formthe pigment rhodopsin, the molecular agent of photosensitivity.HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODThe membrane potential of rod cells isdepolarized in the dark and hyperpolarizes(becomes more negative) in response to light.46.14 A Rod Cell Responds to LightThe plasma membrane of a rod cell hyperpolarizes—becomesmore negative—in response to a flash of light. Rod cells donot fire action potentials, but in response to the absorptionof light energy, the neuron experiences a change inmembrane potential.When a rod cell absorbs photons (light energy),its membrane potential changes in proportion tothe strength of the light stimulus.RESULTSGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.INVESTIGATING LIFEThe membranepotential controlsthe amount ofneurotransmitterreleased.OutersegmentInnersegmentNucleusRecordingLightAmplifierSynaptic terminal(synapse withbipolar cell)1. Record membrane potentials from the inner segmentof a rod cell.2. Stimulate the rod cells with light flashes of varyingintensity and record the results.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: How would you investigate the effect ofbackground illumination on the rod cell’sresponse to light?A bright light stimulus resultsin a strong hyperpolarization.A dim light stimulus results ina slight hyperpolarization.–35–45–55Membrane potential (mV)Light flashMediumlightTimerotransmitter release changes as membrane potential changes.As the rod cell hyperpolarizes, its release of neurotransmitterdecreases.How does the absorption of light by rhodopsin hyperpolarizethe rod cell? When rhodopsin is excited by light, it initiatesa cascade of events. The dark-adapted rod cell has open Na+channels, allowing a depolarizing dark current (Figure 46.15A).Light photoexcites rhodopsin, which activates a G protein calledtransducin. Activated transducin in turn activates a phosphodiesterase(PDE) (Figure 46.15B). Activated PDE converts cyclicGMP (cGMP) to GMP, which causes the Na+ channels to close.Na+ is pumped out and the cell hyperpolarizes (Figure 46.15C).This mechanism may seem like a roundabout way of doingbusiness, but its advantage is its enormous amplification ability.Each molecule of photoexcited rhodopsin can activate severalhundred transducin molecules, thus activating a large numberof PDE molecules. The catalytic capacity of PDE is great: onemolecule can hydrolyze several hundred molecules of cGMPper second. The bottom line is that a single photon of light cancause a huge number of Na+ channels to close.Invertebrates have a variety of visual systemsPhotoreceptors using rhodopsin are incorporated into a varietyof visual systems, from simple to complex. Flatworms obtaindirectional information about light from photoreceptor cells thatare organized into eye cups. The eye cups are paired bilateralstructures, each partly shielded from light by a layer of pigmentedcells lining the cup. The photoreceptors on the two sidesof the animal are unequally stimulated unless the animal is facingdirectly toward or away from a light source. The flatwormgenerally uses directional information from the eye cups tomove away from light.Arthropods have compound eyes that provide them with informationabout patterns or images in the environment. Theseeyes are called compound because each eye consists of many opticalunits called ommatidia (singular ommatidium), each with itsown narrow-angle lens (Figure 46.16). In contrast, a vertebrate eyeconsists of just one optical unit with a wide-angle lens. The numberof ommatidia in a compound eye varies from only a few insome ants, to 800 in fruit flies, to 30,000 in some dragonflies.Each ommatidium has a lens structure that directs light ontophotoreceptor cells. Flies, for example, have eight elongatedphotoreceptors in each ommatidium. The inner borders of thephotoreceptors are covered with microvilli that containrhodopsin and trap light. Axons from the photoreceptors sendthe light information to the nervous system. Since each ommatidiumof a compound eye is directed at a slightly different partof the visual world, only a low-resolution or pixillated imagecan be communicated from the compound eye to the CNS.978 CHAPTER 46 | SENSORY SYSTEMS1 In the absence oflight, Na+ channels areopen and create adepolarizing dark current.3 …causing a G protein, transducin,to exchange GTP for GDP.2 Rhodopsin absorbslight energy…4 Activated PDE hydrolyzes cGMP, causing Na+channels to close. The cell hyperpolarizes.Phosphodiesterase(PDE)GTPcGMPcGMPcGMPcGMPcGMPDiscmembraneGTPLightDark response Light responseGTP LightGDPCytoplasm ofrod cellOuter segmentmembraneOutside ofrod cellDisc Rod cellNa+cGMP cGMPGMP(A) (B) (C)Channelclosed46.15 Light Absorption Closes Sodium Channels The absorption oflight by rhodopsin initiates a signaling cascade that hyperpolarizes the rodcell. In the dark, Na+ channels in the plasma membrane of the rod cell’souter segment are held open by cGMP, allowing positive charges to enterthe cell (panel A, upper right). When the rod cell is stimulated by light, itactivates transducin (lower portion of panel A). (B) Transducin activates amolecule of phosphodiesterase (PDE). (C) Activated PDE catalyzes thebreakdown of cGMP to GMP. The depletion of cGMP results in closure ofthe Na+ channels and hyperpolarization of the cell.Image-forming eyes evolved independently invertebrates and cephalopodsBoth vertebrates and cephalopod mollusks have image-formingeyes—eyes with exceptional abilities to form detailed images ofthe visual world. Like cameras, both these eye types focus invertedimages on an internal surface that is sensitive to light.Considering that they evolved independently, their degree ofsimilarity is remarkable (Figure 46.17).The vertebrate eye is a spherical, fluid-filled structurebounded by a tough connective tissue layer called the sclera. Atthe front of the eye, the sclera forms the transparent cornea,through which light passes to enter the eye. Just inside thecornea is the pigmented iris, which gives the eye its color. Theiris controls the amount of light that reaches thephotoreceptor cells at the back of the eye, justas the diaphragm of a camera controls theamount of light reaching the film. The centralopening of the iris is the pupil. The iris is underneural control. In bright light, the iris constrictsand the pupil is very small. As light levels fall,the iris relaxes and the pupil enlarges.Behind the iris is the crystalline protein lens, which makesfine adjustments in the focus of images falling on the photosensitivelayer—the retina—at the back of the eye. The cornea andthe fluids within the eye bend light rays passing through themso that they are focused on the retina. The lens makes fine adjustmentsto the focus and allows the eye to accommodate—thatis, to focus on objects at various locations in the near visual field.To focus a camera on objects close at hand, you adjust the distancebetween the lens and the internal surface sensitive to light.Fishes, amphibians, and reptiles accommodate in a similar manner,moving the lenses of their eyes closer to or farther from their46.4 | HOW DO SENSORY SYSTEMS DETECT LIGHT? 979The compound eyes of afruit fly each containhundreds of ommatidia.(A) (B) Corneal lensLightCrystallineconePigment cell OmmatidiumBundle of axonsto brainBasementmembranePhotoreceptor(retinula cell)46.16 Ommatidia: The Functional Units of InsectEyes (A) The micrograph shows the compound eyeof a fruit fly. (B) The rhodopsin-containing retinula cellsare the photoreceptors in ommatidia.The eye of the octopus is very similarin structure to the vertebrate eye, butit evolved independently—an exampleof convergent evolution.LensIris(B) OctopusOptic nerveDouble layer ofreceptor cellsCorneaLensIrisFoveaOptic nerveCiliary muscleSuspensoryligamentsRetinaRetinaVitreous humor(A) HumanPupilCorneaScleraCentral artery (red)and vein (blue)Pigment layer46.17 Convergent Evolution of Eyes The lenses of vertebrate (A)and cephalopod (B) eyes focus images on layers of photoreceptor cells.GO TO Web Activity 46.2 • Structure of the Human EyeyourBioPortal.comretinas. Mammals and birds use a different method: they alterthe shape of the lens.The mammalian lens is contained in a connective tissuesheath that tends to keep it in a spherical shape, but it is attachedto suspensory ligaments that pull it into a flatter shape. Circularciliary muscles counteract the pull of the suspensory ligaments,permitting the lens to round up. When the ciliary musclesare at rest, the flatter lens has the correct optical propertiesto focus distant images on the retina. Contracting the ciliarymuscles rounds up the lens, changing its light-bending propertiesto bring close images into focus (Figure 46.18).Lenses become less elastic with age, so we lose the ability tofocus on objects close at hand without the help of correctivelenses. Most people over the age of 45 need the assistance ofreading glasses or bifocal lenses.The vertebrate retina receives and processesvisual informationDuring embryonic development, neural tissue grows out fromthe brain to form the retina. In addition to a layer of photoreceptorcells, the retina includes four additional layers of cellsthat process visual information from the photoreceptors. Lightmust pass through all the layers of retinal cells before being capturedby rhodopsin. In humans and other day-active animals,the light that is not captured by rhodopsin is absorbed by ablack pigment in a layer of epithelial cells behind the retina. Incontrast, nocturnal animals such as deer and raccoons have awhite reflective layer behind their retinas that maximize the captureof photons by reflecting them back onto the photoreceptors.Therefore, a deer in the headlights appears to have brightwhite eyes. Since we do not have the white reflective layer inour retinas, photographic flashes produce the red eye appearanceon photos because the light is being reflected by the abundantblood vessels in the retina.The pigmented epithelium also plays a role in the renewalof the photoreceptors. The photoreceptor cells are always sheddingdiscs from their distal ends as new ones are being generatedby the inner segments of those cells.The pigmented epithelial cells phagocytosethe shed discs. Each outer segment is totallyrenewed about every two weeks.THE PHOTORECEPTORS OF THE RETINA Untilnow we have referred to only one kind ofphotoreceptor—the rod cell. The other majorclass of vertebrate photoreceptor, thecone cell, is also named for its shape (Figure46.19). Whereas rod cells are responsiblefor highly sensitive black-and-white vision,cone cells are responsible for the lesssensitive color vision. A human retina hasabout 5 million cones and about 100 millionrods, but their density is not the same acrossthe entire retina.In humans, light coming from the center of the visual fieldfalls on the fovea, where the density of cone cells is highest. Thehuman fovea has about 160,000 cones per mm2. The fovea of ahawk has almost twice that number, making the hawk’s visionmuch sharper than ours. The hawk also has two foveae in eacheye. One receives light from straight ahead, the other from amore lateral field of vision. The forward-looking foveae makebinocular vision possible, while the lateral-looking foveae providehigh-acuity vision. Birds use both sets of foveae by frequentlyturning their heads slightly; they cannot move theireyes in the sockets as humans can.Cones have low sensitivity to light and contribute little tonight vision. Night vision depends mostly on rod cells, andtherefore vision in dim light is mostly in shades of gray and acuityis low. You may have trouble seeing a small object such as akeyhole at night when you are looking straight at it—that is,when its image is falling on your fovea. If you look a little to theside, so that the image falls on a rod-rich area of your retina, you980 CHAPTER 46 | SENSORY SYSTEMSFor distant vision, ciliary musclesrelax and suspensory ligamentspull the lens into a flatter shape.For near vision, ciliarymuscles contract, causingthe lens to round up.The lens of the mammalianeye focuses an inverted imageon the fovea of the retina.Fovea46.18 Staying in FocusMammals and birds focustheir eyes by changing theshape of the lens dependingon the eye’s distance fromthe object of focus.Rod cells Cone cells46.19 Rods and Cones This scanning electron micrograph of photoreceptorsin the retina of a mud puppy (an amphibian) shows cylindricalrods and tapered cones.Light travels through layersof transparent neurons—ganglion, amacrine, bipolar,and horizontal cells…1 …and is absorbed by the rods andcones (the photoreceptive layer) atthe back of the retina.2Visual information isprocessed through severallayers of neurons……and finally converges on 3ganglion cells, which sendtheir axons to the brain.4Cornea Lens RetinaOpticnerveLightScleraRetinaLightTo optic nerveGanglion cells Horizontal cellAmacrinecellBipolarcellCone Rod PigmentedepitheliumPhotoreceptorsAxons of ganglion cellssee the object better (astronomers looking for faint objects in thesky learned this trick a long time ago). The retinas of nocturnalanimals, such as flying squirrels, contain a high percentage ofrods. By contrast, some animals that are active only during theday (such as chipmunks) have mostly cones in their retinas.COLOR VISION The human retina has three kinds of cone cells,each containing slightly different opsin molecules, which differin the wavelengths of light they absorb best. Although the same11-cis-retinal group is the light absorber in all three kinds ofcones (see Figure 46.13), its molecular interactions with opsindetermine the spectral sensitivity of the rhodopsin moleculeas a whole (Figure 46.20). Because different wavelengths of lightare differentially absorbed by the different visual pigments, thebrain can interpret the relative inputs from the different classesof cones as a full range of color. Some mammals have only oneor two classes of cones, whereas birds have four.Color blindness results from the absence or dysfunction ofone or more classes of cone cells. By far the most common formis red–green color blindness, which occurs in about 10 percentof men of European descent. A genetic condition that affectsa person’s perception of red and green, its inheritance issex-linked because the defective gene is on the X chromosome(see Figure 12.24).INFORMATION FLOW IN THE RETINA The human retina is organizedinto five layers of neurons (including the photoreceptorcells) that receive visual information and process it before sendingit to the brain (Figure 46.21). A first step in understandinghow the retina tells the brain what it is seeing is to study howthese layers are interconnected and how they influence one another.From our discussion of rod cells, we know that the photoreceptorcells at the back of the retina hyperpolarize in responseto light and do not generate action potentials. The cellsat the front of the retina (the cells closest to the lens) are ganglioncells. They do fire action potentials, and their axons formthe optic nerve that travels to the brain. The layers of cells betweenthe photoreceptors and the ganglion cells process informationabout the visual field.The photoreceptors and ganglion cells are connected by bipolarcells. Changes in the membrane potential of rods and conesin response to light alter the rates at which the rods and conesrelease neurotransmitter at their synapses with the bipolar cells.In response to this neurotransmitter, the membrane potentials46.4 | HOW DO SENSORY SYSTEMS DETECT LIGHT? 981400 450 500Wavelength (nm)550 600 650Relative absorbance419 531 559 nm46.20 Absorption Spectra of Cone Cells The three kinds of conecells contain slightly different opsin molecules, which absorb differentwavelengths of light.46.21 The Human Retina Five layers of neurons receiveand process visual information. The rods and cones are photoreceptors.The other four layers are the ganglion cells, thebipolar cells, the horizontal cells, and the amacrine cells, all ofwhich are involved in transmitting light signals received by thephotoreceptors to the brain.GO TO Web Activity 46.3 • Structure of the Human RetinayourBioPortal.comof the bipolar cells change, altering the rate at which they releaseneurotransmitter onto ganglion cells. The rate of neurotransmitterrelease from the bipolar cells determines the rateat which the ganglion cells fire action potentials. Thus, the directflow of information in the retina is from photoreceptor tobipolar cell to ganglion cell. The ganglion cells send the informationto the brain.The other two cell layers, the horizontal cells and theamacrine cells, consist of interneurons that communicate laterallyacross the retina. Horizontal cells form synapses withneighboring photoreceptors and bipolar cells. Thus, light fallingon one photoreceptor can influence the sensitivity of its neighborsto light. This lateral flow of information enables the retinato sharpen the perception of contrast between light and darkpatterns. Amacrine cells form local interconnections betweenbipolar cells and ganglion cells. Some amacrine cell types arehighly sensitive to changing illumination or to motion. Othersassist in adjusting the sensitivity of the eyes according to theoverall level of light falling on the retina. When backgroundlight levels change, amacrine cell connections to the ganglioncells help the ganglion cells remain sensitive to temporalchanges in stimulation. Thus, even with large changes in backgroundillumination, the eyes are sensitive to smaller, morerapid changes in the pattern of light falling on the retina.46.4 RECAPA family of photopigments called rhodopsins are responsiblefor light sensitivity in all animals. Receptorcells, including rod and cone cells in humans, transducethe photosensitivity of rhodopsins to light anduse it to form images of the environment.• Explain how a photon of light affects the membranepotential in a rod cell. See pp. 976–978 and Figures46.14 and 46.15• What is the mechanism of color vision? See p. 981 andFigure 46.20• Describe the flow of signals that occurs in the eye inresponse to light. See pp. 981–982 and Figure 46.21Knowing the path of information in the retina still does nottell us how that information is processed by the brain. Whatdoes the eye tell the brain in response to a pattern of light fallingon the retina? In Chapter 47 we will describe how the brain reassemblesthat information into our view of the world.CHAPTER SUMMARY982 CHAPTER 46 | SENSORY SYSTEMS46.1 How Do Sensory Cells Convert Stimuli into ActionPotentials?• Sensory receptor cells, also known as sensors or receptors,transduce information about an animal’s external and internalenvironment into action potentials. Some sensors do not fireaction potentials, but respond with graded membrane potentialsthat control release of neurotransmitter onto sensory neuronsthat do fire action potentials.• The interpretation of action potentials as particular sensationsdepends on which neurons in the CNS receive them.• Sensory receptor cells have membrane receptor proteins thatcause ion channels to open or close, affecting the restingpotential of the cell. Metabotropic receptors act through signaltransduction pathways to generate receptor potentials.Mechanoreceptors are ionotropic sensory receptors that openion channels physically through forces such as pressure orstretch. Review Figure 46.1• Receptor potentials initiated by a sensory cell can spread toregions of the cell’s plasma membrane that generate actionpotentials, or they can release neurotransmitter in response tochanges in membrane potential. Review Figure 46.2• Adaptation enables the nervous system to ignore irrelevant orcontinuous stimuli while remaining responsive to relevant ornew stimuli.46.2 How Do Sensory Systems Detect ChemicalStimuli?• Chemoreceptors are responsible for olfaction, gustation, andthe sensing of pheromones.• Mammalian olfactory sensors project directly to the olfactorybulb of the brain. Sensors for the same odorant project to thesame area of the olfactory bulb.• Each olfactory receptor cell expresses one receptor protein thatcan bind a specific molecule or ion. Binding causes a secondmessenger to open ion channels, which creates an actionpotential. Review Figure 46.4• In vertebrates, taste buds in the mouth cavity are responsiblefor gustation. The five basic tastes are sweet, salty, sour, bitter,and umami. Review Figure 46.546.3 How Do Sensory Systems Detect MechanicalForces?• The skin contains a variety of ionotropic mechanoreceptorsthat respond to touch and pressure. The density of mechanoreceptorsin any skin area determines the sensitivity of that area.Review Figure 46.6• Stretch receptors in muscle spindles and in the Golgi tendonorgan found in tendons and ligaments inform the CNS of thepositions of and loads on parts of the body. Review Figure 46.7• In mammalian auditory systems, ear pinnae collect and directsound waves to the tympanic membrane, which vibrates inresponse to sound waves. The movements of the tympanicmembrane are amplified through a chain of ossicles that conductthe vibrations to the oval window. Movements of the ovalwindow create pressure waves in the fluid-filled cochlea.Review Figure 46.8, WEB ACTIVITY 46.1• The basilar membrane running down the center of the cochleais distorted by pressure waves at specific locations that dependon the frequency of the wave. These distortions cause thebending of hair cells in the organ of Corti. Receptor potentialsCHAPTER SUMMARY
46.1 How Do Sensory Cells Convert Stimuli into ActionPotentials?• Sensory receptor cells, also known as sensors or receptors,transduce information about an animal’s external and internalenvironment into action potentials. Some sensors do not fireaction potentials, but respond with graded membrane potentialsthat control release of neurotransmitter onto sensory neuronsthat do fire action potentials.• The interpretation of action potentials as particular sensationsdepends on which neurons in the CNS receive them.• Sensory receptor cells have membrane receptor proteins thatcause ion channels to open or close, affecting the restingpotential of the cell. Metabotropic receptors act through signaltransduction pathways to generate receptor potentials.Mechanoreceptors are ionotropic sensory receptors that openion channels physically through forces such as pressure orstretch. Review Figure 46.1• Receptor potentials initiated by a sensory cell can spread toregions of the cell’s plasma membrane that generate actionpotentials, or they can release neurotransmitter in response tochanges in membrane potential. Review Figure 46.2• Adaptation enables the nervous system to ignore irrelevant orcontinuous stimuli while remaining responsive to relevant ornew stimuli.46.2 How Do Sensory Systems Detect ChemicalStimuli?• Chemoreceptors are responsible for olfaction, gustation, andthe sensing of pheromones.• Mammalian olfactory sensors project directly to the olfactorybulb of the brain. Sensors for the same odorant project to thesame area of the olfactory bulb.• Each olfactory receptor cell expresses one receptor protein thatcan bind a specific molecule or ion. Binding causes a secondmessenger to open ion channels, which creates an actionpotential. Review Figure 46.4• In vertebrates, taste buds in the mouth cavity are responsiblefor gustation. The five basic tastes are sweet, salty, sour, bitter,and umami. Review Figure 46.546.3 How Do Sensory Systems Detect MechanicalForces?• The skin contains a variety of ionotropic mechanoreceptorsthat respond to touch and pressure. The density of mechanoreceptorsin any skin area determines the sensitivity of that area.Review Figure 46.6• Stretch receptors in muscle spindles and in the Golgi tendonorgan found in tendons and ligaments inform the CNS of thepositions of and loads on parts of the body. Review Figure 46.7• In mammalian auditory systems, ear pinnae collect and directsound waves to the tympanic membrane, which vibrates inresponse to sound waves. The movements of the tympanicmembrane are amplified through a chain of ossicles that conductthe vibrations to the oval window. Movements of the ovalwindow create pressure waves in the fluid-filled cochlea.Review Figure 46.8, WEB ACTIVITY 46.1• The basilar membrane running down the center of the cochleais distorted by pressure waves at specific locations that dependon the frequency of the wave. These distortions cause thebending of hair cells in the organ of Corti. Receptor potentials
in hair cells cause them to release neurotransmitter, which createsaction potentials in the auditory nerve. Review Figure46.9, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 46.1• Hair cells are also mechanoreceptors. The bending of theirstereocilia alters receptor proteins and therefore their membranepotentials. Hair cells are found in the auditory organs andorgans of equilibrium such as the lateral line system of fishesand the semicircular canals and vestibular system of mammals.Review Figures 46.10, 46.11, and 46.1246.4 How Do Sensory Systems Detect Light?• Photosensitivity depends on the absorption of photons of lightby rhodopsin, a photoreceptor molecule that consists of a proteincalled opsin and a light-absorbing group called retinal.Absorption of light by retinal is the first step in a cascade ofintracellular events leading to a change in the membranepotential of the photoreceptor cell. Review Figure 46.13,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 46.2• When excited by light, vertebrate photoreceptor cells hyperpolarizeand release less neurotransmitter onto the neurons withwhich they form synapses. They do not fire action potentials.Review Figures 46.14 and 46.15• Visual systems range from the simple eye cups of flatworms,which sense the direction of a light source, to the compoundeyes of arthropods, which detect shapes and patterns, to theimage-forming eyes of vertebrates and cephalopods. ReviewFigures 46.16 and 46.17, WEB ACTIVITY 46.2• Vertebrate and cephalopod eyes focus detailed images of thevisual field onto dense arrays of photoreceptors that transducethe visual image into neural signals. Review Figure 46.18• Vertebrates have two types of photoreceptors, rod cells andcone cells. In humans, the fovea contains almost exclusivelycone cells, which are responsible for color vision but are notvery sensitive in dim light. Color vision arises from three typesof cone cells with different spectral absorption properties.Review Figures 46.19 and 46.20• The vertebrate retina consists of five layers of neurons liningthe back of the eye. The light-absorbing photoreceptor cells areat the back of the retina. Review Figure 46.21, WEB ACTIVITY46.3• The axons of the ganglion cells, in the innermost layer of theretina, are bundled together in the optic nerve. Between thephotoreceptors and the ganglion cells are neurons that processinformation from the photoreceptors.