Two of the greatest disasters of recent times occurredbecause of the mismanagement of soil resources.One was in North America in the 1930s and theother is ongoing in Haiti.Beginning in the early 1930s, a prolonged drought,combined with a culturally modified landscape, turnedthe central plains of North America into the Dust Bowl.The native vegetation in the Plains States in the nineteenthcentury was long grass in the east and short grassin the west. Cattlemen moved in to where their herdscould eat a seemingly endless supply of food. But in factthe supply wasn’t endless. As one area was overgrazed,the cattle were moved on to new areas, leaving damagedsoil in their wake. Settlers followed, “busted the sod” withplows, planted crops, and disrupted vegetation cyclesthat had persisted for centuries.In the early twentieth century, farmers in the PlainsStates began growing wheat, plowing both good andmarginal soils. But wheat requires more water than didthe native grasses, and rainfall was irregular throughoutthe 1920s. In 1932 rainfall was almost nonexistent and didnot return at adequate levels until 1939.Without water, crops failed—if they even started togrow. The U.S. plains are windy regions, and without plantroots there was nothing to hold the soil in place when thewinds blew. The farms literally blew away. Farmers spentthe last of their money on seeds, but dry year followed dryyear. Destitute farmers migrated westward, along withothers whose livelihoods had depended on the farmers.But they only encountered more difficulties, as theseevents took place during the Great Depression.Unfortunately Dust Bowl conditions are not just a thingof the past. Today many countries aroundthe world are struggling with land use issues.The consequences of poor land management,principally deforestation, are dramaticallyvisible on the Caribbean island ofHispaniola. The island is shared by thecountries of Haiti, which has mismanagedits soil resources, and the Dominican Republic,which hasn’t. From an airplane windowit is easy to see the 120-mile-long bor-When the land blew away36Dreams Disappeared in a Cloud of DustThis photograph of a family displaced by theDust Bowl was taken by Dorothea Lange in thewinter of 1936. The family had traveled tonorthern California looking for work as migrantfarm labor. In Lange’s words, “I saw andapproached the hungry and desperate mother…I did not ask her name or her history.…She said that they had been living on frozenvegetables from the surrounding fields, andbirds that the children killed. She had just soldthe tires from her car to buy food.”36.1 How Do Plants Acquire Nutrients?Every living thing—and plants are no exception—must obtainraw materials from its environment. These nutrients includethe major ingredients of macromolecules: carbon, hydrogen,oxygen, and nitrogen. Plants are autotrophs, and obtain carbonfrom atmospheric carbon dioxide through the carbon-fixingreactions of photosynthesis (see Chapter 10). Hydrogen andoxygen come mainly from water, so these elements are plentifulwith an adequate water supply. Nitrogen, as you will seelater in this chapter, enters plants primarily through the activitiesof bacteria.Living organisms need other mineral nutrients as well, whichmost plants obtain from the soil. For example, proteins containsulfur (S), nucleic acids contain phosphorus (P), chlorophyllcontains magnesium (Mg), cytochromes contain iron (Fe), andcellular signaling can involve calcium (Ca). Within the soil, theseand other minerals dissolve in water as ions, forming a solution—called the soil solution—that contacts the roots of plants.How does a stationary organism find nutrients?Many organisms can move from place to place to find the nutrientsthey need. An organism that cannot move, termed asessile organism, must obtain nutrients from sources that aresomehow brought to it. With the exception of the carbon andoxygen in CO2, a plant’s supply of nutrients is strictly local, anda plant may use up the water and mineral nutrients in its localenvironment as it grows. How does a plant cope with the problemof scarce nutrient supplies?As discussed in Chapter 34, plants differ fundamentally fromanimals in that they grow throughout their lifetimes. In fact,growth is a plant’s version of movement. For example, roots obtainmost of the mineral nutrients plants need. By growingthrough the soil, roots mine it for new sources of mineral nutrientsand water. The growth of stems and leaves helps a plantsecure light and carbon dioxide, which in turn allows the rootsto continue their growth through the soil.As it grows, a plant—or even a single root—must deal witha variable environment. Animal droppings create high local concentrationsof nitrogen. A particle of calcium carbonate maymake a tiny area of the soil alkaline, while dead organic mattermay make a nearby area acidic. Such microenvironments encourageor discourage the proliferation of a root system andhelp direct its growth.IN THIS CHAPTER we consider the nutritional conditionsthat foster healthy and sustained plant growth. Weidentify nutrients that are essential to plants and how plantsacquire them. Because most plant nutrients come from thesoil, we discuss the formation of soils and the effects ofplants on soils. We devote a section to the role played byfungi and bacteria in the uptake of phosphorus and nitrogenby plants, and we conclude with a look at carnivorousand parasitic plants.der between these two countries. The Dominican side isverdant and forested, while the Haitian side is devoid ofplant life and most of its soil is gone.Haiti’s population, in addition to living in the poorestnation in the Western Hemisphere, has paid a huge pricefor the loss of its trees and soil. Because there are fewplant roots to stabilize the soil in mountainous areas,rain washes the soil into the sea. Not only is this soil lossdetrimental to agriculture, but the runoff hurts offshorereefs and the fisheries they support. To make mattersworse, tropical storms all too often result in devastatinglandslides like the one that killed 2,600 Haitians in 2004.As human activity increases, ecological disasters becomeall too common. Today, parts of sub-SaharanAfrica’s farmland are losing their topsoil as a result ofpoor land management, swelling populations, and achallenging climate. Crop failures, starvation, and largescalehuman displacements are inevitable consequences.CHAPTER OUTLINE36.1 How Do Plants Acquire Nutrients?36.2 What Mineral Nutrients Do Plants Require?36.3 How Does Soil Structure Affect Plants?36.4 How Do Fungi and Bacteria Increase NutrientUptake by Plant Roots?36.5 How Do Carnivorous and Parasitic Plants Obtain aBalanced Diet?A Border Marks Life and Death An aerial view of the borderbetween Haiti (left) and the Dominican Republic (right) providesa dramatic illustration of the extent of deforestation in Haiti.36.1 RECAPPlants are autotrophs that obtain carbon by photosynthesis,and mineral nutrients and water from thesoil.• Why do plants need phosphorus? Why do they neednitrogen? See p. 756• How does the ability to grow throughout their lifetimeallow plants to seek out nutrients? See p. 756We know that plants need nutrients to support their growth. Let’slook in more detail at the specific mineral nutrients they need.What Mineral Nutrients 36.2 Do Plants Require?Plants require many mineral nutrients (Table 36.1). Except fornitrogen, all mineral nutrients derive from rock and are usuallytaken up from the soil solution. Anutrient is called an essentialelement if its absence causes severe disruption of normal plantgrowth and reproduction. An essential element cannot be replacedby another element.Essential elements fall roughly into two categories—macronutrientsand micronutrients (see Table 36.1)—based on theamounts required by plants.• Aplant needs macronutrients in concentrations of at least1 gram per kilogram of the plant’s dry matter.• Aplant needs micronutrients in concentrations of less than100 milligrams per kilogram of the plant’s dry matter.How do we know if a plant is getting enough of a particularnutrient?Deficiency symptoms reveal inadequate nutritionBefore a plant that is deficient in an essential element dies, itusually displays characteristic deficiency symptoms. Table 36.1lists the symptoms of some common mineral deficiencies, oneof which is also shown in Figure 36.1. Such symptoms help horticulturistsdiagnose mineral nutrient deficiencies in plants.With proper diagnosis, the missing nutrient(s) can be providedin the form of a fertilizer (an added source of mineral nutrients).We know that the elements listed in Table 36.1 are essentialto the life of all plants. How did biologists discover which elementsare essential?36.2 | WHAT MINERAL NUTRIENTS DO PLANTS REQUIRE? 757TABLE 36.1Mineral Elements Required by PlantsELEMENT ABSORBED FORM MAJOR FUNCTIONS DEFICIENCY SYMPTOMSMACRONUTRIENTSNitrogen (N) NO3– and NH4+ In proteins, nucleic acids Oldest leaves turn yellow and die prematurely;plant is stuntedPhosphorus (P) H2PO4– and HPO42– In nucleic acids, ATP, phospholipids Plant is dark green with purple veins and is stuntedPotassium (K) K+ Enzyme activation; water balance; ion Older leaves have dead edgesbalance; stomatal openingSulfur (S) SO24– In proteins and coenzymes Young leaves are yellow to white with yellow veinsCalcium (Ca) Ca2+ Affects the cytoskeleton, membranes, and Growing points die back; young leaves are yellowmany enzymes; second messenger and crinklyMagnesium (Mg) Mg2+ In chlorophyll; required by many enzymes; Older leaves have yellow stripes between veinsstabilizes ribosomesMICRONUTRIENTSIron (Fe) Fe2+ and Fe3+ In active site of many redox enzymes and Young leaves are white or yellowelectron carriers; chlorophyll synthesisChlorine (Cl) Cl– Photosynthesis; ion balance Leaf tips wilt; leaves turn yellow and dieManganese (Mn) Mn2+ Activation of many enzymes Younger leaves are pale with green veinsBoron (B) B(OH)3 Required for proper cell wall formation Poor growth of leaves and rootsand expansionZinc (Zn) Zn2+ Enzyme activation; auxin synthesis Young leaves are abnormally small; older leaveshave many dead spotsCopper (Cu) Cu2+ In active site of many redox enzymes and New leaves are dark green, may have dead spotselectron carriersNickel (Ni) Ni2+ Activation of the enzyme urease Leaf tips die; deficiency is rareMolybdenum (Mo) MoO42– Nitrate reduction Leaves turn yellow between veins; older leaves dieHydroponic experimentsidentified essential elementsAn element is considered essential toplants if a plant fails to complete itslife cycle or grows abnormally whenthat element is absent or insufficient.The essential elements for plants wereidentified by growing plants hydroponically—that is, with their roots suspendedin nutrient solutions insteadof soil (Figure 36.2). Growing plantsin this manner allows for greater controlof nutrient availability than is possiblein a complex medium like soil.In the first successful experiments ofthis type, performed a century and ahalf ago, plants grew seemingly normallyin solutions containing only calciumnitrate [Ca(NO3)2], magnesiumsulfate (MgSO4), and potassium phosphate(KH2PO4). A solution missingany of these compounds could notsupport normal growth. Tests withother compounds that included variouscombinations of these elementssoon established six macronutrients—calcium, nitrogen, magnesium, sulfur,potassium, and phosphorus—as essentialelements.Identifying essential micronutrientsby this experimental approach provedto be more difficult. The chemicalsused in nineteenth-century experiments on plant nutrition weresometimes so impure that they provided micronutrients that investigatorsthought they had excluded. Furthermore, somemicronutrients are required in such tiny amounts that a seedmay contain enough to supply the embryo and the resultantsecond-generation plant throughout its lifetime. There mighteven be enough left over to pass on to third-generation plants.Because of such difficulties, nutrition experiments must be performedin tightly controlled laboratories with special air filtersthat exclude microscopic salt particles in the air, and must useonly the purest available chemicals.Iron was the first micronutrient to be clearly establishedas essential, in the 1840s. The last micronutrient to be listed asessential was nickel, in 1983 (the experiment is described inFigure 36.3).758 CHAPTER 36 | PLANT NUTRITION36.1 Iron Deficiency Symptoms In crop plants, mineral deficiencies can often bedetected in leaves, as in these blueberry leaves. As is typical of iron deficiency, theyounger leaves are yellow, whereas the older leaves look normal.TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE36.2 Growing Plants HydroponicallyHydroponics is used to grow plants without soil. It is a classic procedure for identifiyingnutrients essential to plants. Nitrogen is used here as an example.These seedlings arebeing grown in a completegrowth medium.These seedlings arebeing grown in amedium lackingnitrogen.Growth isnormal.Growth is abnormal,and the plants cannotcomplete their life cycle.GrowthComplete growthmediumMedium lackingnitrogenComplete growthmediumMedium lackingnitrogenGO TO Animated Tutorial 36.1 • Nitrogen and Iron DeficienciesyourBioPortal.com36.2 RECAPMineral nutrients required by plants are classified asmacronutrients and micronutrients, depending on theamount needed. Micronutrients are often needed insuch minute amounts that only sophisticated chemicalexperiments can determine their essentiality.• What are some specific mineral deficiency symptomsseen in plants? See p. 757 and Table 36.1• Outline an experimental method for determiningwhether an element is essential to a plant. See Figures36.2 and 36.3As we have seen, all plants require nutrients for growth. Plantsget nutrients in two ways. For plants growing in natural settingssuch as forests and fields, nutrients are derived from mineralsin the soil. Crop plants, which often need large quantitiesof nutrients to support rapid growth, may be given nutrientsupplements in the form of fertilizer. However, in either case,nutrition is not the only role the soil plays in the life of plants.36.3 How Does Soil Structure Affect Plants?Most terrestrial plants grow in soil. Soils provide:• mechanical support• mineral nutrients and water from the soil solution• O2 for root respirationSoils also harbor many bacteria and other organisms; some ofthese are beneficial to plant life, but others are harmful. Somesoils contain toxic levels of metal ions such as cadmium,chromium, and lead (see Chapter 39).Soils are modified by natural phenomena, such as rain, temperatureextremes, and the activities of plants and animals, andby the practices of humans—particularly agriculture. In this section,we examine the composition, structure, and formation ofsoils, as well as their role in plant nutrition.Soils are complex in structureSoils have living and nonliving components (Figure 36.4). Theliving components include plant roots as well as populationsof bacteria, fungi, protists, and animals such as earthworms andinsects. The nonliving portion of the soil includes rock fragments36.3 | HOW DOES SOIL STRUCTURE AFFECT PLANTS? 759CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE36.3 Is Nickel an Essential Element for Plant Growth?Using highly purified salts in growth media, Patrick Brown andhis colleagues tested whether barley can complete its life cyclein the absence of nickel. Other investigators showed that noother element could substitute for nickel.HYPOTHESIS Nickel is an essential element for a plantto complete its life cycle.Barley seeds require nickel in order togerminate and thereby complete the life cycle.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTS1. Grow barley plants for 3 generations in nutrientsolutions containing 0, 0.6, and 1.0 μM NiSO4.2. Harvest seeds from 5–6 third-generation plants ineach of the groups.3. Determine the nickel concentration in seeds fromeach plant.4. Germinate other seeds from the same plants onnickel-free medium and plot the success ofgermination against nickel concentration.There was a positive correlation between seedgermination and seed nickel concentration. Therewas significantly less germination at the lowestnickel concentrations.Percent germination204060801000 50 100 150 200 250Nickel concentration in seeds(ng/g)0 μM NiSO40.6 μM NiSO41.0 μM NiSO4RootRoot hairMineralparticleBacteria (i.e., sand)ClayparticleDeadorganicmatterAirWater36.4 The Complexity of Soil Soilsfavorable for plant growth contain both clayand larger mineral particles, as well as water,air, and organic matter. Other organisms arealso present.ranging in size from large stones to sand to silt and finally to tinyparticles of clay that are 2 μm or less in diameter. Soil also containswater and dissolved mineral nutrients, air spaces, and deadorganic matter. The air spaces in soil contain O2.Although soils vary greatly, almost all of them have a soil profileconsisting of several recognizable horizontal layers, calledhorizons, lying on top of one another. Soil scientists recognizethree major horizons—termed A, B, and C—in the profile of atypical soil (Figure 36.5).Topsoil is the A horizon, which contains most of the soil’s livingand dead organic matter. Successful agriculture depends onthe presence of a suitable Ahorizon; the Ahorizon is what blewaway from the U.S. plains during the Dust Bowl (as we saw atthe beginning of this chapter).Topsoils vary greatly in their proportions of sand, silt, andclay, and this influences their ability to support plant growth.For example, mineral nutrients tend to be leached from the uppersoil horizons—dissolved in rain or irrigation water and carriedto deeper horizons, where they are unavailable to plantroots. Because sand particles are relatively large and cannot holdwater, dissolved minerals are readily leached from sandy soil.Clay binds more water than sand does, and the charged surfacesof clay particles bind mineral ions that plant roots ultimatelytake up. But clay particles are tiny and pack tightly together,leaving little space for air. A loam is a soil that is anoptimal mixture of sand, silt, and clay, and thus has sufficientlevels of air, water, and available nutrients for plants. Loamsalso contain organic matter. Most of the best topsoils for agricultureare loams.Below the Ahorizon is the B horizon, or subsoil, which is thezone of infiltration and accumulation of materials leached fromabove. Farther down, the C horizon is the parent rock, also calledbedrock, that is breaking down to form soil. Some deep-growingroots extend into the B horizon to obtain water and nutrients,but roots rarely enter the C horizon.Soils form through the weathering of rockRocks are broken down into soil particles (weathered) in twoways: First, there is mechanical weathering, which is the physicalbreakdown of materials by wetting, drying, and freezing.Second there is chemical weathering, the alteration of the chemistryof the materials in the rocks. Several types of chemicalweathering occur, all of which influence the availability of mineralnutrients:• Oxidation by atmospheric oxygen• Hydrolysis (reaction with water)• Reaction with acids (particularly carbonic acid)The parent rock and the weathering it undergoes determine thebasic structure and chemical composition of a soil. However, akey soil characteristic for plants is the availability of nutrients,which must be dissolved in the soil solution for uptake by theplant. Chemical weathering results in clay particles coveredwith negatively charged chemical groups, which bind positivelycharged mineral nutrients (Figure 36.6). How do roots obtainthese mineral nutrients?Soils are the source of plant nutritionNegatively charged clay particles form ionic bonds (see Section2.2) with the positively charged ions (cations) of many mineralsthat are important for plant nutrition, such as potassium(K+), magnesium (Mg2+), and calcium (Ca2+). To become availableto plants or other organisms, these cations must be detachedfrom the clay particles.Recall that the root surface is covered with root hair cells (seeFigure 34.11). Protein transporters in the plasma membrane ofthese cells actively pump protons (H+) out of the cell. In addition,cellular respiration in the roots releases CO2, which dissolvesin the soil water and reacts with it to form carbonic acid.This acid ionizes to form bicarbonate and free protons:CO2 + H2O ~H2CO3~H+ + HCO3–Proton-pumping by the root and ionization of carbonic acid bothact to increase the proton concentration in the soil surroundingthe root. The protons bind more strongly to clay particles thando mineral cations; in essence, they trade places with thecations in a process called ion exchange (see Figure 36.6). Ionexchange releases important cations into the soil solution,where they are available to be taken up by the roots. The capacityof a soil to support plant growth, called soil fertility, isdetermined in part by its ability to provide nutrients in thismanner.There is no comparable mechanism for binding and releasingnegatively charged ions. As a result, important anions suchas nitrate (NO3–) and sulfate (SO42–)—direct sources of nitrogenand sulfur, respectively—may leach rapidly from the Ahorizon.760 CHAPTER 36 | PLANT NUTRITIONA horizonTopsoilB horizonSubsoilC horizonWeatheringparent rock(bedrock)36.5 A Soil Profile The A, B, and C horizons can sometimes be seenin road cuts such as this one in Australia. The dark upper layer (the Ahorizon) is home to most of the living organisms in the soil.Fertilizers and lime are used in agricultureAgricultural soils are often deficient in one or more essential elements.Irrigation and rainwater leach mineral nutrients from thesoil, and the harvesting of crops removes the nutrients that thecrops took up from the soil during their growth. Unless the soilis replenished, crop yields will decrease. Mineral nutrients maybe replaced by adding fertilizers: inorganic fertilizers of varioustypes; or organic fertilizers, such as compost or rotted manure.INORGANIC AND ORGANIC FERTILIZERS The three elements mostcommonly added to agricultural soils are nitrogen (N), phosphorus(P), and potassium (K). Commercial inorganic fertilizersare characterized by their “N-P-K” percentages. A 5-10-10fertilizer, for example, contains 5 percent nitrogen, 10 percentphosphate (P2O5), and 10 percent potash (K2O) by weight (ofthe nutrient-containing compound, not as weights of the elementsN, P, and K). Sulfur, in the form of ammonium sulfate,is also occasionally added to soils.Organic fertilizers such as manure or crop residues can alsobe used to supply mineral nutrients. Organic fertilizers haveboth advantages and disadvantages over inorganic fertilizers.Among the advantages:• Organic fertilizers release nutrients slowly, which results inless leaching than occurs with a one-time application of aninorganic fertilizer.• They contain residues of plant or animal materials that improvethe structure of the soil, providing spaces for airmovement, root growth, and drainage.However, the nutrients in organic fertilizers are not in a formthat is immediately available for absorption, as are the nutrientsin inorganic fertilizers. Furthermore, unlike organic fertilizers,inorganic fertilizers can be formulated to meet the specific requirementsof a particular soil and a particular crop.pH EFFECTS ON NUTRIENTS The availability of nutrient ions,whether they are naturally present in the soil or added as fertilizer,depends on soil pH. The proton concentration can affectthe binding of nutrient cations to clay particles, as we saw earlier,and can also affect the solubility of other nutrients, suchas iron, in the soil solution. The optimal soil pH for most cropsis about 6.5, but so-called acid-loving crops such as blueberriesprefer a pH closer to 4.Rainfall and decomposition of organic substances lower thepH of soil, sometimes making it so acidic that plant growth isinhibited. Such acidification can be reversed by liming—the applicationof compounds commonly known as lime, such as calciumcarbonate, calcium hydroxide, or magnesium carbonate.The addition of these compounds removes H+ from the soil, andalso increases the availability of calcium to plants.Sometimes, on the other hand, a soil is not acidic enough fora crop. In this case, sulfur can be added in the form of elementalsulfur, which soil bacteria convert to sulfuric acid. Iron andsome other elements are more available to plants at a slightlyacidic pH. Because soil pH is so important for soil fertility, measuringpH is often the first step in deciding which amendmentsto add to soils for home gardens and agriculture.SPRAY APPLICATION OF NUTRIENTS Spraying leaves with a nutrientsolution is another effective way to deliver some essentialelements to growing plants. Plants take up copper, iron, andmanganese more readily from foliar (leaf) sprays than from thesoil. Many foliar applications contain chemicals that partiallydissolve the protective covering of leaf cells (the cuticle) to increasenutrient uptake.Plants affect soil fertility and pHThe relationship between plants and soils is not a one-way affair—soils affect plants, but plants also affect soils. The soil thatforms in a particular place depends not only on the underlyingparent rock, mechanical weathering, and other such factors, butalso on the particular plants that grow there. For example, deadplant matter provides most of the carbon-rich materials thatbreak down to form humus—a dark-colored, organic soil component,each particle of which is too small to be recognizablewith the naked eye. Soil bacteria and fungi produce humus bybreaking down plant litter (such as fallen leaves and dead roots),animal feces, dead organisms, and other organic material. Humusis rich in mineral nutrients, especially nitrogen (from animalexcrement). Humus also favors plant growth by trappingsupplies of water and oxygen for absorption by roots.36.3 | HOW DOES SOIL STRUCTURE AFFECT PLANTS? 76121 A clay particle, which is negativelycharged, binds cations.The cations are exchanged for hydrogen ions obtainedfrom carbonic acid (H2CO3) or from the plant itself.Mineral cationsare releasedinto the soilsolution.3RoothairClayK+K+K+K+K+ K+Mg2+Mg2+Ca2+Ca2+K+HCO3H – + 2CO3 CO2 + H2OH+ H+H+H+H+CO2——— — ——— ——36.6 Ion Exchange Plants obtain mineral nutrients from the soilprimarily in the form of positive ions; potassium (K+) is the exampleshown here.Plants also affect the pH of the soil in which they grow. Rootsmaintain a balance of electric charges. If roots absorb morecations than anions, they excrete H+, thus lowering the soil pH.If they absorb more anions than cations, they excrete OH– orHCO3–, raising the soil pH. Roots can also actively change thepH in their immediate vicinity by exuding organic acids, suchas citric acid and malic acid, that acidify the soil, making iteasier to take up certain ions such as ferric iron (Fe3+). Lookingat the big picture, we see that successful plant growth can helpcreate conditions that favor further plant growth.36.3 RECAPLand plants live anchored in the soil and obtain waterand mineral nutrients from it. Plants and soil interactin many ways. Plants can affect many aspectsof the soil in which they grow, including mineral contentand availability, pH, and the amount of humus.Many of these effects are beneficial to future plantgrowth.• Explain how mechanical and chemical weatheringform soil from rock. See p. 760• How is soil fertility enhanced by the process of ion exchange?See p. 760 and Figure 36.6Thus far we have focused on the uptake of nutrients in the soilby plant roots. An understanding of how plants acquire nutrientsfrom the soil would be incomplete, however, without takinginto account the involvement of soil microbes, including fungiand bacteria. In the next section we will focus on the intimateinteractions of plants with these organisms, which are essentialto the success of most terrestrial plants.How Do Fungi and Bacteria Increase 36.4 Nutrient Uptake by Plant Roots?One gram of soil contains 6,000–50,000 bacterial species and upto 200 meters of fungal hyphae (the long branching cells offungi), although both are largely invisible to the naked eye. InChapter 39 we describe the strategies plants use to prevent infectionby harmful soil microbes. It may surprise you that plantsactively encourage a few species of fungi and bacteria to infecttheir roots and even invade root cells. In this section we describethe resulting “intracellular trading posts,” where products areexchanged to the mutual benefit of plants and a few very specialsoil microbes.Mycorrhizae expand the root system of plantsThe association of fungi with roots is so prevalent that it hasits own name: mycorrhizae (singular, mycorrhiza) (from theGreek mycos, “fungus,” and rhiza, “root”). Recall from Chapter30 that a multicellular fungus is called a mycelium (plural,mycelia) and that it is composed of rapidly growing individualtubular filaments called hyphae (singular, hypha). Two types ofmycorrhizae were introduced in Chapter 30 (see Section 30.2).In ectomycorrhizae, fungal hyphae wrap around the root (see Figure30.11A) but do not penetrate the cells. In this section we willreview features of a more widespread and intimate association:that of arbuscular mycorrhizae, where the fungal hyphae enter theroot and form arbuscular (treelike) structures inside root cells(see Figure 30.11B). This is an evolutionarily ancient association.What is it about this interaction that makes it so enduring? Whatbenefit does each partner derive?In most cases, roots alone cannot nutritionally support vascularplant growth—they simply cannot reach all the nutrientsavailable in the soil. Mycorrhizae expand the root surface area10- to 1000-fold, increasing the amount of soil that can be scavengedfor nutrients. In addition, because hyphae are much finerthan root hairs, they can get into pores that are inaccessible toroots. In this way, mycorrhizae probe a vast expanse of soil fornutrients and deliver them into root cortical cells.The primary nutrient that the plant obtains from a mycorrhizalinteraction is phosphorus. In exchange, the fungus obtainsan energy source, largely in the form of simple sugars. Infact, up to 20 percent of the photosynthate (the product[s] ofphotosynthesis) of terrestrial plants is directed to and consumedby arbuscular mycorrhiza fungi. Such associations are excellentexamples of mutualism, an interaction between two species inwhich both species benefit (further discussed in Chapter 56).They are also examples of symbiosis, in which two differentspecies live in close contact for a significant portion of theirlife cycles.The events in the formation of arbuscular mycorrhiza areshown in Figure 36.7. Plant roots produce compounds calledstrigolactones that stimulate rapid growth of fungal hyphae towardthe root. (We will return to strigolactones at the end of thischapter.) In response, fungi produce signals that stimulate expressionof plant symbiosis-related genes. The products of someof these genes give rise to the prepenetration apparatus (PPA),which guides the growth of the fungal hyphae into the root cortex.The sites of nutrient exchange between fungus and plantare the arbuscules, which form within root cortical cells. Despitethe intimacy of this association, the plant and fungal cytoplasmsnever mix—they are separated by two membranes, the fungalplasma membrane and the periarbuscular membrane (PAM),which is continuous with the plant plasma membrane. We willreturn to this structure and the features it shares with bacteriainducedroot nodules in the next section.Soil bacteria are essential in getting nitrogenfrom air to plant cellsThe essential mineral nutrient most commonly in short supply,in both natural and agricultural situations, is nitrogen. This issurprising because elemental nitrogen (N2) makes up almostfour-fifths of Earth’s atmosphere. However, plants cannot useN2 directly as a nutrient. The triple bond linking the two nitrogenatoms is extremely stable, and a great deal of energy is requiredto break it; thus N2 is a highly unreactive substance.How, then, do plants obtain usable nitrogen for the synthesis ofproteins and nucleic acids?762 CHAPTER 36 | PLANT NUTRITIONAfew species of bacteria have an enzyme that enables themto convert N2 into a more reactive and biologically useful formby a process called nitrogen fixation. These prokaryotic organisms—nitrogen fixers—convert N2 to ammonia (NH3). Althoughthere are relatively few species of nitrogen fixers, and their biomassis small compared to that of the organisms that dependon them, these talented prokaryotes are essential to the biosphereas we know it.Nitrogen fixers make all other life possibleBy far the greatest share of total world nitrogen fixation is performedbiologically by nitrogen-fixing bacteria, which fix approximately170 million metric tons of nitrogen per year. About80 million metric tons is fixed industrially by humans. Smalleramounts of nitrogen, about 20 million metric tons per year, arefixed in the atmosphere by nonbiological means such as lightning,volcanic eruptions, and forest fires. Rain brings these atmosphericallyformed products to the ground.Several groups of bacteria fix nitrogen. In the oceans, variousphotosynthetic bacteria, including cyanobacteria, fix nitrogen.In fresh water, cyanobacteria are the principal nitrogenfixers. On land, free-living soil bacteria make some contributionto nitrogen fixation, but they fix only what they need for theirown use and release the fixed nitrogen only when they die.Important groups of nitrogen-fixing bacteria live in close associationwith plant roots. The plant obtains fixed nitrogen fromthe bacterium, and the bacterium obtains energy sources fromthe plant. As with arbuscular mycorrhizae, the relationship nitrogen-fixing bacteria have with plants is both mutualistic andsymbiotic.We will look at nitrogen-fixing symbioses in more detail later.But first: how does biological nitrogen fixation work?Nitrogenase catalyzes nitrogen fixationNitrogen fixation is the reduction of nitrogen gas (see Section9.1). It proceeds by the stepwise addition of three pairs of hydrogenatoms to N2 (Figure 36.8). In addition to N2, these reactionsrequire three things:• Astrong reducing agent to transfer hydrogen atoms (protonsand electrons) to N2 and to the intermediate productsof the reaction• Agreat deal of energy, which is supplied by ATP• The enzyme nitrogenase, which catalyzes the reactionDepending on the species of nitrogen fixer, either respiration orphotosynthesis provides the necessary reducing agent and ATP.Nitrogenase is strongly inhibited by oxygen, and many nitrogenfixers are anaerobes that live in environments with littleor no O2. But rhizobia are aerobic and fix nitrogen in aerobicplant roots. How can nitrogenase function under thesecircumstances?Plants typically house nitrogen-fixing bacteria in special rootstructures called nodules. Within a nodule, O2 is maintained ata low level that is sufficient to support respiration, but not sohigh as to inactivate nitrogenase. This is possible because thecytoplasm of nodule cells contains a plant-produced proteincalled leghemoglobin, which is an O2 carrier. Leghemoglobin isa close relative of hemoglobin, the red, oxygen-carrying pigmentof animals, and is thus an evolutionarily ancient molecule.Some plant nodules contain enough of it to be bright pink inside.Leghemoglobin, with its iron-containing heme groups,transports enough oxygen to the nitrogen-fixing bacteria to supporttheir respiration, while keeping free oxygen concentrationslow enough to protect nitrogenase.36.4 | HOW DO FUNGI AND BACTERIA INCREASE NUTRIENT UPTAKE BY PLANT ROOTS? 763Plant roots producestrigolactones that stimulaterapid growth of fungal hyphaetoward the root.Fungal compound stimulatesplant to produce a prepenetrationapparatus (PPA).Fungus leaves plant cells,enters the apoplast, andgrows along the root length.Hyphae induce formationof new PPA structuresinside cortical cells.42Fungal hypha enters the PPAand is guided to the root cortex.215Hyphae enter PPAs and branchto form arbuscules, wherenutrients are exchanged.63EpidermisStrigolactonesSporeRoot tipCorticalcellsPPAFungal signalHyphaPAM36.7 Formation of Arbuscular MycorrhizaeMycorrhizae develop by a highly coordinatedprocess that involves signal exchanges betweenthe plant and the fungus.Some plants and bacteria work together to fix nitrogenBacteria of several different genera, collectively known as rhizobia(singular, rhizobium), fix nitrogen in close, mutualistic associationwith the roots of plants in the legume family. Thelegumes include peas, soybeans, clover, alfalfa, and many tropicalshrubs and trees. The bacteria infect the plant’s roots, andin response the roots develop nodules that house the bacteria.764 CHAPTER 36 | PLANT NUTRITIONThe enzyme nitrogenase bindsa molecule of nitrogen gas.1A reducing agent transfersthree successive pairs ofhydrogen atoms to N2.2 The final products—two moleculesof ammonia—are released, freeingthe nitrogenase to bind another N2molecule.3Enzyme:NitrogenaseSubstrate:Nitrogen gas (N2)Enzyme bindssubstrateReduction2Reduction ReductionNitrogenaseProduct:Ammonia (NH3)N NN N N NH H HH H HHHH HHHHH HH HH2 2N N N NNH HHN36.8 Nitrogenase Fixes Nitrogen Throughout the chemical reactionsof nitrogen fixation, the reactants are bound to the enzyme nitrogenase. Areducing agent transfers hydrogen atoms to nitrogen, and eventually thefinal product—ammonia—is released. This reaction requires a large inputof energy: about 16 ATPs are consumed per reaction.Root hairs release chemicalsignals that attract rhizobia.Rhizobia proliferate and cause a root hairto curl and an infection thread to form.The infection thread grows intothe cortex of the root.The infection thread releases bacterial cells,which become bacteroids in the root cells.42Stimulated by Nod factors secretedby bacteria, root cells begin to divide.215The nodule forms as plant cells continue todivide and become infected with bacteria.63Bacteroids ininfected cellUninfected cellRoot hairs Root hairNoduleRhizobiaBacteroidsInfectionthreadRoottipCortical cells36.9 A Nodule Forms Rhizobia develop the ability tofix nitrogen only after entering a legume root. The diagramsshow the sequence of events in nodule formation.The micrograph shows bacteroids of Bradyrhizobiumjaponicum in vesicles within a soybean root cell. A portionof an uninfected root cell is seen on the right.Because of their ability to form nitrogen-fixing associations,legumes are often used in crop rotations; for example, farmersmight plant clover or alfalfa occasionally to increase the availablenitrogen content of the soil.The legume–rhizobium association is not the only nitrogenfixingsymbiosis. Some cyanobacteria fix nitrogen in associationwith fungi (in lichens) or with ferns, cycads, or nonvascularplants. Rice farmers can increase crop yields by growing the waterfern Azolla, with its symbiotic nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium,in the flooded fields where rice is grown. Another groupof bacteria, the filamentous actinobacteria, fix nitrogen in associationwith woody species such as alder and mountain lilacs.Legumes and rhizobia communicate usingchemical signalsNeither free-living rhizobia nor uninfected legumes can fix nitrogen.Only when the two are closely associated in root nodulesdoes the reaction take place. The establishment of this symbiosisbetween a rhizobium and a legume requires a complexseries of steps, with active contributions by both the bacteriumand the plant root (Figure 36.9). First the root releases flavonoidsand other chemical signals that attract soil-living rhizobia to thevicinity of the root. Flavonoids trigger the transcription of bacterialnod genes, the products of which synthesize Nod (nodulation)factors. These factors, secreted by the bacteria, cause cellsin the root cortex to divide, leading to the formation of a primarynodule meristem. This meristem gives rise to the plant tissuethat constitutes the root nodule.The bacteria enter the root via an infection thread and eventuallyreach cells in the interior of the root nodule. There thebacteria are released into the cytoplasm of the nodule cells, enclosedin plant-derived membrane vesicles. Inside the vesicles,the bacteria differentiate into bacteroids—the form of bacteriathat can fix nitrogen.The legume–rhizobium interaction is very specific. For example,only one species of rhizobium will form a nitrogen-fixingsymbiosis with alfalfa; another rhizobium will only infect clover.The specificity of the interaction is determined in part by thespecificity of the chemical signals exchanged by the plant andbacterium. The soil may not have the correct bacterium for agiven legume crop, so farmers and gardeners often coat legumeseeds with the appropriate rhizobium before planting.There is increasing evidence that nodule formation dependson some of the same genes and mechanisms that allow mycorrhizaeto develop. For example, both processes involve invaginationof the plasma membrane to allow entry of the fungal hyphaor rhizobia. The similarities of the structures formed duringthe development of mycorrhizae and nodules are especiallystriking considering that the symbioses involve members of twodifferent kingdoms (fungi and bacteria) (Figure 36.10).Biological nitrogen fixation doesnot always meet agricultural needsBacterial nitrogen fixation is not alwayssufficient to support the needs of agriculture.Traditional farmers used toplant dead fish along with corn; the decayingfish released nitrogen that the developingcorn could use. Today farmersuse inorganic nitrogen fertilizers producedthrough industrial nitrogen fixationto meet the food needs of a rapidlyexpanding population.Most industrial nitrogen fixation isdone by the Haber process, a chemical reductionthat requires a great deal of energy.(Recall that biological nitrogen fixationconsumes a lot of ATP—about 16ATP per N fixed; see Figure 36.8.) Atpresent in the United States, the manufactureof nitrogen-containing fertilizertakes more energy—primarily naturalgas and hydroelectric—than does anyother aspect of crop production. The risingcost and dwindling supply of energy36.4 | HOW DO FUNGI AND BACTERIA INCREASE NUTRIENT UPTAKE BY PLANT ROOTS? 765A plant membraneseparates thefungus and rhizobiafrom the plant cellcytoplasm.In both types of infection,a strand of plant cytoplasmforms in the next cell to becrossed, ahead of the hyphaor infection thread.Plant cell wallFungal cell wallFungal cellmembranePlant cell membraneVacuole VacuoleNucleusPreinfection threadInfection threadmembraneRhizobiaMycorrhizal infectionRhizobial infectionPeriarbuscular membrane36.10 Intracellular Structures in Plant–Fungus and Plant–Rhizobium Symbioses Several steps in the developmentof mycorrhizae and nodules involve similar structures.Bacteria and abioticprocesses fix N2 fromthe atmosphere,producing ammoniaand ammonium ions.Plants reduce nitrate ionsback to ammonium, theform in which nitrogen isincorporated into proteins.Some denitrifying bacteria canreduce nitrate back to nitrogen gas,which returns to the atmosphere.Nitrifying bacteria oxidizeammonia to nitrate ions.STARTDenitrifyingbacteriaNitrifyingbacteriaBiological Abiotic fixationfixationNitrifyingbacteriaNH3NH4+NH4+NO2–NO3–NitrateNitriteNITROGENFIXATIONNITRIFICATIONDENITRIFICATIONNITRATEREDUCTIONRecyclingto soilN2Nitrogen-fixingbacteriasources raises serious questions about the sustainability of thisapproach to fertilizer production.Plants and bacteria participate in the globalnitrogen cycleNitrogen moves through the biosphere in a global nitrogencycle (Figure 36.11), which includes four key steps:1. Fixation of atmospheric N2 to NH3 and NH4+ by bacteriaand by abiotic processes2. Nitrification of these molecules to nitrate by bacteria3. Nitrate reduction by plants4. Denitrification of nitrate by bacteria back to N2, which isthen released to the atmosphere to begin another cycleThe nitrogen released into the soil as a result of nitrogen fixationis primarily in the form of ammonia (NH3) and ammonium ions(NH4+). Although ammonia can be toxic to plants if it accumulatesin tissues, ammonium ions can be taken up safely at lowconcentrations. Soil bacteria called nitrifiers oxidize ammonia tonitrate ions (NO3–)—another form that plants can take up—bythe process of nitrification. Soil pH affects which form of nitrogenis taken up by plants: nitrate ions are taken up preferentiallyunder more acidic conditions, ammonium ions under more basicones. To use nitrate, a plant must first reduce it to ammoniumin a process called nitrate reduction. This occurs in two enzymecatalyzedsteps. The first step, from nitrate (NO3–) to nitrite(NO2–), takes place in the cytoplasm; the second, from nitrite(NO2–) to ammonia (NH4+), in the plastids. The plant uses theammonia to manufacture amino acids, from which the plant’sproteins and all its other nitrogen-containing compounds areformed. Animals cannot reduce nitrogen, and they depend onplants to supply them with reduced nitrogenous compounds.The nitrogen cycle is essential for life on Earth: nitrogen-containingcompounds constitute 5–30 percent of a plant’s total dryweight. The nitrogen content of animals is even higher, and allof it arrives there by way of the plant kingdom.36.4 RECAPTwo mutualistic interactions with soil microbes arecritical to the success of terrestrial plants. Fungi andplants form mycorrhizae, which greatly increase thesoil area that roots can scavenge for nutrients. Bacteriain soils and root nodules fix inert, atmosphericnitrogen into forms that plants and ultimately animalscan use. Denitrification returns nitrogen fromdead organisms and animal waste back to the atmosphere,continuing the global nitrogen cycle.• What is exchanged between plants and fungi inmycorrhizae? See p. 762• What, besides nitrogenase, is required to reducenitrogen gas to a form plants can use? See p. 763 andFigure 36.8• How is the formation of a root nodule on a legumesimilar to the formation of an arbuscular mychorriza?See p. 765 and Figure 36.10766 CHAPTER 36 | PLANT NUTRITION36.11 The Nitrogen CycleNitrogen fixation, nitrification, nitratereduction, and denitrification arecomponents of an essential chemicalcycle that converts atmosphericnitrogen gas into ammonium ionsand nitrate ions—forms of nitrogenthat can be taken up by plants—andreturns N2 to the atmosphere.GO TO Web Activity 36.1 • The Nitrogen CycleyourBioPortal.comLet’s turn now to some special mechanisms for obtaining nutrientsthat have evolved in plant species with unusual lifestyles.How Do Carnivorous and Parasitic 36.5 Plants Obtain a Balanced Diet?Most plants obtain their mineral nutrients from the soil solution(with the help of fungi), but some use other sources. Carnivorousand parasitic plants are examples of such plants.Carnivorous plants supplement their mineral nutritionSome plants augment their nitrogen supply by capturing anddigesting flies and other insects. There are about 500 of these carnivorousplant species, the best known of which are Venus flytraps(genus Dionaea; Figure 36.12A), sundews (genus Drosera;Figure 36.12B), and pitcher plants (genus Sarracenia).Carnivorous plants are typically found in boggy habitats thatare acidic and nutrient deficient. To obtain extra nitrogen, theseplants capture animals, digest their proteins, and absorb theamino acids. Pitcher plants have pitcher-shaped leaves that collectsmall amounts of rainwater. Insects and even small rodentsare lured into the pitchers by bright colors or attractive scentsand are prevented from leaving by stiff, downward-pointinghairs. The animals eventually die and are digested by a combinationof plant enzymes and bacteria in the water. Sundewshave leaves covered with hairs that secrete a clear, sticky, sugaryliquid. Insects become stuck to these hairs, and more hairscurve over to further entrap them. Enzymes secreted by theplant digest the insects. Venus flytraps have specialized leaveswith two halves that fold together. When an insect touches triggerhairs on a leaf, its two halves quickly come together, theirspiny margins interlocking and imprisoning the insect before itcan escape. The leaf then secretes enzymes that digest its prey.The closing of the Venus flytrap’s leaf is one of the fastestmovements in the plant world, requiring only 0.1 sec. To findout how this happens, Dr. Lakshminarayanan Mahadevan andcolleagues painted fluorescent dots on the surface of the flytrap’sleaf surface and used high-speed cameras to record thetrap snapping shut when its trigger hairswere touched. They then used computeranalysis of the recorded dot movementsto generate a mathematical model to helpexplain the movement. The researchersfound that the first step is the elongationof cells on the outer surface of the leaf.The expansion of only one side of the leafcauses it to snap from a convex into a concave shape, much likea contact lens flipping inside out.Carnivorous plants do not need to feed on insects, but doingso helps them grow faster in their natural habitats. They use theadditional nitrogen from the insects to make more proteins,chlorophyll, and other nitrogen-containing compounds.Parasitic plants take advantage of other plantsApproximately 1 percent of flowering plant species derive someor all of their water, nutrients, and sometimes even photosynthatefrom other plants. In these parasitic plants, absorptiveorgans called haustoria have evolved that invade the host andtap into the vascular tissues in the root or stem.Parasitic plants are divided into two broad classes based ontheir nutritional interactions with their hosts. Hemiparasites canstill photosynthesize, but derive water and mineral nutrientsfrom the living bodies of other plants. Perhaps the most familiarhemiparasites are the several genera of mistletoes. Mistletoesare green and carry on some photosynthesis, but they parasitizeother plants for water and mineral nutrients and mayderive photosynthetic products from them as well. Dwarfmistletoe (Arceuthobium americanum) is a serious parasite inforests of the western United States, destroying more than 3 billionboard feet of lumber per year.Holoparasites are completely parasitic and do not performphotosynthesis. They are taxonomically and morphologicallydiverse. Some, such as members of the dodder family, are plantlikein appearance, with small leaf remnants and flowers (Figure36.13). Some holoparasites do not have leaves or stems becausethey spend most of their life cycle underground and onlybreak the surface to flower.Several parasitic plant species lack many of the genes normallypresent in the chloroplast genome (which in turn is onlya remnant of the genome in the original endosymbiont fromwhich the chloroplast evolved; see Sections 5.5 and 27.1). Thesegenes, which are needed for photosynthesis, have been lostbecause there is no evolutionary pressure to retain them. Thus,while the parasitic lifestyle can be viewed as a free ride, for some36.5 | HOW DO CARNIVOROUS AND PARASITIC PLANTS OBTAIN A BALANCED DIET? 767(A) Dionaea muscipula (B) Drosera rotundifolia36.12 Carnivorous Plants Some plantshave adapted to nitrogen-poor environments bybecoming carnivorous. (A) The Venus flytrapobtains nitrogen from the bodies of insectstrapped inside the plant when its hinges snapshut. (B) Sundews trap insects on sticky hairs.Secreted enzymes will digest the carcassexternally.plants it is also a one-way ticket, with no possibility of returnto self-sufficiency.The plant–parasite relationship is similar to plant–fungiand plant–bacteria associationsPlant–bacteria and plant–fungus relations both involve reciprocalsignaling between the two species (see Figures 36.7 and36.9). Parasitic plants also need to detect nearby plants so theycan obtain their nutrients, but obviously this is to the disadvantageof the potential host plant. In one interesting case, a mechanismhas evolved in a parasitic plant to recognize the chemicalsignals produced by plants to attract beneficial fungi.The holoparasite Striga (witchweed) is a serious pest of cerealcrops in Africa (see the opening story of Chapter 30). Earlierin this chapter, you learned that arbuscular fungi are attractedto plant roots by compounds called strigolactones. Oneof these same molecules was discovered over 60 years ago asan inducer of germination of some parasitic plants, includingStriga. Scientists strongly suspect that this is no coincidence. Themycorrhizal interaction is ancient (over 400 million years old)and predates the evolution of parasitic plants. For this reasonscientists hypothesize that a mechanism evolved in the ancestorsof modern Striga to recognize a compound that was alreadyproduced by plants to attract soil microbes.In Striga we thus find an example of “opportunistic evolution”—that is, the repurposing of preexisting processes ratherthan the invention of new processes from scratch. This is not thefirst time we have encountered this phenomenon in this chapter.Recall that the formation of nodules by rhizobia uses someof the same mechanisms utilized by arbuscular fungi to establishresidence inside plant cells (see Figure 35.10), implying anevolutionary connection between the two symbioses.36.5 RECAPCarnivorous plants supplement their nutrition by extractingmaterials from animals. Rapid reflexes haveevolved in some of these plants for trapping theirprey. Parasitic plants, on the other hand, get someor all of their sustenance from other plants. Extremeholoparasites cannot function as autotrophs, havinglost chloroplast genes coding for photosyntheticmachinery. At least one parasitic plant responds tothe same signaling molecule that the host plant usesto attract beneficial fungi.• Why do carnivorous plants eat animals? See p. 767• How do the needs of holoparasitic plants differ fromthose of carnivorous plants? See p. 767• What characteristics are shared among plant–parasite,plant–fungus, and plant–bacteria associations?768 CHAPTER 36 | PLANT NUTRITIONDodderflower budsTendrils ofdodderHost stemThe host goldenrodhas scars from priorattachment sites.36.13 A Parasitic Plant Tendrils of dodder (genus Cuscuta) wraparound a goldenrod (genus Solidago). The parasitic dodder obtains water,sugars, and other nutrients through tiny, rootlike protuberances that penetratethe surface of the host plant.36.1 How Do Plants Acquire Nutrients?• Plants are photosynthetic autotrophs that can produce all theirorganic molecules from carbon dioxide, water, and minerals,including a nitrogen source.• Mineral nutrients are obtained from the soil solution.• Root growth allows plants, which are sessile, to search for mineralresources.• Microenvironments within the soil, such as acidic or alkalineareas, affect the direction of root growth.36.2 What Mineral Nutrients Do Plants Require?• Plants require 14 essential elements. Of these, six are macronutrientsand eight are micronutrients. Deficiency symptomssuggest what essential element a plant lacks. Review Table36.1 and Figure 36.1• The essential elements were discovered by growing plants onhydroponic solutions that lacked individual elements. ReviewFigures 36.2 and 36.3, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 36.136.3 How Does Soil Structure Affect Plants?• Soils contain water, air, and inorganic and organic substances.Soils have living (biotic) and nonliving (abiotic) components.Review Figure 36.4CHAPTER SUMMARY
36.1 How Do Plants Acquire Nutrients?• Plants are photosynthetic autotrophs that can produce all theirorganic molecules from carbon dioxide, water, and minerals,including a nitrogen source.• Mineral nutrients are obtained from the soil solution.• Root growth allows plants, which are sessile, to search for mineralresources.• Microenvironments within the soil, such as acidic or alkalineareas, affect the direction of root growth.36.2 What Mineral Nutrients Do Plants Require?• Plants require 14 essential elements. Of these, six are macronutrientsand eight are micronutrients. Deficiency symptomssuggest what essential element a plant lacks. Review Table36.1 and Figure 36.1• The essential elements were discovered by growing plants onhydroponic solutions that lacked individual elements. ReviewFigures 36.2 and 36.3, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 36.136.3 How Does Soil Structure Affect Plants?• Soils contain water, air, and inorganic and organic substances.Soils have living (biotic) and nonliving (abiotic) components.Review Figure 36.4
• A soil typically consists of two or three horizontal zones calledhorizons. Topsoil forms the uppermost or A horizon. Topsoiltends to lose mineral nutrients through leaching. Loams areexcellent agricultural topsoils, with a good balance of sand, silt,clay, and organic matter. Review Figure 36.5• Soils form by mechanical and chemical weathering of rock.Chemical weathering imparts mineral nutrients to clay particles.Plant litter and other organic matter decomposes to formhumus. Plants obtain some mineral nutrients through ionexchange between the soil solution and the surface of clay particles.Review Figure 36.6• Farmers use fertilizers to make up for deficiencies in soil mineralnutrient content. Liming can reverse acidification.• Plants can influence the characteristics, including the pH, of thesoil in which they grow.36.4 How Do Fungi and Bacteria Increase NutrientUptake by Plant Roots?• Mycorrhizae are symbiotic root–fungus associations that greatlyincrease a plant’s absorption of water and minerals, especiallyphosphorus. They occur in 80 percent of plant species.• The fungal mycelia invade root cortex cells and form arbuscules,which are the sites of nutrient exchange between thefungus and plant. Review Figure 36.7• In the earliest stages of mycorrhiza formation, the hyphae ofarbuscular fungi grow toward strigolactones, compounds thatare produced by the plant roots.• Some nitrogen-fixing bacteria live free in the soil; others livesymbiotically as bacteroids within plant roots. In nitrogen fixation,nitrogen gas (N2) is reduced to ammonia (NH3) or ammoniumions (NH4+) in a reaction catalyzed by nitrogenase. ReviewFigure 36.8• Nitrogenase requires anaerobic conditions, but the bacteroidsin root nodules require oxygen, which is maintained at theproper level by leghemoglobin.• The formation of a root nodule requires interaction betweenthe root system of a legume and a rhizobium. ReviewFigure 36.9• Several steps in the formation of root nodules and arbusculesare similar and probably involve some of the same plant genes.Review Figure 36.10• In agriculture, biological nitrogen fixation must usually be supplementedwith commercial nitrogen fertilizers made by theHaber process.• Plants and bacteria interact in the global nitrogen cycle, whichinvolves a series of reductions and oxidations of nitrogencontainingmolecules. Review Figure 36.11, WEB ACTIVITY36.1• Nitrification by bacteria converts ammonia to nitrate ions in thesoil. Nitrate reduction is carried out by plant enzymes, enablingplants to form their own nitrogen compounds. Denitrificationreturns nitrogen from animal wastes and dead organisms to theatmosphere.36.5 How Do Carnivorous and Parasitic Plants Obtain aBalanced Diet?• Carnivorous plants are autotrophs that supplement a low nitrogensupply by feeding on insects or other small animals.• Parasitic plants draw on other plants to meet their needs,which may include minerals, water, or the products of photosynthesis.• Hemiparasites, such as mistletoes, can still photosynthesize.Extreme holoparasites cannot function as auxotrophs becausethey have lost chloroplast genes that code for components ofthe photosynthetic apparatus (which they no longer need).• A strigolactone—a compound in the same category of compoundsplants use to attract mycorrhizal fungi—also inducesthe germination of some parasitic plants, including Striga.• Scientists hypothesize that a mechanism evolved in the ancestorsof modern Striga to recognize a compound that wasalready produced by plants to attract arbuscular fungi.