Producer of valuable honey and pollinator of manycrucial plants, the common honey bee, Apismellifera, has been the subject of study and fascinationfor humans throughout recorded history. The uniquesex life of these social insects is among their most intriguingaspects.More than 99 percent of female honey bees do not reproduce.They exist to help just one female—the queen—reproduce. At any given time, there is only one queen in ahive. She lays all of the eggs, which is a full-time job. Shealso determines whether or not an egg will be fertilized.Fertilized eggs develop into females; unfertilized eggs developinto males. Wait, you say, it’s the male that fertilizesthe egg! Yes, the male’s sperm fertilizes the egg, but inthis case the female—the queen bee—stores sperm aftermating and controls its delivery to her eggs.Eventually, every hive must have a new queen. Sometimesthe old queen dies. Other times, in a phenomenonknown as swarming, the queen and a retinue of workersleave their current hive to start a new one. Whether thequeen dies or leaves, a new queen must be produced. Theremaining worker bees enlarge a few cells in the honeycombthat contain fertilized eggs laid by the old queen.The larvae that hatch from those eggs are fed special foodthat stimulates their growth and development intoprospective queens.The first queen to pupate and emerge from her royalchamber kills any other aspiring queens. She then leavesthe hive for her mating flight. Males from all around getthe message that a virgin queen is available and congregatearound her. While in flight, she mates with 15 to 20males, and each coupling is an event. After a male managesto insert his penis into her vagina, he literally explodes,leaving inside the female not only his sperm butalso his sex organs (the latter will drop out later). Thisprocess is repeated with other males, which also die asa result. The queen returns to the hive with a lifetimesupply of sperm and sets about laying eggs.The queen lives for about 2 years and lays as many as3,000 eggs each day. If she releases sperm, the eggs willbe fertilized and develop into sterile females that will devotetheir lives to feeding her, maintaining the hive, foragingfor nectar and pollen, and raising their sisters. Unfertilizedeggs develop into males, which hang around thehive doing nothing useful until they take off to search fora receptive queen—an unlikely event. It is thus in theExplosive sex43A Unique Reproductive Strategy Among honey bees andother hymenopteran insects, the only reproductive female is thequeen, seen here in the center as she deposits eggs in thecomb. The female workers that attend her are sterile.How Do Animals Reproduce 43.1 without Sex?Sexual reproduction is a nearly universal trait in animals, althoughmany species can also reproduce asexually and somereproduce only asexually. Offspring produced asexually are geneticallyidentical to one another and to their parents. Asexualreproduction is efficient because no time or energy is wasted onmating and every member of the population can convert resourcesinto offspring. However, asexual reproduction does notgenerate genetic diversity as sexual reproduction does, and thisdiversity is the raw material that enables natural selection toshape adaptations in response to environmental change. Whensuch changes occur, the lack of genetic diversity can be disadvantageousto a species.A variety of animals, mostly invertebrates, reproduce asexually.They tend to be species that are attached to their substrateand cannot search for mates or that live in sparse populationsand rarely encounter potential mates. Asexually reproducingspecies are likely to be found in relatively constant environmentswhere genetic diversity is less important for species success. Infact, asexual reproduction is a good way to preserve a genotypethat is successful in a particular environment, as long as that environmentdoes not change. Three common modes of asexualreproduction are budding, regeneration, and parthenogenesis.Budding and regeneration produce new individualsby mitosisMany simple multicellular animals produce offspring by budding.New individuals form as outgrowths or buds from thebodies of older animals. A bud grows by mitotic cell division,and the cells differentiate before the bud breaks away from theparent (Figure 43.1A). The bud is genetically identical to the parent,and it may grow as large as the parent before it becomes independent.Regeneration is usually thought of as the replacement ofdamaged tissues or lost limbs, but in some cases pieces of an organismcan regenerate complete individuals. Echinoderms,for example, have remarkable abilities to regenerate. If sea stars(starfishes) are cut into pieces, each piece that includes an armand a portion of the central disc can grow into a new animal(Figure 43.1B). In the early 1900s, oyster fishermen in NarragansettBay tried to eliminate the sea stars that were preying ontheir oysters. Whenever they encountered a sea star, theychopped it up with knives and threw it back into the water. Asa result, the sea star population increased explosively.Regeneration can occur when an animal is broken by an outsideforce such as wave action in the intertidal zone. In someIN THIS CHAPTER we will examine the diverse waysin which animals produce offspring. First we examine asexualreproduction, in which only a single parent is involved.We then turn to sexual reproduction, in which an egg anda sperm unite to create a new diploid individual. Finally, wefocus on the anatomy, function, and endocrine control ofthe human reproductive system, as well as technologiesused to limit or enhance human fertility.queen’s best interest to limit the number of males sheproduces.Natural selection has resulted in some amazing adaptations,none more so than those involved in reproduction.Sexual or asexual, bizarre or otherwise, theanatomy, physiology, biochemistry, and behaviorsurrounding the urge to propagate one’s species arefascinating fields of study.CHAPTER OUTLINE43.1 How Do Animals Reproduce without Sex?43.2 How Do Animals Reproduce Sexually?43.3 How Do the Human Male and FemaleReproductive Systems Work?43.4 How Can Fertility Be Controlled?Swarming Means a New Queen Bee When a honey beecolony swarms, the queen leaves the hive and takes a retinueof workers with her. A new queen will emerge to take over theold hive, at which time a few males will get to perform theirone brief function—fertilizing a virgin queen—before they die.cases, breakage occurs in the absence of external forces. Somespecies of segmented marine worms develop segments withrudimentary heads bearing sensory organs. The segments thenbreak apart, and each one forms a new worm.Parthenogenesis is the development ofunfertilized eggsNot all eggs must be fertilized to develop. Acommon mode ofasexual reproduction in arthropods is the development of offspringfrom unfertilized eggs. This phenomenon, calledparthenogenesis, also occurs in some species of fishes, amphibians,and reptiles. Most species that reproduce parthenogeneticallyalso engage in sexual reproduction or at least sexual behaviorat other times.In some species, parthenogenesis is part of the mechanismthat determines sex. As we saw at the beginning of this chapter,in honey bees (as well as in most ants and wasps), males developfrom unfertilized eggs and are haploid. Females developfrom fertilized eggs and are diploid.Parthenogenetic reproduction in some species requires sexualbehavior even though sperm are not delivered to the femalereproductive tract and eggs are not fertilized. One case that hasbeen investigated extensively by David Crews and his studentsat the University of Texas is parthenogenetic reproduction in aspecies of whiptail lizard. This species has no males, but femalescan act as males, engaging in all aspects of courtship displayand mating, although no sperm are produced or transferred(Figure 43.2). Whether a specific female acts as a female or asa male depends on cyclical hormonal states. When estrogen levelsare high, she acts as a female. When her progesterone levelpeaks, she acts as a male. The stimulation resulting from the sexualactivity triggers the release of eggs from the ovaries.43.1 | HOW DO ANIMALS REPRODUCE WITHOUT SEX? 901(A) Hydra sp. (B) Fromia sp.When its estrogen levels arehigh, a lizard acts as a female.When its progesterone levels arehigh, a lizard acts as a male.Acts as afemaleActs as amaleOvulationEstrogen ProgesteroneOvulationActs as afemaleActs as amaleHormone levelTime(B)(A)Cnemidophorus uniparensLizard acting as 6 Lizard acting as 743.1 Two Forms of Asexual Reproduction (A) Budding: A new individualforms as an outgrowth from an adult hydra. (B) Regeneration: Asingle severed arm and a piece of the central disc of a mature sea starcan regenerate into an entire animal.43.2 Sexual Behavior May Be Required for Asexual Reproduction(A) Parthenogenetic whiptail lizards are all females, but they take turnsacting the male role in reproductive behavior. The stimulation from sexualbehavior is necessary for ovulation to occur. (B) The stage of the ovariancycle determines the role an individual whiptail plays.43.1 RECAPMost animals reproduce sexually, but many can alsoor can only reproduce asexually, through budding,regeneration, or parthenogenesis.• Explain why asexual reproduction might be disadvantageousfor an animal living in a changing environment.See p. 900• How is parthenogenesis related to sex determinationin honey bees? See p. 901Asexual reproduction is an efficient way to use resources. However,the fact that sexual reproduction produces genetic diversitymust be a tremendous advantage, because most species reproducesexually.43.2 How Do Animals Reproduce Sexually?Given the efficiency of asexual reproduction in perpetuating anorganism’s genome, the prevalence of sexual reproduction issomewhat surprising. Even the evolution of meiosis—an extremelycomplicated process in comparison to mitosis—has beenthe subject of much speculation and debate among evolutionarybiologists. And of course, mating behaviors involve costs andrisks. Costs include time and energy for finding, attracting, andcompeting for a mate as well as the opportunity costs of detractingfrom other activities such as feeding and caring for existingoffspring. Risks include increased exposure to predation and thepotential for physical damage. Despite these disadvantages, mosteukaryotic organisms reproduce sexually. Thus it would seemthat the production of genetic diversity is an evolutionary advantagethat overwhelms “the cost of sex” (see Section 21.4).Sexual reproduction requires the joining of two haploid sexcells to form a diploid individual. These haploid cells, or gametes,are produced through gametogenesis, a process that involvesmeiotic cell divisions. Two events in meiosis contribute to geneticdiversity: crossing over between homologous chromosomesand the independent assortment of chromosomes (see Sections 11.5and 12.1). Sexual reproduction itself also contributes to geneticdiversity. The genetic variation among the gametes of a singleindividual and the genetic variation between any two parentsproduce an enormous potential for genetic variation betweenany two offspring of a sexually reproducing pair of individuals.Sexual reproduction in animals consists of three fundamentalsteps:• Gametogenesis: making gametes• Spawning or mating: bringing gametes together• Fertilization: fusing gametesThe process of gametogenesis is very similar across sexually reproducinganimal species. Processes of fertilization are alsorather similar in widely different species. Therefore, while ourdiscussion of gametogenesis will focus generally on mammals,and our discussion of fertilization will feature sea urchins, thefacts would not be dramatically different were we to considermany other animal groups. Adaptations for spawning and mating,in contrast, show incredible anatomical, physiological, andbehavioral diversity across species.Gametogenesis produces eggs and spermGametogenesis occurs in the gonads, which are testes (singulartestis) in males and ovaries (singular ovary) in females. Thetiny gametes of males, the sperm, move by beating their flagella.The larger gametes of females, called eggs or ova (singularovum), are nonmotile.Gametes are produced from germ cells, which have their originin the earliest cell divisions of the embryo and remain distinctfrom all the other cells of the body (the somatic cells). Germcells are sequestered in the body of the embryo until its gonadsbegin to form. The germ cells then migrate to the developinggonads, where they take up residence and proliferate by mitosis,producing spermatogonia (singular spermatogonium) inmales and oogonia (singular oogonium) in females. Spermatogoniaand oogonia are diploid and multiply by mitosis.In the next step in gametogenesis, meiotic cell division reducesthe chromosomes to the haploid number (see Section11.5). The spermatogonia and oogonia that enter meiosis are primaryspermatocytes and primary oocytes. Although the stepsof meiosis are similar in males and females, gametogenesis differsbetween the sexes.SPERMATOGENESIS The initial proliferation of male germ cellsinto spermatogonia proceeds by mitosis in the embryo. As illustratedin Figure 43.3A, primary spermatocytes then undergothe first meiotic division to form secondary spermatocytes. Thesecond meiotic division produces four haploid spermatids foreach primary spermatocyte that enters meiosis. In mammals,the progeny of primary spermatocytes remain connected by cytoplasmicbridges after each division.One reason that mammalian spermatocytes remain in cytoplasmiccontact throughout their development is the asymmetryof sex chromosomes in males. Half the secondary spermatocytesreceive an X chromosome, the other half a Y chromosome.The Y chromosome contains fewer genes than the X chromosome,and some of the products of genes found only on the Xchromosome are essential for spermatocyte development. Byremaining in cytoplasmic contact, all four spermatocytes canshare the gene products of the X chromosomes, although onlyhalf of them have an X chromosome.A spermatid bears little resemblance to a mature sperm.Through further differentiation (spermiogenesis), the spermatidbecomes compact, streamlined, and grows a flagellum to becomemotile. We will look at the production of human sperm inthe next section.OOGENESIS Oogonia, like spermatogonia, proliferate throughmitosis (Figure 43.3B). The resulting primary oocytes immediatelyenter prophase of the first meiotic division. In manyspecies, including humans, the oocyte experiences developmentalarrest at this point and may remain in that state for days,902 CHAPTER 43 | ANIMAL REPRODUCTIONmonths, or years. In the human female, this period of arrest isat least 10 years (i.e., until puberty), and some primary oocytesremain in prophase I for up to 50 years (i.e., until menopause).In contrast, spermatogenesis continues, uninterupted, to completiononce the primary spermatocyte has differentiated.During this prolonged prophase I, or shortly before it ends,the primary oocyte grows larger through increased productionof ribosomes, RNA, cytoplasmic organelles, and energystores. At this point, the primary oocyte acquires all the energy,raw materials, and RNA that the ovum will need to survive itsfirst cell divisions after fertilization. In fact, the nutrients in theegg must maintain the embryo until it is either nourished by thematernal circulatory system or can feed on its own.When a primary oocyte resumes meiosis, its nucleus completesthe first meiotic division near the surface of the cell. Thedaughter cells of this division receive grossly unequal shares ofcytoplasm. This asymmetry represents another major differencefrom spermatogenesis, in which cytoplasm is apportionedequally. The daughter cell that receives almost all the cytoplasm43.2 | HOW DO ANIMALS REPRODUCE SEXUALLY? 903The second meioticdivision produceshaploid cells.Spermatids, each of which is differentgenetically, will differentiate intoindividual sperm.The second meiotic division producesanother polar body and the haploid egg.The first meiotic division produces a secondaryoocyte and a small adjacent, nucleus-containingpolar body.Male germ cell(2n)(A)(B)Spermatogonium(2n)Primaryspermatocyte (2n)Secondaryspermatocytes (n)Spermatids (n)Differentiation and maturation into gametesMitosisEmbryo AdultEmbryo AdultMitosis MitosisMitosisFirstmeioticdivisionFirstmeioticdivisionSecondmeioticdivisionSecondmeioticdivisionDifferentiation and growthSperm cells (n)Female germcell (2n) Oogonium (2n)Primaryoocyte (2n) Secondary oocyte (n)Firstpolar bodyOotid (n) Ovum (egg) (n)Polar bodiesSecond degradepolar bodyCytoplasmicbridgeSPERMATOGENESISOOGENESIS43.3 Gametogenesis Male and female germ cells proliferate bymitosis and produce diploid spermatogonia and oogonia that mature intoprimary spermatocytes and oocytes before entering meiosis. (A) Spermatogoniacontinue to divide by mitosis in adults, producing a steady supplyof spermatocytes that divide meiotically to produce haploid spermatids,which differentiate into sperm. In many species, the progeny of spermatocytesremain in contact through cytoplasmic bridges until the spermmature. (B) In mammals, oogonia cease division in the embryo, and primaryoocytes remain arrested in prophase I of meiosis until they are ovulatedand fertilized. Each oocyte will produce one haploid ootid whichmatures into an ovum.becomes the secondary oocyte, and the one that receives almostnone forms the first polar body (see Figure 43.3B).The second meiotic division of the large secondary oocyte isalso accompanied by an asymmetrical division of the cytoplasm.One daughter cell forms the large, haploid ootid, which eventuallydifferentiates into a mature ovum, and the other forms thesecond polar body. Polar bodies degenerate, so the end result ofoogenesis is only one mature egg for each primary oocyte thatentered meiosis. However, that egg is a large, well-provisionedcell.A second period of arrested development occurs after thefirst meiotic division forms the secondary oocyte. The egg maybe expelled from the ovary in this condition. In many species,904 CHAPTER 43 | ANIMAL REPRODUCTIONIn the acrosomal reaction, the acrosomal membranebreaks down, releasing enzymes that digest a paththrough the egg’s protective jelly coat.Polymerization of actin creates the acrosomal process, whichcontacts egg plasma membrane, triggering the fast block topolyspermy (a change in electrical charge on the membrane).Species-specific recognition molecules (in this case,bindin) on the acrosomal process bind to correspondingreceptor molecules on the vitelline envelope.Sperm and egg cell membranes fuse. Activated bindin receptorsstimulate Ca2+ release, causing cortical granules to fuse with theplasma membrane. Sperm organelles enter the egg cytoplasm.Cortical granule enzymes dissolve the bonds betweenthe vitelline envelope and the plasma membrane,initiating the slow block to polyspermy.Substances releasedby the cortical granulesabsorb H2O and swell.Enzymes remove sperm-bindingreceptors. The vitelline envelopehardens, forming a fertilization envelope.EggmembraneCorticalgranulesMitochondrionNucleusVitellineenvelopeJelly coatSpermDigestiveenzymesAcrosomalprocessProtein bondCorticalgranulesFertilizationconeSperm nucleusCentrioleCentrioleFertilizationenvelopeH2OCytoplasmCytoplasmBindinreceptorsSperm cell(A)(B)MitochondriaActinSperm nucleusAcrosomeVitellineenvelopeJelly coat Egg plasmamembraneBindinmolecules––––––––––––––––+++++++++12345612 3 45643.4 Fertilization of the Sea Urchin Egg (A) Sea urchin eggsare protected by a jelly layer and a proteinaceous vitelline envelope.Sperm must penetrate both to reach the egg plasma membrane.Many sperm attach to the vitelline envelope, but only one penetratesthe egg cell membrane and achieves fertilization. Circlednumbers match structures with the events shown in panel B. (B)The acrosomal reaction allows a sea urchin sperm to recognize anegg of the same species and pass through its protective layers.Enzymes from the egg’s cortical granules trigger the slow block topolyspermy.GO TO Animated Tutorial 43.1 • Fertilization in a Sea UrchinyourBioPortal.comincluding humans, the second meiotic division is not completeduntil the egg is fertilized by a sperm.Fertilization is the union of sperm and eggThe union of the haploid sperm and the haploid egg in fertilizationcreates a single diploid cell, called a zygote, which will developinto an embryo. Fertilization does more, however, thanjust restore the full genetic complement of the animal. Theprocesses associated with fertilization help the egg and spermget together, prevent the union of the sperm and egg of differentspecies, and guarantee that only one sperm will enter andactivate the egg metabolically. Fertilization involves a complexseries of events:• The sperm and the egg recognize each other.• The sperm is activated, enabling it to gain access to theplasma membrane of the egg.• The plasma membrane of the egg fuses with the plasmamembrane of a single sperm.• The egg blocks entry of additional sperm.• The egg is metabolically activated and stimulated to startdevelopment.• The egg and sperm nuclei fuse to create the diploid nucleusof the zygote.SPECIFICITY IN SPERM–EGG INTERACTIONS Specific recognitionmolecules mediate interactions between sperm and eggs. Thesemolecules ensure that the activities of sperm are directed towardeggs and not other cells, and they help prevent eggs frombeing fertilized by sperm from the wrong species. The latterfunction is particularly important in aquatic species thatrelease eggs and sperm into the surrounding water, as theeggs of such animals may readily be exposed to sperm ofother species. The sea urchin is a good example of sucha species, and its mechanisms of fertilization have beenwell studied.The eggs of sea urchins release chemical attractants thatincrease the motility of sperm and cause them to swim towardthe egg. These chemical attractants are species-specific.For example, eggs of one species of sea urchin releasea specific peptide consisting of 14 amino acids. As thispeptide diffuses from the egg, it binds to receptors onthe sperm of the same species. The sperm respond by increasingtheir mitochondrial respiration and motility. Beforeexposure to the peptide, the sperm swim in tight littlecircles, but after binding to the peptide, they swimenergetically up the concentration gradient of the peptideuntil they reach the egg that is releasing it.When sperm reach an egg, they must get through twoprotective layers before they can fuse with the egg plasmamembrane. The eggs of sea urchins are covered with a jellycoat, which surrounds a proteinaceous vitelline envelope(Figure 43.4A). The success of a sperm’s assault on theseprotective layers depends on a membrane-enclosed structureat the front of the sperm head called an acrosome.The acrosome, which contains enzymes and other proteins,forms a cap over the sperm nucleus. When the sperm makes contactwith an egg of its own species, substances in the jelly coattrigger an acrosomal reaction, which begins with the breakdownof the plasma membrane covering the sperm head and the underlyingacrosomal membrane (Figure 43.4B). The acrosomalenzymes are released and digest a hole through the jelly coat.As a result of the polymerization of actin triggered by theacrosomal reaction, a structure called the acrosomal process extendsout of the head of the sperm. The acrosomal process iscoated with species-specific recognition molecules called bindin,and there are bindin receptors on the vitelline envelope of theegg. The interaction of these two molecules enables the spermto contact the egg plasma membrane. That contact results in fusionof the sperm and egg plasma membranes and the formationof a fertilization cone that engulfs the sperm head, bringingit into the egg cytoplasm. The sperm mitochondrion, whichlargely constitutes the mid-piece of the sperm, is also drawninto the egg cytoplasm, but it degrades and disappears so thatthe mitochondria and mitochondrial genes of the new urchinare derived only from the egg.In animals that practice internal fertilization, mating behaviorshelp guarantee species specificity, but egg–sperm recognitionmechanisms still exist. The mammalian egg is surroundedby a thick layer called the cumulus, which consists ofa loose assemblage of maternal cells in a gelatinous matrix (Figure43.5). Beneath the cumulus is a glycoprotein envelope calledthe zona pellucida, which is functionally similar to the vitellineenvelope of sea urchin eggs. When mammalian sperm are depositedin the female reproductive tract, they are metabolicallyactivated and made capable of an acrosomal reaction43.2 | HOW DO ANIMALS REPRODUCE SEXUALLY? 905In mammals, a species-specific proteinin the zona pellucida binds a spermand triggers the acrosomal reaction.CumulusOvum(egg)Plasmamembrane75 μmSperm43.5 Barriers to Sperm This human egg, like other mammalian eggs, is surroundedby the cumulus and zona pellucida, both of which a sperm must penetrateto fertilize the egg. Only one sperm will penetrate the zona pellucida andfuse with the plasma membrane.should they encounter an egg. An activated sperm can penetratethe cumulus and interact with the zona pellucida.Unlike the jelly coat of sea urchin eggs, the cumulus of mammalianeggs does not trigger the acrosomal reaction. Whensperm make contact with the zona pellucida, a species-specificglycoprotein binds to recognition molecules on the head of thesperm. This binding triggers the acrosomal reaction, releasingacrosomal enzymes that digest a path through the zona pellucida.When the sperm head reaches the egg plasma membrane,other proteins facilitate its adhesion to and fusion with the eggplasma membrane.The importance of the zona pellucida and its sperm-bindingmolecules as a species-specific recognition mechanism was revealedin experiments on mammalian eggs and sperm in culturedishes. When the zona was stripped from human eggs andthe eggs were exposed to hamster sperm, fertilization tookplace, resulting in a hamster–human hybrid zygote. The hybridzygote did not survive its first cell division, but the experimentdemonstrated that a recognition mechanism in mammalianspecies resides in the zona pellucida.BLOCKS TO POLYSPERMY The fusion of the sperm and eggplasma membranes and the entry of the sperm into the egg initiatea programmed sequence of events. The first responses tosperm entry are blocks to polyspermy—that is, mechanisms thatprevent more than one sperm from entering the egg. If more thanone sperm enters the egg, the embryo is unlikely to survive.Blocks to polyspermy have been studied extensively in seaurchin eggs, which can be fertilized in a dish of seawater. Withinseconds after the sperm membrane contacts the egg membrane,an influx of sodium ions changes the electric charge differenceacross the egg’s plasma membrane. This fast block to polyspermyprevents the fusion of any other sperm with the egg plasmamembrane, but it is transient. The change in membrane electricalcharge lasts only about a minute, but that is enough timeto allow a slower block to sperm entry to develop.The slow block to polyspermy involves converting the vitellineenvelope to a physical barrier that sperm cannot penetrate.Before fertilization, the vitelline envelope is bonded to the eggplasma membrane. Just under the plasma membrane are vesiclescalled cortical granules (see Figure 43.4), which contain enzymesand other proteins.The sea urchin egg, like all animal cells, contains calcium ionssequestered in its endoplasmic reticulum. Sperm entry intothe egg stimulates the release of calcium ions from the endoplasmicreticulum and into the egg cytoplasm. This increase incytosolic calcium causes the egg’s cortical granules to fuse withthe plasma membrane and release their contents. Cortical granuleenzymes break the bonds between the vitelline envelopeand the plasma membrane, and other proteins released fromthe cortical granules attract water into the space between them.As a result, the vitelline envelope rises to form a fertilizationenvelope. Cortical granule enzymes also degrade sperm-bindingmolecules on the surface of the fertilization envelope and causeit to harden, thus preventing additional sperm from contactingthe egg’s plasma membrane.In mammals, sperm entry does not cause a rapid change inmembrane potential, but it does trigger a release of calcium fromthe endoplasmic reticulum. As in the sea urchin, the increasedcalcium causes the cortical granules to fuse with the egg plasmamembrane. A fertilization envelope does not form around themammalian egg, but the cortical granule enzymes destroy thesperm-binding molecules in the zona pellucida. The rise in cytosoliccalcium also signals the egg to complete meiosis. Thestage is set for the first cell division.Getting eggs and sperm togetherAs we have just seen, sexual reproduction requires the productionof haploid gametes (gametogenesis) and the joining togetherof those gametes to form a diploid zygote (fertilization).Spawning and mating behaviors get eggs and sperm closeenough together that fertilization can occur. Fertilization can occurexternally or internally.EXTERNAL FERTILIZATION In an aquatic environment, animalscan bring their gametes together by simply releasing them intothe water. This practice, called spawning, results in external fertilization.Many aquatic animals are not very mobile, but theyproduce huge numbers of gametes that can travel far from thepoint of release. A female oyster, for example, will release millionsof eggs when she spawns, and the number of sperm producedby a male oyster is astronomical.Numbers alone, however, do not guarantee that gametes willmeet. The reproductive activities of the males and females of apopulation must be synchronized, since released gametes havea limited life span. Seasonal breeders may use day length,changes in temperature, or changes in weather to time the productionand release of their gametes. Mutual stimulation is alsoimportant. Release of gametes into the water by one individualcan stimulate others to spawn.Behavior can play an important role in bringing gametestogether even when fertilization is external. Many species travelgreat distances to congregate with potential mates and releasetheir gametes at the same time in a suitable environment.Salmon are an extreme example. They hatch and develop infreshwater streams and then migrate to the ocean where theyremain for years. When they are grown, they travel hundredsof miles to spawn back in the stream where they hatched. Malesand females expend great amounts of energy to swim up thestreams to the spawning grounds, where they pair up, preparea depression in the streambed gravel, and together release theirsperm and eggs. As the gametes drift down into the gravel, fertilizationoccurs.INTERNAL FERTILIZATION Terrestrial animals cannot simply releasetheir gametes into the environment. Sperm can move onlythrough liquid, and delicate gametes released into air woulddry out and die. Terrestrial animals avoid these problems by internalfertilization, the release of sperm into the female reproductivetract. Some aquatic animals also practice internal fertilization,but it is ubiquitous in terrestrial animals.906 CHAPTER 43 | ANIMAL REPRODUCTIONAnimals have evolved an astonishing diversity of behavioraland anatomical adaptations for internal fertilization.As we saw above, gametogenesis occurs in the gonads,which are the primary sex organs. All additionalanatomical components of an animal’s reproductive system arecalled accessory sex organs. An obvious accessory sex organ inmales of many species is the penis, which enables the male todeposit sperm in the female’s vagina, the entry to her reproductivetract. Accessory sex organs include a variety of glands,tubules, ducts, and other structures.Copulation is the physical joining of male and female accessorysex organs. Transfer of sperm in internal fertilization canalso be indirect. Males of many invertebrate species (for example,mites and scorpions) and a few vertebrates (salamanders)deposit spermatophores—packets of sperm—in the environment.The packets protect the sperm from desiccation. When a femalemite encounters a spermatophore from a potential mate, shestraddles it and opens a pair of plates in her abdomen so thatthe tip of the spermatophore enters her reproductive tract andallows the sperm to enter.Male squids and spiders play a more active role in spermatophoretransfer. The male spider secretes a drop containingsperm onto a bit of web, then uses a special structure on his forelegto pick up the sperm-containing web and insert it throughthe female’s genital opening. Male squids use one specializedtentacle to pick up a spermatophore and insert it into the female’sgenital opening.Most male insects copulate and transfer sperm to the female’svagina through a penis. The genitalia—external sex organs—of insects often have species-specific shapes that ensure that themale and female genitalia match in a lock-and-key fashion. Thismechanism ensures a tight, secure fit between the mating pairduring the prolonged period of sperm transfer. In some insectspecies in which females mate with more than one male, themales have elaborate structures on their penises that can scoopsperm deposited by other males out of a female’s reproductivetract, replacing it with their own.An individual animal can function as bothmale and femaleIn most species, gametes are produced by individuals that areeither male or female. Species that have separate male and femalemembers are called dioecious species (from the Greekfor “two houses”). In some species, however, a single individualmay produce both sperm and eggs. Such species are calledmonoecious (“one house”) or hermaphroditic, species.Almost all invertebrate groups contain some hermaphroditicspecies. An earthworm is an example of a simultaneous hermaphrodite,meaning an individual is both male and female at thesame time. When two earthworms mate, they exchange sperm,and as a result, the eggs of each are fertilized (see Figure 32.13C).Some vertebrates are sequential hermaphrodites, meaning thatan individual may function as a male or a female at differenttimes in its life. An example is the anemone fish, or clown fish(Figure 43.6), a species that lives in small groups within largesea anemones. All anemone fish are born male. The largest onein a group becomes a functional female. If that fish is removedfrom the group, the next largest male becomes a female. Also,the second-largest anemone fish in the group is the only malein breeding condition.What is the evolutionary advantage of hermaphroditism?Some simultaneous hermaphrodites, such as parasitic tapeworms,have a low probability of meeting a potential mate—itmay be the only tapeworm in the host. Although tapewormscan fertilize their own eggs, most simultaneous hermaphroditesmust mate with another individual; but because every memberof the population is both male and female, the probability of encounteringa possible mate is double what it would be in strictlymonoecious species. In some sequential hermaphrodites, all siblingsare either male or female at the same time, thus reducingthe incidence of inbreeding.The evolution of vertebrate reproductive systemsparallels the move to landThe earliest vertebrates evolved in aquatic environments. Theclosest living relatives of those earliest vertebrates are moderndayfishes. They remain exclusively aquatic animals, and mostpractice external fertilization. The most primitive of the fishes,the lampreys and hagfishes, simply release their gametes intothe environment. In most fishes, however, mating behaviorsbring females and males into close proximity at the time of ga-43.2 | HOW DO ANIMALS REPRODUCE SEXUALLY? 907Amphiprion percula43.6 When Size Determines Sex Anemone fish (also known asclown fish) live in groups of about a dozen centered on a single seaanemone. All anemone fish are born male, and the largest one in thegroup becomes a functional female. Thus any one fish may function as amale and as a female at different times in its life.mete release. In sharks and rays, fins have evolved into claspersthat hold the male and female together and enable sperm to betransferred directly into the female reproductive tract.Amphibians were the first vertebrates to live in terrestrialenvironments. They dealt with the challenge of a dry environmentby returning to water to reproduce, as most amphibiansstill do today.Reptiles were the first vertebrate group to solve the problemof reproduction in the terrestrial environment. Their solution,the amniote egg, is shared with the birds (see Section 33.4). Achicken egg is a good example of an amniote egg. It contains asupply of food (yolk) and water for the developing embryo. Ahard shell protects the embryo and impedes water loss whileallowing the diffusion of oxygen into the egg and carbon dioxideout of the egg (Figure 43.7A). The eggshell creates an obviousproblem for fertilization. Sperm cannot penetrate the shell,so they must reach the egg before the shell forms. Hence internalfertilization and the evolution of accessory sex organs werenecessary for the evolution of the amniote egg.Male snakes and lizards have paired hemipenes, which can befilled with blood and thereby extruded from the male’s body.Only one hemipenis is inserted into the female’s reproductivetract at a time. It is usually rough or spiny at the end to achievea secure hold while sperm are transferred down a groove on itssurface. Retractor muscles pull the hemipenis back into themale’s body when mating is completed. Some evolutionarilyancient bird species have erectile penises that channel spermalong a groove into the female’s reproductive tract. Birds withmore recent evolutionary origins, however, do not have erectilepenises; instead, the male and female simply bring their genitalopenings close together to transfer sperm. Usually this involvesthe male standing on the female’s back (Figure 43.7B).All mammals practice internal fertilization, and with the exceptionof the prototherian mammals, the developing embryois retained for some time in the female reproductive tract. Prototherianmammals (the monotremes; see Figure 33.24) lay eggs.The other mammals (the therians) vary enormously as to the developmentalstage of their offspring at the time of birth.Animals with internal fertilization are distinguishedby where the embryo developsTwo patterns of care and nurture of the embryo have evolvedin animals: oviparity (egg laying) and viviparity (live bearing).Oviparous animals lay eggs in the environment, and their embryosdevelop outside the mother’s body. Oviparous terrestrialanimals such as insects, reptiles, and birds protect their eggsfrom desiccation with waterproof membranes or shells. Oviparityis possible because eggs are stocked with abundant nutrientsto supply the needs of the embryo. Some oviparous animalsengage in various forms of parental behavior to protecttheir eggs, but until the eggs hatch, the embryos depend entirelyon the nutrients stored in the egg.Viviparous animals retain the embryo within the mother’sbody during its early developmental stages. Although examplesof viviparity exist in all vertebrate groups except the crocodiles,turtles, and birds (even some sharks retain fertilized eggsin their bodies and give birth to free-living offspring), there is abig difference between viviparity in mammals and in otherspecies.All mammals except the prototherians are viviparous andhave a specialized portion of the female reproductive tract, theuterus or womb, that holds the embryo and interacts with it toproduce a placenta, which enables the exchange of nutrientsand wastes between the blood of the mother and that of the embryo.Very few non-mammalian species have evolved such aconnection between the embryo and the mother.In most non-mammalian viviparous animals, such as gartersnakes and the well-known aquarium fish the guppy, fertilized908 CHAPTER 43 | ANIMAL REPRODUCTION(B) Merops apiaster(A) Chelonia mydas43.7 The Shelled Egg The shelled egg was a major evolutionary step that allows reptilesand birds to reproduce in the terrestrial environment. (A) A female green sea turtlehas deposited her eggs in the sand. (B) The shelled egg requires that sperm meet eggbefore the shell forms. Terrestrial animals thus must practice internal fertilization, as theseEuropean bee-eaters are doing.eggs are retained in the mother’s body until they hatch. Theseembryos still receive nutrition from stores in the egg, so this reproductiveadaptation is called ovoviviparity.43.2 RECAPSexual reproduction involves gametogenesis, mating,and fertilization. Fertilization can be external or internaland involves mechanisms for ensuring that onlyone sperm from the right species enters the egg.• Describe the steps by which a sea urchin sperm penetratesthe egg. See Figure 43.4• Explain how polyspermy is prevented and why it iscrucial to do so. See p. 906 and Figure 43.4• What reproductive adaptations made life on land possible?See p. 908Now that we have covered some of the general aspects of gametogenesisand fertilization and have briefly discussed thegreat diversity of mating systems, we will next consider the humanreproductive systems in detail.How Do the Human Male and Female 43.3 Reproductive Systems Work?In this section we describe the structures and functions of themale and female reproductive systems in mammals, using humanbeings as our prime example. We also discuss the hormonalregulation of both male and female systems. Our discussion includesthe primary sex organs (testes in males and ovaries in females)that produce gametes and serve endocrine functions. Italso includes the accessory sex organs: the ducts through whichthe gametes pass, the various glands that empty into those ducts,and the external genitalia. We also discuss secondary sexual characteristics,which are not directly involved in reproduction butare responsible for the major differences in external appearanceof men and women and are important in mating.Male sex organs produce anddeliver semenSemen is the product of the male reproductivesystem. Besides sperm, semen contains a complexmixture of fluids and molecules that support thesperm and facilitate fertilization. Sperm make upless than 5 percent of the volume of the semen.The male reproductive organs are diagrammedin Figure 43.8. Sperm are produced inthe testes, the paired male gonads. The testes ofmost mammals are located outside the body cavityin a pouch of skin called the scrotum.Why should the testes be located outside thebody cavity? The optimal temperature for spermatogenesisin most mammals is slightly lowerthan the normal body temperature. The scrotum43.3 | HOW DO THE HUMAN MALE AND FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEMS WORK? 909Sperm are storedand mature in theepididymis.Sperm are deliveredto the urethra by thevas deferens whichjoins the seminalvesicle duct in theprostate gland toform the ejaculatoryduct.Seminal fluids areproduced by theseminal vesicles,prostate gland,and bulbourethralglands.Sperm areproducedin the testes.Semen is ejaculated through themale copulatory organ, the penis.Ureter(from kidney)ColonSeminalvesicleUrinary bladderSeminalvesicleProstateglandBulbourethralglandErectiletissuePenis UrethraGlans penisUreterEjaculatoryductAnusProstate glandBulbourethralglandVas deferensScrotum TestisEpididymisGlans penisUrethraErectile tissueUrinary bladderPubic boneForeskinRectumEjaculatoryduct(A) Posterior view(B) Side view43.8 Reproductive Tract of the Human Male The male reproductive organs are shown(A) from the rear and (B) from the side.GO TO Web Activity 43.1 • The Human Male Reproductive TractyourBioPortal.comkeeps the testes at this optimal temperature. Muscles in the scrotumcontract in a cold environment, bringing the testes closerto the warmth of the body; in a hot environment they relax, coolingthe testes by suspending them farther from the body.Spermatogenesis takes place within the seminiferous tubules,which are tightly coiled in each testis (Figure 43.9A). Betweenthe seminiferous tubules are clusters of Leydig cells, or interstitialcells, which produce testosterone (Figure 43.9B). Spermatogoniareside in the outer regions of the tubule, just under the basementmembrane. Moving inward from these outer layers towardthe lumen of the tubule, we find germ cells in successive stagesof spermatogenesis (Figure 43.9C). These germ cells are intimatelyassociated with Sertoli cells, which provide nutrients forthe developing sperm.When the second meiotic division is complete, each primaryspermatocyte has given rise to four spermatids (see Figure43.3A), which develop into spermatozoa as they continue to migratetoward the lumen of the seminiferous tubule. The nucleusbecomes compact, and the surrounding cytoplasm is lost. Aflagellum,or sperm tail, develops. The mitochondria, which willprovide energy for tail motility, become condensed into a midpiecebetween the head and the tail. An acrosome forms overthe nucleus in the head of the sperm. Immature sperm are shedinto the lumen of the seminiferous tubule.From the seminiferous tubules, sperm move into the epididymis(see Figure 43.8), where they mature and become motile.The epididymis connects to the urethra via the vas deferens910 CHAPTER 43 | ANIMAL REPRODUCTIONSperm mature while beingstored in the epididymis.Sperm cells develop continuouslyover the great length of theseminiferous tubules.Each Sertoli cell envelops, nourishes,and protects developing sperm cells.Mature sperm are shed into thelumen of the seminiferous tubule.Leydig cells in the tissue between seminiferoustubules produce male sex hormones.(B)LumenEpididymisSeminiferoustubule(A) Vas deferens(C)TestisBasementmembraneof tubuleSertoli cellMaturesperm:AcrosomeNucleusMidpiece(containsmitochondria)TailSpermatogonium (2n)First meiotic divisionSecond meiotic divisionPrimary spermatocyte (2n)Secondary spermatocytes (2n)Spermatids (n)Differentiation and maturationSpermatozoa (n)MitosisMale germ cell (2n)MitosisLumen oftubule43.9 Spermatogenesis Takes Place in theSeminiferous Tubules (A) Seminiferous tubules fill thetestes of men, continuously producing millions of sperm.(B) Cross section of seminiferous tubules and the Leydigcells in the spaces between them. (C) This longitudinal diagramshows how, as sperm mature, they move from theouter layer of the tubule toward the center, where they areshed into the lumen of the tubule.GO TO Web Activity 43.2 • SpermatogenesisyourBioPortal.com(plural vasa deferentia) and the ejaculatory duct. The urethra originatesin the bladder, runs through the penis, and opens to theoutside of the body at the tip of the penis. It serves as the commonfinal duct for the urinary and reproductive systems. Thecomponents of the semen other than sperm come from severalaccessory glands. About 60 percent of the volume of semen is secretedby the paired seminal vesicles, which empty into the vasdeferens just before it joins the urethra. Seminal fluid is thick becauseit contains mucus and fibrinogen, a protein also found inthe blood, where it can polymerize to form blood clots. Seminalfluid also contains the monosaccharide fructose, an energysource for the sperm.The prostate gland surrounds the urethra and contributesabout 30 percent of the volume of the semen. Prostate fluid isalkaline, so it neutralizes the acidity in the male and female reproductivetracts and makes those environments more hospitableto sperm. The prostate also secretes a clotting enzymethat causes the fibrinogen from the seminal vesicles to convertthe semen into a coagulum (gelatinous mass), facilitating itspropulsion into and retention in the upper regions of the femalereproductive tract. Another enzyme in the prostate fluid, profibrinolysin,is inactive when secreted but is activated shortly afterit enters the female reproductive tract. Active fibrinolysindissolves the clotted semen and liberates the sperm.The bulbourethral glands produce a small volume of an alkaline,mucoid secretion that helps neutralize acidity in the urethraand lubricate it to facilitate the passage of semen at theclimax of sexual intercourse. Secretions of the bulbourethralglands precede the climax of the sex act and can carry with themresidual sperm from prior sexual activity. Therefore, it is possiblefor pregnancy to occur even if the penis is withdrawn fromthe vagina just before climax (a rather ineffective birth controlpractice known as coitus interruptus).The penis and the scrotum are the male genitalia. The shaftof the penis is covered with normal skin, but the highly sensitivetip, the glans penis, is covered with thinner, more sensitive skinthat is especially responsive to sexual stimulation. Afold of skincalled the foreskin covers the glans of the human penis. The procedureknown as circumcision removes a portion of the foreskin.Sexual stimulation triggers responses in the nervous systemthat result in penile erection. Nerve endings release a gaseous neurotransmitter,nitric oxide (NO), onto blood vessels leading intothe penis. NO stimulates production of the second messengercGMP (see Figure 7.17), which causes these vessels to dilate. Theincreased blood flow that results fills and swells shafts of spongy,erectile tissue located along the length of the penis. The enlargementof these blood-filled cavities compresses the vessels that normallycarry blood out of the penis. As a result, the erectile tissuebecomes more and more engorged with blood. The penis becomeshard and erect, facilitating its insertion into the vagina. Manyspecies of mammals, but not humans, have a bone in the penis,but these species still depend on erectile tissue for copulation.At the climax of copulation, about 2 to 6 milliliters of semenare propelled through the vasa deferentia and the urethra in twosteps, emission and ejaculation. During emission, rhythmic contractionsof smooth muscles in the vasa deferentia and accessoryglands move the semen into the urethra at the base of the penis.Ejaculation is caused by contractions of other muscles at the baseof the penis surrounding the urethra. These contractions force thecoagulum of semen through the urethra and out of the penis. Themuscle contractions of ejaculation are accompanied by feelingsof intense pleasure known as orgasm. They are also accompaniedby transient increases in heart rate, blood pressure, breathing, andskeletal muscle contractions throughout the body.After ejaculation, NO release decreases and enzymes breakdown cGMP, causing the blood vessels flowing into the penisto constrict. The blood pressure in the erectile tissue decreases,relieving the compression of the blood vessels leaving the penis,and the erection declines.Erectile dysfunction (ED), or impotence, is the inability toachieve or sustain an erection. ED may have different causes,including cardiovascular disease. Drugs used to treat ED act byinhibiting the breakdown of cGMP, thus enhancing the effect ofNO released in the penis, which improves the ability to achieveand maintain an erection.Male sexual function is controlled by hormonesSpermatogenesis and maintenance of male secondary sexualcharacteristics such as facial hair and a deep voice depend ontestosterone produced by the Leydig cells of the testes. As describedin Section 41.3, increased production of testosterone atpuberty results from an increased release of gonadotropin-releasinghormone (GnRH) by the hypothalamus, which stimulatesanterior pituitary cells to increase their secretion of luteinizinghormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)(Figure 43.10). Higher levels of LH stimulate the Leydig cells43.3 | HOW DO THE HUMAN MALE AND FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEMS WORK? 911GnRHTestesReproductive tractand other organsLH FSHTestosteroneTestosterone InhibinSpermatogenesisLeydigcellsSertolicellsAnteriorpituitaryHypothalamusThe hormone inhibin,produced by the Sertolicells, inhibits FSHproduction.A high level ofcirculatingtestosterone,produced by theLeydig cells,inhibits GnRH andLH production.43.10 Male Reproductive Hormones The male reproductive systemis under hormonal control by the hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary.Red lines indicate inhibition; green lines indicate stimulation.to increase their production and release of testosterone. Testosteroneexerts negative feedback on the anterior pituitary andthe hypothalamus. At the time of puberty, the sensitivity ofthe hypothalamus to negative feedback from testosterone declines,and the level of circulating testosterone increases.Increased testosterone in pubertal boys causes the developmentof pubic and facial hair, a deeper voice, enlarged genitals,and an increased growth rate. Testosterone also promotes increasedmuscle mass and maturation of the testes. Continuedproduction of testosterone after puberty is essential for themaintenance of secondary sexual characteristics and the productionof sperm.Spermatogenesis is controlled by the influenceof FSH and testosterone on the Sertoli cells in theseminiferous tubules. The Sertoli cells also producea hormone called inhibin, which exerts negativefeedback on the anterior pituitary cells thatproduce and secrete FSH.Female sex organs produce eggs, receivesperm, and nurture the embryoWhen a mammalian egg matures, it is releasedfrom the ovary directly into the body cavity. Butthe egg does not go far. The ovaries are close tothe fimbria, the undulating, fringed openings ofthe oviducts (also known as the Fallopian tubes).The fimbria draw the released egg into anoviduct (Figure 43.11), where fertilization takesplace. Whether or not the egg is fertilized, cilialining the oviduct propel the egg slowly towardthe uterus, a muscular, thick-walled cavityshaped in humans like an upside-down pear. Theuterus is where the embryo develops if the eggis fertilized. At the bottom, the uterus narrowsinto a region called the cervix, which leads intothe vagina.In humans, two sets of skin folds surround theopening of the vagina and the opening of the urethra,through which urine passes. The inner, moredelicate folds are the labia minora; the outer, thickerfolds are the labia majora. At the anterior tip of thelabia minora is the clitoris, a small bulb of erectiletissue that has the same developmental origins asthe penis. The clitoris is highly sensitive and playsan important role in sexual response. The labia minoraand the clitoris become engorged with bloodin response to sexual stimulation.The external opening of an infant’s vagina is usually, but notalways, partly covered by a thin membrane, the hymen. Eventuallythe hymen can be torn by vigorous physical activity orby first sexual intercourse; it can sometimes make first intercoursedifficult or painful for the woman.To fertilize an egg, sperm deposited in the vagina swim andare propelled by contractions of the female reproductive tractthrough the cervical opening, the uterus, and most of theoviduct. The egg (actually a secondary oocyte) is fertilized inthe upper region of the oviduct. Fertilization stimulates the completionof the second meiotic division, after which the haploid912 CHAPTER 43 | ANIMAL REPRODUCTIONEggs are taken into the oviducts, wherethey travel to the uterus. Fertilizationoccurs in the upper regions of theoviduct, where development begins.Eggs mature in and arereleased by the ovaries.The blastocyst implants inthe endometrium of theuterus, where embryonicdevelopment continues.The neck of the uterus isthe cervix, which remainsclosed during pregnancyand dilates to allowchildbirth.Sperm are deposited inthe vagina duringcopulation. The vagina isalso the birth canal.OvaryCervixOvaryFimbriaOviductUrinarybladderUrethraPubic boneClitorisLabiamajoraLabiaminora VaginaEndometrium(lines uterus)UterusColonCervixRectumOviduct (Fallopian tube)AnusLigament(A) Front view(B) Side view43.11 Reproductive Tract of the Human Female Thefemale reproductive organs are shown (A) from the front and(B) from the side.GO TO Web Activity 43.3 • The Human FemaleReproductive TractyourBioPortal.comnuclei of the sperm and the egg can fuse to produce a diploidzygote nucleus.Still in the oviduct, the zygote undergoes its first few cell divisionsto become a blastocyst. The blastocyst moves down theoviduct to the uterus, where it attaches itself to the epitheliallining of the uterus, or endometrium. Once attached, the blastocystburrows into the endometrium—a process called implantation—and interacts with it to form the placenta, as we will seein Chapter 44. The placenta nurtures the embryo and produceshormones that help sustain pregnancy.As an egg matures in the ovary, the endometrium thickens.If no blastocyst arrives in the uterus, the endometrium regressesor is sloughed off. Thus the female reproductive cycle actuallyconsists of two linked cycles: an ovarian cycle that produces eggsand hormones, and a uterine, or menstrual, cycle that preparesthe endometrium for the arrival of a blastocyst.The ovarian cycle produces a mature eggAn ovarian cycle is about 28 days long in the human female, butit varies considerably among individuals. During the first halfof each cycle, at least one primary oocyte matures into a secondaryoocyte (egg) and is expelled from the ovary (ovulation). Duringthe second half of the cycle, cells in the ovary that were associatedwith the maturing oocyte develop endocrine functionsand then regress if the egg is not fertilized. The progression ofthese events is shown diagrammatically in Figure 43.12A.A newborn baby girl has about a million primary oocytesin each ovary. By the time she reaches puberty, she has onlyabout 200,000; the rest have degenerated. During a woman’sfertile years, her ovaries go through about 450 ovarian cycles.During each cycle, several oocytes begin to mature, but usuallyonly one matures completely and is released; the others degenerate.At around the age of 50, a woman reaches menopause—the end of fertility—and may have few if any oocytes left in eachovary.Each primary oocyte in the ovary is surrounded by a layerof ovarian cells. An oocyte and its surrounding cells constitutethe functional unit of the ovary, the follicle (Figure 43.12B). Betweenpuberty and menopause, 6 to 12 follicles begin to matureeach month. In each follicle, the oocyte enlarges and the surroundingfollicular cells proliferate. After about a week, one follicleis larger than the rest, and it continues to grow, while theothers cease to develop. In the enlarged follicle, the follicularcells nurture the growing egg, supplying it with nutrients,growth factors, and hormonal stimulation.In humans, after 2 weeks of follicular growth, ovulation occurs:the follicle ruptures and the egg is released. Following ovulation,the follicle cells that remain in the ovary continue to proliferateand form a mass of endocrine tissue about the size of amarble. This structure is the corpus luteum (plural corpora lutea).It functions as an endocrine gland, producing estrogen andprogesterone for about 2 weeks. It then degenerates, unless ablastocyst implants in the endometrium.The uterine cycle prepares an environmentfor the fertilized eggThe uterine cycle parallels the ovarian cycle and consists of abuildup and then a breakdown of the endometrium (Figure43.13). About 5 days into the ovarian cycle, the endometriumstarts to grow in preparation for receiving a blastocyst. The uterus43.3 | HOW DO THE HUMAN MALE AND FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEMS WORK? 913If pregnancy does notoccur, the corpusluteum degenerates.7The remaining follicle cellsform the corpus luteum,which produces progesteroneand estrogen.6At ovulation, the follicleruptures, releasing the egg.5About once a monthbetween puberty andmenopause, 6–12primary oocytes begin tomature. A primary oocyteand its surrounding cellsconstitute a follicle.2The developing oocyte isnourished by surroundingfollicular cells, which alsoproduce estrogen.3After 1 week, usually only one primaryoocyte continues to develop. Ameiotic division just before ovulationcreates the secondary oocyte (n).4Primary oocytes(2n) are present inthe ovary at birth.1Ruptured follicleOvaryLigament (holds ovaryin place in the abdomen)STARTPrimary oocyte(A)(B)43.12 The Ovarian Cycle (A) The ovarian cycle progresses from thedevelopment of a follicle to ovulation and finally to growth and degenerationof the corpus luteum. (B) This micrograph shows a mature mammalianfollicle; the oocyte is in the center.attains its maximal state of preparednessabout 5 days after ovulation and remainsin that state for another 9 days. If a blastocysthas not arrived by that time, the endometriumbegins to break down, and thesloughed-off tissue, including blood, flowsfrom the body through the vagina—theprocess of menstruation (from menses, theLatin word for “months”).The uterine cycles of most mammalsother than humans do not include menstruation;instead, the uterine lining typicallyis resorbed. In these species, themost obvious correlate of the ovarian cycleis a state of sexual receptivity calledestrus around the time of ovulation. Youmay be aware of the bloody dischargethat occurs in dogs at the time of estrus.This discharge is not the same as menstruation—in fact it is exactly the opposite.Bleeding in dogs occurs during theproliferation of the uterine lining, whichoccurs just before ovulation. When the femalemammal comes into estrus, or “heat,” she actively solicitsmale attention and may be aggressive to other females. Humansare unusual among mammals in that females are potentiallysexually receptive throughout their ovarian cycles and at all seasonsof the year.Hormones control and coordinate the ovarianand uterine cyclesThe ovarian and uterine cycles are coordinated and timed bythe same hormones that initiate sexual maturation. Gonadotropins(FSH and LH) secreted by the anterior pituitary arethe central elements of this control. Before puberty (that is, beforeabout 11 years of age), the secretion of FSH and LH is lowand the ovaries are inactive. At puberty, the hypothalamus increasesits release of GnRH, stimulating the anterior pituitaryto secrete FSH and LH.In response to FSH and LH, ovarian tissue grows and producesestrogen. The rise in estrogen causes the maturation ofthe accessory sex organs and the development of female secondarysexual characteristics. Between puberty and menopause,interactions of GnRH, gonadotropins, and sex steroids controlthe ovarian and uterine cycles.Menstruation marks the beginning of each uterine and ovariancycle. A few days before menstruation begins, the anteriorpituitary begins to increase its secretion of FSH and LH. In response,some 10 to 20 follicles begin to mature in the ovaries,and these follicles steadily increase their production of estrogen.After about a week, all but one of the follicles wither away.Estrogen exerts negative feedback control on gonadotropinrelease by the anterior pituitary during the first 12 days of theovarian cycle. Then, on about day 12, estrogen exerts positiverather than negative feedback control on the pituitary (Figure43.14). As a result, a surge of LH and a lesser surge of FSH occur(see Figure 43.13A). The LH surge triggers the mature follicleto rupture and release its egg, and it stimulates the cells ofthe ruptured follicle to develop into a corpus luteum.The corpus luteum becomes an endocrine gland. Estrogenand especially progesterone secreted by the corpus luteum followingovulation are crucial to continued growth and mainte-914 CHAPTER 43 | ANIMAL REPRODUCTIONFSH and LH are undercontrol of GnRH fromthe hypothalamus andthe ovarian hormonesestrogen and progesterone(part C). LH surge triggers ovulation.FSH stimulates thedevelopment of follicles;the LH surge causesovulation and then thedevelopment of thecorpus luteum.Estrogen and progesteronestimulate thedevelopment ofthe endometrium inpreparation forpregnancy.DevelopingfollicleOvulation(day 14)Corpus luteum Developingoocyte(A) Gonadotropins (from anterior pituitary)(B) Events in ovary (ovarian cycle)(C) Ovarian hormones and the uterine cycleOocytematurationLuteinizinghormone (LH)Bleeding and sloughing(menstruation)EstrogenEstrogen inhibitsLH and FSHreleaseEstrogen stimulatesLH and FSHreleaseEstrogen inhibitsLH and FSHrelease0 7 14 21Day of uterine cycle28ProgesteroneFollicle-stimulatinghormone (FSH)(D) Endometrium of uterusThickness ofendometriumHighly proliferated andvascularized endometrium43.13 The Ovarian and Uterine CyclesDuring a woman’s ovarian and uterine cycles,coordinated changes occur in (A) gonadotropinrelease by the anterior pituitary, (B) the ovary, (C)the release of female sex steroids, and (D) theuterus. The cycles begin with the onset of menstruation;ovulation is at midcycle (yellow bar).GO TO Animated Tutorial 43.2 •The Ovarian and Uterine CyclesyourBioPortal.comnance of the endometrium. In addition, these sex steroids exertnegative feedback control on the pituitary, inhibiting gonadotropinrelease and thus preventing new follicles from beginningto mature.If the egg is not fertilized, the corpus luteum degenerates onabout day 26 of the cycle. Without production of progesteroneby the corpus luteum, the endometrium sloughs off and menstruationoccurs. The decrease in circulating steroids also releasesthe hypothalamus and pituitary from negative feedbackcontrol, so GnRH, FSH, and LH all begin to increase. The increasein these hormones induces the next round of follicle development,and the ovarian cycle begins again.In pregnancy, hormones from the extraembryonicmembranes take overIf the egg is fertilized and a blastocyst arrives in the uterus andimplants in the endometrium, a new hormone comes into play.A layer of cells covering the blastocyst begins to secrete humanchorionic gonadotropin, or hCG (Figure 43.15A). This gonadotropin,a molecule similar to LH, stimulates the corpus luteumto continue to produce estrogen and progesterone tosupport the growth and maintenance of the endometrium andthereby prevent menstruation. Because it is present only in theblood of pregnant women, the presence of hCG is the basis forpregnancy testing. Pregnancy tests use an antibody to detecthCG in urine; they take only minutes, and can be done at home.915Negative feedbackoccursthroughoutmost of thecycle.Positive feedbackoccursduring days 12through 14.HypothalamusAnteriorpituitaryGnRHLH/FSHOvaryEstrogenandprogesteroneUterus43.14 Hormones Control the Ovarian and Uterine Cycles Theovarian and uterine cycles are under a complex series of positive andnegative feedback controls involving several hormones.The release ofoxytocin by theposterior pituitaryincreases thecontractions of theuterus during laborand birth (a positivefeedback loop).Plasma hormone concentration0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10Months since start of last menstrual periodIncreased ratio ofestrogen toprogesterone atthe end of thethird trimesterGrowth offetusIncreased contractilityof uterine muscleIncreased stretchof uterusIncreased uterinecontractionsIncreased pressureof fetal head on cervixNervous systemcommunicatesuterine stretchingto hypothalamusIncreased oxytocinsecretion(B)(A)(C)Human chorionicgonadotropin (hCG)ProgesteroneEstrogenDeliveryIncrease in E/P ratio43.15 Pregnancy and Childbirth (A) When a fertilized ovum implantsin the uterus, cells surrounding it produce human chorionic gonadotropin,which acts like LH and keeps the corpus luteum functioning as anendocrine gland. The ovarian and uterine cycles are put on hold for theduration of pregnancy. (B) Both mechanical and hormonal signals areinvolved in stimulating the uterine contractions of labor and delivery. (C) Anew person is delivered into the world headfirst.Blastocyst and endometrial tissues form the placenta, whichproduces estrogen and progesterone (eventually replacing thecorpus luteum as the most important source of these sex steroids).Continued high levels of estrogen and progesterone prevent thepituitary from secreting gonadotropins; thus, the ovarian cycleceases for the duration of pregnancy. (This mechanism underliesthe action of birth control pills, which contain synthetic hormonesresembling estrogen and progesterone that exert negative feedbackcontrol on the hypothalamus and pituitary.)Childbirth is triggered by hormonal andmechanical stimuliThroughout pregnancy, the muscles of the uterine wall periodicallyundergo slow, weak, rhythmic contractions called BraxtonHicks contractions. These contractions become stronger duringthe third trimester of pregnancy and are sometimes calledfalse labor contractions. True labor contractions usually markthe beginning of childbirth. Both hormonal and mechanicalstimuli contribute to the onset of labor.Progesterone inhibits and estrogen stimulates contractions ofuterine muscle. Toward the end of the third trimester, the estrogen–progesterone ratio shifts in favor of estrogen. The onset oflabor is marked by increased secretion of the hormone oxytocinby the posterior pituitaries of both mother and fetus. Oxytocinis a powerful stimulant of uterine muscle contraction. Manufacturedoxytocin is used to induce labor when that is necessary.Mechanical stimuli come from the stretching of the uterus bythe fully grown fetus and the pressure of the fetal head on thecervix. These mechanical stimuli increase the release of oxytocinby the mother’s posterior pituitary, which in turn increasesthe activity of uterine muscle, which causes even more pressureon the cervix. This positive feedback loop converts the weak,slow, rhythmic Braxton Hicks contractions into stronger laborcontractions (Figure 43.15B).In the early stage of labor, hormonal changes and pressurecreated by the contractions cause the cervix to dilate (expand)until it is large enough to allow the baby to pass through. Graduallythe contractions become more frequent and more intense.This stage of labor lasts an average of 12 to 15 hours in a firstpregnancy; it is usually 8 hours or less in subsequent ones.The second stage of labor, called delivery, begins when thecervix is fully dilated to a diameter of about 10 centimeters (Figure43.15C). The baby’s head moves into the vagina; passage ofthe fetus through the vagina is assisted by the mother’s bearingdown (“pushing”) with her abdominal and other muscles.Once the head and shoulders of the baby clear the cervix, therest of its body eases out rapidly, but it is still connected to theplacenta by the umbilical cord. Once the baby clears the birthcanal, it starts breathing and is independent of its mother’scirculation. The umbilical cord may then be clamped and cut.The segment still attached to the baby dries up and sloughs offin a few days, leaving behind its distinctive signature, the bellybutton—more properly called the umbilicus. The detachmentand expulsion of the placenta and fetal membranes take from afew minutes to an hour, and may be accompanied by uterinecontractions. If the baby suckles at the breast immediately followingbirth, its suckling stimulates additional secretion of oxytocin,which augments uterine contractions that reduce the sizeof the uterus and help stop bleeding.43.3 RECAPThe reproductive systems of men and women producegametes and hormones, and these functionsare controlled by hypothalamic and anterior pituitaryhormones. In women, the hormonal control of reproductivefunctions produces linked ovarian anduterine cycles.• Describe the path the human sperm and ovum take inmoving from their respective gonads to the point atwhich fertilization occurs. See Figures 43.8 and 43.11• In males, increased production of GnRH at pubertystimulates the release of what two hormones of theanterior pituitary? What effect do these hormoneshave? See p. 911• Explain the events in the ovarian cycle that result in releaseof a single ovum each month. What events preparethe uterus to receive the egg? See Figures 43.12and 43.13Understanding the physiology of human reproduction has ledto numerous methods and technologies for controlling it, eitherto prevent unwanted pregnancies or to overcome infertility.43.4 How Can Fertility Be Controlled?Sexual issues and sexual behavior are dominant aspects of oursociety, and reproductive technologies have had huge impactson our sexual and reproductive lives.Human sexual responses have four phasesThe responses of both women and men to sexual stimulationconsist of four phases: excitement, plateau, orgasm, and resolution.As sexual excitement begins in a woman, her heart rateand blood pressure rise, muscular tension increases, breastsswell, and nipples become erect. Her external genitals, includingthe sensitive clitoris, swell as they become filled with blood,and the walls of the vagina secrete lubricating fluid that facilitatescopulation. In the plateau phase, her blood pressure andheart rate rise further and her breathing becomes rapid. The sensitivityonce focused in the clitoris spreads over the external genitals,and the clitoris itself becomes even more sensitive. Orgasmmay last as long as a few minutes, and unlike men, somewomen can experience several orgasms in rapid succession.During the resolution phase, blood drains from the genitals, andbody physiology returns to close to normal.In the man, the excitement phase is marked by an increasein blood pressure, heart rate, and muscle tension (just like in thewoman) and by penile erection. In the plateau phase, breathing916 CHAPTER 43 | ANIMAL REPRODUCTIONbecomes rapid, the diameter of the glans increases,and a few drops of a lubricating fluid from the bulbourethralgland may ooze from the penis. Continuedstimulation of the nerve endings in theglans and in the skin along the shaft of the peniseventually trigger orgasm. Massive spasms of themuscles in the genital area and contractions in theaccessory reproductive organs result in ejaculation.Within a few minutes after ejaculation, the penisshrinks to its former size and body physiologyreturns to resting conditions.The male sexual response also includes a refractoryperiod immediately after orgasm. During thisperiod, which may last from minutes to hours, aman cannot achieve a full erection or another orgasm,regardless of the intensity of sexual stimulation.This refractory period is believed to becontrolled by the anterior pituitary hormone prolactin(see Figure 41.2), which is released duringorgasm. We say “believed” because the studyshown in Figure 43.16 is not conclusive; it comparesthe data from a single subject who displayedan unusual physiological characteristicwith averaged data from a group of typical individuals.In Chapter 1 we learned the importanceof statistical tests to establish whether an observedresult could be due to chance alone, butwe can’t perform the necessary tests with a samplesize of only one. This problem frequentlycrops up in medical science when there is an effortto find an explanation for a highly unusualtrait or disease. In such cases, data from even asingle individual is of interest and can lead to additionalstudies and experiments.Humans use a variety of methodsto control fertilityAccording to a recent study, almost half of themore than 6 million pregnancies that occur in theUnited States each year are unintended. Forwomen of college age, a single act of unprotectedintercourse in the 2 days prior to ovulation carriesa chance of conception as high as 50 percent.The only failure-proof methods of preventingpregnancy are complete abstinence from sexual activity or thesurgical removal of the gonads. Since those options are not acceptableto most people, they turn to other methods to preventpregnancy. Many of these methods prevent fertilization or implantation(conception) and are therefore referred to as contraception.Most methods are used by the woman, some are usedby the man; they also vary enormously in their effectiveness.Table 43.1 lists some of the most commonly used contraceptivemethods and their relative failure rates.Once a fertilized egg is successfully implanted in the uterus,any termination of the pregnancy is called an abortion. A spontaneousabortion is the medical term for what most people call amiscarriage. Spontaneous abortions are common early in pregnancyand are usually the result of either a chromosomal abnormalityin the fetus or to a breakdown in the process of implantation.Many spontaneous abortions occur before the womaneven realizes she is pregnant.Abortions that result from medical intervention may be performedeither for therapeutic purposes or for fertility control.A therapeutic abortion may be necessary to protect the healthof the mother, or it may be performed because prenatal testingreveals that the fetus has a severe defect. Of the approximately3 million unintended pregnancies in the United States each year,almost half are ended by abortion.43.4 | HOW CAN FERTILITY BE CONTROLLED? 917CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE43.16 Prolactin and the Male Refractory PeriodMen experience a refractory period immediately after achieving orgasm,during which most men cannot achieve a full erection. A study done inGermany on a single individual who was able to achieve multiple orgasmsindicated that the hormone prolactin may control the onset of refraction.HYPOTHESIS Release of prolactin during copulation induces a refractoryperiod in males.In normal men, blood levels of prolactin rise followingejaculation. The multiorgasmic male showed no increasein prolactin levels, which may explain the lack of arefractory period in this individual.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSXXXXX1. Catheterize subjects and withdraw blood samples(9 normal subjects; 1 multiorgasmic subject).2. Induce orgasms 30 minutes apart.3. Withdraw blood samples following orgasms.4. Analyze all blood samples for levels of prolactin.These results were averaged from 9 subjectsdisplaying normal refractory periods. Error barsindicate the range of results.This individual was able to achieve asecond orgasm within 10 minutes ofthe first induced orgasm.Prolactin level (ng/ml) 515 25 35 45 55 65Time (min)2.55.07.510.012.515.0Orgasminduced918 CHAPTER 43 | ANIMAL REPRODUCTIONTABLE 43.1Methods of ContraceptionFAILUREMETHOD MODE OF ACTION RATEa COMMENTSUnprotected No form of birth control 85 High risk of pregnancy, especially for women 15–30.NONTECHNOLOGICAL METHODSRhythm method The couple abstains from intercourse between days 15–35 High failure rate due to miscalculation and/or variation10 and 20 of the ovarian cycle (peak fertility). of individual cycles.Coitus The man withdraws his penis prior to ejaculation, 20–40 Requires self-control, especially by the male partner.interruptus so no sperm is deposited in the vagina. Very high failure rate.BARRIER METHODSbCondom A sheath of impermeable material (often latex) is fitted 15 If fitted correctly, an intact condom can prevent pregnancyover the erect penis. Semen is trapped in the condom, and provide protection against sexually transmittedso no sperm is deposited in the vagina. diseases (STDs), including HIV (AIDS).Spermicidal Applied inside the vagina, these chemical compounds 25 Used alone, spermicidal compounds have a fairly highjellies kill or immobilize sperm. failure rate.Diaphragms, Inserted by the woman prior to intercourse, these items 10–15 Approximately the same failure rate as condom use bycervical caps work by blocking the cervix so that sperm cannot pass males, but do not protect against STDs. Can be used ininto the uterus. conjunction with spermicidal jelly for extra protection.HORMONE-BASED CONTRACEPTIVESOral A daily pill for females containing a combination of 0–3 Requires medical consultation and prescription. Takenhormones synthetic estrogens and progesterone (progestin). These correctly, oral contraceptives are extremely effective.(“the pill”) hormones mimic pregnancy to the extent that the ovarian In the U.S., more than 12 million women use themcycle and ovulation are suspended. The uterine cycle is each year; they are sometimes prescribed to treatallowed to continue by including a week of non-hormone menstrual disorders.administration every 21–28 days.Non-orally Making use of same hormonal actions as the pill, these <1 Same as oral contraceptives. A slightly lower failureadministered methods include long-acting injections, patches that rate because the woman does not have to rememberhormones release hormones transdermally (through the skin), and to take a daily pill.a hormone-containing vaginal ring.Progestin- An oral contraceptive meant to be taken within 72 hours 5-40c Not an “abortion pill,” this drug will not terminate anonly pill after unprotected sex. A high dose of progestin in two existing pregnancy. Currently available to women over(Plan B®) pills prevents ovulation in the same manner birth control 17 without a prescription.pills do.IMPLANTATION BLOCKERSIntrauterine A medical professional inserts a small plastic or metal 0.5–5 A highly effective contraceptive, it is the most widelydevice (IUD) device into the uterus. The resulting inflammation reaction used birth control device in China (and hence the world).(see Chapter 42) releases prostaglandins, which prevent With medical monitoring, can remain in place forimplantation of the fertilized egg. several years.Mifepristone Also known as the “morning after” or “abortion pill,” 0.5–6 Prevents implantation when taken up to several days(RU-486) this drug blocks progesterone receptors necessary to after unprotected intercourse. Can end a pregnancy upmaintain the endometrium during implantation and to the time of the first missed menstrual period. In thepregnancy. U.S., available from specialized providers.STERILIZATIONVasectomy The vasa deferentia (see Figure 43.8A) are cut and tied 0–0.15 A simple surgical procedure performed under localoff so that sperm can no longer pass into the urethra. anesthetic in a doctor’s office. Although it can theor-Sperm continue to be produced but are reabsorbed etically be reversed, vasectomy should be consideredby the man’s body. Male hormone levels and sexual permanent.responses are not affected.Tubal ligation The oviducts (see Figure 43.11A) are tied off so that 0–0.05 This surgical procedure is somewhat more complexeggs cannot reach the uterus and sperm cannot reach than vasectomy. It is often performed in conjunctionthe egg. As with vasectomy, hormone levels and sexual with childbirth when a woman has decided that herresponses are not affected. family is complete.a “Failure rate” refers to the number of pregnancies per 100 women per year.b All of these barrier methods are routinely available without medical prescription.c Failure rate varies widely depending on when taken.In a medical abortion, the cervix is dilated and some of theendometrium, along with the implanted fetus, is removed fromthe uterus. When performed in the first trimester of a pregnancy,a medical abortion carries less risk of death to the mother thana full-term pregnancy. The risk rises after the first 12 weeks ofpregnancy but remains less than that of a full-term pregnancythrough the second trimester.Reproductive technologies help solve problemsof infertilityAbout 15 percent of the couples in the United States are infertile;they can’t have children. There are many reasons for infertility,and they are equally distributed between men andwomen. A number of technologies have been developed toovercome barriers to both conceiving and bearing a child.The simplest treatment available is artificial insemination, inwhich the physician positions sperm in the female’s reproductivetract. This technique is useful if the male’s sperm count islow, if his sperm lack motility, or if problems in the female’s reproductivetract prevent the normal movement of sperm up toand through the oviducts. Artificial insemination is used widelyin the production of domesticated animals such as cattle.More recent advances, called assisted reproductive technologies,or ARTs, involve procedures that remove unfertilized eggsfrom the ovary, combine them with sperm outside the body, andthen place fertilized eggs or egg–sperm mixtures in the appropriatelocation in the female’s reproductive tract for developmentto take place. The first successful ART was in vitro fertilization(IVF). In IVF, the female is treated with hormones thatstimulate many follicles in her ovaries to mature. Eggs are collectedfrom these follicles, and sperm are collected from the male.Eggs and sperm are combined in a culture medium outside thebody, where fertilization takes place. The resulting embryos canbe injected into the mother’s uterus in the blastocyst stage orkept frozen for implantation later. The first “test-tube baby” resultingfrom IVF was born in England in 1978. Since then, morethan 3 million babies have been produced by this ART.A major cause of failure of IVF is failure of sperm to gainaccess to the egg plasma membrane (see Figure 43.4). To solvethis problem, methods have been developed to inject a spermcell directly into the cytoplasm of an egg. In intracytoplasmicsperm injection (ICSI), an egg is held in place by suction appliedto a polished glass pipette. Aslender, sharp pipette is then usedto penetrate the egg and inject a sperm (Figure 43.17). This ARTwas used successfully for the first time in 1992 by researchersin Belgium; now thousands of these procedures are performedin U.S. clinics each year, with a success rate of about 25 percent.IVF, coupled with techniques of genetic analysis, can eliminatethe risk that adults who are carriers of genetic diseases willproduce affected children. It is now possible to take a cell froma human embryo at the 4- or 8-cell stage (see Figure 44.4) withoutdamaging its developmental potential. The sampled cell canbe subjected to molecular analysis to determine whether it carriesthe harmful gene. This procedure, called preimplantationgenetic diagnosis (PGD), makes it possible to determinewhether an embryo produced by IVF carries the genetic defectof concern.43.4 RECAPControlling fertility is an important aspect of modernhuman life. Decreasing the probability of pregnancyis achieved through methods that prevent sperm andegg from meeting and from preventing implantation.Pregnancies can be facilitated through medicaltechnology.• What are the four phases of the human sexualresponse? See p. 916• Which method of contraception is the only one to offerprotection against sexually transmitted diseases(STDs)? See Table 43.1The fertilized egg of a sexually reproducing organism is a singlecell containing all the genetic information needed to createa new organism. Chapters 19 and 20 introduced some of the molecularaspects of the process of development in multicellularanimals. Chapter 44 describes the physical events of animal development.43.4 | HOW CAN FERTILITY BE CONTROLLED? 919Pipetteholding eggPipetteEgg injecting sperm43.17 Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection In this procedure, spermare injected directly into a mature egg cell. The fertilized egg is thenplaced in the female reproductive tract, where it can implant and developinto a fetus.
43.1 How Do Animals Reproduce Without Sex?• Asexual reproduction produces offspring that are geneticallyidentical to their parent and to one another; it produces nogenetic diversity.• Means of asexual reproduction include budding, regeneration,and parthenogenesis. Review Figures 43.1 and 43.243.2 How Do Animals Reproduce Sexually?• Sexual reproduction consists of three basic steps: gametogenesis;spawning and mating; and fertilization.• Gametogenesis and fertilization are similar in all animals, butspawning and mating includes a great variety of anatomical,physiological, and behavioral adaptations.• In sexually reproducing species, genetic diversity is created bycrossing over and independent assortment of chromosomesduring gametogenesis. Fertilization also contributes to geneticdiversity.• Gametogenesis occurs in testes and ovaries. In spermatogenesis(the production of sperm) and oogenesis (the production ofeggs), the germ cells proliferate mitotically, undergo meiosis,and mature into gametes.• Each primary spermatocyte can produce four haploid spermthrough the two divisions of meiosis. Review Figure 43.3A• Primary oocytes immediately enter prophase of the first meioticdivision, and in many species, including humans, their developmentis arrested at this point. Each oogonium produces onlyone egg. Review Figure 43.3B• Fertilization involves sperm activation, species-specific bindingof sperm to egg, the acrosomal reaction, digestion of a paththrough the protective coverings of the egg, and fusion ofsperm and egg plasma membranes. Fusion of these two membranestriggers blocks to polyspermy, which prevent additionalsperm from entering the egg, and in mammals, signal the eggto complete meiosis and begin development. Review Figure43.4, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 43.1• External fertilization is common in aquatic species. Internalfertilization is necessary in terrestrial species and usuallyinvolves copulation.• The shelled egg of amniotes is an important evolutionary adaptationthat allows reptiles and birds to reproduce in the terrestrialenvironment.• Hermaphroditic or monoecious species have both male andfemale reproductive systems in the same individual, eithersequentially or simultaneously. Dioecious species have separatemale and female individuals.• Animals can be classified as oviparous or viviparous, dependingon whether the early stages of development occur outsideor inside the mother’s body.43.3 How Do the Human Male and Female ReproductiveSystems Work?• Men produce semen and deliver it into the woman’s reproductivetract. Semen consists of sperm suspended in seminal fluid,which nourishes the sperm and facilitates fertilization.• Sperm are produced in the seminiferous tubules of the testes,mature in the epididymis, and are delivered to the urethrathrough the vasa deferentia. Other components of semen areproduced in the seminal vesicles, prostate gland, and bulbourethralgland. Review Figures 43.8 and 43.9, WEBACTIVITY 43.1• All components of the semen join in the urethra at the base ofthe penis and are ejaculated through the erect penis by musclecontractions at the culmination of copulation.• Spermatogenesis depends on testosterone secreted by theLeydig cells of the testes, which are under the control of hormonesproduced in the anterior pituitary and the hypothalamus.The production of these hormones is controlled by negativefeedback from testosterone and another hormone, inhibin,produced by the Sertoli cells of the testes. Review Figure43.10, WEB ACTIVITY 43.2• Eggs mature in the woman’s ovaries and are released into theoviducts. Sperm deposited in the vagina during copulationmove up through the cervix and uterus into the oviducts.Fertilization occurs in the upper regions of the oviducts. ReviewFigure 43.11, WEB ACTIVITY 43.3• The maturation and release of eggs constitute an ovarian cycle.In women, this cycle takes about 28 days. The uterine cycle preparesthe uterus for receipt of a blastocyst. If no blastocyst is implanted,the lining of the uterus sloughs off in the process of menstruation.Review Figure 43.13, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 43.2• Both the ovarian and the uterine cycles are under the control ofhypothalamic and pituitary hormones, which in turn are underthe feedback control of estrogen and progesterone. ReviewFigure 43.14• Childbirth is initiated by hormonal and mechanical stimuli thatincrease the contraction of uterine muscle. Review Figure 43.1543.4 How Can Fertility Be Controlled?• Human sexual responses consist of four phases: excitement,plateau, orgasm, and resolution. In addition, men have a refractoryperiod during which renewed excitement is not possible.Review Figure 43.16• Methods of contraception include abstention from copulationand the use of technologies that decrease the probability of fertilization.Review Table 43.1• Assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs) have been developedto increase fertility.