Go to Google Maps and compare London with NewYork City at the same scale. In which city is it easierto drive a taxi? In the city with numbered avenuesand streets at right angles to each other, or the city with amaze of named streets going in every which direction?Eleanor Maguire at University College London was soimpressed with the navigational abilities of London taxidrivers, she decided to see if there was anything “special”about their brains. Using the brain imaging techniqueknown as MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), Maguire andher colleagues examined the brains of taxi drivers withvarying years of experience and compared them with eachother and with the brains of control subjects who were nottaxi drivers. The studies revealed significant changes in theanatomy of the hippocampus among taxi drivers.The hippocampus is an area of the brain involved inlearning and memory. The posterior hippocampus in particularis implicated in the memory of spatial relationshipsamong objects in the environment. Maguire found thatthe posterior hippocampi of taxi drivers was larger thanthat of the control subjects and that, among the cab driversthemselves, there was a positive correlation betweenthe size of the posterior hippocampus and years of drivingexperience.At the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Matt Wilsonand his colleagues can record the hippocampal activityof lab rats as the animals navigate a maze. By placingelectrodes in the rats’ hippocampi, Wilson has locatedspecific neurons, sometimes referred to as “place cells,”that fire only when the rat is at a particular location in themaze. In a sense he can even see what they are thinking,because when the rats are not moving through the maze,the neurons will occasionally fire in the same pattern aswhen the animal is running the maze—or they will fire inthe reverse sequence, representing wherethe animal has just been. In a maze that hada choice point (go right or go left), the firingpattern seen when the animal was held atthe start position predicted which directionit would turn. Similar firing patterns occurwhen the rats are sleeping. Are they dreamingabout the maze, or are they transferringmemory of today’s experience into longtermmemory?Neural firing patterns that correlate withthe hippocampal sequences are also seenin the visual cortex at the back of the brainDrive a cab, grow your brain47A Mind-Expanding Maze The extraordinaryability of taxicab drivers in London to navigateits mazelike warren of streets and bywaysprompted a study that revealed London cabbiesto have larger than normal posterior hippocampi—a brain region implicated in the memoryof spatial relationships in the environment.© Bluesky International LimitedHow Is the Mammalian Nervous 47.1 System Organized?We can describe the organization of the mammalian nervoussystem anatomically or functionally. In anatomical terms, all vertebratenervous systems consist of three parts: a brain, a spinalcord, and a set of peripheral nerves that reach to all parts ofthe body. As discussed in Section 45.1, the brain and spinal cordare referred to as the central nervous system, or CNS, and the cranialand spinal nerves that connect the CNS to all the tissues ofthe body are referred to as the peripheral nervous system, or PNS.An additional division of the nervous system exists in the gut:the enteric nervous system, which we discuss in Chapter 51.Recall from Section 45.1 that a neuron is an electrically excitablecell that communicates via an axon, and a nerve is a bundleof axons that carries information about many things simultaneously.Some axons in a nerve may be carrying informationto the CNS, while other axons in the same nerve are carrying informationfrom the CNS to the body’s organs. In this chapter,we will further divide the anatomy of the brain, spinal cord, andPNS into smaller functional units.A functional organization of the nervous system isbased on flow and type of informationFigure 47.1 illustrates the major avenues of information flowthrough the nervous system. The afferent portion of the PNS carriessensory information to the CNS. We are conscious of muchof this information (e.g., light, sound, skin temperature, the positionof limbs), but we are usually not conscious of the informationinvolved in physiological regulation (e.g., blood pressure,deep body temperature, blood oxygen levels).The efferent portion of the PNS carries information from theCNS to the muscles and glands of the body. Efferent pathwayscan be divided into a voluntary division, which executes ourconscious movements, and an involuntary, or autonomic, division,which controls physiological functions.In addition to the neural information it receives from thePNS, the CNS receives chemical information from hormones circulatingin the blood. In turn, neurohormones released by neuronsenter the circulation and affect neurons and other cells distantfrom the site of release (see Figure 41.1).The vertebrate CNS develops from theembryonic neural tubeEarly in the development of a vertebrate embryo, a tube of neuraltissue forms (see Section 44.3). At its anterior end, this neuraltube forms three swellings that become the hindbrain, midbrain,and forebrain. The rest of the neural tube becomes theIN THIS CHAPTER we will explore the cellular basisof important subsystems of the human nervous system. Thehuman brain has about 100 billion neurons and probably athousand times as many synapses, which account for its abilityto handle vast amounts of information. But the ability ofthe brain to carry out specific functions—evaluating sensoryinput, controlling emotions, generating motor output, learningand remembering—arises from functional subsystems.and in the prefrontal cortex at the front of the brain. Inhumans, the prefrontal cortex is involved in planningand decision-making.The extensive ability of humans to remember, to learn,to communicate, and to feel emotions—the “higherfunctions” of the mammalian brain—is a fascinating subjectthat brings together the fields of neurobiology, psychology,and medicine. Are these functions simply theproduct of molecular changes in brain cells? To what extentcan we reverse damage to the brain that interfereswith higher functioning? These and countless other questionsare only beginning to be articulated and studied.CHAPTER OUTLINE47.1 How Is the Mammalian Nervous System Organized?47.2 How Is Information Processed by Neural Networks?47.3 Can Higher Functions Be Understood inCellular Terms?Seeing What a Rat Thinks By recording from many neuronsin the hippocampus of a rat while it runs a maze, asequence of “place cell” activities that correspond to differentlocations in the maze can be described. After the rat haslearned the maze, a similar sequence of neural activity can berecorded from its visual cortex.spinal cord. Peripheral nerves sprout from the midbrain andhindbrain (the cranial nerves) and from the spinal cord (thespinal nerves). From these early stages we see the linear axisof information flow in the nervous system. Although the developingbrain will fold and become a complex structure, the informationflow in the adult nervous system will follow pathsthat emerge from the simple linear neural tube.Each of the three regions of the embryonic brain develops intoseveral structures in the adult brain (Figure 47.2). From the embryonicmidbrain come structures that process aspects of visualand auditory information. From the hindbrain come themedulla, the pons, and the cerebellum. The medulla is continuouswith the spinal cord, the pons is in front of the medulla, andthe cerebellum is a dorsal outgrowth of the pons. The medullaand pons contain distinct groups of neurons involved in controllingphysiological functions such as breathing and circulationand basic motor patterns such as swallowing and vomiting. Allinformation traveling between the spinal cord and higher brainareas must pass through the pons, the medulla, and the midbrain,which are collectively known as the brainstem.The cerebellum is involved in coordinating muscle activityand maintaining balance. It is like the conductor of an orchestra;the cerebellum receives “copies” of the commands going tothe muscles from higher brain areas, and it receives informationcoming up the spinal cord from the joints and muscles. It comparesthe motor “score” with the actual behavior of the musclesand refines the motor commands accordingly.The embryonic forebrain develops a central region called thediencephalon and a surrounding structure called the telencephalon.The diencephalon is the core of the forebrain and consistsof an upper structure called the thalamus and a lower structurecalled the hypothalamus. The thalamus is the final relaystation for sensory information going to the telencephalon. The47.1 | HOW IS THE MAMMALIAN NERVOUS SYSTEM ORGANIZED? 987Centralnervoussystem(CNS)Peripheralnervoussystem(PNS)CONSCIOUSConscioussensoryinformation (e.g.,sight, sound, smell)Unconsciousphysiologicalinformation (e.g.,blood pressure,deep bodytemperature)Voluntarycommands toskeletal muscles(behavior)Autonomiccommands (e.g.,heart rate,sweating,salivation)UNCONSCIOUSVOLUNTARYAUTONOMICNeuralafferents(informationto CNS)Neuralefferents(informationout of CNS)Hormones NeurohormonesThe forebrain develops intotwo major divisions, thetelencephalon and diencephalon.The hindbrain developsinto three major divisions:the cerebellum, pons, andmedulla.Adult brain (midsagittal section, right cerebral hemisphere)ForebrainMidbrainHindbrainPituitarySpinalcordTelencephalonDiencephalonDeveloping eyeCranial andspinal gangliaOpticvesicleCerebrumThalamusHypothalamusCerebellumMidbrainPonsMedulla30 days Neural tubeSpinalcordSpinal cordCerebellumPonsMedulla60 days180 daysBrainstem47.1 Organization of the Nervous System The peripheral nervoussystem (beige, green) carries information both to (afferent) and from (efferent)the central nervous system (purple). The CNS also receives hormonalinputs and produces hormonal outputs (lavender).47.2 Development of the Central Nervous System In vertebrateembryos, the anterior end of the hollow neural tube differentiates intoforebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain. Each of these regions develops intoseveral structures in the adult brain. The remainder of the neural tubebecomes the spinal cord.hypothalamus regulates many physiological functions and biologicaldrives such as hunger and thirst; it receives a lot ofphysiological information of which we are not conscious.The telencephalon—also called the cerebrum—consists oftwo cerebral hemispheres, left and right. The outer layer ofthe telencephalon is the cerebral cortex, a thin layer rich in cellbodies. If we compare the classes of vertebrates from fishesthrough amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals, the telencephalonincreases in size, complexity, and importance—an evolutionarytrend called telencephalization (see Figure 45.2). Inhumans, the telencephalon is by far the largest part of the brainand plays major roles in sensory perception, learning, memory,and conscious behavior.The spinal cord transmits and processes informationThe spinal cord conducts information in both directions betweenthe brain and the body’s organs. It also integrates muchof the information coming from the PNS and responds to thatinformation by issuing motor commands.Across section of the spinal cord reveals a central area of graymatter in the shape of a butterfly, surrounded by an area ofwhite matter (Figure 47.3). In the nervous system, gray matteris rich in neural cell bodies, and white matter contains axons.The gray matter of the spinal cord contains the cell bodies of thespinal neurons; the white matter contains the axons that conductinformation up and down the spinal cord. The white appearanceis due to the myelin that wraps most of the axons.Spinal nerves extend from the spinal cord at regular intervalson each side. Each spinal nerve has two roots, one connectingwith the dorsal horn of the gray matter, the other with theventral horn. The afferent (sensory) axons in a spinal nerve enterthe spinal cord through the dorsal root, and the efferent (motor)axons leave through the ventral root.The conversion of afferent to efferent information in the spinalcord without participation of the brain is called a spinal reflex.The simplest type of spinal reflex involves only two neurons andone synapse and is therefore called a monosynaptic reflex. Anexample is the knee-jerk reflex, which your physician checks witha mallet tap just below your knee. We can diagram the wiring ofa monosynaptic reflex by following the flow of informationthrough the spinal cord, as shown in Figure 47.3.In the knee-jerk reflex, sensory information comes fromstretch receptors in the leg muscle that is suddenly stretchedwhen the mallet strikes the tendon running over the knee.Each stretch receptor initiates action potentials that are conductedby the axon of a sensory neuron through the dorsalhorn of the spinal cord and all the way to the ventral horn. Inthe ventral horn, the sensory neuron synapses with motor neurons,causing them to fire action potentials that are then conductedback to the leg extensor muscle, causing it to contract.The function of this simple circuit is to sense an increased loadon the limb and to increase the strength of muscle contractionto compensate for the added load and thereby keep musclelength constant.Most spinal circuits are more complex than this monosynapticreflex, as we can demonstrate by building on the circuit wejust traced. Limb movement is controlled by antagonistic sets ofmuscles—muscles that work against each other. When onemember of an antagonistic set of muscles contracts, it bends,or flexes, the limb; it is therefore called a flexor. The antagonistto this muscle, the extensor, straightens, or extends, thelimb. For a limb to move, one muscle of the pair must relaxwhile the other contracts. Thus, sensory input that activates themotor neuron of one muscle also inhibits its antagonist. Thiscoordination is achieved by an interneuron, which makes an inhibitorysynapse onto the motor neuron of the antagonistic988 CHAPTER 47 | THE MAMMALIAN NERVOUS SYSTEM: STRUCTURE AND HIGHER FUNCTIONA hammer tap stretchesthe tendon in the knee,stretching receptors inthe extensor muscle.The legextends.The motor neuron conductsaction potentials to the extensormuscle, causing contraction.153642A polysynaptic pathway involvinga spinal interneuron inhibits firingin the motor neuron for theantagonistic muscle.Stretch receptors fireaction potentials.In a monosynaptic pathway,the sensory neuron synapseswith a motor neuron in theventral horn of the spinal cord.Dorsal root(afferentnerves)GraymatterWhitematterDorsal hornVentral hornVentral root(efferentnerves)MotorneuronsSpinalinterneuron47.3 The Spinal Cord Coordinates the Knee-Jerk Reflex Sensory (afferent) information entersthe spinal cord through the dorsal horns (red pathway),and motor (efferent) output leaves it via theventral horns (blue pathways). Information travels tothe brain in white matter tracts. Interneurons makeconnections within the spinal cord that result in acomplex, coordinated behavior pattern.GO TO Animated Tutorial 47.1 • InformationProcessing in the Spinal CordyourBioPortal.commuscle (see Figure 47.3). Thus the reciprocal inhibition of antagonisticmuscles involves an interneuron between the sensorycell and the motor neuron of the inhibited muscle, andtherefore at least two synapses.The withdrawal reflex is an example of a polysynaptic spinalreflex that involves many interneurons. When you step on atack, you immediately pull back your foot: the tack stimulatespain receptors in the foot, and the sensory neurons transmit actionpotentials into the dorsal horn of the spinal cord on thesame side of the body. In the dorsal horn, these neuronssynapse with interneurons that send information through theiraxons to the brain, resulting in the conscious sensation of pain.Before the brain is aware of the pain, however, synapses ofthe sensory neurons with other interneurons stimulate and inhibita variety of different motor neurons in the spinal cord. Interneuronson the same side of the spinal cord coordinate theactivity of the muscles that withdraw the foot and leg. To pullaway, however, the other leg has to extend, and balance mustbe shifted. The coordination of these actions involves interneuronsthat make connections across the spinal cord to motor neuronson the opposite side. Thus a rather complex suite of movementsis coordinated in the spinal cord without the brain’sparticipation.The reticular system alerts the forebrainSensory information ascending the spinal cord to final destinationsin the forebrain passes through the brainstem. Manysensory axons give off branches in the brainstem that formsynapses with a network of brainstem neurons called the reticularsystem. Within this highly complex network of axons anddendrites are many discrete groups of neurons that share a commoncharacteristic such as the neurotransmitter they produceand release. Such an anatomically distinct group of neurons inthe CNS is called a nucleus (not to be confused with the nucleusof a single cell).As axons carrying sensory information ascend through thereticular formation, they make connections with nuclei that areinvolved in controlling many functions of the body. Informationfrom joints and muscles, for example, is directed to nucleiin the pons and cerebellum that are involved in balance and coordination.Sensory information also goes to reticular formationnuclei that control sleep and wakefulness. High reticular formationactivity produces waking; in the absence of such stimulation,sleep occurs. Therefore, the reticular core of the brainstemis called the reticular activating system.The core of the forebrain controls physiological drives,instincts, and emotionsAs mentioned above, the diencephalon consists of the thalamusand the hypothalamus. The thalamus communicates sensoryinformation to the cerebral cortex; the hypothalamus receivesinformation about physiological conditions in the body and regulatesmany homeostatic functions. Section 40.4 describes howthe hypothalamus is involved in regulating body temperature,and Section 41.2 discusses the intimate association between thehypothalamus and the pituitary gland and its control of manyhomeostatic functions.Surrounding the diencephalon of all vertebrates are phylogeneticallyolder structures of the telencephalon called the limbicsystem (Figure 47.4). The limbic system is responsible forbasic physiological drives such as hunger and thirst, instincts,long-term memory formation, and emotions such as fear. Withinthe limbic system are areas that, when stimulated with smallelectric currents, can cause intense sensations of pleasure, pain,or rage. If a rat is given the opportunity to stimulate its ownpleasure centers by pressing a switch, it will ignore food, water,and even sex, pushing the switch until it is exhausted. Pleasureand pain centers in the limbic system are believed to playroles in learning and in physiological drives.As described in the introduction to Chapter 45, one componentof the limbic system—the amygdala—is involved in fearand fear memory. If a certain portion of the amygdala is damagedor chemically blocked, an animal cannot learn to be afraidof a stimulus or a situation that would normally induce a strongfear reaction.Another part of the limbic system, the hippocampus, is necessaryin humans for the transfer of short-term memory to longtermmemory, as we’ll discuss in Section 47.3.47.1 | HOW IS THE MAMMALIAN NERVOUS SYSTEM ORGANIZED? 989Structures deep within the cerebral hemispheresand surrounding the hypothalamus control aspectsof motivation, drives, emotions, and memory.The hippocampusis necessary formemory function.The amygdala controls fearmemory and responses to fear.Cerebralhemispheres CingulategyrusOlfactorybulbsHypothalamusPituitary Amygdala HippocampusThalamus47.4 The Limbic System The evolutionarily primitive parts of thetelencephalon are referred to as the limbic system. The hippocampus isinvolved in forming long-term memory. The amygdala triggers fear emotionsand fear memories (see p. 943).Regions of the telencephalon interact to produce consciousnessand control behaviorThe cerebrum is the dominant structure in the mammalian brain.In humans, it is so large that it covers all other parts of the brainexcept the cerebellum (Figure 47.5A). The cerebral cortex coveringthe cerebrum is only about 4 millimeters thick, but it coversa surface area larger than 1 m2 because it is folded into ridges(gyri; singular gyrus) and valleys (sulci; singular sulcus). Thesefoldings, or convolutions, allow the cortex to fit into the skull.A curious feature of our nervous system is that the left sideof the body is served (in both sensory and motor aspects) mostlyby the right side of the brain, and the right side of the body isserved mostly by the left side of the brain. Thus, sensory inputfrom the right hand goes to the left cerebral hemisphere, andsensory input from the left hand goes to the right cerebral hemisphere.The exception is the head, where the left side is controlledby the left cerebral hemisphere and the right side bythe right cerebral hemisphere. The two hemispheres are notsymmetrical with respect to all functions. Language abilities,for example, reside predominantly in the left hemisphere.Different regions of the cerebral cortex have specific functions(Figure 47.5B). Some of those functions are easily defined,such as receiving and processing sensory information or generatingmotor commands, but most of the cortex is involved inhigher-order information processing that is less easy to define.These latter areas are given the general name of association cortex,so named because they integrate, or associate, informationfrom different sensory modalities and from memory.To understand the cerebral cortex, it helps to have an anatomicalroad map. Viewed from the left side, the left cerebral hemispherelooks like a boxing glove for the right hand with the fingerspointing forward, the thumb pointing out, and the wrist atthe rear. The “thumb” area is the temporal lobe, the fingers thefrontal lobe, the back of the hand the parietal lobe, and the wristthe occipital lobe (see Figure 47.5A). The right cerebral hemisphereshows a mirror image of this arrangement. Let’s look ateach lobe separately.As we explore the functions of the cerebral cortex and otherparts of the brain, you will note frequent mention of personswhose brains were damaged by accidents or other unfortunateevents. Until recently, the study of such individuals hasbeen the main source of functional information about the humanbrain, but new imaging technologies such as positron emissiontomography (PET) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)are providing a wealth of new information and opportunitiesto study the human brain.THE TEMPORAL LOBE The upper region of the temporal lobe receivesand processes auditory information. The association areasof this lobe are involved in recognizing, identifying, andnaming objects. Damage to the temporal lobe results in disorderscalled agnosias, in which the individual is aware of an objectbut cannot identify it.Damage to a certain area of the temporal lobe results in theinability to recognize faces. Even old acquaintances cannot beidentified by facial features, although they may be identified byother attributes such as voice, body features, and posture. Usingmonkeys, it has been possible to record the activity of neuronsin this region that respond selectively to faces in general.These neurons do not respond to other stimuli in the visual field,and their responsiveness decreases if some of the facial featuresare missing or appear in inappropriate locations (Figure 47.6).Damage to other association areas of the temporal lobe causesdeficits in understanding spoken language, although speaking,reading, and writing abilities may be intact.990 CHAPTER 47 | THE MAMMALIAN NERVOUS SYSTEM: STRUCTURE AND HIGHER FUNCTIONThe highly convoluted cerebral cortex,viewed here from the left side, covers allof the other structures of the forebrain.FrontallobeCentral sulcusParietal lobeOccipitallobeCerebellumSpinal cordTemporallobeOlfactorybulb(A) (B)SpeechPrimary motor cortex(motor control)CentralsulcusPrimary somatosensorycortex(touch and pressure)TastePrimaryvisualareaFacerecognitionHearingBodyawarenessSmellLanguageReading47.5 The Human Cerebrum (A) Each cerebral hemisphere is dividedinto four lobes. (B) Different functions are localized in particular areas ofthe cerebral lobes.GO TO Web Activity 47.1 • The Human CerebrumyourBioPortal.comTHE FRONTAL LOBE The frontal and parietal lobes are separatedby a deep valley called the central sulcus. A strip of the frontallobe cortex just in front of the central sulcus is called the primarymotor cortex (see Figure 47.5B). The neurons in this region controlmuscles in specific parts of the body; the parts of the bodyhave been mapped onto the primary motor cortex largely duringneurosurgical procedures. As part of these procedures, electrodeswere used to stimulate small areas of cortex. In the areajust anterior to the central sulcus, stimulation causes specificmuscles to contract. Parts of the body with fine motor control,such as the face and hands, have disproportionate representation(Figure 47.7A). Stimulation ofneurons in the primary motor cortexcauses twitches of muscles, notcoordinated movements.The association functions of thefrontal lobe are diverse and are bestdescribed as having to do with feelingand planning. They contributesignificantly to personality. Peoplewith frontal lobe damage havedrastic alterations of personalityand difficulty planning future events. Adramatic case of frontallobe damage is the story of Phineas Gage, who in 1848 was anindustrious and responsible young railroad construction foreman.Then a blasting accident shot a meter-long, 3-centimeterwideiron tamping rod through his brain. The rod enteredGage’s head below his left eye, passed through his frontal lobe,and exited the top of his head (Figure 47.8).Remarkably, Gage survived, but he was a completely differentperson. He was quarrelsome, impatient, obstinate, and usedprofane language, which he had never done before. He lost hisrailroad job and spent his days as a drifter, earning money bytelling his story and exhibiting his scars (and the tamping iron).He died of a seizure in 1860, at the age of 38. If you are in Boston,you can pay him a visit—his skull, death mask, and the tampingiron are on display in the Warren Anatomical Museum ofHarvard Medical School.THE PARIETAL LOBE The strip of parietal lobe cortex just behindthe central sulcus is the primary somatosensory cortex (see Figure47.5B). This area receives touch and pressure informationrelayed from the body through the thalamus.The entire body surface can be mapped onto the primary somatosensorycortex (Figure 47.7B). Areas of the body that havea high density of tactile mechanoreceptors and are capable ofmaking fine discriminations in touch (such as the lips and fingers)have disproportionately large representation. If a verysmall area of the primary somatosensory cortex is stimulatedelectrically, the subject reports feeling specific sensations, suchas touch, in a localized part of the body.47.1 | HOW IS THE MAMMALIAN NERVOUS SYSTEM ORGANIZED? 991Firing rate of neuronThis neuron responds maximally to acomplete face viewed from the front.47.6 “Face Neurons” in One Region of the Temporal Lobe Theelectrode traces represent the firing rate of a neuron in the temporal lobeof a monkey in response to the pictures shown below them. Highest firingis stimulated by the appearance of a complete face.The left side of the cerebralcortex communicates withthe right side of the body,and vice versa.LegHipHeadArmElbowForeamHandFingersThumbEyeNoseFaceLipsTeethGumsGenitalsMotor SomatosensoryToesArmElbowWristHandFingersThumbEyeNeckBrowFaceLipsShoulderTrunkTrunkNeckHipKneePharynxThroatTongueTongueAbdomenJaw Jaw(A) Motor cortex (B) Somatosensory cortex47.7 The Body IsRepresented in PrimaryMotor and PrimarySomatosensory CortexNeurons in the primary motorcortex (A) control muscles inspecific parts of the body, whileneurons in the primary somatosensorycortex (B) receive informationfrom specific parts of thebody. The locations of theseneurons in the cortex correspondto “maps” on which regions ofthe body are represented in proportionto the amount of primarycortical area devoted to them.Amajor association function of the parietal lobe is attendingto complex stimuli. Damage to the right parietal lobe causes acondition called contralateral neglect syndrome, in which the individualtends to ignore stimuli from the left side of the bodyor the left visual field. Such individuals have difficulty performingcomplex tasks, such as dressing the left side of the body; anafflicted man may not be able to shave the left side of his face.When asked to copy simple drawings, a person who exhibitsthis syndrome can do well with the right side of the drawingbut not the left.The parietal cortex is not symmetrical with respect to its rolein attention, however. Damage to the left parietal cortex doesnot cause the same degree of neglect of the right side of thebody. We will see similar asymmetries in cortical function laterin the chapter when we discuss language.THE OCCIPITAL LOBE The occipital lobe receives and processesvisual information. The association areas of the occipital cortexare essential for making sense of the visual world and translatingvisual experience into language. Some deficits resulting fromdamage to these areas are specific. In one case, a woman withlimited damage was unable to see motion. Her vision was intact,but she could see a waterfall only as a still image, and an approachingcar only as a series of a stationary objects at differentdistances.The human brain is off the curveHumans are sometimes called “big-brain primates,” and that isan accurate characterization. Across vertebrate species there isa correlation between body size and brain size (Figure 47.9).Higher primates such as chimpanzees, baboons, and gorillas allfall above this regression line, but humans stand out becausethey are so far above the regression line. Gorillas are muchlarger than humans, but they have smaller brains. Elephantsand whales have large brains, but they fall closer to the regressionline. Dolphins and humans stand out as having biggerbrains than would be predicted by their body sizes.The correlation of brain size to body size does not tell thewhole story of human brain evolution, however. In Figure 45.2,which compares the brains of four vertebrates, we see that theforebrain is larger than other brain regions, and in mammals thisis seen as an elaboration of the cerebral cortex. If we look just atmammals, another feature is the degree of convolution ofthe cortex. Since the cortex is a layered, two-dimensionalarray of neurons, the area of cortex is increased by convolutions,which are greatest in humans. And finally, the percentageof the cortex that is association cortex (i.e., devotedto the integration of information) is by far the greatest inhumans. It is these evolutionary changes, primarily in thecortex, that provide the resources for the great intellectualcapacity of humans—a topic to which we will returnat the end of the chapter.992 CHAPTER 47 | THE MAMMALIAN NERVOUS SYSTEM: STRUCTURE AND HIGHER FUNCTION47.8 A Mind-Altering Experience Phineas Gage miraculously survived a nineteenth-century railroad construction accident in which an explosion blew an iron rodthrough his brain. His personality, however, was permanently altered. The path of theiron rod through Gage’s brain is superimposed on this reconstruction of his skull.Brain weight in grams (log scale)0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 1,000 10,000 100,000Body weight in kilograms (log scale)Goldfish0.010.050.10.51.0510501005001,0005,00010,000MoleRatOpossumCrowVampire batWolf OstrichSting rayBaboonAustralopithicusChimpanzeeModern manMale gorillaElephantBluewhaleLionTiger sharkBottlenose dolphin47.9 Evolution of the Human Brain Brain size scales to bodysize across a wide range of vertebrates. The higher primates havelarger brains than predicted by the correlation, and humans standoutside this relationship with much bigger brains. The increase inbrain size in humans is mostly due to an increase in the cerebralcortex. The human brain is also highly convoluted, and more of it isdevoted to associative functions.47.1 RECAPThe central nervous system communicates with therest of the body through the peripheral nervous system.We are conscious of some sensory informationcoming into the CNS, but are not conscious of otherafferent information used in physiological regulation.Different regions of the brain have specific functions.Evolution of the human brain has resulted in agreatly increased cerebral cortex devoted to integrationof information.• Explain how the major functional divisions of thenervous system relate to their origins in the embryonicneural tube. See pp. 986–988 and Figure 46.2• Trace the information flow that results in a spinalreflex. See pp. 988–989 and Figure 46.3• Describe the spatial relations and functions of themajor divisions of the telencephalon. See pp. 990–992and Figure 47.5• What distinguishes the human brain from the brains ofother mammals? See p. 992 and Figure 47.9Now that you have some knowledge of the structure and functionof different regions of the nervous system, let’s exploresome examples of how information is processed in the neuralcircuitry in some specific regions.How Is Information Processed 47.2 by Neural Networks?Specific functions are localized in specific parts of the nervoussystem and depend on the neural circuits, or networks, in thosestructures. Amajor focus of modern neuroscience is understandinghow the various functions of the nervous system, rangingfrom simple reflexes to complex learning and memory, are accomplishedby the interactions of neurons in circuits. Let’s lookat two examples of how neural networks process information:the autonomic nervous system (an output pathway) and the visualsystem (an input pathway).The autonomic nervous system controls involuntaryphysiological functionsThe autonomic nervous system, or ANS, comprises the outputpathways of the CNS that control involuntary functions, suchas heart rate, sweating, and some functions of the gut. Its controlof diverse organs and tissues is crucial to homeostasis. TheANS has two divisions, sympathetic and parasympathetic, thatwork in opposition to each other in their effects on most organs:one division causes an increase in an activity and the other a decrease.The sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of theANS are easily distinguished by their anatomy, their neurotransmitters,and their actions (Figure 47.10).The best-known functions of the ANS are those of the sympatheticdivision that produce the fight-or-flight response: increasingheart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac output andpreparing the body for emergencies (see Figure 41.5). In contrast,the parasympathetic division slows the heart and lowersblood pressure; its actions have been characterized as “rest anddigest.” It is tempting to think of the sympathetic division asspeeding things up and the parasympathetic division as slowingthings down, but it is not that simple; for example, the sympatheticdivision slows down the digestive system whereas theparasympathetic division accelerates it.Whether sympathetic or parasympathetic, every autonomicefferent pathway begins with a cholinergic neuron (one that usesacetylcholine as its neurotransmitter) that has its cell body inthe brainstem or spinal cord. These cells are called preganglionicneurons because the second neuron in the pathway with whichthey synapse resides in a collection of neurons outside the CNScalled a ganglion. The second neuron is called a postganglionicneuron because its axon extends out from the ganglion. The axonof the postganglionic neuron synapses with cells in the targetorgans (see Figure 47.10).The postganglionic neurons of the sympathetic division arecalled noradrenergic because they use norepinephrine (alsoknown as noradrenaline) as their neurotransmitter. In contrast,the postganglionic neurons of the parasympathetic division aremostly cholinergic. In organs that receive both sympathetic andparasympathetic input, the target cells respond in oppositeways to norepinephrine and to acetylcholine. This happens, forexample, in a region of the heart called the pacemaker, which generatesthe heartbeat. Stimulating the sympathetic nerve to theheart or dripping norepinephrine onto the pacemaker cells increasestheir firing rate and causes the heart to beat faster. Incontrast, stimulating the parasympathetic nerve to the heartor dripping acetylcholine onto the pacemaker cells decreasestheir firing rate and causes the heart to beat more slowly.The sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of the ANScan also be distinguished by anatomy. The preganglionic neuronsof the parasympathetic division come from the brainstemand the sacral region; those of the sympathetic division comefrom the thoracic and lumbar regions (see Figure 47.10). Most ofthe ganglia of the sympathetic division are lined up in twochains, one on either side of the spinal cord. The parasympatheticganglia are close to the target organs.A specialization of the sympathetic division is its innervationof the adrenal gland, which is critical for the fight-or-flightresponse. The preganglionic sympathetic neuron sends its axonall the way out to the adrenal gland. The medulla (core) of thegland is composed of hormone-secreting cells that are really developmentallymodified postganglionic sympathetic neuronsthat have lost their axons, and they secrete their “neurotransmitters”(epinephrine and norepinephrine) into the extracellularfluid, from which they enter the circulation and act as hormones(see Section 41.1).The ANS is an important link between the CNS and manyphysiological functions. Its control of diverse organs and tissuesis crucial to homeostasis. Despite its complexity, work by neu-47.2 | HOW IS INFORMATION PROCESSED BY NEURAL NETWORKS? 993robiologists and physiologists over many decades has made itpossible to understand its functions in terms of neuronal propertiesand circuits.Patterns of light falling on the retina are integratedby the visual cortexThe visual system is one of the most studied input pathways tothe central nervous system. In Section 46.4 we described howlight falling on the retina produces signals that are transmittedthrough the cellular circuits of the retina, resulting in action po-InhibitssalivationRelaxesairwaysAcceleratesheartbeatInhibitsdigestionStimulatesbreakdownof glycogenand releaseof glucoseStimulatessecretion ofepinephrine andnorepinephrineStimulatesorgasm,vaginalcontractionDilatespupilRelaxesurinarybladderCeliacganglionInferiormesentericganglionChain ofsympatheticgangliaPARASYMPATHETIC DIVISION SYMPATHETIC DIVISIONCranialnervesCervicalThoracicLumbarSacralConstrictspupilsStimulatessalivationSlowsheartbeatConstrictsairwaysStimulatesdigestionSlight stimulationof glucose uptakeand glycogensynthesisStimulates activityof intestinesInhibits activityof intestinesStimulates urinarybladder to contractStimulates penileor clitoral arousalNoradrenergic neurons (postganglionic)Cholinergic neurons (preganglionic)Cholinergic neurons (postganglionic)47.10 The Autonomic Nervous System The autonomic nervous systemis divided into the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions. Thetwo divisions work in opposition to each other in their effects on mostorgans; one results in an increase and the other a decrease in activity.tentials in the optic nerve. But, how does the CNS use this informationto reconstruct the visual world in the brain? The experimentsthat have investigated this question are some of themost famous experiments in neurobiology and have resulted inNobel Prizes.RETINAL RECEPTIVE FIELDS One aspect of the processing of visualinformation through the retina is the convergence of information.Each human retina contains over 100 million photoreceptorsbut only about 1 million ganglion cells. It is the axons of theganglion cells that communicate information from the eyes tothe brain. How is the information from so many photoreceptorsintegrated by the many fewer ganglion cells?This question was addressed in classic experiments byStephen Kuffler at Johns Hopkins University in 1953. He usedelectrodes to record the activity in the axons of single ganglioncells of cat eyes while stimulating the retinas with spots of light(Figure 47.11). These experiments were the starting point forunderstanding how the brain assembles information from singlecells to create visual images—in other words, of how thebrain sees.Kuffler’s experiments revealed that each ganglion cell has awell-defined receptive field composed of a group of photoreceptorcells that receive light from a small area of the entire visualfield. Stimulating these photoreceptors with light activatesthe ganglion cell, which sends action potentials to the thalamusand on to the visual cortex (the area of the occipital lobe wherevisual information is processed; see Figure 47.5). Informationfrom many photoreceptors is therefore communicated to thebrain as a single message. However, individual photoreceptorsmay contribute to the receptive fields of multiple ganglion cells,so that receptive fields overlap.The receptive fields of most ganglion cells are circular, butwhether a spot of light falling on a receptive field excites or inhibitsits ganglion cell depends both on the nature of the receptivefield and on where the spot of light falls on it. Receptivefields have a center and a concentric surround, and can be eitheron-center or off-center. Light falling on the center of an oncenterreceptive field excites the ganglion cell, and light fallingon the center of an off-center receptive field inhibits the ganglioncell. Light falling on the surround has the opposite effect:the surround for an on-center receptive field inhibits theganglion cell, and the surround for an off-center field is excitatory.Thus the activity of the ganglion cell reflects how muchof the light stimulus is on the center and how much is on thesurround of its receptive field (see Figure 47.11).Center effects are always stronger than surround effects.Thus a small dot of light directly on the center of a receptivefield has the maximal effect, and a larger light stimulus illuminatingthe center and parts of the surround has a smaller effect.A uniform patch of light falling equally on the center and surroundhas very little effect on the firing rate of the ganglion cellfor that receptive field.How are cells in the retina connected to each other to createreceptive fields? The photoreceptors in a receptive field’scenter are connected to the associated ganglion cell by bipolarcells. The photoreceptors in the surround modify communicationbetween the center photoreceptors and their bipolar cellsthrough the lateral connections of horizontal cells and amacrinecells (see Figure 46.21). Thus, the receptive field of a ganglioncell results from a pattern of synapses between photoreceptors,horizontal cells, amacrine cells, and bipolar cells. A generallesson to learn from this seemingly confusing chain ofevents is that inhibition can be as important as excitation inneural circuits.In summary, the neural circuitry of the retina results in thegeneration of signals in the axons of the optic nerve to the brainthat communicate simple information about the patterns of lightand dark falling on different parts of the retina. But once the actionpotentials in the optic nerve reach their destinations, howdoes the brain integrate them to construct visual images of theoutside world?RECEPTIVE FIELDS OF CELLS IN THE VISUAL CORTEX The axons ofthe optic nerves terminate in a region of the thalamus that is arelay station receiving information from both the right and lefteyes. From the thalamus, the information encoded in the activityof axons in the optic nerves is relayed to the visual cortexin the occipital lobes at the back of the brain. In the 1960s,David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel of Harvard University studiedthe activity of neurons in the visual cortex by shining spotsand bars of light on retinas while recording the activities of singlecells in the cortex. They found that neurons in the visual cortex,like retinal ganglion cells, have receptive fields. For their pioneeringwork in visual neurophysiology, Hubel and Wieselreceived the Nobel prize in 1981.Receptive fields of neurons in the visual cortex, however, differfrom the circular receptive fields of retinal ganglion cells.Neurons in the visual cortex called simple cells are maximallystimulated by bars of light with a particular orientation fallingon a small region of the retina. These simple cells receive inputfrom several ganglion cells whose circular retinal receptivefields are lined up in a row, creating a bar of sensitivity.Other cells in the visual cortex are called complex cells. Thesecells responded maximally to bars of light with particular orientations,but the bars can fall anywhere on a large area of retina.Thus the receptive field of a complex cell appears to be due to thatcell receiving inputs from several simple cells that share a certainstimulus orientation but have receptive fields in different locationson the retina (Figure 47.12). Some complex cells respond moststrongly when the bar of light moves in a particular direction.The concept that emerges from these experiments is that thebrain assembles a mental image of the visual world by analyzingedges in patterns of light falling on the retina. Each retinasends a million axons to the brain, but there are hundreds ofmillions of neurons in the visual cortex. The action potentialsfrom one retinal ganglion cell are received by hundreds of corticalneurons, each responsive to a different combination of orientation,position, color, and movement of contrasting lines inthe patterns of light and dark falling on the retina.47.2 | HOW IS INFORMATION PROCESSED BY NEURAL NETWORKS? 995GO TO Animated Tutorial 47.2 • Information Processingin the RetinayourBioPortal.com996 CHAPTER 47 | THE MAMMALIAN NERVOUS SYSTEM: STRUCTURE AND HIGHER FUNCTIONGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODRESULTSINVESTIGATING LIFEGanglion cells use a center-surround dichotomy to encode patterns of contrast between light and dark.47.11 What Does the Eye Tell the Brain?Stephen Kuffler’s experiments recorded the activity in the axons of single ganglion cells in the eyes of cats. These groundbreaking experimentsrevealed the existence of a circular receptive field for each of the retina’s ganglion cells. Signals from photoreceptor cells in a receptive field areeither excitatory or inhibitory to the ganglion cell, which sends action potentials via the optic nerve to the brain.Retinal ganglion cells are excited or inhibited by light and dark stimuli falling on local areas of the retina.1. Place electrodes in the optic nerve of a cat.2. Stimulate the retina with different combinations oflight and dark stimuli and record the responses ofganglion cell axons.3. Continue recording and move the stimuli aroundthe retina to find the area of sensitivity—thereceptive field—for a specific ganglion cell.Stimulus patternson retinaComplete darknessSmall spot fallingon center ofreceptive fieldLarge spot coveringreceptive fieldRing of light excludingcenter of receptive fieldAction potentials inoff-center ganglion cellOn OffStimulusAction potentials inon-center ganglion cellOn OffStimulusLight stimuli Retinal cellsOptic nerveGanglion cells Bipolar cellsAxons ofganglion cellsElectrodeRecording of action potentialsin axon of ganglion cellPhotoreceptorsAn on-center ganglion cell is maximally stimulated bylight falling on its receptive field’s center and is inhibitedby a ring of light falling on its receptive field’s surround.An off-center ganglion cell is maximally stimulatedby light falling on its receptive field’s surroundand is inhibited by light falling on its center.Cortical cells receive input from both eyesHow do we see objects in three dimensions? The quick answeris that a person’s two eyes, located at the front of the head, seeoverlapping, yet slightly different, visual fields—that is, humanshave binocular vision. Aperson who is blind in one eye has greatdifficulty discriminating distances. Animals whose eyes areon the sides of the head have minimal overlap in their fields ofvision and, as a result, poor depth vision; however, they can seepredators creeping up from all sides.The story of how the brain integrates information from twoeyes begins with the paths of the optic nerves. The two opticnerves run along the underside of the brain, join just underthe hypothalamus, and then separate again (Figure 47.13A). Theplace where they join is called the optic chiasm. Axons from thehalf of each retina closest to your nose cross in the optic chiasmand go to the opposite side of your brain. The axons from theouter half of each retina do not cross over at the optic chiasm;axons from the outer left retina go to left side of the brain, andvice versa for axons from the outer right retina.The functional consequence of the optic chiasm is that all ofthe visual information from the left side of your field of visionwhen you are looking straight ahead goes to the right side ofyour brain, and all of the visual information from the right side47.2 | HOW IS INFORMATION PROCESSED BY NEURAL NETWORKS? 997HYPOTHESIS Signals from light falling on receptive fields of the ganglion cells elicit responses from cells in the visual cortex.INVESTIGATING LIFEMETHODRESULTS47.12 Cells in the Visual Cortex Respond to Specific Patterns of LightTorsten and Wiesel showed that information from light falling on the circular receptive fields of ganglion cells (see Figure 47.11) convergeson the visual cortex’s simple cells, which have linear receptive fields. These simple cells transmit information to complex cells in the cortex,which in turn respond to linear stimuli falling on different areas of the retina.CONCLUSION Cells in the retina, thalamus, and cortex are connected in such a way as to respond to specific patterns of light.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.Retinal ganglion cellsOn-center responseof a cell in the occipitalcortexThis model explains the results in termsof synaptic connections between cells.Relay cellsin thalamusSimple cellsin cortexComplexcells incortexThe bar of lightmoves acrossthe screen…Complex cells in the cortexrespond to a moving barof light.Simple cells in the cortexrespond to a static bar oflight at a particular angleand location.As the cat views the screen, theelectrode records activity in singlecells in the occipital cortex……stimulatingreceptive fieldsin the retina.1 …and displaysit on anoscilloscope.2 3 4Ganglion cells communicate with thalamic cells that relay information to the visual cortex.The area stimulated by each bar of light includes the receptive fields of several ganglion cells.of your field of vision goes to the left side of your brain. Theserelationships are shown in red and green in Figure 47.13A.Cells in the visual cortex are organized in stripes andcolumns. Stripes refer to the organization across the surface ofthe cortex, and columns to the organization through the depthof the cortex (Figure 47.13B). Stripes and columns alternate accordingto the source of their input: left eye, right eye, left eye,right eye, and so on. Cells closest to the border between twostripes or columns receive input from both eyes and are thereforecalled binocular cells. Binocular cells interpret distance bymeasuring the disparity between the points at which the samestimulus falls on the two retinas.What is disparity? Hold your finger out in front of you andlook at it, closing one eye and then the other. Your finger appearsto jump back and forth, because its image falls on a different positionon each retina. Repeat the exercise with a distant object.It doesn’t jump back and forth as much, because there is less disparityin the positions of the image on the two retinas. Certainbinocular cells respond optimally to a stimulus falling on bothretinas with a particular disparity. Which set of binocular cellsis stimulated depends on how far away the stimulus is.When we look at something, we can detect its shape, color,depth, and movement. Where does all this information cometogether? Is there a single cell that fires only when a red sportscar drives by? No. Specific visual experience comes from simultaneousactivity in a large collection of cells. In addition, mostvisual experiences are enhanced by information from the othersenses and from memory, which helps explain why about 75percent of the cerebral cortex is association cortex.47.2 RECAPInformation in the nervous system is processed bycellular interactions in neural networks. The opposingactions of the sympathetic and parasympatheticdivisions of the ANS can be understood in terms ofneural pathways consisting of just two neurons. Visioninvolves a more complex interaction of neurons,organized into receptive fields, to process patternsof light and dark falling on the retina.• Describe the anatomical and functional differences betweenthe sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions.See p. 993 and Figure 47.10• Explain the cellular basis for the receptive fields of retinalganglion cells. See p. 995 and Figure 47.11• How do cells in the visual cortex get information abouthow far away an object is? See pp. 997–998 andFigure 47.13By studying the neural circuitry of the visual system and theANS, you have gained some understanding of how informationreaches the CNS and how the CNS controls various functionsof the body. But what about the higher functions of themammalian CNS—the complex functions between input andoutput, such as language, learning, memory, and dreams?Can Higher Functions Be Understood 47.3 in Cellular Terms?The higher brain functions discussed in the remaining pages ofthis chapter are undeniably complex. Nevertheless, neuroscientists,using a wide range of techniques, are making considerableprogress in understanding some of the cellular and molec-998 CHAPTER 47 | THE MAMMALIAN NERVOUS SYSTEM: STRUCTURE AND HIGHER FUNCTIONThe optic nerves crossat the optic chiasm.The visual cortex isorganized in columns thatreceive input from the righteye and the left eye.Binocular cells at the bordersof columns receive input fromboth the right and left eyes.Right eyeBinocularcellsLeft eyeRight eyeLeft eyeRighteyeOpticnervesRelay areasin thalamusLefteyeLeftvisualfield(red)Rightvisualfield(green)Axons fromrelay areas tovisual cortexVisualcortexBinocularvisionHuman brain (viewed from underneath)(A) (B)47.13 Anatomy of Binocular Vision (A) Each eye transmits informationto both sides of the brain; however, the right side of the brainprocesses all information from the left visual field (red), and the left sideof the brain processes all information from the right visual field (green).(B) The visual cortex sorts visual field information according to whether itcomes from the right or left eye.ular mechanisms involved in those processes. The followingdiscussion addresses several aspects of brain and behavior thatpresent challenges to neuroscientists: sleep and dreaming, learningand memory, language use, and consciousness.Sleep and dreaming are reflected in electrical patternsin the cerebral cortexA dominant feature of behavior is the daily cycle of sleep andwaking. All birds and mammals, probably all other vertebrates,and also many invertebrates, sleep. We humans spend one-thirdof our lives sleeping, yet we do not know why or how. We doknow, however, that we need to sleep. Loss of sleep impairsalertness and performance. Many people in our society—certainlymost college students—are chronically sleep-deprived.Every day, accidents and serious mistakes that endanger livescan be attributed to impaired alertness caused by lack of sleep.Insomnia (difficulty in falling or staying asleep) is one of themost common medical complaints.THE ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAM A common tool of sleep researchersis the electroencephalogram, or EEG (Figure 47.14A).Rather than recording the activity of single neurons, the EEGcharacterizes activity in huge numbers of neurons. EEG electrodesare much larger than the very fine electrodes used to detectsingle cell activity. Placed at different locations on the scalp,EEG electrodes record changes in the electric potential differencesbetween electrodes over time. These differences reflect theelectrical activity of the neurons in the brain regions under theelectrodes, primarily regions of the cerebral cortex. Usuallythe electrical activity of one or more skeletal muscles is alsorecorded on the chart; this record is called an electromyogram(EMG). Movements of the eyes are recorded as an electroocculogram(EOG).EEG, EMG, and EOG patterns reveal the transition from beingawake to being asleep. They also reveal that there are differentstates of sleep. In mammals other than humans, two majorsleep states are easily distinguished: slow-wave sleep andrapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep. Slow-wave sleep gets itsname from the high-amplitude, slow-frequency waves in theEEG. REM sleep gets its name from jerky movements of the eyeballsthat occur during this state. In humans, sleep states arecharacterized as non-REM sleep and REM sleep. Human non-REM sleep has four stages, of which only the two deepest stagesare considered true slow-wave sleep.When you fall asleep at night, the first sleep state entered isstage 1 non-REM sleep, which then progresses through stages2, 3, and 4 (Figure 47.14B). Stages 3 and 4 are deep, restorative,slow-wave sleep. This first full cycle of non-REM sleep isfollowed by an episode of REM sleep. Throughout the night,you experience four or five cycles of non-REM and REM sleep(Figure 47.14C). About 80 percent of your sleep is non-REMsleep. Vivid dreams and nightmares occur during the 20 percentof sleep that is REM sleep.CELLULAR CHANGES DURING SLEEP When we are awake, severalnuclei in the brainstem reticular formation are continuously active.Axons from neurons in these nuclei extend to the thalamusand throughout the cerebral cortex, where they release depolarizingneurotransmitters (acetylcholine, norepinephrine, andserotonin). These broadly distributed neurotransmitters keepthe resting potential of the neurons of the thalamus and cortexclose to threshold and sensitive to synaptic inputs, therebymaintaining the responsiveness of the brain that characterizesbeing awake.47.3 | CAN HIGHER FUNCTIONS BE UNDERSTOOD IN CELLULAR TERMS? 999Stage 4Stage 3Stage 2Stage 1REMAwakeStage 4Stage 3Stage 2Stage 1REMAwake0 10 10 202 3 4 5 6 7Time (hours)Time (seconds)(B)(A)(C)Non-REM47.14 Stages of Sleep (A) Electrical activity in the cerebral cortex is detected by electrodes thatare placed on the scalp and record changes in voltage between the electrodes through time. (B)The resulting record is an electroencephalogram, or EEG. (C) Humans cycle through differentstages of sleep throughout the night.With the onset of sleep, activity in these brainstem nuclei decreases,and their axon terminals release less neurotransmitter.With the withdrawal of the depolarizing neurotransmitters, theresting potentials of the cells of the thalamus and cortex becomemore negative (hyperpolarized), and the cells are less sensitiveto excitatory synaptic input. Their processing of informationis inhibited, and consciousness is lost.An interesting neural event happens as a result of the hyperpolarizationwith the onset of sleep: cells begin to fire actionpotentials in bursts. The synchronization of these burstsover broad areas of cerebral cortex results in the EEG slowwavepattern that characterizes deep non-REM sleep. Studiesof neurons of the thalamus and cortex have shown that theirhyperpolarization during non-REM sleep is due to increasedopening of K+ channels, and that bursting is due to Ca2+ channelswhose inactivation gates close rapidly and require hyperpolarizationto be reopened. We can therefore explain theEEG pattern of non-REM sleep in terms of the properties ofneurons and ion channels.At the transition from non-REM to REM sleep, dramaticchanges occur. Some of the brainstem nuclei that were inactiveduring non-REM sleep become active again, causing a generaldepolarization of cortical neurons. Thus in REM sleep the synchronizedbursts of firing cease, and the EEG resembles that ofthe awake brain. Because the resting potentials of the neuronsreturn to near threshold levels, the cortex can process information,and vivid dreams occur.So, why don’t we act out our dreams? During REM sleep thebrain inhibits both afferent (sensory) and efferent (motor) pathways;we are paralyzed during REM sleep. Limb twitches andthe jerky eye movements are motor signals breaking throughthe inhibition. The bizarre nature of dreams may be due to thelack of sensory feedback to the cortex from the body and theoutside world. In other words, a functioning cortex is out oftouch with reality. The function of muscle paralysis during REMsleep may be to prevent the acting out of dreams.Knowing the cellular mechanisms of sleep has not yet led toan understanding of its function. Many questions remain. Whydo we have two sleep states with very different neurophysiologicalcharacteristics? Why does non-REM sleep always occurfirst? Why do the two states cycle during the rest period?We know sleep is essential for life, but we don’t know why. Oneset of hypotheses is that sleep is necessary for the maintenanceand repair of neural connections and for the neural changesinvolved in learning and memory—and possibly forgetting.These hypotheses are supported by many experiments showingthat performance of a learned task or recall of declarativeinformation on the day following training is impaired if sleepis prevented, and is best following a good night’s sleep.Language abilities are localized in the leftcerebral hemisphereNo aspect of brain function is as integrally related to human consciousnessand intellect as language. Therefore, brain mechanismsthat underlie the acquisition and use of language are extremelyinteresting to neuroscientists. A curious observation about languageability is that it resides in one cerebral hemisphere—whichin 97 percent of people is the left hemisphere. This phenomenonis referred to as the lateralization of language functions.Fascinating research on this subject was conducted by RogerSperry and his colleagues at the California Institute of Technology.The two cerebral hemispheres are connected by a tract ofwhite matter called the corpus callosum. In one severe form ofepilepsy, bursts of action potentials travel between hemispheresvia the corpus callosum. Cutting the tract eliminates the problem,and patients function well following surgery. However,these “split-brain” subjects display interesting deficits in languageability.After the surgery, if an object is shown in the right visual fieldand the left eye is closed (see Figure 47.13), the patient can describeit verbally and in writing. If the object is shown in the leftvisual field and the right eye is closed, the patient cannot describeit verbally or in writing, but can use his left hand to pointto a picture of it. Lacking the connecting tissue between the twohemispheres, knowledge or experience of the right hemispherecan no longer be expressed in language.Individuals who have suffered damage to the left hemisphereare frequently left with some form of aphasia, a deficitin the ability to use or understand words. Studies of such individualshave identified several language areas in the lefthemisphere.• Broca’s area, located in the frontal lobe just in front of theprimary motor cortex, is essential for speech. Damage toBroca’s area results in halting, slow, poorly articulatedspeech or even complete loss of speech, but the patient canstill read and understand language.• Wernicke’s area, located in the temporal lobe close to itsborder with the occipital lobe, is more involved with sensorythan with motor aspects of language. Damage to Wernicke’sarea can cause a person to lose the ability to speaksensibly while retaining the abilities to form the sounds ofnormal speech and to imitate its cadence. Such a patientcannot understand spoken or written language.• The angular gyrus, located near Wernicke’s area, is believedto be essential for integrating spoken and written language.Normal language ability depends on the flow of informationamong various areas of the left cerebral cortex. Input from spokenlanguage travels from the auditory cortex to Wernicke’s area(Figure 47.15A). Input from written language travels from the visualcortex to the angular gyrus to Wernicke’s area (Figure47.15B). Commands to speak are formulated in Wernicke’s areaand travel to Broca’s area and from there to the primary motorcortex. Damage to any one of those areas or the pathways betweenthem can result in aphasia. Using modern methods ofbrain imaging, it is possible to see the metabolic activity in differentbrain areas when the brain is using language (Figure 47.16).Some learning and memory can be localizedto specific brain areasLearning is the modification of behavior by experience. Memoryis the ability of the nervous system to retain what is learned and1000 CHAPTER 47 | THE MAMMALIAN NERVOUS SYSTEM: STRUCTURE AND HIGHER FUNCTIONexperienced. Even very simple animals can learn and remember,but these two abilities are most highly developed in humans.Consider the amount of information associated withlearning a language. The capacity of memory and the rate atwhich memories can be retrieved are remarkable features of thehuman nervous system.LEARNING Learning that leads to long-term memory and modificationof behavior must involve long-lasting synapticchanges. A phenomenon that may explain how long-termsynaptic changes might arise is long-term potentiation, or LTP(see Figure 45.18). LTP results from high-frequency electricalstimulation of certain identifiable circuits that makes these circuitsmore sensitive to subsequent stimulation. In contrast, continuous,repetitive, low-level stimulation of these same circuitsreduces their responsiveness, a phenomenon that has beencalled long-term depression (LTD). LTP and LTD may be fundamentalcellular or molecular mechanisms involved in learningand memory.Several kinds of learning exist. A form that is widespreadamong animal species is associative learning, in which twounrelated stimuli become linked to the same response. The simplestexample of associative learning is the conditioned reflex,described by the Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov. Pavlov observedthat a dog salivates at the sight or smell of food—a simpleautonomic reflex. He discovered that if he rang a bell justbefore food was presented to the dog, after a few trials the dogwould salivate at the sound of the bell, even if no food followed.The salivation reflex was conditioned to be associated withthe sound of a bell, a stimulus that normally is unrelated to feedingand digestion. Experiments in the laboratory of RichardThompson, now at University of Southern California, locatedfor the first time the circuitry for a conditioned reflex, and it isin the cerebellum.More complex forms of learning, often referred to as “observationallearning” are the foundation of human intelligence.The general pattern of successful observational learning hasthree elements:• We pay attention to another person’s behavior.• We retain a memory of what we have observed.• We try to copy or use that information.47.3 | CAN HIGHER FUNCTIONS BE UNDERSTOOD IN CELLULAR TERMS? 1001Passively viewing words Listening to wordsSpeaking words Generating words47.16 Imaging Techniques Reveal Active Parts of the BrainPositron emission tomography (PET) scanning reveals the brain regionsactivated by different aspects of language use. Radioactively labeled glucoseis given to the subject. Brain areas take up radioactivity in proportionto their metabolic use of glucose. The PET scan visualizes levels ofradioactivity in specific brain regions when a particular activity is performed.The red and white areas are the most active.SpeechPrimary motor cortex(motor control)PrimaryvisualareaHearingBroca’sarea(A) Repeating a heard word (B) Speaking a written word435Wernicke’sareaAngulargyrus3 1241247.15 Language Areas of the Cortex Different regions of the leftcerebral cortex participate in the processes of (A) repeating a word that isheard and (B) speaking a written word.GO TO Web Activity 47.2 • Language Areas of the CortexyourBioPortal.comAkey to this scheme of learning is the way in which we createand recall memories.MEMORY Some of the first insights into memory processescame from clinical treatment of patients with severe epilepsy,a disorder characterized by uncontrollable, local increases inneural activity. The resulting seizures can endanger the afflictedindividual. Serious cases of epilepsy are sometimes treated bydestroying the part of the brain from which the surge of activityoriginates. To find the right area, the surgery is done underlocal anesthesia, with the patient remaining conscious. As differentregions of the brain are electrically stimulated with electrodes,the patient reports the resulting sensations. Stimulationof some regions of the association cortex elicit recall of vividmemories. Such observations provided the first evidence thatspecific areas in the brain are associated with specific memoriesand that memory can be attributed to networks of neurons. Destroyinga small area of the brain does not completely erase amemory, however, so it is postulated that memory is a functiondistributed over many brain regions and can be stimulated viamany different routes.You experience several forms of memory everyday. Youhave immediate memory for events that are happening now.Immediate memory is almost perfectly photographic, but itlasts only seconds. Short-term memory contains less informationbut lasts longer—on the order of 10 to 15 minutes. If youare introduced to a group of new people, you may remembermost of their names for 5 or 10 minutes, but you will have forgottenthem in an hour or so if you have not repeated them,written them down, or used them in a conversation. Repetition,use, or reinforcement by something that gets your attention(such as the title “president”) facilitates the transfer ofshort-term memory to long-term memory, which can last fordays, months, years, or a lifetime.Knowledge about neural mechanisms for the transfer ofshort-term memory to long-term memory has come from observationsof persons who have lost parts of the limbic system,notably the hippocampus. A famous case is that of the manidentified as H.M., whose hippocampus on both sides of thebrain was removed in 1953 in an effort to control severe epilepsy.After the surgery, H.M. was unable to transfer information tolong-term memory. If someone was introduced to him, had aconversation with him, and then left the room for several minutes,when that person returned, H.M did not recognize him—it was as if the conversation had never taken place. Up until hisdeath 55 years later, H.M. remembered events that happenedbefore his surgery but could not remember postsurgery eventsfor more than 10 or 15 minutes.Memory of people, places, events, and things is called declarativememory because you can consciously recall and describethem. Procedural memory cannot be consciously recalledand described; it is the memory of how to perform a motor task.When you learn to ride a bicycle, ski, or use a computer keyboard,you form procedural memories. Although H.M. wasincapable of forming declarative memories, he could form proceduralmemories. When taught a motor task day after day, hecould not recall the lessons of the previous day, yet his performancesteadily improved. Thus procedural learning and memorymust involve mechanisms different from those used in declarativelearning and memory.Memories can have considerable emotional content. Asmentioned earlier, the limbic system plays a major role in controllingemotions. The amygdala, a component of the limbicsystem, is necessary for the emotion of fear and the formationof fear memories. As we saw in the opening to Chapter 45, patientswith a damaged amygdala do not associate fear reactionswith their declarative memories. Memories can also havepositive emotional content, and recalling those memories activatesparts of the brain known to be associated with pleasurablesensations and reward, as revealed by brain imagingtechnologies.We still cannot answer the question “What isconsciousness?”This chapter has only scratched the surface of the organizationand functions of the human brain. Even with all of our knowledgeof the human brain, and with all of the sophisticated newresearch tools, we still cannot answer the question “What isconsciousness?”The word “consciousness” is used in everyday language torefer to being awake in contrast to being asleep or in a coma.Here we are referring to the deeper meaning of being mentallyaware of yourself, your environment, and events going onaround you in such a way that you can plan for future eventsand make decisions based on experience, evidence, value systems,and predicted consequences. Speculations about consciousnesshave been the realm of philosophers, but we are gettingcloser to a neurobiological understanding.The central requirement for conscious experience is a perceptionof self that can be integrated with information from thephysical and social environment and information from past experience.The basis for a perception of self derives from the hugeamount of somatosensory and visceral information that comesfrom all parts of the body. In the CNS of all vertebrates, this informationis used for motor control and for homeostatic regulation.It enables animals to find food, seek mates, seek warmth,avoid cold, avoid danger, and so on. This afferent informationgoes to appropriate control and regulatory systems in the brainstemand forebrain.In addition, some of this information goes to somatosensoryareas of the cerebral cortex, so the animal is aware of certaininformation in the sense that it responds to it behaviorally.Visceral afferent information goes beyond its regulatory andcontrol centers in the brainstem and hypothalamus to an areadeep within the forebrain called the insular cortex, or insula.The insula appears to integrate physiological information fromall over the body to create a sensation of how the body “feels.”Thus, when an animal’s actions restore homeostasis, it “feels”better, and this is motivation to do the right thing for wellbeing.In humans and the great apes, the insula is greatly expandedand has even acquired new types of spindle-shaped neurons notseen in other animals. The circuitry involving the insula has also1002 CHAPTER 47 | THE MAMMALIAN NERVOUS SYSTEM: STRUCTURE AND HIGHER FUNCTIONevolved to communicate with parts of the brain that are involvedin planning and decision making. In imaging studies, the insulais seen to be active in a great diversity of situations that involvestrong feelings, be they pleasure, disgust, humor, pain, lust, craving,humiliation, guilt, or empathy. Damage to the insula causesapathy, loss of ability to enjoy music, loss of sexual response, andeven loss of the ability to distinguish good food from spoiledfood. Humans and the few other species that have expanded insulasand the new spindle cells are the only species that canrecognize themselves in a mirror. Could it be that this very discretepart of our brains and its circuitry are the neurobiologicalbases for self-awareness and conscious experience?47.3 RECAPEven complex functions of the nervous system arebeginning to be understood in terms of the propertiesof neurons and neural networks.• What events in the brain are associated with wakefulnessand the stages of sleep? See p. 999• Why do some neurobiologists think that the insularcortex might be involved in conscious experience?See p. 1002–100347.3 | CAN HIGHER FUNCTIONS BE UNDERSTOOD IN CELLULAR TERMS? 100347.1 How Is the Mammalian Nervous System Organized?• The brain and spinal cord make up the central nervous system(CNS); the cranial and spinal nerves make up the peripheralnervous system (PNS).• The nervous system can be modeled conceptually in terms ofthe direction of information flow and whether we are consciousof the information. The afferent component carries informationfrom the PNS to the CNS, and the efferent component directsinformation from the CNS to the peripheral parts of the body.Review Figure 47.1• The vertebrate nervous system develops from a hollow dorsalneural tube. The brain forms from three swellings at the anteriorend of the neural tube, which become the hindbrain, the midbrain,and the forebrain. The forebrain develops into the cerebralhemispheres (the telencephalon, or cerebrum) and theunderlying thalamus and hypothalamus (which together composethe diencephalon). The midbrain and hindbrain developinto the brainstem and the cerebellum. Review Figure 47.2• The spinal cord communicates information between the brainand the rest of the body. It can issue some commands to thebody without input from the brain. Review Figure 47.3,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 47.1• The reticular system is a complex network that directs incominginformation to appropriate brainstem nuclei that controlautonomic functions, and transmits the information to the forebrainthat results in conscious sensation. The reticular systemcontrols the level of arousal of the nervous system, includingsleep and wakefulness.• The limbic system is an evolutionarily primitive part of the telencephalonthat is involved in emotions, physiological drives (suchas hunger or thirst), instincts, and memory. Review Figure 47.4• The cerebral hemispheres are the dominant structures of thehuman brain. Their surfaces are layers of neurons called thecerebral cortex. The cerebral hemispheres can be divided intothe temporal, frontal, parietal, and occipital lobes. Manymotor functions are localized in parts of the frontal lobe.Information from many sensory receptors projects to a regionof the parietal lobe. Visual information projects to the occipitallobe, and auditory information projects to a region of the temporallobe. Review Figures 47.5, 47.6, and 47.7, WEBACTIVITY 47.147.2 How Is Information Processed by Neural Networks?• The autonomic nervous system (ANS) consists of efferent pathwaysthat control the physiological function of organs andorgan systems. Its sympathetic and parasympathetic divisionsare characterized by their anatomy, neurotransmitters, andeffects on target tissues. Review Figure 47.10• The neural network of vision involves patterns of light falling onreceptive fields in the retina. Receptive fields have a center anda surround, which have opposing effects on ganglion cell firing.Review Figure 47.11, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 47.2• Information from retinal ganglion cells is communicated via theoptic nerve to the thalamus and then to the visual cortex. Thevisual cortex seems to assemble an image of the visual world byanalyzing edges of patterns of light. Review Figure 47.12• Binocular vision is possible because information from botheyes is communicated to binocular cells in the visual cortex.These cells interpret distance by measuring the disparitybetween where the same stimulus falls on the two retinas.Review Figure 47.1347.3 Can Higher Functions Be Understood in CellularTerms?• Humans have a daily cycle of sleep and waking. Sleep can bedivided into rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep and non-REMsleep. Deep non-REM sleep is known as slow-wave sleepbecause of its characteristic EEG patterns. Review Figure 47.14• Language abilities are localized mostly in the left cerebralhemisphere, a phenomenon known as lateralization. Differentareas of the left hemisphere—including Broca’s area,Wernicke’s area, and the angular gyrus—are responsiblefor different aspects of language. Review Figure 47.16, WEBACTIVITY 47.2• Some learning and memory processes have been localized tospecific brain areas. Long-lasting changes in synaptic propertiesreferred to as long-term potentiation (LTP) and longtermdepression (LDP) may be involved in learning andmemory.• Complex memories can be elicited by stimulating small regionsof association cortex. Damage to the hippocampus can destroythe ability to form long-term declarative memory but not proceduralmemory.• A sense of the physiological state of the body may be created inthe insular cortex from visceral afferent information. Evolutionof this integrative function in higher primates and humanscould be the basis for conscious experience.SEE WEB ACTIVITY 47.3 for a concept review of this chapter.CHAPTER SUMMARY
47.1 How Is the Mammalian Nervous System Organized?• The brain and spinal cord make up the central nervous system(CNS); the cranial and spinal nerves make up the peripheralnervous system (PNS).• The nervous system can be modeled conceptually in terms ofthe direction of information flow and whether we are consciousof the information. The afferent component carries informationfrom the PNS to the CNS, and the efferent component directsinformation from the CNS to the peripheral parts of the body.Review Figure 47.1• The vertebrate nervous system develops from a hollow dorsalneural tube. The brain forms from three swellings at the anteriorend of the neural tube, which become the hindbrain, the midbrain,and the forebrain. The forebrain develops into the cerebralhemispheres (the telencephalon, or cerebrum) and theunderlying thalamus and hypothalamus (which together composethe diencephalon). The midbrain and hindbrain developinto the brainstem and the cerebellum. Review Figure 47.2• The spinal cord communicates information between the brainand the rest of the body. It can issue some commands to thebody without input from the brain. Review Figure 47.3,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 47.1• The reticular system is a complex network that directs incominginformation to appropriate brainstem nuclei that controlautonomic functions, and transmits the information to the forebrainthat results in conscious sensation. The reticular systemcontrols the level of arousal of the nervous system, includingsleep and wakefulness.• The limbic system is an evolutionarily primitive part of the telencephalonthat is involved in emotions, physiological drives (suchas hunger or thirst), instincts, and memory. Review Figure 47.4• The cerebral hemispheres are the dominant structures of thehuman brain. Their surfaces are layers of neurons called thecerebral cortex. The cerebral hemispheres can be divided intothe temporal, frontal, parietal, and occipital lobes. Manymotor functions are localized in parts of the frontal lobe.Information from many sensory receptors projects to a regionof the parietal lobe. Visual information projects to the occipitallobe, and auditory information projects to a region of the temporallobe. Review Figures 47.5, 47.6, and 47.7, WEBACTIVITY 47.147.2 How Is Information Processed by Neural Networks?• The autonomic nervous system (ANS) consists of efferent pathwaysthat control the physiological function of organs andorgan systems. Its sympathetic and parasympathetic divisionsare characterized by their anatomy, neurotransmitters, andeffects on target tissues. Review Figure 47.10• The neural network of vision involves patterns of light falling onreceptive fields in the retina. Receptive fields have a center anda surround, which have opposing effects on ganglion cell firing.Review Figure 47.11, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 47.2• Information from retinal ganglion cells is communicated via theoptic nerve to the thalamus and then to the visual cortex. Thevisual cortex seems to assemble an image of the visual world byanalyzing edges of patterns of light. Review Figure 47.12• Binocular vision is possible because information from botheyes is communicated to binocular cells in the visual cortex.These cells interpret distance by measuring the disparitybetween where the same stimulus falls on the two retinas.Review Figure 47.1347.3 Can Higher Functions Be Understood in CellularTerms?• Humans have a daily cycle of sleep and waking. Sleep can bedivided into rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep and non-REMsleep. Deep non-REM sleep is known as slow-wave sleepbecause of its characteristic EEG patterns. Review Figure 47.14• Language abilities are localized mostly in the left cerebralhemisphere, a phenomenon known as lateralization. Differentareas of the left hemisphere—including Broca’s area,Wernicke’s area, and the angular gyrus—are responsiblefor different aspects of language. Review Figure 47.16, WEBACTIVITY 47.2• Some learning and memory processes have been localized tospecific brain areas. Long-lasting changes in synaptic propertiesreferred to as long-term potentiation (LTP) and longtermdepression (LDP) may be involved in learning andmemory.• Complex memories can be elicited by stimulating small regionsof association cortex. Damage to the hippocampus can destroythe ability to form long-term declarative memory but not proceduralmemory.• A sense of the physiological state of the body may be created inthe insular cortex from visceral afferent information. Evolutionof this integrative function in higher primates and humanscould be the basis for conscious experience.SEE WEB ACTIVITY 47.3 for a concept review of this chapter.