Eyes are not essential for survival; many animals andall plants get by just fine without them. However,almost all animals do have eyes or some type oflight-sensing organs, and having eyes can confer a selectiveadvantage.About a dozen different kinds of eyes are found amongthe different animals, including the camera-like eyes ofhumans and the compound eyes of insects, with theirthousands of individual units. In trying to understand theorigin of this variety, scientists—starting with Charles Darwin—proposed that eyes evolved independently manytimes in different animal groups, and that each improvementin the ability of eyes to gather light and form imagesconferred a selective advantage on their possessor.A remarkable discovery in the 1990s may have overturnedthis long-held dogma about the evolution of eyes.Years earlier a mutant fruit fly without eyes was found,and the gene involved—appropriately called eyeless—was mapped onto one of its chromosomes. This mutantfly remained a laboratory curiosity until 1994, when theSwiss developmental biologists Rebecca Quiring and WalterGehring began looking for transcription factors thatmight be involved in fly development. The gene for oneof the proteins they identified mapped to the eyeless locus.Thus, the product of the eyeless gene is a transcriptionfactor that controls the formation of the eye. Quiringand Gehring demonstrated this by making recombinantDNA constructs that allowed the eyeless gene to be expressedin various embryonic tissues of transgenic flies.These experiments resulted in adult flies with extra eyeson various body parts—including on the legs, under thewings, and on the antennae—depending on where theeyeless gene was expressed in the embryos.But the big surprise came when the scientists performeda database search and found that theeyeless gene sequence was quite similar to thatof Pax6, a gene in mice that, when mutated,leads to the development of very small eyes.Could the very different eyes of flies and micejust be variations on a common developmentaltheme? To test for functional similarity betweenthe insect and mammalian genes, Gehring andcolleagues repeated their gene expression experimentsusing the mouse Pax6 gene instead ofthe fly eyeless gene. Once again, eyes developedat various sites on the transgenic flies. So a genewhose expression normally leads to the developmentof a mammalian “camera” eye now ledto the development of an insect’s “compound”The eyes have it20Eye of the Fly Unlike the single-lensed eyes ofvertebrates, the compound eyes of flies and otherinsects are composed of thousands of individuallenses, or ommatidia.20.1 What Is Evo-Devo?The modern study of evolution and development is called evolutionarydevelopmental biology, or evo-devo. Its ideas havecome from studies of the molecular mechanisms that underliethe development of morphology, and how the genes controllingthese mechanisms have evolved. The principles of evo-devo are:• Many groups of animals and plants, even distantly relatedones, share similar molecular mechanisms for morphogenesisand pattern formation. As we saw in the opening essay,some genes that are experimentally swapped from one organismto another can retain similar functions in the neworganisms. These mechanisms can be thought of as “toolkits,”in the same sense that a few tools in a carpenter’stoolkit can be used to build many different structures.• The molecular pathways that determine different developmentalprocesses, such as anterior–posterior polarity andorgan formation in animals, operate independently fromone another. This is called modularity.• Changes in the location and timing of expression of particulargenes are important in the evolution of new body formsand structures.• Development produces morphology, and much of morphologicalevolution occurs by modifications of existing developmentgenes and pathways, rather than the introductionof radically new developmental mechanisms.• Mechanisms of development have often evolved to be responsiveto environmental conditions.Biologists have long known that the morphological differencesbetween species are due to differences in their genomes. But wehave also discussed how the genomes of different species—including distantly related ones—share numerous similar regulatoryand coding sequences (see Section 17.3). When developmentalbiologists began to describe the events of differentiation,morphogenesis, and pattern formation at the molecular level,they found common regulatory genes and pathways in organismsthat don’t appear similar at all, such as fruit flies and mice.Developmental genes in distantly related organismsare similarIn the opening story of this chapter, we describe how a singledevelopmental switch turns on the production of eyes in twowidely divergent species—fruit flies and mice—that are onlyIN THIS CHAPTER we show that the genes controllingpattern formation, which we introduced in Chapter 19,are shared by a diverse array of organisms. We next describehow changes can occur in some parts of an organism withoutcausing undesirable changes in other parts. We see howa common set of genes can produce a great variety of bodyforms. We then turn to the ways some organisms can modulatetheir development by responding to signals from theirenvironment. Finally, we examine how developmentalprocesses constrain evolution.eye—a very different eye type. Thus a single transcriptionfactor appears to function as a molecular switch thatturns on eye development. Although eyes evolved manytimes during animal evolution, all of them depend onthe same gene. The special features of the many differenteyes in diverse animals all evolved from a commondevelopmental process.The discovery that the same genes govern developmentin a wide variety of animals led to the rapid growthof the discipline of evolutionary developmental biology,often known as “evo-devo.” Evolutionary developmentalbiologists compare the genes that regulate developmentin many different multicellular organisms to understandhow a single gene can do so many different things.CHAPTER OUTLINE20.1 What Is Evo-Devo?20.2 How Can Mutations with Large Effects ChangeOnly One Part of the Body?20.3 How Can Differences among Species Evolve?20.4 How Does the Environment ModulateDevelopment?20.5 How Do Developmental Genes ConstrainEvolution?A Mouse Gene Can Produce a Fly’s Eye When themouse Pax6 eye-specifying gene was implanted in the part ofthe fruit fly embryo that normally produces a limb, ommatidiaemerged in place of a leg.distantly related by evolution. The genes that control this switch,eyeless in fruit flies and Pax6 in mice, contain sequences that arehighly conserved in these species and in other animals (Figure20.1). As described in Section 22.1, biologists infer from thesesimilarities that the genes are homologous, meaning that theyevolved from a gene present in a common ancestor of mice andfruit flies. In recent years, thousands of genes have been foundthat are homologous across distantly related species.An even more dramatic example of homology in genes thatcontrol development, because it involves a whole set of genes,is the Hox gene cluster. These genes provide positional informationand control pattern formation in early Drosophila embryos(see Figure 19.19). When scientists looked for similarsequences in the mouse and human genomes, the results wereamazing. The Hox genes had homologs in mammals, and whatis more, the genes were arranged in similar clusters in thegenomes of mammals and fruit flies, and were expressed insimilar patterns in their embryos (Figure 20.2). Over the millionsof years that have elapsed since the common ancestor ofthese animals, the genes in question have mostly been maintained,suggesting that their functions were favored over manydifferent conditions.These and other examples have lead evo-devo biologists tothe idea that certain developmental mechanisms, controlled byspecific DNA sequences, have been conserved over long periodsduring the evolution of multicellular organisms. These sequencescomprise the genetic toolkit, which has been modifiedand reshuffled over the course of evolution to producethe remarkable diversity of plants, animals, and other organismsin the world today.Mouse Pax6 gene:Fly eyeless gene:Shark eye control gene:Squid eye control gene:GTATCCAACGGTTGTGTGAGTAAAATTCTGGGCAGGTATTACGAGACTGGCTCCATCAGAV S N G C V S K I L G R Y Y E T G S I R78%100% V S N G C V S K I L G R Y Y E T G S I RGTCTCCAACGGCTGCGTTAGCAAGATTCTCGGACGGTACTATGAGACGGGCTCCATAAGA85%100% V S N G C V S K I L G R Y Y E T G S I RGTGTCCAACGGTTCTGTCAGTAAAATCCTGGGCAGATACTATGAAACAGGATCCATCAGA77%100% V S N G C V S K I L G R Y Y E T G S I RGTATCAAATGGATGTGTGAGCAAAATTCTCGGGAGGTATTATGAAACAGGAAGCATACGADNAAminoacids20.1 DNA Sequence Similarity in Eye Development Genes Genescontrolling eye development contain regions that are highly conserved,even among species with very different eyes. These sequences, from aconserved region of the Pax6 gene and its homologs in other species, aresimilar at the DNA level (top sequence in each pair) and identical at theamino acid level (bottom sequence). The percentages beside the sequencesrepresent the percent match with the corresponding DNA andprotein sequences in the mouse.HeadThorax(T1–T3)Abdomen(A1–A8)Drosophila lab pb Dfd Scr Antp Ubx AbdA AbdBHom-CMouse b1Hoxbb2 b3 b4 b5 b6 b7 b8 b9Drosophila embryo(10 hours)Mouse embryo(12 days)Neural tubeSpinal cord20.2 Regulatory Genes Show Similar Expression Patterns Homologous genesencoding similar transcription factors are expressed in similar patterns along the anterior–posterior axes of both insects and vertebrates. The mouse (and human) Hox genes are actuallypresent in multiple copies; this prevents a single mutation from having drastic effects.20.1 RECAPChanges in development underlie the changes inmorphology that result in evolution of body form.Evo-devo is the study of the evolutionary aspects ofdevelopment. Evo-devo uses the knowledge gainedfrom, and techniques of, molecular genetics. A genetictoolkit consisting of highly conserved regulatorygenes encoding transcription factors governspattern formation in multicellular organisms.• Describe the main ideas of evo-devo. See p. 427• How does the story of the eye-determining genesPax6 and eyeless demonstrate the existence of commondevelopmental genes in different organisms? Seepp. 427–428 and Figure 20.1• What is the significance of the similarity between thefruit fly and mouse genes involved in the developmentof polarity and pattern formation? See p. 428and Figure 20.2Many developmental mutations in fruit flies that result in strikingabnormalities (e.g., a head segment that forms a leg; see Figure19.20) affect only a single structure, segment or region. Therest of the embryo is often unaffected. How is this possible?How Can Mutations With Large Effects 20.2 Change Only One Part of the Body?In Chapter 19 we describe how development involves interactionsbetween gene products, which determine a sequence oftranscriptional events leading to differential gene expression.On the other hand, the study of homeotic mutations revealedthat embryos, like adults, are made up of developmental modules—functional entities encompassing genes and various signalingpathways that determine physical structures such asbody segments and legs.The form of each module in an organism may be changedindependently of the other modules because some developmentalgenes exert their effects on only a single module. For example,the form of a developing animal’s heart can change independentlyof changes in its limbs, because some of the genesthat govern heart formation do not affect limb formation, andvice versa. If this were not true, a mutation in any developmentalgene might result in an adult with multiple, widely differentdeformities. Such an adult would have difficulty functioningwell in any environment.Genetic switches govern how the genetic toolkit is usedDifferent structures can evolve within a single organism usinga common set of genetic instructions because there are mechanismscalled genetic switches that control how the genetic toolkitis used. These mechanisms involve promoters and the transcriptionfactors that bind them. The signal cascades that convergeon and operate these switches determine when and where geneswill be turned on and off. Multiple switches control each geneby influencing its expression at different times and in differentplaces. In this way, elements of the genetic toolkit can be involvedin multiple developmental processes while still allowingindividual modules to develop independently.Genetic switches integrate positional information in the developingembryo and play key roles in determining the developmentalpathways of different modules. For example, each Hox genecodes for a transcription factor that is expressed in a particularsegment or appendage of the developing fruit fly. The pattern andfunctioning of each segment depend on the unique Hox gene orcombination of Hox genes that are expressed in the segment.Consider the formation of fruit fly wings. Drosophila has threethoracic segments, the first of which bears no wings. The secondsegment bears the large forewings, and the third segmentbears small hindwings, called halteres, that function as balancingorgans. Hox proteins are not expressed in forewing cells,but all hind wing cells express the Hox gene Ultrabithorax (Ubx)because a set of genetic switches activates the Ubx gene in thethird thoracic segment. Ubx turns off genes that promote theformation of the veins and other structures of the forewing, andit turns on genes that promote the formation of hind wing features(Figure 20.3). In butterflies, on the other hand, Ubx influencestarget genes so that wings develop in the third-segmentcells, so full hind wings develop. Therefore, a simple geneticchange results in a major morphological difference in the wingsof flies and butterflies.20.2 | HOW CAN MUTATIONS WITH LARGE EFFECTS CHANGE ONLY ONE PART OF THE BODY? 429In the second segment,genes aretranscribed thatproduce large,veined wings.In the thirdsegment, Ubxprotein inhibitswing genetranscription.Drosophila embryoDNAPromoterTranscription No transcriptionTranscriptionfactorUbxproteinT1 T2 T3WingforminggeneWingHaltere20.3 Segments Differentiateunder Control of GeneticSwitches The binding of a singleprotein, Ultrabithorax (Ubx), determineswhether a thoracic segmentproduces full wings or halteres(balancers).GO TO Animated Tutorial 20.1 • ModularityyourBioPortal.com430 CHAPTER 20 | DEVELOPMENT AND EVOLUTIONARY CHANGEThe webbinghas undergoneapoptosisbetween thedigits.Apoptosis didnot occur duringdevelopment, sothe webbingremains.(A) B. rostratus(terrestrial)(B) B. occidentalis(arboreal)Modularity allows for differences in the timingand spatial pattern of gene expressionModularity allows the relative timing of different developmentalprocesses to shift independently of one another, in a processcalled heterochrony. That is, the genes regulating the developmentof one module (say, the eyes of vertebrates) may be expressedat different developmental stages in different species.Salamanders of the genus Bolitoglossa illustrate how heterochronycan result in major morphological changes. Salamanderembryos have webbing between their toes, but in most speciesof salamanders a particular gene triggers apoptosis in the webbingas the salamanders develop. The resulting independentdigits allow the adult salamander to walk more easily than ifit had webbed feet. This is the case with Bolitoglossa rostratus, aspecies that lives on the forest floor (Figure 20.4A). But in arborealspecies such as Bolitoglossa occidentalis (Figure 20.4B), thisgene is not expressed and apoptosis does not occur. The feet ofB. occidentalis are webbed throughout life, acting like suctioncups so the animal can adhere to vertical surfaces such as treetrunks. Thus a simple change in gene expression led to a majormorphological change and allowed a new lifestyle.The evolution of the giraffe’s neck provides another exampleof heterochrony. As in virtually all mammals (with the exceptionof manatees and sloths) there are seven vertebrae in the neck ofthe giraffe. So the giraffe did not get a longer neck by adding vertebrae.Instead the cervical (neck) vertebrae of the giraffe aremuch longer than those of other mammals (Figure 20.5). Bonesgrow due to the proliferation of cartilage-producing cells calledchondrocytes. Bone growth is stopped by a signal that results indeath of the chondrocytes and calcification of the bone matrix.In giraffes this signaling process is delayed in the cervical vertebrae,with the result that these vertebrae grow longer. Thus, theevolution of longer necks acted through changes in the timing ofexpression of the genes that control bone formation.Differences in the spatial expression pattern of a developmentalgene can also result in evolutionary change. Foot webbingin salamanders is determined by the temporal expression of adevelopmental gene, but foot webbing in ducks and chickensis affected by alterations in the spatial expression of a gene. Thefeet of all bird embryos have webs of skin that connect their toes.This webbing is retained in adult ducks (and other aquaticbirds) but not in adult chickens (and other non-aquatic birds).The loss of webbing is due to a signaling protein called bonemorphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) that instructs the cells in thewebbing to undergo apoptosis. The death of these cells destroysthe webbing between the toes.Embryonic duck and chicken hindlimbs both express theBMP4 gene in the webbing between the toes, but they differ inexpression of a gene called Gremlin, which encodes a BMP inhibitorprotein (Figure 20.6). In ducks, but not chickens, the Gremlingene is expressed in the webbing cells. The Gremlin proteininhibits the BMP4 protein from signaling for apoptosis, and theresult is a webbed foot. If chicken hindlimbs are experimentallyexposed to Gremlin during development, apoptosis does not occur,and ducklike webbed feet form on the chicken (Figure 20.7).20.4 Heterochrony Resulted in theEvolution of a Tree-Climbing Salamander(A) The foot of an adult B. rostratus, a terrestrialsalamander. (B) The foot of B. occidentalis, aclosely related salamander, does not lose itswebbing. This species uses the suction of itswebbed feet in an arboreal lifestyle.(A) Giraffe(B) Human20.5 Heterochrony in the Development of a Longer Neck Thereare seven vertebrae in the neck of the giraffe (left) and human (right; not toscale). But the vertebrae of the giraffe are much longer (25 cm comparedto 1.5 cm) because during development, growth continues for a longerperiod of time. This timing difference is called heterochrony.20.2 RECAPEmbryos and adult organisms are made up of selfcontainedunits called modules. The form of eachmodule may change independently because somedevelopmental genes exert their effects on only asingle module.• How do genetic switches control the way a gene isused? See p. 429 and Figure 20.3• Explain how heterochrony can result in evolutionarychange. See p. 430 and Figures 20.4 and 20.5Genetic manipulations and studies of pattern formation withinembryos have shown that the same signals can control developmentof different structures in an individual organism. Forexample, the protein BMP4 promotes apoptosis between developingdigits in feet, and then is involved later in the formation20.2 | HOW CAN MUTATIONS WITH LARGE EFFECTS CHANGE ONLY ONE PART OF THE BODY? 431Chick hindlimb Duck hindlimbDuck limbsproduce Gremlinin the webbing(arrows).No apoptosisoccurs.In the chicken,webbing undergoesapoptosis, resultingin the separatedtoes of the adult.Webbing in theadult duck’s footremains intact.Chick limbs donot produceGremlin (a BMP4inhibitor) in thewebbing.Purple dyemarks thepresence ofBMP4 proteins.Red dye showsthe pattern ofcell death(apoptosis).CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE20.7 Changing the Form of an AppendageDucks have webbed feet and chickens do not—a majordifference in the adaptations of these species. Webbing isinitially present in the chick embryo, but undergoes apoptosisthat is stimulated by the protein BMP4. In ducks anotherprotein, Gremlin, binds to BMP4 and inhibits it, preventingapoptosis and resulting in webbed feet. J. J. Hurle andcolleagues at the Universidad de Cantabria in Spain askedwhat would happen if Gremlin were put onto a developingchick foot. They hypothesized that apoptosis would beinhibited, and it was: the chick developed webbed feet.Thus, a single developmental switch controls foot shape—an important adaptation to the environment.HYPOTHESIS Adding Gremlin protein (a BMP4 inhibitor) toa developing chicken foot will transform itinto a ducklike foot.Differences in Gremlin gene expression causedifferences in morphology, allowing duckhindlimbs to retain their webbing.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSControl Gremlin addedChip a small window in chick egg shell and carefullyadd Gremlin-secreting beads to the webbing ofembryonic chicken hindlimbs. Add beads that donot contain Gremlin to other hindlimbs (controls).Close the eggs and observe limb development.In the hindlimbs in which Gremlin was secreted,the webbing does not undergo apoptosis, and thehindlimb resembles that of a duck. The controlhindlimbs develop the normal chicken form.20.6 Changes in Gremlin Expression Correlate with Changes inHindlimb Structure The left column of photos shows the developmentof a chicken’s foot; the right column shows foot development in a duck.Gremlin protein in the webbing of the duck foot inhibits BMP4 signaling,thus preventing the embryonic webbing from undergoing apoptosis.of bone. These studies suggest that the processes thatgenerate multiple structures within an organism mightalso explain how different structures develop in differentspecies.How Can Differences among 20.3 Species Evolve?Can the processes that allow different structures to developin different regions of an embryo also explain majormorphological differences among species? Apparentlythey can. The genetic switches that determinewhere and when genes will be expressed appear to underlieboth the transformation of an individual from eggto adult and the many major differences in body formthat exist among species. Arthropods provide good examplesof how morphological differences among speciescan evolve through mutations in the genes that regulatethe differentiation of segments.The arthropods (which include crustaceans, centipedes,spiders, and insects) are segmented, with head,thoracic, and abdominal segments. In centipedes, boththoracic and abdominal segments form legs; but in insects,only the thoracic segments do. Arthropods express a genecalled Distal-less (Dll) that causes legs to form from segments.What shuts down Dll expression in insect abdominal segments?The product of the Hox gene Ubx is produced in arthropod abdominalsegments. But it has very different effects in differentorganisms. In centipedes, the Ubx protein apparently activatesexpression of the Dll gene to promote the formation of legs. Butduring the evolution of insects, a change in the Ubx gene sequenceresulted in a modified Ubx protein that represses Dllexpression in abdominal segments, so leg formation is inhibited.A phylogenetic tree of arthropods shows that this changein Ubx occurred in the ancestor of insects, at the same time thatabdominal legs were lost (Figure 20.8).In vertebrates, a similar process governs the development ofdifferences in segments of the vertebral column. The vertebralcolumn consists of a set of anterior-to-posterior regions: the cervical(neck), thoracic (chest), lumbar (back), sacral, and caudal(tail) regions. The spatial pattern of Hox gene expression governsthe transition from one region to another (Figure 20.9). Forexample, the anterior limit of expression of Hoxc6 always fallsat the boundary between the cervical and thoracic vertebrae ofmice and chickens, even though these animals have differentnumbers of cervical and thoracic vertebrae. The anterior-most432 CHAPTER 20 | DEVELOPMENT AND EVOLUTIONARY CHANGEIn the insect lineage, a mutation in theUbx gene prevents legs from forming inthe abdominal segments.Most arthropods have legs growingfrom their abdominal segments.Insects FlyMosquitoButterflyMothBeetleSpringtailShrimpSpiderCentipedeOnychophoranChange inprotein structureCommonancestorCentipedeInsect20.8 A Mutation in a Hox GeneChanged the Number of Legs inInsects In the insect lineage (bluebox) of the arthropods, a change to theUbx gene resulted in a protein thatinhibits the Dll gene, which is requiredfor legs to form. Because insectsexpress this modified Ubx gene in theirabdominal segments, no legs growfrom these segments. Other arthropods,such as centipedes, do growlegs from their abdominal segments.In the mouse embryo, thetransition from cervical tothoracic vertebrae in thespine occurs at the anteriorlimit of Hoxc6 expression.In the chicken, the anterior limitof Hoxc6 expression is furtherdown the spine, resultingin more cervical vertebrae.CervicalvertebraeHeadThoracicvertebraeHoxc6 expression in embryosMouse ChickTail20.9 Changes in Gene Expression and Evolution of the SpineDifferences in the pattern of Hoxc6 expression result in a different boundarybetween the cervical and thoracic vertebrae in mice and chicks.segment that expresses Hoxc6 is the segment where the forelimbswill develop. Thus, genetic changes that expanded or contractedthe expression domains of different Hox genes resultedin changes in the characteristic numbers of different vertebraeduring evolution.20.3 RECAPChanges in the genetic switches that determinewhere and when genes will be expressed underliethe evolution of differences in form among species.• Why do insects, unlike other arthropods, lack abdominallimbs? See p. 432 and Figure 20.8• How can the evolution of the spinal column be explainedby changes in a developmental gene? See p.432 and Figure 20.9So far in this chapter, we have focused on how modular geneticsignaling cascades control the development of an organism andhow changes in genetic switches can produce differences betweenspecies. You may have the impression that all of theseprocesses unfold from the genetic information contained in thefertilized egg, but that is not the case. Information from the environmentcan influence the genetic signaling cascades andthereby alter the form of the organism.How Does the Environment 20.4 Modulate Development?The environment an individual lives in may differ from the oneits parents lived in. Some environmental signals can producedevelopmental changes in an organism. If such changes resultin higher reproductive fitness, they will be favored by naturalselection. The ability of an organism to modify its developmentin response to environmental conditions is called developmentalplasticity or phenotypic plasticity. It means that a single genotypehas the capacity to produce two or more different phenotypes.Temperature can determine sexIn Chapter 12 we discuss the genetic mechanisms that determinesex. In mammals there are two sex chromosomes; XX individualsare female and XY individuals are male. But in somereptiles, sex is determined not by genetic differences betweenindividuals, but rather by the temperature at which the eggs areincubated—a remarkable case of developmental plasticity.Research in the laboratory of David Crews at the Universityof Texas has shown that if eggs of the red-eared slider turtleare incubated at temperatures below 28.6oC, they will all becomemales, whereas if the eggs are incubated above 29.4oC,they will all become females. In the less than 1oC range betweenthese two temperatures, a mix of males and females will hatchfrom the eggs (Figure 20.10). In other species with temperaturedependentsex determination, the incubation temperatures thatproduce males and females may differ from those that producemales and females in the red-eared slider. These different temperaturedependencies indicate that the effects of incubationtemperature can vary among species. But how does temperaturecontrol this developmental plasticity?In vertebrates, the development of male and female organsin the embryo is controlled by the actions of sex steroid hormones.This is the case whether the organism’s sex determinationis controlled genetically or by temperature. Sex steroidbiosynthesis in both males and females begins with cholesterol,which goes through many chemical reactions to produce themale sex steroids (androgens) and the female sex steroids (estrogens).In this biosynthetic sequence, the step that producesthe first androgen—testosterone—precedes the step that producesestrogens; therefore, both males and females producetestosterone.In animals with temperature-controlled sex determination, incubationtemperature influences sex development by controllingthe expression of the enzyme aromatase, which convertstestosterone to estrogen. If aromatase is abundantly expressed,estrogens are dominant and female organs develop. If aromataseis not expressed, testosterone is dominant, and male organsdevelop. Applying estrogen to eggs results in the developmentof females, even at the male-inducing temperature.What is the evolutionary advantage of this sex determinationmechanism? It might be that incubation temperature influencesthe growth rate of the embryo and the time of hatching.cholesterol testosteroneestrogenother androgensaromatasereductase20.4 | HOW DOES THE ENVIRONMENT MODULATE DEVELOPMENT? 433Percent male25 26 27 28 29 30Temperature (°C)20040608010020.10 Hot Females, Cool Males Whether the embryo of a red-earedslider turtle develops into a male or a female depends on the temperatureat which the egg is incubated. Higher temperatures produce only femalesand lower temperatures produce only males. This is apparently due totemperature sensitivity in the synthesis of sex hormones.In species in which males compete for territories and for females,a larger body size would be a benefit for males, but notnecessarily for females. Depending on availability of food in theenvironment, earlier hatching may have a positive or a negativeeffect on growth rate. For these kinds of reasons, incubationtemperature may have a differential effect on the reproductivesuccesses of males and females in a population.One interesting experiment clearly demonstrated the fitnessvalue of temperature-determined sex (Figure 20.11). At the Universityof Sydney, Daniel Warner and Richard Shine used hormonesto manipulate the eggs of a lizard called the jacky dragon(Amphibolurus muricatus) to produce males at temperatures thatwould normally result in females. In this species, females areproduced at all incubation temperatures, but males are only producedat incubation temperatures between 27oC and 30oC. Thehormonal manipulations allowed the investigators to obtainboth males and females from three different incubation temperatures—low, medium, and high—and to compare their subsequentgrowth characteristics and reproductive success.The young lizards were released into outdoor enclosures andallowed to behave naturally for the next three years. The malesincubated at the medium temperature had higher reproductivesuccess over the three-year study. The reproductive successesof females from the low and medium incubation temperaturesdid not differ, but were higher for the high-temperature femalegroup. These data support the hypothesis that the incubationtemperature differentially affects reproductive success in malesand females, and provides an explanation for why there couldbe selection for temperature-dependent sex determination insome species.Organisms use information that predictsfuture conditionsIn many cases of phenotypic plasticity, the adaptation of the differentbody forms to different but predictable environments isquite obvious. An excellent example is the moth Nemoria arizonaria,which produces two generations each year. Caterpillars434 CHAPTER 20 | DEVELOPMENT AND EVOLUTIONARY CHANGEGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODINVESTIGATING LIFEIncubation temperature during development has a differential effect on fitness of male and female jackydragons, and thus could be a selective pressure leading to the pattern of temperature determination ofsex in this species.20.11 Temperature-Dependent Sex Determination is Associated with Sex-Specific Fitness DifferencesIn some reptiles, sex is determined by the incubation temperature of the developing embryo. This led to the hypothesis that male-inducingtemperatures during development result in males with higher reproductive fitness. Warner and Shine tested this hypothesis by using a drugto block estrogen synthesis, so that males developed instead of females at high and low temperatures. These males had much lowerreproductive fitness than males that developed at the normal male-inducing temperature (which is intermediate). In contrast, females showedhighest fitness when they developed from eggs incubated at higher temperatures.Incubation temperature has a differential effect on reproductive success in lizards.RESULTSMales coming from the 27°C incubation temperatureand females coming from the 33°C incubationtemperature had the greatest reproductive success.Number ofoffspring produced23Males Females27 33Incubation temperature (°C)10223 27 33Incubate jacky dragon eggs at 23°C, 27°C, and 33°C. Apply aromatase inhibitor to half the eggs.Raise lizards in the natural environment and record the number of offspring produced.Untreated eggs: males at 27°C; females at 23°C and 33°CInhibitor-treated eggs: males at 23°C, 27°C, and 33°Cthat hatch from eggs in spring feed on oak tree flowers (catkins).These caterpillars complete their development and transform intoadult moths in summer. The summer moths lay their eggs on oakleaves, and the caterpillars that hatch eat the leaves. When thesecaterpillars transform into adult moths, they lay eggs that overwinterand hatch in the spring when the catkins are once againin bloom. Both types of caterpillars are camouflaged in the environmentsin which they feed. The body form of the spring caterpillarsresembles the catkins (Figure 20.12A), and the body formof the summer caterpillars resembles small oak branches (Figure20.12C). At the time of hatching, the young caterpillars all looksimilar, but their diets trigger developmental changes that resultin the differences in appearance. The ability to avoid predationby phenotypic plasticity increases evolutionary fitness.A variety of environmental signals influencedevelopmentIn addition to temperature and diet, there are other environmentalsignals that initiate developmental changes. Aubiquitous anddependable source of environmental information is light, whichprovides predictive information about seasonal changes. Outsideof the equatorial region, lengthening days herald spring andsummer while shortening days indicate oncoming fall and winter.Many insects use day length to enter or exit a period of developmentalor reproductive arrest called diapause, which enablesthem to better survive harsh conditions. Deer, moose, andelk use day length to time the development and the dropping ofantlers, and many organisms use day length to optimize the timingof reproduction. As we discuss in Chapter 38, many plantsinitiate reproduction in response to the length of the night (anabsence of light) and others respond to certain wavelengths oflight with developmental changes.You may wonder why we are mentioning processes likeantler growth and seasonal reproduction in a chapter on development.Development encompasses more than the events thatoccur before an organism reaches maturity.Development includes changes in bodyform and function that can occur throughoutthe life of the organism.Plants provide a particularly clear exampleof this. Redwood trees that are thousandsof years old still have undifferentiatedtissues called meristems that produce newdifferentiated tissues for the tree—stems,leaves, reproductive structures, and so on—throughout its life. These developmentalprocesses are not a simple read-out of a geneticprogram; they are adjusted to optimizeplant form in the environment in which theplant grows. Light, which plants need for photosynthesis, is animportant environmental signal in plant development. Dimlight stimulates the elongation of stem cells, so that plants growingin the shade become tall and spindly (Figure 20.13). Thisdevelopmental plasticity is adaptive because a spindly plant ismore likely to reach a patch of brighter light than a plant thatremains compact. In bright light a plant does not need to growtall, and can put its energy into growing leaves.Natural selection can act on any genes or signaling pathwayswith important developmental functions that can influence reproductivesuccess. Antler growth cycles involve the turning onand off of genes controlling bone growth. Seasonal breeding involvesturning on and off the same genes that were involved insex development and maturation. The evolution of developmentextends to all stages of life.20.4 | HOW DOES THE ENVIRONMENT MODULATE DEVELOPMENT? 435(A)(B)(C)Catkins Nemoria arizonariacaterpillarsSpring: on catkin Summer: on branchSummer adult20.12 Spring and Summer Forms of aCaterpillar (A) Spring caterpillars of the moth N.arizonaria resemble the oak catkins on which theyfeed. They develop into adults (B), which lay eggson oak leaves. The summer caterpillars (C) of thesame species resemble oak twigs.GO TO Web Activity 20.1 • Plant DevelopmentyourBioPortal.com20.4 RECAPDevelopmental plasticity enables developing organismsto adjust their forms to fit the environments inwhich they live. Organisms respond to environmentalsignals that are accurate predictors of future conditions.Development continues throughout life, andcan result in adaptive changes in the forms andfunctions of adult organisms.• Describe several examples of how an organism’s phenotypecan be a response to environmental signals.See pp. 433–435 and Figures 20.10 and 20.12• How would you determine whether or not an environmentaleffect on development is adaptive? Seepp. 434–435 and Figure 20.11Appropriate responses to new environmental conditions arelikely to evolve over time, but what are the limits of such evolution?Do developmental genes dictate what structures andforms are possible?How Do Developmental Genes 20.5 Constrain Evolution?Four decades ago, the French geneticist François Jacob madethe analogy that evolution works like a tinker, assembling newstructures by combining and modifying the available materials, andnot like an engineer, who is free to develop dramatically differentdesigns (say, a jet engine to replace a propeller-driven engine).We have seen that the evolution of morphology has notbeen governed by the appearance of radically new genes, butby modifications of existing genes and their regulatory pathways.Thus, developmental genes and their expression constrainevolution in two major ways:• Nearly all evolutionary innovations are modifications ofpreviously existing structures.• The genes that control development are highly conserved;that is, the regulatory genes themselves change slowly overthe course of evolution.Evolution proceeds by changing what’s already thereThe features of organisms almost always evolve from preexistingfeatures in their ancestors. New “wing genes” did not suddenlyappear in insects, birds, and bats; instead, wings arose asmodifications of existing structures. Wings evolved independentlyin insects and vertebrates—once in insects, and in threeindependent instances among the vertebrates (Figure 20.14). Invertebrates, the wings are modified limbs.Like limbs, wings have a common structure: a humerus thatarticulates with the body; two longer bones, the radius and ulna,that project away from the humerus; and then metacarpals andphalanges (digits). During development these bones have differentlengths and weights in different organisms.Developmental controls also influence how organisms losestructures. The ancestors of present-day snakes lost their forelimbsas a result of changes in the segmental expression of Hoxgenes. The snake lineage subsequently lost its hindlimbs by theloss of expression of the Sonic hedgehog gene in the limb bud tissue.But some snake species such as boas and pythons still haverudimentary pelvic bones and upper leg bones.Conserved developmental genes can lead toparallel evolutionThe nucleotide sequences of many of the genes that govern developmenthave been highly conserved throughout the evolutionof multicellular organisms—in other words, these genesexist in similar form across a broad spectrum of species (seeFigure 20.2).The existence of highly conserved developmental genesmakes it likely that similar traits will evolve repeatedly, especiallyamong closely related species—a process called parallelphenotypic evolution. A good example of this process is providedby a small fish, the three-spined stickleback (Gasterosteusaculeatus).436 CHAPTER 20 | DEVELOPMENT AND EVOLUTIONARY CHANGEIn the dark, stem cellselongate and leaf growthis reduced.In the light, stem cellsare shorter and leavesare bigger.20.13 Light Seekers The bean plants on the left were grown underlow light levels. The plant’s cells have elongated in response to the lowlight, and the plants have become spindly. The control plants on the rightwere grown under normal light conditions.BirdPterosaur(extinct)BatHumerusPhalangesRadiusUlnaUlnaMetacarpalsHumerusPhalanges(digits)RadiusUlnaMetacarpalsHumerusPhalangesRadiusMetacarpalsSticklebacks are widely distributed across the Atlanticand Pacific Oceans and are also found in many freshwaterlakes. Marine populations of this species spend most oftheir lives at sea, but return to fresh water to breed. Membersof freshwater populations live in lakes and never journeyto salt water. Genetic evidence shows that freshwaterpopulations have arisen independently from marine populationsmany times, most recently at the end of the last iceage. Marine sticklebacks have several structures that protectthem from predators: well-developed pelvic bones withpelvic spines, and bony plates. In the freshwater populationsdescended from them, this body armor is greatly reduced,and dorsal and pelvic spines are much shorter oreven lacking (Figure 20.15).The difference between marine and freshwater sticklebacksis not induced by environmental conditions. Marinespecies that are reared in fresh water still growspines. Not surprisingly, the difference is due to a genethat affects development. The Pitx1 gene codes for a transcriptionfactor that is normally expressed in regions ofthe developing embryo that form the head, trunk, tail,and pelvis of the marine stickleback. However, in independentpopulations from Japan, British Columbia, California,and Iceland, the gene has evolved such that it isno longer expressed in the pelvis, and the spines do notdevelop. This same gene has evolved to produce similar phenotypicchanges in several independent populations, and isthus a good example of parallel evolution. What couldbe the common selective mechanism in these cases? Possibly,the decreased predation pressure in the freshwaterenvironment allows for increased reproductive successin animals that invest less energy in the development ofunnecessary protective structures.20.5 | HOW DO DEVELOPMENTAL GENES CONSTRAIN EVOLUTION? 43720.14 Wings Evolved Three Times in VertebratesThe wings of pterosaurs (the earliest flying vertebrates,which lived from 265 to 220 million years ago), birds, andbats are all modified forelimbs constructed from the sameskeletal components. However, the components have differentforms in the different groups of vertebrates.Bony plates and pronouncedspines characterize marinesticklebacks.Bony armour is absent inmost freshwater sticklebacks,as is Pitx1 expression.Pelvic spineDorsal spinesPitx1 geneexpression(pelvic view)No Pitx1expression20.15 Parallel Phenotypic Evolution in Sticklebacks A developmentalgene, Pitx1, encodes a transcription factor that stimulates the production ofplates and spines. This gene is active in marine sticklebacks, but mutated andinactive in various freshwater populations of the fish. The fact that this mutationis found in geographically distant and isolated freshwater populations isevidence for parallel evolution.20.5 RECAPDevelopmental controls constrain evolution because nearly all evolutionaryinnovations are modifications of previously existing structures. The conservationof many genes makes it likely that similar traits will evolve repeatedly.• How have diverse body forms evolved by means of modifications in the functioningof existing genes? See p. 436 and Figures 20.14• Explain how the differences between marine and freshwater sticklebacks exemplifyparallel evolution via changes in gene regulation. See p. 437 and Figure 20.15438 CHAPTER 20 | DEVELOPMENT AND EVOLUTIONARY CHANGE20.1 What Is Evo-Devo?• Evolutionary developmental biology (evo-devo) is the modernstudy of the evolutionary aspects of development, and it focuseson molecular mechanisms.• Changes in development underlie evolutionary changes in morphologythat produce major differences in body forms.• Similarities in the basic mechanisms of development betweenwidely divergent organisms reflect common ancestry. ReviewFigure 20.1• Evolutionary diversity is produced using a modest number ofregulatory genes.• The transcription factors and chemical signals that govern patternformation in the bodies of multicellular organisms, and thegenes that encode them, can be thought of as a genetic toolkit.• Regulatory genes have been highly conserved during evolution.Review Figure 20.220.2 How Can Mutations with Large Effects ChangeOnly One Part of the Body?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 20.1• The bodies of developing and mature organisms are organizedinto self-contained units called developmental modules thatcan be modified independently. Modularity allows the timing ofdifferent developmental processes to shift independently, in aprocess called heterochrony. Review Figure 20.4 and 20.5• Alterations in the spatial expression patterns of regulatorygenes can also result in evolutionary changes. Review Figure20.620.3 How Can Differences among Species Evolve?• Changes in genetic switches that determine where and when aset of genes will be expressed underlie both the transformationof an individual from egg to adult and the evolution of differencesamong species.• Morphological changes in species can evolve through mutationsin the genes that regulate the differentiation of body segments.Review Figure 20.820.4 How Does the Environment ModulateDevelopment?SEE WEB ACTIVITY 20.1• The ability of an organism to modify its development inresponse to environmental conditions is called developmentalplasticity.• In many species of reptiles, sex development is determined byincubation temperature, which acts through genes that controlthe production, modification, and action of sex hormones.Review Figure 20.10• The adaptive significance of developmental plasticity is notalways obvious, but experiments can test for effects on reproductivesuccess. Review Figure 20.11• Some environmental cues, such as those that anticipate seasons,are highly regular and can reliably drive seasonal adaptations inbody form and function. Review Figure 20.12• Environmental cues that trigger developmental change arediverse and can act at any stage of the life of an organism.20.5 How Do Developmental Genes Constrain Evolution?• Virtually all evolutionary innovations are modifications of preexistingstructures. Review Figure 20.14• Because many genes that govern development have been highlyconserved, similar traits are likely to evolve repeatedly, especiallyamong closely related species. This process is called parallelphenotypic evolution. Review Figure 20.15CHAPTER SUMMARYSELF-QUIZ1. Which of the following is not one of the principles of evolutionarydevelopmental biology (evo-devo)?a. Animal groups share similar molecular mechanisms formorphogenesis.b. Changes in the timing of gene expression are importantin the evolution of new structures.c. Evolution of development is not responsive to the environment.d. Changes in the locations of gene expression in theembryo can lead to new structures.e. Evolution occurs by modification of existing developmentalgenes and pathways.2. The developmental control pathway that results in polarityand pattern formation in the head–abdomen axis in Drosophilaa. has a similar gene sequence and chromosome order inthe mouse.During the course of evolution, manynovel traits have arisen, but failed topersist beyond a single generation. PartSix of this book examines the processesof evolution—the powerful forces thatinfluence the survival and reproductivesuccess of various life forms. We will examinehow different adaptations becomeprevalent in different environments,resulting in the extraordinarydiversity of life on Earth today.
20.1 What Is Evo-Devo?• Evolutionary developmental biology (evo-devo) is the modernstudy of the evolutionary aspects of development, and it focuseson molecular mechanisms.• Changes in development underlie evolutionary changes in morphologythat produce major differences in body forms.• Similarities in the basic mechanisms of development betweenwidely divergent organisms reflect common ancestry. ReviewFigure 20.1• Evolutionary diversity is produced using a modest number ofregulatory genes.• The transcription factors and chemical signals that govern patternformation in the bodies of multicellular organisms, and thegenes that encode them, can be thought of as a genetic toolkit.• Regulatory genes have been highly conserved during evolution.Review Figure 20.220.2 How Can Mutations with Large Effects ChangeOnly One Part of the Body?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 20.1• The bodies of developing and mature organisms are organizedinto self-contained units called developmental modules thatcan be modified independently. Modularity allows the timing ofdifferent developmental processes to shift independently, in aprocess called heterochrony. Review Figure 20.4 and 20.5• Alterations in the spatial expression patterns of regulatorygenes can also result in evolutionary changes. Review Figure20.620.3 How Can Differences among Species Evolve?• Changes in genetic switches that determine where and when aset of genes will be expressed underlie both the transformationof an individual from egg to adult and the evolution of differencesamong species.• Morphological changes in species can evolve through mutationsin the genes that regulate the differentiation of body segments.Review Figure 20.820.4 How Does the Environment ModulateDevelopment?SEE WEB ACTIVITY 20.1• The ability of an organism to modify its development inresponse to environmental conditions is called developmentalplasticity.• In many species of reptiles, sex development is determined byincubation temperature, which acts through genes that controlthe production, modification, and action of sex hormones.Review Figure 20.10• The adaptive significance of developmental plasticity is notalways obvious, but experiments can test for effects on reproductivesuccess. Review Figure 20.11• Some environmental cues, such as those that anticipate seasons,are highly regular and can reliably drive seasonal adaptations inbody form and function. Review Figure 20.12• Environmental cues that trigger developmental change arediverse and can act at any stage of the life of an organism.20.5 How Do Developmental Genes Constrain Evolution?• Virtually all evolutionary innovations are modifications of preexistingstructures. Review Figure 20.14• Because many genes that govern development have been highlyconserved, similar traits are likely to evolve repeatedly, especiallyamong closely related species. This process is called parallelphenotypic evolution. Review Figure 20.15