Many people drink alcoholic beverages but relativelyfew of them become addicted (alcoholic).When they do, the results are often disastrous,both socially and physiologically. Alcoholism often disruptsrelationships with family, friends, and colleagues.Lost productivity leads to economic costs estimated atover $100 billion per year in the U.S. alone. Physiologically,alcoholism is characterized by a compulsion to consumealcohol, tolerance (increasing doses are needed for thesame effect), and dependence (abrupt cessation of consumptionleads to severe withdrawal symptoms). In mostof these people, alcohol acts not just to provide pleasantsensations (positive reinforcement) but also to alleviateunpleasant ones such as anxiety (negative reinforcement).Why do only some people become alcoholic? Alcoholismis a complex behavioral disease. Psychologistssometimes speak of “addictive personalities,” and geneticstudies indicate there may be inherited factors. It wouldhelp both alcoholics and those who treat them if we understoodthe differences in brain chemistry between alcoholicand nonalcoholic individuals. But we can’t do thenecessary experiments on humans; instead, animal modelsare used to study alcoholism at the molecular level.James Murphy at Indiana University has bred a strain ofrats, called P rats, that prefer alcohol when given thechoice of alcohol-containing or alcohol-free water. Theserats show many of the symptoms of true addiction, includingcompulsive drinking, tolerance, and withdrawal.In effect, they are a genetic strain of alcoholic animals.People often drink alcoholic beverages to relieve anxiety,and there are clear links between anxiety disordersand alcoholism. Like many of their human counterparts,the P rats appear more anxious than wild-type rats, spendingmore time in a closed rather than an open environment.Drinking alcohol alters this behavior and seems torelieve their anxiety.There may also be a link between the transcription factorCREB and alcohol consumption. CREB (or cyclic AMP responseelement binding protein) is especially abundant inthe brain and regulates the expression of hundreds ofgenes that are important in metabolism. CREB becomesactivated when it is phosphorylated by the enzyme proteinkinase A, which in turn is activated by the second messengercyclic AMP. In an effort to understand the molecularbasis of alcoholism and anxiety, neuroscientist SubhashPandey and his colleagues at the University of Illinois comparedCREB levels in the brains of P rats and wild-type rats.Alcoholism and the control of gene expression16Alcoholism Huge social and economic costs are associatedwith alcohol abuse. Scientists are trying to understand itsmolecular basis.IN THIS CHAPTER we will focus on the control of geneexpression in many types of organisms. We begin with thesimplest systems, viruses, which undertake an ordered seriesof molecular events when they infect a host cell. Thenwe turn to prokaryotes, which respond to changes in theirenvironment with coordinated changes in gene expression.In eukaryotes, similar principles are used to regulate geneexpression, but with added levels of complexity. Finally, weturn to the regulation of gene expression by modificationof the genome—the field of epigenetics.They found that P rats have inherently lower levels ofCREB in certain parts of the brain. When these rats consumedalcohol, the total levels of CREB did not increase,but the levels of phosphorylated CREB did. It is the phosphorylatedversion of CREB that binds to DNA and regulatesgene transcription.The prospect that CREB, a transcription factor that regulatesgene expression, is a key element in the geneticpropensity for alcoholism is important because it begins toexplain the molecular nature of a complex behavioral disease.Such understanding may permit more effective treatmentof alcohol abuse or its prevention. Equally importantto our purpose here, it underscores the importance of theregulation of gene expression in biological processes.An Explanation for Alcoholism? The transcription factor,CREB, binds to DNA and activates promoters of genesinvolved in addictive behaviors in alcoholism.How Do Viruses Regulate Their 16.1 Gene Expression?“Avirus is a piece of bad news wrapped in protein.” This quotefrom immunologist Sir Peter Medawar is certainly true for thecells that viruses infect. As we describe in Chapter 13, a virusinjects its genetic material into a host cell and turns that cell intoa virus factory (see Figure 13.3). Viral life cycles are very efficient.Perhaps the record is held by poliovirus: a single poliovirusinfecting a mammalian cell can produce over 100,000new virus particles!Unlike organisms, viruses are acellular; that is, they are notcells, do not consist of cells, and do not carry out many of theprocesses characteristic of life. Most virus particles, called virions,are composed of only nucleic acid and a few proteins.Viruses do not carry out two of the basic functions of cellularlife: they do not regulate the transport of substances into andout of themselves by membranes, and they do not performmetabolic functions involved with taking in nutrients, refashioningthem, and expelling wastes. But they can reproduce insystems that do perform these metabolic functions—namely,living cells. By studying the relatively simple viral reproductivecycle, biologists have discovered principles of gene expressionand its regulation that apply to cellular systems that may bemuch more complex.As we describe in Chapter 14, gene expression begins at thepromoter, where RNA polymerase binds to initiate transcription.In a genome with many genes, not all promoters are active at agiven time—there is selective gene transcription. The “decision”regarding which genes to activate involves two types of regulatoryproteins that bind to DNA: repressor proteins and activatorproteins. In both cases, these proteins bind to the promoterto regulate the gene (Figure 16.1):• In negative regulation, the gene is normally transcribed.Binding of a repressor protein prevents transcription.• In positive regulation, the gene is normally not transcribed.An activator protein binds to stimulate transcription.You will see these mechanisms, or combinations of them, as weexamine regulation in viruses, prokaryotes, and eukarytotes.Bacteriophage undergo a lytic cycleThe Hershey–Chase experiment (see Figure 13.4) involved thetypical viral reproductive cycle, the lytic cycle, so named becausethe infected host cell lyses (bursts), releasing progenyviruses. Once a virus has injected its nucleic acid into a cell, thatCHAPTER OUTLINE16.1 How Do Viruses Regulate Their Gene Expression?16.2 How Is Gene Expression Regulated in Prokaryotes?16.3 How Is Eukaryotic Gene Transcription Regulated?16.4 How Do Epigenetic Changes Regulate GeneExpression?16.5 How Is Eukaryotic Gene Expression RegulatedAfter Transcription?nucleic acid takes over the host’s syntheticmachinery. In the case of some bacteriophage(viruses that infect bacteria), theprocess is extremely rapid—within 15 minutes,new phage particles appear in the bacterialcell (Figure 16.2). Ten minutes later,the “game is over,” and these particles arereleased from the lysed cell. What happensduring this rapid life cycle?At the molecular level, the reproductivecycle of a lytic virus has two stages: earlyand late (Figure 16.3). Look for both positiveand negative regulation of gene expressionin these events:• The viral genome contains a promoterthat binds host RNA polymerase. In theearly stage (1–2 minutes after phageDNAentry) viral genes that lie adjacent344 CHAPTER 16 | REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSIONBinding of repressor proteinblocks transcription.Binding of activator proteinstimulates transcription.DNA(A) Negative regulationRepressor binding siteTranscription5′3′3′5′DNANo transcriptionNo transcription5′3′3′5′DNA(B) Positive regulationActivator binding siteTranscription5′3′3′5′DNA5′3′3′5′(B)0.50 μm(A) 16.2 Bacteriophage andHost (A) E. coli cells(viewed here from the side)are the host for bacteriophageT2. (B) BacteriophageT2 have attached to thishost E. coli cell and thereproductive cycle is underway,producing new phageparticles.The cell is viewedin transverse section.A virus infectsa host cell.21It uses the host bacterium’sRNA polymerase totranscribe early genes.3 One early proteinshuts down host(bacterial) genetranscription…5 Another early proteinstimulates late genetranscription…6 …leading to production ofnew viral capsid proteinsand a protein that lyses thehost cell.4 …and anotherstimulates viralgenome replication.56PromoterTranscription TranscriptionCapsid Enzymefor lysisTranslationmRNAEarly genes Late genesViralgenome16.3 The Lytic Cycle: A Strategy for Viral Reproduction In a host cell infected with avirus, the viral genome uses its early genes to shut down host transcription while it replicatesitself. Once the viral genome is replicated, its late genes produce capsid proteins that packagethe genome and other proteins that lyse the host cell.16.1 Positive and Negative Regulation Proteins regulategene expression by binding to DNA and preventingor allowing RNA polymerase to bind DNA at the promotorregion to control transcription.to this promoter are transcribed. These early genes oftenencode proteins that shut down host transcription andstimulate viral genome replication and transcription of virallate genes. Three minutes after DNA entry, viral nucleaseenzymes digest the host’s chromosome, providing nucleotidesfor the synthesis of viral genomes.• In the late stage, viral late genes are transcribed; they encodethe viral capsid proteins and enzymes that lyse thehost cell to release the new virions. This begins 9 minutesafter DNA entry and 6 minutes before the first new phageparticles appear.The whole process—from binding and infection to release ofnew phage—takes about half an hour. During this period, thesequence of transcriptional events is carefully controlled to producecomplete, infective virons.Some bacteriophage can carry bacterial genesfrom one cell to anotherDuring the lytic cycle some bacteriophage package their DNAin capsids (outer shells). In rare cases, a bacterial DNA fragmentis inserted into a capsid instead of, or along with, the phageDNA. When such a virion infects another bacterium, the bacterialDNA is injected into the new host cell, a mechanism of genetransfer called transduction. The viral infection does not producenew viruses. Instead, the incoming DNA fragment can recombinewith the host chromosome, replacing host genes withgenes from the virus’s former host. The recipeint cell survivesunder these conditions because there is no virus replication.Some bacteriophage can undergo a lysogenic cycleLike all nucleic acid genomes, those of viruses can mutate andevolve by natural selection. Some viruses have evolved an advantageousprocess called lysogeny that postpones the lytic cycle.In lysogeny, the viral DNA becomes integrated into the hostDNAand becomes a prophage (Figure 16.4). As the host cell divides,the viral DNA gets replicated along with that of the host.The prophage can remain inactive within the bacterial genomefor thousands of generations, producing many copies of theoriginal viral DNA.However, if the host cell is not growing well, the virus “cutsits losses.” It immediately switches to a lytic cycle, in which theprophage excises itself from the host chromosome and reproduces.In other words, the virus is able to enhance its chancesof multiplication and survival by inserting its DNA into the hostchromosome, where it sits as a silent partner until conditionsare right for lysis.16.1 | HOW DO VIRUSES REGULATE THEIR GENE EXPRESSION? 3451 The bacteriophagebinds to the bacterium.2 The phage DNAenters the host cell.4 The chromosome with itsintegrated prophage replicates.3 The phage DNA integrates itself into the bacterial4 New phage DNA forms, using chromosome and becomes a noninfective prophage.nucleotides from former host DNA.5 The host celltranscribes thephage DNA andtranslates phageRNA, producingphage proteins.3 The host DNAis digested.In rare cases, the prophage excisesitself from the host chromosomeand the cell enters the lytic cycle.6 Assembly of newphage is complete.A phage-encodedenzyme causesthe cell to lyse.5New phage arereleased to startthe cycle again.7BacterialcellProphageLYSOGENICCYCLELYTICCYCLESTART16.4 The Lytic and Lysogenic Cycles of Bacteriophage In the lyticcycle, infection of a bacterium by viral DNA leads directly to the multiplicationof the virus and lysis of the host cell. In the lysogenic cycle, aninactive prophage is integrated into the host DNA where it is replicatedduring the bacterial life cycle.Uncovering the regulation of gene expressionthat underlies the lysis/lysogeny switchwas a major achievement of molecular biologists.Here we present just an outline of theprocess to give you an idea of the positive andnegative regulatory mechanisms involved(Figure 16.5). The model virus bacteriophage l(lambda) has been used extensively to studythe lysogenic mechanism.How does the phage “know” when toswitch to the lytic cycle? Akind of “genetic switch” senses conditionswithin the host. Two viral regulatory proteins, cI andCro, compete for two promoters on the phage DNA (Figure16.5). These two promoters control the transcription of the viralgenes involved in the lytic and the lysogenic cycles, respectively,and the two regulatory proteins have opposite effects oneach promoter.Phage infection is essentially a “race” between these two regulatoryproteins. In a rapidly growing E. coli host cell, Cro synthesisis low, so cI “wins,” and the phage enters a lysogenic cycle.If the host cell is growing slowly, Cro synthesis is higher,and the genes involved in lysis are activated. The two regulatoryproteins are made very early in phage infection, and eachbinds to a specific DNA sequence.The reproductive cycle of bacteriophage λ is a paradigm forour understanding of viral life cycles in general. This relativelysimple system has served as a model to help us understand howthe complicated reproductive cycles of other viruses, includingHIV, are controlled.Eukaryotic viruses have complex regulatorymechanismsMany eukaryotes are susceptible to infections by various kindsof viruses: RNA and DNA viruses, as well as retroviruses (seealso Section 26.6).• DNA viruses. Many viral particles contain double-strandedDNA. However, some contain single-stranded DNA, and acomplementary strand is made after the viral genome hasbeen injected into the host cell. Like some bacteriophage,DNAviruses that infect eukaryotes are capable of undergoingboth lytic and lysogenic life cycles. Examples include theherpes viruses and papillomaviruses (which cause warts).• RNA viruses. Some viral genomes are made up of RNA thatis usually, but not always, single-stranded. The RNA istranslated by the host’s machinery to produce viral proteins,some of which are involved in replication of the RNAgenome. The influenza virus has an RNA genome.• Retroviruses. The retroviral genome is RNA, and the retrovirusencodes a protein that makes a DNA strand that iscomplementary to the RNA. The DNA is integrated into thehost chromosome and acts as a template for both mRNAand new viral genomes. Human immunodeficiency virus(HIV) is the retrovirus that causes acquired immune deficiencysyndrome (AIDS).REGULATING HIV GENES As an example of viral genome regulation,we will consider the reproductive cycle of HIV (Figure16.6). HIV is an enveloped virus; it is enclosed within a phospholipidmembrane derived from its host cell. Proteins in themembrane are involved in infection of new host cells, whichHIV enters by direct fusion of the viral envelope with the hostplasma membrane.As indicated above, a distinctive feature of the retroviral lifecycle is RNA-directed DNA synthesis. This process is catalyzedby the viral enzyme reverse transcriptase, which uses the RNAtemplate to produce a complementary DNA (cDNA) strand,while at the same time degrading the viral RNA. The reversetranscriptase also makes a complementary copy of the cDNA,and it is the double-stranded cDNA that gets integrated into thehost’s chromosome. The integrated DNA is referred to as theprovirus and, like the prophage, it contains promoters that arerecognized by the host cell transcription apparatus. Both the reversetranscriptase and the integrase are needed for the veryearly stages of infection and are carried inside the HIV virion.346 CHAPTER 16 | REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSIONWhen the bacterial host is growing poorly,Cro protein accumulates and activatespromoters for lysis genes.When the bacterial host is growing rapidly,cI protein accumulates and activatespromoters for lysogeny genes.cromRNAcImRNAcrocro gene promoterCro proteinLysisgenesLysogenygenescI cI genepromotercI proteinViral DNAPROTEIN PROMOTER SITELyticRepressesActivatesLysogenicActivatesRepressescICro16.5 Control of Bacteriophage l Lysis andLysogeny Two regulatory proteins, Cro and cI,compete to control expression of one another andgenes for viral lysis and lysogeny.16.1 | HOW DO VIRUSES REGULATE THEIR GENE EXPRESSION? 347HIV attaches to hostcell at membraneprotein CD4.1Viral RNA uses reversetranscriptase to makecomplementary DNA (cDNA).3cDNA enters the nucleusand is integrated into thehost chromosome, forminga provirus.6In the cytoplasm, the viral RNAis translated into proteins,using host ribosomes.8Upon activation, proviral DNA istranscribed to viral RNA, whichis exported to the cytoplasm.7Viral glycoproteins,new capsids, RNA,and viral envelopesare assembled.9Reverse transcriptasesynthesizes the secondDNA strand.54 Viral RNA degrades.An assembled virusbuds from the plasmamembrane.10Viral envelope fuseswith plasma membrane,capsid breaks down,and RNA is released.2Envelope Envelope glycoproteinHIV retrovirusTwo copies ofretroviral RNAReversetranscriptaseReverse transcriptaseRNA templatecDNA strandHost DNAMammalian host cell(usually a helper T cellCD4 or macrophage)Viral RNACapsidNucleus16.6 The Reproductive Cycle of HIVThis retrovirus enters a host cell via fusion ofits envelope with the host’s plasma membrane.Reverse transcription of retroviral RNAthen produces a DNA provirus—a moleculeof complementary DNA that inserts itself intothe host’s genome.The provirus resides permanently inthe host chromosome and is occasionallyactivated to produce new virions.When this happens, the provirus istranscribed as mRNA, which is thentranslated by the host cell’s protein-synthesizingmachinery.Under normal circumstances, thehost cell regulates viral gene expressionusing proteins that may have originatedas a defense mechanism against invaders.Host proteins bind to viralmRNA as it is being made and causesRNA polymerase to fall off the viralDNA, thereby terminating transcription.However, HIV can counteract thisregulation with a virus-encoded proteincalled tat (transactivator of transcription),which binds to the terminatorproteins and blocks their action. Thisantitermination allows viral gene transcriptionand the rest of the viral reproductivecycle to proceed (Figure 16.7).Almost every step in the complex reproductivecycle of HIV is, in principle,a potential target for drugs to treat AIDS.16.1 RECAPViruses are not cells. They consist of nucleic acidsand a few proteins, and require a host cell to reproduce.In the lytic cycle, the viral genome directs thehost cell to generate new virions along with proteinsthat cause the host cell to lyse. In the lysogeniccycle, viral DNA becomes integrated in the host’sgenome. This DNA is multiplied along with the hostcells but may remain inactive for long periods. Specialviral proteins that interact with host and viralDNA sequences are the keys to the regulation ofviral gene expression.• What is the difference between positive and negativeregulation of gene expression? See Figure 16.1• What are the lytic and lysogenic cycles of bacteriophage?See p. 345 and Figure 16.4• Describe positive and negative regulation of gene expressionin bacteriophage and HIV life cycles. See pp.346–347 and Figures 16.5 and 16.7The environment surrounding prokaryotic cells can changeabruptly, requiring rapid responses by the cell. We now turnto these responses, which often involve, as in viruses, the positiveand negative regulation of gene expression by proteinsbinding to DNA.How Is Gene Expression Regulated 16.2 in Prokaryotes?Prokaryotes conserve energy and resources by making certainproteins only when they are needed. The protein content of abacterium can change rapidly when conditions warrant. Thereare several ways in which a prokaryotic cell can shut off the supplyof an unneeded protein. The cell can:• downregulate the transcription of mRNA for that protein;• hydrolyze the mRNA after it is made, thereby preventingtranslation;• prevent translation of the mRNA at the ribosome;• hydrolyze the protein after it is made; or• inhibit the function of the protein.Whichever mechanism is used, it must be both responsive to environmentalsignals and efficient. The earlier the cell intervenesin the process of protein synthesis, the less energy it wastes. Selectiveblocking of transcription is far more efficient than transcribingthe gene, translating the message, and then degradingor inhibiting the protein. While all five mechanisms for regulatingprotein levels are found in nature, prokaryotes generallyuse the most efficient one: transcriptional regulation.Regulating gene transcription conserves energyAs a normal inhabitant of the human intestine, E. coli must beable to adjust to sudden changes in its chemical environment.Its host may present it with one foodstuff one hour (e.g., glucose)and another the next (e.g., lactose). Such changes in nutrientspresent the bacterium with a metabolic challenge. Glucoseis its preferred energy source, and is the easiest sugar to metabolize,but not all of its host’s foods contain an abundant supplyof glucose. For example, the bacterium may suddenly bedeluged with milk, whose main sugar is lactose. Lactose is a β-galactoside—a disaccharide containing galactose β-linked toglucose (see Section 3.3). Three proteins are involved in theinitial uptake and metabolism of lactose by E. coli:• b-galactoside permease is a carrier protein in the bacterialplasma membrane that moves the sugar into the cell.348 CHAPTER 16 | REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSIONTranscription isinitiated fromviral DNA.Host terminator proteins bindto RNA polymerase.RNA polymerase transcribes the entiremRNA, allowing expression of HIV genes.Transcription endsprematurely, preventingviral gene expression.HIV tat protein bindsto the terminatorcomplex, blockingtermination.Without tatRNA polymeraseViral DNAViral mRNATranscriptionTerminatorproteinsWith tatViral DNAViral mRNATranscriptiontat protein16.7 Regulation of Transcription by HIV The tat protein acts as anantiterminator, allowing transcription of the HIV genome.• b-galactosidase is an enzyme that hydrolyses lactose to glucoseand galactose.• b-galactoside transacetylase transfers acetyl groups fromacetyl CoA to certain β-galactosides. Its role in the metabolismof lactose is not clear.When E. coli is grown on a medium that contains glucose butno lactose or other β-galactosides, the levels of these three proteinsare extremely low—the cell does not waste energy and materialsmaking the unneeded enzymes. But if the environmentchanges such that lactose is the predominant sugar availableand very little glucose is present, the bacterium promptly beginsmaking all three enzymes. There are only two moleculesof β-galactosidase present in an E. coli cell when glucose is presentin the medium. But when glucose is absent, the presenceof lactose can induce the synthesis of 3,000 molecules of β-galactosidaseper cell!If lactose is removed from E. coli’s environment, synthesis ofthe three enzymes stops almost immediately. The enzyme moleculesalready present do not disappear; they are merely dilutedduring subsequent cell divisions until their concentration fallsto the original low level within each bacterium.Compounds that, like lactose, stimulate the synthesis of aprotein are called inducers (Figure 16.8). The proteins that areproduced are called inducible proteins, whereas proteins thatare made all the time at a constant rate are called constitutiveproteins. (Think of the constitution of a country, a document thatdoes not change under normal circumstances.)We have now seen two basic ways of regulating the rate of ametabolic pathway. In Section 8.5 we described allosteric regulationof enzyme activity (the rate of enzyme-catalyzed reactions);this mechanism allows rapid fine-tuning of metabolism.Regulation of protein synthesis—that is, regulation of the concentrationof enzymes—is slower, but results in greater savingsof energy and resources. Protein synthesis is a highly endergonicprocess, since assembling mRNA, charging tRNA, andmoving the ribosomes along mRNA all require the hydrolysisof ATP. Figure 16.9 compares these two modes of regulation.Operons are units of transcriptional regulationin prokaryotesThe genes that encode the three enzymes for processing lactosein E. coli are structural genes; they specify the primary structure(the amino acid sequence) of a protein molecule. Structuralgenes are genes that can be transcribed into mRNA.The three structural genes involved in the metabolism of lactoselie adjacent to one another on the E. coli chromosome. Thisarrangement is no coincidence: the genes share a single promoter,and their DNA is transcribed into a single, continuousmolecule of mRNA. Because this particular mRNA governs thesynthesis of all three lactose-metabolizing enzymes, either allor none of these enzymes are made, depending on whether theircommon message—their mRNA—is present in the cell.Acluster of genes with a single promoter is called an operon,and the operon that encodes the three lactose-metabolizingenzymes in E. coli is called the lac operon. Thelac operon promoter can be very efficient (themaximum rate of mRNA synthesis can behigh) but mRNAsynthesis can be shut downwhen the enzymes are not needed. This exampleof negative regulation was elegantlyworked out by Nobel Prize winners FrançoisJacob and Jacques Monod.In addition to the promoter, an operonhas other regulatory sequences that are nottranscribed. A typical operon consists of apromoter, an operator, and two or more16.2 | HOW IS GENE EXPRESSION REGULATED IN PROKARYOTES? 349An inducer is addedto growth medium.Enzyme concentration rises.Concentration ofinducible enzyme in a cell0 10Time after additionof inducer (min)InductionThe end product feeds back, inhibiting the activity ofenzyme 1 only, and quickly blocking the pathway.The end product blocks the transcription ofall five genes. No enzymes are produced.Regulation ofenzyme concentrationRegulation of enzyme activityPrecursorGene 1A B CGene 2 Gene 3DGene 4End productGene 5Enzyme 1 Enzyme 2 Enzyme 3 Enzyme 4 Enzyme 516.8 An Inducer Stimulates the Expression of a Gene for an Enzyme It is mostefficient for a cell to produce an enzyme only when it is needed. Some enzymes areinduced by the presence of the substance they act upon (for example, β-galactosidaseis induced by the presence of lactose).16.9 Two Ways to Regulate a Metabolic PathwayFeedback from the end product of a metabolic pathwaycan block enzyme activity (allosteric regulation), or it canstop the transcription of genes that code for theenzymes in the pathway (transcriptional regulation).structural genes (Figure 16.10). The operator is ashort stretch of DNA that lies between the promoterand the structural genes. It can bind verytightly with regulatory proteins that either activateor repress transcription. There are numerousmechanisms to control the transcription ofoperons; here we will focus on three examples:• An inducible operon regulated by a repressorprotein• Arepressible operon regulated by a repressorprotein• An operon regulated by an activator proteinOperator–repressor interactions controltranscription in the lac and trp operonsThe lac operon contains a promoter, to whichRNA polymerase binds to initiate transcription,and an operator, to which a repressor protein canbind. When the repressor is bound, transcriptionof the operon is blocked.The repressor protein has two binding sites:one for the operator and the other for the inducer,lactose. Binding with the inducer changes theshape of the repressor protein. This change inthree-dimensional structure (conformation) preventsthe repressor from binding to the operator(Figure 16.11). As a result, RNA polymerase canbind to the promoter and start transcribing thestructural genes of the lac operon.Study Figure 16.11 for the features of this negativecontrol. You will notice that:• in the absence of inducer, the operon isturned off;• control is exerted by a regulatory protein—the repressor—that turns the operon off;• the inducer, when present, binds to andchanges the shape of the repressor so that itno longer binds to the operator, turning theoperon on;350 CHAPTER 16 | REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSIONRegulatory sequences Structural genesRegulatory gene( i ) codes forrepressor proteinOperator (o)Promoter forstructural genes (plac )Promoter forregulatory gene( pi )z y aDNAStructural genefor b-galactosidepermeaseStructural genefor b-galactosidaselac OperonStructural genefor b-galactosidetransacetylase2 RNA polymerase cannotbind to the promoter;transcription is blocked.3 No mRNA is produced, sono enzyme is produced.2 RNA polymerase canthen transcribe thegenes for enzymes.1 The repressor protein encodedby gene i prevents transcriptionby binding to the operator.1 Lactose induces transcription bybinding to the repressor, which thencannot bind to the operator. RNApolymerase binds to the promoter.y aInducer(lactose)InactiverepressorLactose absentLactose presentDNAiio zo z y ai oplacplacplacActive repressorzy amRNA transcriptEnzymes of thelactose-metabolizingpathwayTranslationTranscriptionb-galactosidase Permease TransacetylaseRNA polymeraseDirection of transcription16.10 The lac Operon of E. coli The lac operon ofE. coli is a segment of DNA that includes a promoter, anoperator, and the three structural genes that code forlactose-metabolizing enzymes.16.11 The lac Operon: An Inducible System Lactose (the inducer) leads to synthesisof the enzymes in the lactose-metabolizing pathway by binding to the repressor proteinand preventing its binding to the operator.GO TO Animated Tutorial 16.1 • The lac OperonyourBioPortal.com• the regulatory gene produces a protein whose sole functionis to regulate expression of the other genes; and• certain DNA sequences (operators and promoters) do notcode for proteins, but are binding sites for regulatory orother proteins.In contrast to the inducible system of the lac operon, otheroperons in E. coli are repressible; that is, they are repressed whenmolecules called co-repressors bind to their repressors. Thisbinding causes the repressor to change shape and bind to theoperator, thereby inhibiting transcription.An example is the operon whose structural genes catalyzethe synthesis of the amino acid tryptophan:5 enzyme-catalyzed reactionsprecursor molecules → → → → →tryptophanWhen tryptophan is present in the cell in adequate concentrations,it is advantageous to stop making the enzymes for tryptophansynthesis. To do this, the cell uses a repressor that bindsto an operator upstream of the genes of the trp operon. But therepressor of the trp operon is not normally bound to the operator;it only binds when its shape is changed by binding to tryptophan,the co-repressor. To summarize the differences betweenthese two types of operons:• In inducible systems, the substrate of ametabolic pathway (the inducer) interactswith a regulatory protein (the repressor),rendering the repressor incapable of bindingto the operator and thus allowingtranscription.• In repressible systems, the product of ametabolic pathway (the co-repressor)binds to a regulatory protein, which isthen able to bind to the operator andblock transcription.In general, inducible systems control catabolicpathways (which are turned on only when thesubstrate is available), whereas repressible systemscontrol anabolic pathways (which areturned on until the concentration of the productbecomes excessive). In both of the systemsdescribed here, the regulatory protein is a repressorthat functions by binding to the operator.Next we will consider an example of positivecontrol involving an activator.Protein synthesis can be controlled by increasingpromoter efficiencyThe examples described in the previous section are termed negativecontrol because transcription is decreased in the presenceof a repressor protein. E. coli can also use positive control to increasetranscription through the presence of an activator protein.For an example we return to the lac operon, where the relativelevels of glucose and lactose determine the amount of transcription.When lactose is present and glucose is low, the lac operonis activated by binding of a protein called cAMP receptor protein(CRP) to the lac operon promoter. CRP is an activator oftranscription, because its binding results in more efficient bindingof RNA polymerase to the promoter, and thus increasedtranscription of the structural genes (Figure 16.12).In the presence of abundant glucose, CRP does not bind tothe promoter and so the efficiency of transcription of the lacoperon is reduced. This is an example of catabolite repression,a system of gene regulation in which the presence of the preferredenergy source represses other catabolic pathways. Thesignaling pathway that controls catabolite repression of the lacoperon involves the second messenger cAMP (see Section 7.3).The mechanisms controlling positive and negative regulationof the lac operon are summarized in Table 16.1.16.2 | HOW IS GENE EXPRESSION REGULATED IN PROKARYOTES? 3511 When glucose levelsare low, a regulatoryprotein (CRP) binds tocAMP and theCRP–cAMP complexbinds to the promoter.1 When glucose levels are high, cAMP islow and CRP doesn’t bind the promoter.RNA polymerase cannot bind efficiently.2 RNA polymerase thenbinds more efficientlyto the promoter…3 …and the lac operon—a set of genes encodingthe lactose-metabolizing enzymes—is transcribed.2 Transcription of the structural genes forlactose-metabolizing enzymes is reduced.TranscriptionLow glucose, lactose presentHigh glucose, lactose presentCRP cAMPmRNA transcriptp o z ylacap o z ylacaCRP (inactive)RNApolymerase16.12 Catabolite Repression Regulates the lacOperon The promoter for the lac operon does notfunction efficiently in the absence of cAMP, as occurswhen glucose levels are high. High glucose levelsthus repress the enzymes that metabolize lactose.GO TO Animated Tutorial 16.2 • The trp OperonyourBioPortal.com16.2 RECAPGene expression in prokaryotes is most commonlyregulated through control of transcription.An operon consists of a set of closelylinked structural genes and the DNA sequences(promoter and operator) that control their transcription.Operons can be regulated by bothnegative and positive controls.• Describe the molecular conditions at the lacoperon promoter in the presence versus absenceof lactose. See Figure 16.11• What are the key differences between an induciblesystem and a repressible system? See p. 351• What are the differences between positive andnegative control of transcription? See p. 351 andTable 16.1Studies of viruses and bacteria provide a basic understandingof mechanisms that regulate gene expression and ofthe roles of regulatory proteins in both positive and negativeregulation. We now turn to the control of gene expressionin eukaryotes. You will see both negative and positivecontrol of transcription, as well as posttranscriptionalmechanisms of regulation.How Is Eukaryotic Gene 16.3 Transcription Regulated?For the normal development of an organism from fertilizedegg to adult, and for each cell to acquire and maintain itsproper specialized function, certain proteins must be madeat just the right times and in just the right cells; these proteinsmust not be made at other times in other cells. Thus theexpression of eukaryotic genes must be precisely regulated.As in prokaryotes, eukaryotic gene expression can beregulated at a number of different points in the process oftranscribing and translating the gene into a protein (Figure16.13). In this section we will describe the mechanismsTABLE 16.1Positive and Negative Regulation in the lac OperonacAMP RNA POLYMERASE TRANSCRIPTION LACTOSEGLUCOSE LEVELS BINDING TO PROMOTER LACTOSE LAC REPRESSOR OF lac GENES? USED BY CELLS?Present Low Absent Absent Active and bound to operator No NoPresent Low Present, not efficient Present Inactive and not bound to operator Low level NoAbsent High Present, very efficient Present Inactive and not bound to operator High level YesAbsent High Absent Absent Active and bound to operator No NoaNegative regulators are in red type.16.13 Potential Points for the Regulation of Gene ExpressionGene expression can be regulated before transcription (1), duringtranscription (2, 3), after transcription but before translation (4, 5), attranslation (6), or after translation (7).Pre-mRNANUCLEUSCYTOPLASMmRNADNAInactive mRNAActive/inactiveprotein2. Transcriptional control3. Processing control4. Transport control5. mRNAstability control6. Translationalcontrol ofprotein synthesis7. Posttranslational controlof protein activity8. Proteindegradation1. Remodeling ofchromatinNuclearporeGO TO Web Activity 16.1 • Eukaryotic Gene Expression Control PointsyourBioPortal.comthat result in the selective transcription of specific genes. Themechanisms for regulating gene expression in eukaryotes havesimilar themes to those of prokaryotes. Both types of cells useDNA–protein interactions and negative and positive control.However, there are many differences, some of them dictated bythe presence of a nucleus, which physically separates transcriptionand translation (Table 16.2).Transcription factors act at eukaryotic promotersAs in prokaryotes, a promoter in eukaryotes is a sequence ofDNAnear the 5′ end of the coding region of a gene where RNApolymerase binds and initiates transcription. There are typicallytwo important sequences in a promoter: One is the recognitionsequence—the sequence recognized by RNA polymerase. Thesecond, closer to the transcription initiation site, is the TATA box(so called because it is rich in AT base pairs), where DNA beginsto denature so that the template strand can be exposed.Eukaryotic RNA polymerase II cannot simply bind to thepromoter and initiate transcription. Rather, it does so only aftervarious regulatory proteins, called transcription factors, haveassembled on the chromosome (Figure 16.14). First, the proteinTFIID (“TF” stands for transcription factor) binds to the TATAbox. Binding of TFIID changes both its own shape and that ofthe DNA, presenting a new surface that attracts the binding ofother transcription factors to form a transcription complex. RNApolymerase II binds only after several other proteins havebound to this complex.Some regulatory DNA sequences, such as the TATAbox, arecommon to the promoters of many eukaryotic genes and are recognizedby transcription factors that are found in all the cells ofan organism. Other sequences found in promoters are specific16.3 | HOW IS EUKARYOTIC GENE TRANSCRIPTION REGULATED? 353TABLE 16.2Transcription in Prokaryotes and EukaryotesPROKARYOTES EUKARYOTESLocations of functionally related genes Often clustered in operons Often distant from one another with separatepromotersRNA polymerases One Three:I transcribes rRNAII transcribes mRNAIII transcribes tRNA and small RNAsPromoters and other regulatory Few ManysequencesInitiation of transcription Binding of RNA polymerase to promoter Binding of many proteins, including RNA polymerase1 The first transcriptionfactor, TFIID, binds tothe promoter at theTATA box…RNA polymerase II bindsonly after severaltranscription factors arealready bound to DNA…and anothertranscriptionfactor joins it.32…and the RNApolymerase is readyto transcribe RNA.5More transcriptionfactors are added…4DNAPromoterInitiation site for transcriptionTATATATATATATA boxRNA polymerase IIBFETFIIDTFIIDTFIIDEHFFHBBTFIIDTFIIDB16.14 The Initiation of Transcription in Eukaryotes Apart from TFIID,which binds to the TATA box, each transcription factor in this transcriptioncomplex has binding sites only for the other proteins in the complex, anddoes not bind directly to DNA. B, E, F, and H are transcription factors.GO TO Animated Tutorial 16.3 • Initiation of TranscriptionyourBioPortal.comto only a few genes and are recognized by transcription factorsfound only in certain types of cells. These specific transcriptionfactors play an important role in cell differentiation, the structuraland functional specialization of cells during development.Other proteins can recognize and bind to DNAsequences and regulate transcriptionIn addition to the promoter, there are other short sequences (elements)of DNA that bind regulatory proteins, which in turn interactwith RNA polymerase to regulate the rate of transcription(Figure 16.15). Some of these DNA elements are positiveregulators (termed enhancers, which bind activator proteins)and others are negative (silencers, which bind repressor proteins).Some occur near the promoter and others as far as 20,000base pairs away. One example of a transcription factor is CREB,which you read about in the opening essay of this chapter.When the activators and/or repressors (collectively termed transcriptionfactors) bind to these elements, they interact with theRNApolymerase complex, causing DNA to bend. Often manysuch binding proteins are involved, and the combination of factorspresent determines the rate of transcription.For example, the immature red blood cells in bone marrowmake large amounts of β-globin. At least thirteen different transcriptionfactors are involved in regulating transcription of theβ-globin gene in these cells. Not all of these factors are presentor active in other cells, such as the immature white blood cellsproduced by the same bone marrow. As a result the β-globingene is not transcribed in those cells. So although the samegenes are present in all cells, the fate of the cell is determinedby which of its genes are expressed. How do transcription factorsrecognize specific DNA sequences?Specific protein–DNA interactions underlie bindingAs we have seen, transcription factors with specific DNA bindingdomains are involved in the activation and inactivation ofspecific genes. There are four common structural themes inthe protein domains that bind to DNA. These themes, or structuralmotifs, consist of different combinations of structural elements(protein conformations) and may include special componentssuch as zinc. The four common structural motifs in DNAbinding domains are: helix-turn-helix, leucine zipper, zinc finger,and helix-loop-helix (Figure 16.16).Let’s look at how one of these motifs works. As pointed outin Section 13.2, the complementary bases in DNA not only formhydrogen bonds with each other, but also can form additionalhydrogen bonds with proteins, particularly at points exposed inthe major and minor grooves. In this way, an intact DNA doublehelix can be recognized by a protein motif whose structure:• fits into the major or minor groove;• has amino acids that can project into the interior of the doublehelix; and• has amino acids that can form hydrogen bonds with the interiorbases.The helix-turn-helix motif, in which two α-helices are connectedvia a non-helical turn, fits these three criteria. The interior-facing “recognition” helix is the one whose amino acidsinteract with the bases inside the DNA. The exterior-facing helixsits on the sugar–phosphatebackbone, ensuring that the interiorhelix is presented to the basesin the correct configuration. Manyrepressor proteins have this helixturn-helix motif in their structure.Repressors can inhibit transcriptionin several different ways. Theycan prevent the binding of transcriptionalactivators to DNA, orthey can interact with other DNAbinding proteins to decrease therate of transcription.354 CHAPTER 16 | REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSIONDNA bending can bring an activator protein, boundto an enhancer element far from the promoter, intocontact with the transcription complex.A long stretch of DNAlies between the activatorbinding site and thetranscription complex.RNApolymerasebindingEnhancerDNAPromoterActivatorproteinRegulatoryproteinRNApolymerase IITranscriptionfactorbinding siteTranscribedregionRegulatoryproteinbindingTranscription factors5′3′3′5′Transcription 16.15 Transcription Factors,Repressors, and Activators Theactions of many proteins determinewhether and where RNA polymeraseII will transcribe DNA.The expression of sets of genes can be coordinatelyregulated by transcription factorsHow do eukaryotic cells coordinate the regulation of severalgenes whose transcription must be turned on at the same time?Prokaryotes solve this problem by arranging multiple genes inan operon that is controlled by a single promoter. But most eukaryoticgenes have their own separate promoters, and genesthat are coordinately regulated may be far apart. In these cases,the expression of genes can be coordinated if they share regulatorysequences that bind the same transcription factors.This type of coordination is used by organisms to respond tostress—for example, by plants in response to drought. Under conditionsof drought stress, a plant must simultaneously synthesizea number of proteins whose genes are scattered throughout thegenome. The synthesis of these proteins comprises the stress response.To coordinate expression, each of these genes has a specificregulatory sequence near its promoter called the stress responseelement (SRE). Atranscription factor binds to this elementand stimulates mRNA synthesis (Figure 16.17). The stress re-16.3 | HOW IS EUKARYOTIC GENE TRANSCRIPTION REGULATED? 355Helix-turn-helix motifZinc finger motifHelix-loop-helix motifLeucine zipper motifDNA-binding helix Turn Dimer-binding helixThese proteins regulate genes involved in development.These proteins are steroid hormone receptors.These proteins regulate immune system genes.These proteins regulate cell division genes.ZipperLeucine“Finger” Zinc ionsHelixLoopDNA-binding helix16.16 Protein–DNA Interactions The DNA-binding domains of most regulatoryproteins contain one of four structural motifs.321 A stressor (e.g., drought)activates transcription ofa regulatory proteinthrough a droughtsensitivetranscriptionfactor.Binding of the regulatoryprotein to the stressresponse element (SRE)stimulates transcriptionof genes A, B, and C…… which produce different proteinsparticipating in the stress response.PromotermRNAmRNAPromoterSRE Gene A Gene B Gene CRNApolymeraseRegulatoryproteinRegulatoryprotein geneTranscriptionTranslation5′3′ 5′3′16.17 Coordinating Gene Expression A single environmental signal,such as drought stress, causes the synthesis of a transcriptional regulatoryprotein that acts on many genes.sponse proteins not only help the plant conserve water, but alsoprotect the plant against excess salt in the soil and freezing. Thisfinding has considerable importance for agriculture because cropsare often grown under less than optimal conditions.16.3 RECAPA number of transcription factors must bind to a eukaryoticpromoter before RNA polymerase will bindto it and begin transcription. This provides a numberof ways to increase or decrease transcription.• Describe some of the different ways in which transcriptionfactors regulate gene transcription. See pp.353–354 and Figure 16.15• How can more than one gene be regulated at thesame time? See p. 355 and Figure 16.17The mechanisms for control of gene expression that we havediscussed so far involve direct interactions between proteinsand specific DNA elements. If the sequences of the DNA elementsare altered, then transcription of the gene will be affected.However, there are other mechanisms for controlling gene expressionthat do not depend on specific DNA sequences. Wewill discuss these mechanisms in the next section.How Do Epigenetic Changes 16.4 Regulate Gene Expression?In the mid-twentieth century, the great developmental biologistConrad Hal Waddington coined the term “epigenetics” and definedit as “that branch of biology which studies the causal interactionsbetween genes and their products which bring thephenotype into being.” Today epigenetics is defined morespecifically, referring to changes in the expression of a gene orset of genes that occur without changing the DNA sequence.These changes are reversible, but sometimes are stable and heritable.They include two processes: DNA methylation and chromosomalprotein alterations.DNA methylation occurs at promoters and silencestranscriptionDepending on the organism, from 1 to 5 percent of cytosineresidues in the DNA are chemically modified by the additionof a methyl group (—CH3) to the 5′-carbon, to form 5-methylcytosine(Figure 16.18). This covalent addition is catalyzed bythe enzyme DNA methyltransferase and, in mammals, usuallyoccurs in C residues that are adjacent to G residues. DNA regionsrich in these doublets are called CpG islands, and are especiallyabundant in promoters.This covalent change in DNA is heritable: when DNA is replicated,a maintenance methylase catalyzes the formation of 5-methylcytosine in the new DNA strand. However, the patternof cytosine methylation can also be altered, because methylationis reversible: a third enzyme, appropriately called demethylase,catalyzes the removal of the methyl group from cytosine(see Figure 16.18).What is the effect of DNA methylation? During replicationand transcription, 5-methylcytosine behaves just like plain cytosine:it base pairs with guanine. But extra methyl groups in apromoter attract proteins that bind methylated DNA. These proteinsare generally involved in the repression of gene transcription;thus heavily methylated genes tend to be inactive. Thisform of genetic regulation is epigenetic because it affects geneexpression patterns without altering the DNA sequence.356 CHAPTER 16 | REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSIONDNA methylasecatalyzes theformation of5-methylcytosineat CpG regions.Transcription isrepressed.After DNA replication,the cytosines on thenew strand areunmethylated.Maintenance methylasecatalyzes cytosinemethylation on thenew strand.Demethylase catalyzesremoval of methyl groups.Transcription is activated.OHHCytosineN NNCGGCOHHN NNCH35-Methylcytosine5′3′3′5′CGGC5′3′3′5′MethylationMethylationMethylationDNAreplicationCH3CH3CGGC5′3′3′5′CH3CGGC5′3′3′5′CH3CGGC5′3′3′5′CH3 CH3CGGC5′3′3′5′CH3DemethylationCGGC5′3′3′5′CH316.18 DNA Methylation: an Epigenetic Change The reversible formationof 5-methylcytosine in DNA can alter the rate of transcription.DNAmethylation is important in development from egg toembryo. For example, when a mammalian sperm enters an egg,many genes in first the male and then the female genome becomedemethylated. Thus many genes that are usually inactiveare expressed during early development. As the embryo developsand its cells become more specialized, genes whose productsare not needed in particular cell types become methylated.These methylated genes are “silenced”; their transcription is repressed.However, unusual or abnormal events can sometimesturn silent genes back on.For example, DNA methylation may play roles in the genesisof some cancers. In cancer cells, oncogenes get activated andpromote cell division, and tumor suppressor genes (that normallyinhibit cell division) are turned off (see Chapter 11). Thismisregulation can occur when the promoters of oncogenes becomedemethylated while those of tumor suppressor genesbecome methylated. This is the case in colorectal cancer.Histone protein modifications affect transcriptionAnother mechanism for epigenetic gene regulation is the alterationof chromatin structure, or chromatin remodeling. DNA ispackaged with histone proteins into nucleosomes, which canmake DNAphysically inaccessible to RNA polymerase and therest of the transcription apparatus. Each histone protein has a“tail” of approximately 20 amino acids at its N terminus thatsticks out of the compact structure and contains certain positivelycharged amino acids (notably lysine). Enzymes calledhistone acetyltransferases can add acetyl groups to these positivelycharged amino acids, thus changing their charges:Ordinarily, there is strong electrostatic attraction between thepositively charged histone proteins and DNA, which is negativelycharged because of its phosphate groups. Reducing thepositive charges of the histone tails reduces the affinity of thehistones for DNA, opening up the compact nucleosome. Additionalchromatin remodeling proteins can bind to the loosenednucleosome–DNA complex, opening up the DNA for geneexpression (Figure 16.19). Histone acetyltransferases can thusactivate transcription.Another kind of chromatin remodeling protein, histonedeacetylase, can remove the acetyl groups from histones andCH3(CH2)3NH3+CoA S C N C C + CoA +OCH H O(CH2)3CN CHNCC CH3OH H OSHLysine in histone Acetyl-CoA Acetyl-lysine16.4 | HOW DO EPIGENETIC CHANGES REGULATE GENE EXPRESSION? 357Histone modification by histoneacetyltransferase loosens theattachment of the nucleosometo the DNA.Remodeling proteins bind,disaggregating the nucleosome.Now the transcription complexcan bind to begin transcription.HistoneproteinsHistoneNucleosome DNA tailsAcetylgroupsHistone acetyltranserfaseAcetylatedhistonesRemodelingproteinTranscription complexTranscription begins16.19 Epigenetic Remodeling of Chromatin forTranscription Initiation of transcription requires that nucleosomeschange their structure, becoming less compact. Thischromatin remodeling makes DNA accessible to the transcriptioncomplex (see Figure 16.14).thereby repress transcription. Histone deacetylases are targetsfor drug development to treat some forms of cancer. As notedabove, certain genes block cell division in normal specializedtissues. In some cancers these genes are less active than normal,and the histones near them show excessive levels of deacetylation.Theoretically, a drug acting as a histone deacetylase inhibitorcould tip the balance toward acetylation and this mightactivate genes that normally inhibit cell division.Other types of histone modification can affect gene activationand repression. For example, histone methylation is associatedwith gene inactivation and histone phosphorylation alsoaffects gene expression, the specific effect depending on whichamino acid is modified. All of these effects are reversible and sothe activity of a eukaryotic gene may be determined by verycomplex patterns of histone modification. David Allis of theRockefeller University in New York City has dubbed this epigeneticsystem the “histone code.”Epigenetic changes induced by the environmentcan be inheritedDespite that fact that they are reversible, many epigeneticchanges such as DNA methylation and histone modification canpermanently alter gene expression patterns in a cell. If the cellis a germ line cell that forms gametes, the epigenetic changescan be passed on to the next generation. But what determinesthese epigenetic changes? A clue comes from a recent study ofmonozygotic twins.Monozygotic twins come from a single fertilized egg thatdivides to produce two separate cells; each of these goes on todevelop a separate individual. Twin brothers or sisters thushave identical genomes. But are they identical in theirepigenomes? A comparison of DNA in hundreds of such twinpairs shows that in tissues of three-year-olds, the DNA methylationpatterns are virtually the same. But by age 50, by whichtime the twins have usually been living apart for decades, indifferent environments, the patterns are quite different. Thisindicates that the environment plays an important role in epigeneticmodifications and, therefore, in the regulation of genes that thesemodifications affect.What factors in the environment lead to epigenetic changes?One might be stress: when mice are put in a stressful situation,genes that are involved in important brain pathways becomeheavily methylated (and transcriptionally inactive). Treatmentof the stressed mice with an antidepressant drug “hits the undobutton,” reversing these changes. Transcription factors such asCREB that mediate addiction (see the opening story of this chapter)are involved with histone acetylation, which leads to subsequentgene activation. The sperm of men with psychosis havedifferent methylation patterns than sperm from nonpsychoticmen. This last observation is especially provocative, as it suggeststhat epigenetic patterns, some of which may have formedduring life, can be passed on to the next generation. This meansthat some phenotypic characteristics acquired during the lifetimeof an organism might be heritable, contrary to biologists’long-held views. The idea that epigenetic changes can be inheritedremains controversial.DNA methylation can result in genomic imprintingIn mammals specific patterns of methylation develop for eachsex during gamete formation. This happens in two stages: first,the existing methyl groups are removed from the 5-methylcytosinesby a demethylase, and then a DNA methylase addsmethyl groups to the appropriate cytosines. When the gametesform they carry this new pattern of methylation (epigeneticinformation).The DNA methylation pattern in male gametes (sperm) differsfrom that in female gametes (eggs) at about 200 genes in themammalian genome. That is, a given gene in this group may bemethylated in eggs but unmethylated in sperm (Figure 6.20).In this case the offspring would inherit a maternal gene that istranscriptionally inactive (methylated) and a paternal gene thatis transcriptionally active (demethylated). This is called genomicimprinting.358 CHAPTER 16 | REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSIONThis chromosome camefrom the mother; thegene is methylated.In germ line cells,all genes aredemethylated.A sex-specificmethylationpattern isestablished inthe gametes.This chromosome camefrom the father; thegene is unmethylated.FemalesomaticcellMalesomaticcellDemethylation DemethylationMethylation MethylationEggsSpermMeiosis Meiosis16.20 Genomic Imprinting For some genes, epigenetic DNA methylationdiffers in male and female gametes. As a result, an individual mightinherit an allele from the female parent that is transcriptionally silenced;but the same allele from the male parent would be expressed.An example of imprinting is found in a region on humanchromosome 15 called 15q11. This region is imprinted differentlyduring the formation of male and female gametes, and offspringnormally inherit both the paternally and maternallyderived patterns. In rare cases, there is a chromosome deletionin one of the gametes, and the newborn baby inherits just themale or the female imprinting pattern in this particular chromosomeregion. If the male pattern is the only one present (femaleregion deleted), the baby develops Angelman Syndrome,characterized by epilepsy, tremors, and constant smiling. Ifthe female pattern is the only one present (male region deleted),the baby develops a quite different phenotype called Prader-Willi syndrome, marked by muscle weakness and obesity. Notethat the gene sequences are the same in both cases: it is the epigeneticpatterns that are different.Imprinting of specific genes occurs primarily in mammalsand flowering plants. Most imprinted genes are involved withembryonic development. An embryo must have both the paternallyand maternally imprinted gene patterns to develop properly.In fact, attempts to make an embryo that has chromosomesfrom only one sex (for example, by chemically treating an eggcell to double its chromosomes) usually fail. So imprinting hasan important lesson for genetics: males and females may be the samegenetically (except for the X and Y chromosomes), but they differepigenetically.Global chromosome changes involve DNA methylationLike single genes, large regions of chromosomes or even entirechromosomes can have distinct patterns of DNA methylation.Under a microscope, two kinds of chromatin can be distinguishedin the stained interphase nucleus: euchromatin and heterochromatin.The euchromatin appears diffuse and stains lightly;it contains the DNA that is transcribed into mRNA. Heterochromatinis condensed and stains darkly; any genes it containsare generally not transcribed.Perhaps the most dramatic example of heterochromatin isthe inactive X chromosome of mammals. Anormal female mammalhas two X chromosomes; a normal male has an X and a Y(see Section 12.4). The X and Y chromosomes probably arosefrom a pair of autosomes (non–sex chromosomes) about 300million years ago. Over time, mutations in the Y chromosomeresulted in maleness-determining genes, and the Y chromosomegradually lost most of the genes it once shared with its X homolog.As a result, females and males differ greatly in the“dosage” of X-linked genes. Each female cell has two copies ofeach gene on the X chromosome, and therefore has the potentialto produce twice as much of each protein product. Nevertheless,for 75 percent of the genes on the X chromosome, transcriptionis generally the same in males and in females. Howdoes this happen?Mary Lyon, Liane Russell, and Ernest Beutler independentlyhypothesized in 1961 that one of the X chromosomes in eachcell of a female is, to a significant extent, transcriptionally inactivatedearly in embryonic development. They proposed thatone copy of X becomes inactive in each embryonic cell, andthe same X remains inactive in all that cell’s descendants. Severallines of evidence have since confirmed this hypothesis.In a given embryonic cell, the “choice” of which X in the pairto inactivate is random. Recall that one X in a female comes fromher father and one from her mother. Thus, in one embryonic cellthe paternal X might be the one remaining transcriptionally active,but in a neighboring cell the maternal X might be active.The inactivated X chromosome does not vanish, but is identifiablewithin the nucleus. During interphase a single, stainablenuclear body called a Barr body (after its discoverer, MurrayBarr) can be seen in cells of human females under the light microscope(Figure 16.21A). This clump of heterochromatin, whichis not present in normal males, is the inactivated X chromosome,and it consists of heavily methylated DNA. A female with thenormal two X chromosomes will have one Barr body, while arare female with three Xs will have two, and an XXXX femalewill have three. Males that are XXY will have one. These observationssuggest that the interphase cells of each person, male16.4 | HOW DO EPIGENETIC CHANGES REGULATE GENE EXPRESSION? 3591 The Xist gene is onthe X chromosome.2 Transcription of theXist gene makesinterference RNA.3 The RNA binds tothe X chromosomefrom which it wastranscribed.4 Methylation and histone deacetylationattract chromosomal proteins that formheterochromatin, inactivating thechromosome.Xist geneInterferenceRNATranscription(A) (B)The Barr body is the condensed,inactive member of a pair of Xchromosomes in the cell. Theother X is not condensed and isactive in transcription.16.21 X Chromosome Inactivation (A) ABarr body in the nucleus of a human femalecell. (B) A model for X chromosome inactivation.or female, have a single active X chromosome, and thus a constantdosage of expressed X chromosome genes.Condensation of the inactive X chromosome makes its DNAsequences physically unavailable to the transcriptional machinery.Most of the genes of the inactive X are heavily methylated.However, one gene, Xist (for X inactivation-specific transcript),is only lightly methylated and is transcriptionally active. On theactive X chromosome, Xist is heavily methylated and not transcribed.The RNA transcribed from Xist binds to the X chromosomefrom which it is transcribed, and this binding leads to aspreading of inactivation along the chromosome. The Xist RNAtranscript is an example of interference RNA (Figure 16.21B).16.4 RECAPEpigenetics describes stable changes in gene expressionthat do not involve changes in DNA sequences.These changes involve modifications ofDNA (cytosine methylation) or of histone proteinsbound to DNA. Epigenetic changes can be affectedby the environment, and can also result in genomeimprinting, in which expression of some genes dependson their parental origin.• How are DNA methylation patterns established andhow do they affect gene expression? See p. 356 andFigure 16.18• Explain how histone modifications affect transcription.See pp. 357–358 and Figure 16.19• Why and how does X chromosome inactivation occur?See p. 359Gene expression involves transcription and then translation. Sofar we have described how eukaryotic gene expression is regulatedat the transcriptional level. But as Figure 16.13 shows,there are many points at which regulation can occur after theinitial gene transcript is made.How Is Eukaryotic Gene Expression 16.5 Regulated After Transcription?Eukaryotic gene expression can be regulated both in the nucleusprior to mRNA export, and after the mRNA leaves the nucleus.Posttranscriptional control mechanisms can involve alternativesplicing of pre-mRNA, microRNAs, repressors of translation,or regulation of protein breakdown in the proteasome.Different mRNAs can be made from the same geneby alternative splicingMost primary mRNA transcripts contain several introns (seeFigure 14.7). We have seen how the splicing mechanism recognizesthe boundaries between exons and introns. What wouldhappen if the β-globin pre-mRNA, which has two introns, werespliced from the start of the first intron to the end of the second?The middle exon would be spliced out along with the two introns.An entirely new protein (certainly not a β-globin) wouldbe made, and the functions of normal β-globin would be lost.Such alternative splicing can be a deliberate mechanism for generatinga family of different proteins with different activities andfunctions from a single gene (Figure 16.22).Before the human genome was sequenced, most scientistsestimated that they would find between 80,000 and 150,000protein-coding genes. You can imagine their surprise whenthe actual sequence revealed only about 24,000 genes! In fact,there are many more human mRNAs than there are humangenes, and most of this variation comesfrom alternative splicing. Indeed, recentsurveys show that about half of all humangenes are alternatively spliced. Alternativesplicing may be a key to thedifferences in levels of complexityamong organisms. For example, althoughhumans and chimpanzees havesimilar-sized genomes, there is more alternativesplicing in the human brainthan in the brain of a chimpanzee.360 CHAPTER 16 | REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSION5′5′3′3′3′5′Exon 1 Exon 2 Exon 3 Exon 4 Exon 5 Exon 6111224455661133556611334455662 3 4 5 6TranscriptionAlternative splicingTranslation Translation TranslationPrimarytranscriptMaturemRNAsDNAProtein 1 Protein 2 Protein 316.22 Alternative Splicing Results inDifferent Mature mRNAs and ProteinsPre-mRNA can be spliced differently in differenttissues, resulting in different proteins.MicroRNAs are important regulators of gene expressionAs we discuss in the next chapter, less than 5 percent of thegenome in most plants and animals codes for proteins. Some ofthe genome encodes ribosomal RNA and transfer RNAs, butuntil recently biologists thought that the rest of the genome wasnot transcribed; some even called it “junk.” Recent investigations,however, have shown that some of these noncoding regionsare transcribed. The noncoding RNAs are often very smalland therefore difficult to detect. These tiny RNA molecules arecalled microRNA (miRNA).The first miRNA sequences were found in the wormCaenorhabditis elegans. This model organism, which has beenstudied extensively by developmental biologists, goes throughseveral larval stages. Victor Ambros at the University of Massachusettsfound mutations in two genes that had different effectson progress through these stages:• lin-14 mutations (named for abnormal cell lineage) causedthe larvae to skip the first stage and go straight to the secondstage. Thus the gene’s normal role is to facilitate eventsof the first larval stage.• lin-4 mutations caused certain cells in later larval stages torepeat a pattern of development normally shown in thefirst larval stage. It was as if the cells were stuck in thatstage. So the normal role of this gene is to negatively regulatelin-14, turning its expression off so the cells can progress tothe next stage.Not surprisingly, further investigation showed that lin-14 encodesa transcription factor that affects the transcription of genesinvolved in larval cell progression. It was originally expectedthat lin-4, the negative regulator, would encode a protein thatdownregulates genes activated by the lin-14 protein. But thisturned out to be incorrect. Instead, lin-4 encodes a 22-basemiRNA that inhibits lin-14 expression posttranscriptionally bybinding to its mRNA.Several hundred miRNAs have now been described inmany eukaryotes. Each one is about 22 bases long and usuallyhas dozens of mRNA targets. These miRNAs are transcribedas longer precursors that are then cleaved through a series ofsteps to double-stranded miRNAs. Aprotein complex guidesthe miRNA to its target mRNA, where translation is inhibitedand the mRNA is degraded (Figure 16.23). The remarkableconservation of the miRNA gene silencing mechanism ineukaryotes indicates that it is evolutionarily ancient and biologicallyimportant.Translation of mRNA can be regulatedIs the amount of a protein in a cell determined by the amountof its mRNA? Recently, scientists examined the relationship betweenmRNA abundance and protein abundance in yeast cells.For about a third of the many genes surveyed, there was a clearcorrelation between mRNA and protein: more of one led tomore of the other. But for two-thirds of the proteins, there wasno apparent relationship between the two: sometimes there waslots of mRNA and little or no protein, or lots of protein and littlemRNA. The concentrations of these proteins must thereforebe determined by factors acting after the mRNA is made.Cells do this in two major ways: by blocking the translation ofmRNA, or by altering how long newly synthesized proteins persistin the cell (protein longevity).REGULATION OF TRANSLATION There are three known ways inwhich the translation of mRNA can be regulated. One way, aswe saw in the previous section, is to inhibit translation withmiRNAs. Asecond way involves modification of the guanosinetriphosphate cap on the 5′ end of the mRNA (see Section 14.4).An mRNA that is capped with an unmodified GTP molecule isnot translated. For example, stored mRNAs in the egg cells of thetobacco hornworm moth are capped with unmodified GTP moleculesand are not translated. After the egg is fertilized, however,the caps are modified, allowing the mRNA to be translated toproduce the proteins needed for early embryonic development.In another system, repressor proteins directly block translation.For example, in mammalian cells the protein ferritin bindsfree iron ions (Fe2+). When iron is present in excess, ferritin synthesisrises dramatically, but the amount of ferritin mRNA remainsconstant, indicating that the increase in ferritin synthesisis due to an increased rate of mRNA translation. Indeed, whenthe iron level in the cell is low, a translational repressor proteinbinds to ferritin mRNA and prevents its translation by blockingits attachment to a ribosome. When the iron level rises, someof the excess Fe2+ ions bind to the repressor and alter its three-16.5 | HOW IS EUKARYOTIC GENE EXPRESSION REGULATED AFTER TRANSCRIPTION? 361A precursor RNA foldsback on itself, forminga double-stranded RNA.21The dicer proteincomplex cuts the RNAinto small fragments.3 Another protein complexconverts the fragmentsto single-stranded RNA.4 This single-strandedmicroRNA is complementaryto a target mRNA.5 Translation is inhibited,and the target mRNAbreaks down.Target mRNAMicroRNA16.23 mRNA Inhibition by MicroRNAs MicroRNAs result in inhibitionof translation and in breakdown of the target mRNA.dimensional structure, causing the repressor to detach from themRNAand allowing translation to proceed.REGULATION OF PROTEIN LONGEVITY The protein content of anycell at a given time is a function of both protein synthesis andprotein degradation. Certain proteins can be targeted for destructionin a chain of events that begins when an enzyme attaches a76-amino acid protein called ubiquitin (so named because it isubiquitous, or widespread) to a lysine residue of the protein tobe destroyed. Other ubiquitins then attach to the primary one,forming a polyubiquitin chain. The protein–polyubiquitin complexthen binds to a huge protein complex called a proteasome(from protease and soma, body) (Figure 16.24). Upon entering theproteasome, the polyubiquitin is removed and ATP energy isused to unfold the target protein. Three different proteases thendigest the protein into small peptides and amino acids.You may recall from Section 11.2 that cyclins are proteins thatregulate the activities of key enzymes at specific points in thecell cycle. Cyclins must be broken down at just the right time,and this is done by proteasomes. Viruses can hijack this system.For example, some strains of the human papillomavirus targetp53 protein and retinoblastoma protein, which normally inhibitthe cell cycle, for proteasomal degradation, resulting in unregulatedcell division (cancer).16.5 RECAPOne of the most important means of posttranscriptionalregulation is alternative RNA splicing, whichallows more than one protein to be made from a singlegene. The stability of mRNA in the cytoplasmcan also be regulated. MicroRNAs, mRNA modifications,and translational repressors can preventmRNA translation. Proteins in the cell can be targetedfor breakdown by ubiquitin and then hydrolyzedin proteasomes.• How can a single pre-mRNA sequence encode severaldifferent proteins? See p. 360 and Figure 16.22• How do miRNAs regulate gene expression? See p. 361and Figure 16.23• Explain the role of the proteasome. See p. 362 andFigure 16.24362 CHAPTER 16 | REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSION1 A protein istargeted forbreakdown.2 An enzymeattaches ubiquitinto the protein…3 …and isrecognized bya proteasome.4 Ubiquitin isreleased andrecycled.5 The proteasomehydrolyzes thetarget protein.ProteasomeUbiquitin16.24 A Proteasome Breaks Down ProteinsProteins targeted for degradation are bound toubiquitin, which then binds the targeted protein toa proteasome. The proteasome is a complexstructure where proteins are digested by severalpowerful proteases.16.1 How Do Viruses Regulate Their Gene Expression?• Viruses are not cells, and rely on host cells to reproduce.• The basic unit of a virus is a virion, which consists of a nucleicacid genome (DNA or RNA) and a protein coat, called a capsid.• Bacteriophage are viruses that infect bacteria.• Viruses undergo a lytic cycle, which causes the host cell toburst, releasing new virions.• Some viruses have promoters that bind host RNA polymerase,which they use to transcribe their own genes and proteins.Review Figure 16.3• Rarely, a phage will transfer bacterial genes to a new host in theprocess of transduction.• Some viruses can also undergo a lysogenic cycle, in which amolecule of their DNA, called a prophage, is inserted into thehost chromosome, where it replicates for generations. ReviewFigure 16.4• The cellular environment determines whether a phage undergoesa lytic or a lysogenic cycle. Regulatory proteins that competefor promoters on phage DNA control the switch betweenthe two life cycles. Review Figure 16.5• A retrovirus uses reverse transcriptase to generate a cDNAprovirus from its RNA genome. The provirus is incorporatedinto the host’s DNA and can be activated to produce newvirions. Review Figure 16.616.2 How Is Gene Expression Regulated in Prokaryotes?• Some proteins are synthesized only when they are needed.Proteins that are made only in the presence of a particular compound—an inducer—are inducible proteins. Proteins that aremade at a constant rate regardless of conditions are constitutiveproteins.• An operon consists of a promoter, an operator, and two ormore structural genes. Promoters and operators do not codeCHAPTER SUMMARY
16.1 How Do Viruses Regulate Their Gene Expression?• Viruses are not cells, and rely on host cells to reproduce.• The basic unit of a virus is a virion, which consists of a nucleicacid genome (DNA or RNA) and a protein coat, called a capsid.• Bacteriophage are viruses that infect bacteria.• Viruses undergo a lytic cycle, which causes the host cell toburst, releasing new virions.• Some viruses have promoters that bind host RNA polymerase,which they use to transcribe their own genes and proteins.Review Figure 16.3• Rarely, a phage will transfer bacterial genes to a new host in theprocess of transduction.• Some viruses can also undergo a lysogenic cycle, in which amolecule of their DNA, called a prophage, is inserted into thehost chromosome, where it replicates for generations. ReviewFigure 16.4• The cellular environment determines whether a phage undergoesa lytic or a lysogenic cycle. Regulatory proteins that competefor promoters on phage DNA control the switch betweenthe two life cycles. Review Figure 16.5• A retrovirus uses reverse transcriptase to generate a cDNAprovirus from its RNA genome. The provirus is incorporatedinto the host’s DNA and can be activated to produce newvirions. Review Figure 16.616.2 How Is Gene Expression Regulated in Prokaryotes?• Some proteins are synthesized only when they are needed.Proteins that are made only in the presence of a particular compound—an inducer—are inducible proteins. Proteins that aremade at a constant rate regardless of conditions are constitutiveproteins.• An operon consists of a promoter, an operator, and two ormore structural genes. Promoters and operators do not code
for proteins, but serve as binding sites for regulatory proteins.Review Figure 16.10• Regulatory genes code for regulatory proteins, such as repressors.When a repressor binds to an operator, transcription of thestructural gene is inhibited. Review Figure 16.11, ANIMATEDTUTORIALS 16.1 AND 16.2• The lac operon is an example of an inducible system, in whichthe presence of an inducer (lactose) keeps the repressor frombinding the operator, allowing the transcription of structuralgenes for lactose metabolism.• Transcription can be enhanced by the binding of an activatorprotein to the promoter. Review Figure 16.12• Catabolite repression is the inhibition of a catabolic pathwayfor one energy source by a different, preferred energy source.16.3 How Is Eukaryotic Gene Transcription Regulated?• Eukaryotic gene expression is regulated both during and aftertranscription. Review Figure 16.13, WEB ACTIVITY 16.1• Transcription factors and other proteins bind to DNA andaffect the rate of initiation of transcription at the promoter.Review Figure 16.14 and 16.15, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 16.3• The interactions of these proteins with DNA are highly specificand depend on protein domains and DNA sequences.• Genes at distant locations from one another can be coordinatelyregulated by common transcription factors and promoter elements.Review Figure 16.1716.4 How Do Epigenetic Changes Regulate GeneExpression?• Epigenetics refers to changes in gene expression that do notinvolve changes in DNA sequences.• Methylation of cytosine residues generally inhibits transcription.Review Figure 16.18• Modifications of histone proteins in nucleosomes make transcriptioneither easier or more difficult. Review Figure 16.19• Epigenetic changes can occur because of the environment.• DNA methylation can explain genome imprinting, where theexpression of a gene depends on its parental origin. ReviewFigure 16.2016.5 How Is Eukaryotic Gene Expression RegulatedAfter Transcription?• Alternative splicing of pre-mRNA can produce different proteins.Review Figure 16.22• MicroRNAs are small RNAs that do not code for proteins, butregulate the translation and longevity of mRNA. Review Figure16.23• The translation of mRNA to proteins can be regulated by translationalrepressors.• The proteasome can break down proteins, thus affecting proteinlongevity. Review Figure 16.24SEE WEB ACTIVITY 16.2 for a concept review of this chapter.