34 PART EIGHT FLOWERING PLANTS: FORM AND FUNCTIONCarved into a sandstone mountain, surrounded bypermafrost on the Arctic island of Spitsbergen,Norway, the Svalbard vault is almost the size of asoccer field. It is stable enough to withstand a major earthquake,even though earthquakes are very unlikely at thatlocation. It is high enough in elevation to remain abovesea level even if all the polar ice caps were melted byglobal warming. A cooling system run on energy from localcoal holds its interior at –18°C, and even if this systemfails, insulation and the cold weather outside ensure that itwill be weeks before the interior temperature rises. It is surroundedby a technologically advanced security system.The 120 nations that participated in establishing this facilityagree that the vault at Svalbard needs to be very secure.Does it contain gold bars? No, it contains seeds, thecarriers of plant embryos. As photosynthesizers, plants arethe keys to the biosphere. They have also been the mainstayof human survival. Of the approximately 300,000species of plants, humans depend directly on only a fewdozen. You can name some of them—wheat, rice, andcorn for food; cotton for fiber; forest trees for paper. Millenniaago, humans selected certain plants growing in thewild for their own uses and began to cultivate them. Aftermany generations of artificial selection, the plants lookedvery distinct from their wild relatives. In addition, becausethese plants were grown in different environments andfor different purposes, different genetic strains of plantscame into being.By the twentieth century, there were thousands of geneticallydistinct varieties of crop plants—an amazing100,000 varieties of rice alone. A crop plant variety, alsocalled a cultivar, is a member of a species that has been artificiallyselected for one or more of its useful traits. Althoughonly a small number of these varieties are in use ata given time, plant biologists realized that the genetic diversityof the remaining species should not be allowed todisappear. Because plant seeds are generally quite hardyThe doomsday vaultSeed vaults Airlock doors Office and handling area Sleeve to protect tunnel from erosion and climactic changes Tunnel entrance BridgeThe Svalbard Global Seed Vault The vault is located 390feet inside a sandstone mountain on the Norwegian island ofSpitsbergen, about 700 miles from the North Pole. The locationwas chosen for secure, long-term storage of seeds becauseearthquakes are unlikely there and the ground is permeatedwith permafrost.34.1 What Is the Basic Body Plan of Plants?Plants live by harvesting energy from sunlight and by collectingwater and mineral nutrients from the soil. These resources,however, are incredibly sparse in the environment, so plantsface the challenge of collecting them from huge areas, bothabove and below ground. Another challenge plants face is theirinability to move. Plants cannot relocate themselves from, say,a dry, shady location to one that is wet and sunny.The plant body plan allows plants to respond to these challenges.Stems, leaves, and roots enable plants anchored to onespot to capture scarce resources effectively, both above and belowthe ground. More important, to compensate for their inabilityto move, plants can grow throughout their lifetimes. Thus,while plants cannot move to a new water source or a new sunnyclearing, they can respond to environmental cues by redirectingtheir growth to exploit opportunities that arise in their immediateenvironment.In Chapters 28 and 29 we saw how modern plants arose fromaquatic ancestors, giving rise to simple land plants and then vascularplants. Despite their obvious differences in size and form,all vascular plants have essentially the same simple structuralorganization. This chapter describes the basic architecture of thelargest group of vascular plants, the angiosperms (floweringplants), and shows how so much diversity can literally growout of such a simple basic form.As we saw in Figure 29.1, angiosperms first appeared about140 million years ago, radiated explosively over a period ofabout 60 million years, and became the dominant plant life onthis planet. There are over 250,000 angiosperm species today.Flowers, the angiosperms’ devices for sexual reproduction andtheir main distinguishing feature, consist of modified leaves andstems and will be considered in detail in Section 38.1. In thischapter we’ll focus on the three kinds of vegetative (nonsexual)organs angiosperms possess: roots, stems, and leaves. Each ofthese vegetative organs can be understood in terms of its structure.By structure we mean both its overall form, called its morphology,and its internal component cells and tissues and theirarrangement, known as its anatomy.Plant organs are organized into two systems (Figure 34.1):• The root system anchors the plant in place, absorbs waterand dissolved minerals, and stores the products of photosynthesisfrom the shoot system. The extreme branching ofplant roots and their high surface area-to-volume ratios allowthem to absorb water and mineral nutrients from thesoil efficiently.IN THIS CHAPTER we will examine plant structure atthe levels of cells, tissues, organs, and tissue systems. We willsee how that structure arises from clusters of undifferentiatedcells, called meristems, that permit continuous growththroughout a plant’s lifetime. The chapter concludes with alook at how humans have altered plant form through cropdomestication.and relatively easy to store for long periods, seed bankswere established. One of the largest is the National SeedBank in Colorado, USA, where over half a million plant varietiesare stored as seeds. When a plant breeder wants todevelop a new genetic strain of corn—for example, onethat is naturally resistant to a fungal disease—samples ofseed can be withdrawn from the seed bank and used forcross-breeding.The newly established seed vault in Norway is not somuch a bank as a safe deposit box. Seed banks from allover the world are depositing samples of seeds for safekeepingin the vault in the event of a disaster that mightdestroy the seed banks. Such destruction does happen; forexample, two valuable seed banks in Iraq and Afghanistanwere destroyed during recent wars. As the existence of theSvalbard vault clearly demonstrates, seeds, and the plantsthat they form, are vital to humanity.CHAPTER OUTLINE34.1 What Is the Basic Body Plan of Plants?34.2 How Does the Cell Wall Support Plant Growth andForm?34.3 How Do Plant Tissues and Organs Originate?34.4 How Do Meristems Build a Continuously GrowingPlant Body?34.5 How Has Domestication Altered Plant Form?Plant in Storage Every seed contains an embryo with themeans to create all parts of the plant body.Dr. R. Kessel & Dr. G. Shih/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.• The shoot system of a plant consistsof the stems, leaves, and flowers.Broadly speaking, the leavesare the chief organs of photosynthesis.The stems hold and displaythe leaves to the sun and provideconnections for the transport ofmaterials between roots and leaves.As we saw in Section 29.3, most angiospermsbelong to one of two majorclades. Monocots are generally narrow-leaved flowering plants such asgrasses, lilies, orchids, and palms. Eudicotsare broad-leaved floweringplants such as soybeans, roses, sunflowers,and maples. These two clades,which account for 97 percent of floweringplant species, differ in several important basic characteristics(see Figure 34.1). Let’s take a closer look at how the root andshoot systems are elaborated in eudicots and monocots.The root system anchors the plant and takes up waterand dissolved mineralsWater and minerals enter most plants through the root system,which is located in the soil. Because light does not penetratethe soil, roots typically lack the capacity for photosynthesis.Although hidden from view, the root system is often largerthan the visible shoot system. For example, the root system ofa 4-month-old winter rye plant (Secale cereale) was found to be130 times larger than the shoot system, with almost 13 millionbranches that had a cumulative length of over 500 km!The root system of angiosperms originates in an embryonicroot called the radicle. From this common starting point, the rootsystems of monocots and eudicots develop differently. Followingseed germination, the radicle of most eudicots develops asa primary root (called the taproot), which extends downwardby tip growth and outward by initiating lateral roots. The taprootand the lateral roots form a taproot system, which can takea variety of forms. For example, the taproot itself often functionsas a nutrient storage organ, as in carrots (Daucus carota),sugar beets (Beta vulgaris), and sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas)(Figure 34.2A).In contrast, the primary root of monocots (and some eudicots)is short-lived. Because they originate from the stem at34.1 | WHAT IS THE BASIC BODY PLAN OF PLANTS? 721The shoot systemconsists of stemsand leaves, inwhich photosynthesistakes place.The root systemanchors the plantand provides waterand nutrients for theshoot system.Eudicot MonocotTerminal budAxillary budLeafBladePetioleNodeInternodeNodeInternodePhytomerBranchStemRoots34.1 Vegetative Organs and Systems The basic plant bodyplan, with root and shoot systems, and the principal vegetativeorgans are similar in eudicots and monocots, although there arealso some differences between the two clades.(A) Taproots (B) Fibrous root system (C) Prop roots34.2 Root Systems ofEudicots and Monocots(A) The taproot systems of eudicots,such as carrots, sugarbeets, and sweet potato, contrastwith (B) the fibrous rootsystem of a leek and (C) theadventitious prop roots of corn.ground level or below, the roots of a typical monocot are calledadventitious (“arriving from outside”) roots, and they form a fibrousroot system composed of numerous thin roots that are allroughly equal in diameter (Figure 34.2B). Many fibrous rootsystems have a large surface area for the absorption of waterand minerals. Afibrous root system clings to soil very well. Thefibrous root systems of grasses, for example, may protect steephillsides where runoff from rain would otherwise cause erosion.In some monocots—corn, banyan trees, and some palms, forexample—adventitious roots function as props to help supportthe shoot. Prop roots are critical to these plants, which, unlikemost eudicot tree species, are unable to support abovegroundgrowth through the thickening of their stems (Figure 34.2C).The stem supports leaves and flowersThe central function of stems is to elevate and support the photosyntheticorgans (leaves) as well as the reproductive organs(flowers).Unlike roots, stems bear buds of various types. A bud is anundeveloped shoot that may or may not develop further to produceadditional branches or leaves. Shoots are composed ofrepeating modules called phytomers (see Figure 34.1). A phytomerincludes one or more leaves, which are attached to thestem at a node; an internode (the interval of stem between twonodes); and one or more axillary buds, which form in the angle(axil) where each leaf meets the stem. The axillary buds are distinguishedfrom the bud at the end of a stem or branch, whichis called a terminal bud. If it becomes active, an axillary bud candevelop into a new branch, or extension of the shoot system. Thearrangement of leaves along the stem (called the phyllotaxy) isoften characteristic of the plant species.Various modifications of stems are seen in nature. The tuberof a potato, for example—the part of the plant eaten by humans—is not a root, but rather an underground stem. The “eyes”of a potato are depressions containing axillary buds—in otherwords, a sprouting potato is just a branching stem (Figure 34.3A).Many desert plants have enlarged, water-retaining stems (Figure34.3B). The runners of strawberry plants are horizontal stemsfrom which roots grow at frequent intervals (Figure 34.3C). Ifthe links between the rooted portions are broken, independentplants can develop on each side of the break—a form of vegetative(asexual) reproduction (see Section 38.3).Although most young stems are green and capable of photosynthesis,leaves are the principal sites of photosynthesis inmost plants. There are, however, exceptions: for example, photosynthesisoccurs primarily in the stem of the barrel cactus featuredin Figure 34.3B.Leaves are the primary sites of photosynthesisIn gymnosperms and in most flowering plants, the leaves areresponsible for most of the plant’s photosynthesis. Leaves aremarvelously adapted for gathering light. Typically, the blade ofa leaf is a thin, flat structure attached to the stem by a stalk calleda petiole (see Figure 34.1). In many plants, the leaf blade is heldby its petiole at an angle almost perpendicular to the rays of thesun. This orientation, with the leaf surface facing the sun, maximizesthe amount of light availablefor photosynthesis. Someleaves track the sun over thecourse of the day, moving sothat they constantly face it.In some plant species, leavesare highly modified for specialfunctions. For example, somemodified leaves serve as storagedepots for energy-rich molecules,as in the bulbs of onions. Inother species, such as succulents,the leaves store water.The protective spines of cactiare modified leaves (see Figure34.3B). Other plants, such as peas,have modified portions of leavescalled tendrils that support theplant by wrapping around otherstructures or plants.722 CHAPTER 34 | THE PLANT BODY(A)(C)(B)StemRunner(horizontal stem)Spines(modified leaves)Tuber (modified stem) Branches“Barrel”(enlarged stem)34.3 Modified Stems (A) A potato is a modified stem called a tuber; the sproutsthat grow from its eyes are shoots, not roots. (B) The stem of this barrel cactus isenlarged to store water. Its highly modified leaves serve as thorny spines. Most of thisplant’s photosynthesis occurs in the stem. (C) The runners of beach strawberry are horizontalstems that produce roots and shoots at intervals. Rooted portions of the plantcan live independently if the runner is cut.34.1 RECAPThe basic vegetative plant body plan consists of a rootsystem and a shoot system. Stems and leaves, whichare part of the shoot system, may be highly modified.• How do plants explore their environment for resourceseven though they cannot move? See p. 720• How would you distinguish between a piece of a rootand a piece of a shoot? See pp. 721–722• What are the differences between the root systems ofeudicots and monocots? See p. 721 and Figure 34.2Our closer examination of the plant body begins with its fundamentalbuilding blocks: its cells. Although plant cells sharemany features with animal cells, including nucleus, mitochondria,plasma membrane, and Golgi apparatuses (see Section5.3), it is their distinguishing features that we will consider inthis chapter.How Does the Cell Wall Support 34.2 Plant Growth and Form?Plant cells have the essential organelles that are shared by alleukaryotes (see Figure 5.7), but certain additional structures andorganelles distinguish them from many other eukaryotic cells:• Chloroplasts or other plastids• Acentral vacuole• Rigid, cellulose-containing cell wallsAs mentioned earlier, plant form is dictated in part by the needto collect energy for photosynthesis, which takes place in thechloroplasts (see Section 10.2). Less obvious is the importanceof vacuoles and cell walls in determining plant form.Cell walls and vacuoles help determine plant formMature plant cells usually contain a single central vacuole,which may account for a staggering 90 percent of its volume(see Figure 5.16). The vacuole is a watery sac containing a highconcentration of solutes, including enzymes, amino acids, andsugars produced by photosynthesis. Many of these solutes arepumped into the vacuole by transporter proteins located inthe tonoplast, the vacuolar membrane. This active accumulationof solutes provides the osmotic force for water uptake intothe vacuole (as we will see in Section 35.1). As the vacuole expands,it exerts turgor pressure on the cell wall (see Figure 6.10).Turgor pressure not only keeps plants upright, but also is essentialfor plant growth.The structure of cell walls allows plants to growCell walls are a feature of bacteria, fungi, algae, and plants. Theyserve to regulate cell volume, determine cell shape, and protectthe cell contents. Plant cell walls have unique features that derivefrom their chemical composition. Furthermore, most of thecarbon in terrestrial ecosystems is sequestered in the moleculesthat make up plant cell walls. As such, it is worth taking a closerlook at their formation and structure.The cytokinesis of a plant cell is completed when the twodaughter cells are separated by a cell plate (Figure 34.4; see alsoFigure 11.13). A gluelike substance that forms within the cellplate constitutes the middle lamella, which persists as a thinlayer between the walls of the two daughter cells. Each daughtercell then secretes three types of polysaccharides to form aprimary cell wall (Figure 34.5):• Cellulose is made up of linear polymers of thousands ofglucose molecules (see Figure 3.16) that are organized intobundles of microfibrils, which form a lattice within thecell wall.• Hemicelluloses are highly branched polysaccharide chainsthat extensively cross-link the cellulose microfibrils.34.2 | HOW DOES THE CELL WALL SUPPORT PLANT GROWTH AND FORM? 723At the end of cytokinesistwo daughter cells areseparated by a cell plate.Next, each daughter cellsecretes three types ofpolysaccharides—cellulose,hemicellulose, and pectin—to form a primary cell wall.As the cell expands, theprimary cell wall thins.When expansion stops,the cells may depositsecondary walls.4213MiddlelamellaPrimarycell wallPlantcellPlasmamembraneCellplateSecondarywallCentralvacuole34.4 Plant Cell Wall Formation Plant cell walls form as the final stepin cell division.PlasmodesmataPlasmamembranes80 nm(A) (B)CellwallsDesmotubulePlasmamembraneEndoplasmic reticulumCell 2Cell 1Plant cells• Pectins are heterogeneous polysaccharides that are moresoluble than the other components. (Pectin is responsiblefor the gel properties of fruit jams and jellies.)This secretion and deposition of polysaccharides continues asthe cell expands to its final size.One of the major ways that plants grow is by cell expansion.Some cells can increase in volume by 100,000 to 1,000,000 times!How can a plant cell expand when it is surrounded by a rigidcell wall? Recall that osmotic pressure leads to expansion of thecentral vacuole, which exerts turgor pressure on the cell wall.The living contents of the plant cell—that is, the plasma membraneand everything contained within it—constitute the protoplast.The cell wall responds to the increasing size of the protoplastby loosening the linkages between cellulose microfibrils. Aclass of proteins that reside in the cell wall, called expansins, arethought to assist in cell wall loosening by disrupting the noncovalentbonds that link the hemicelluloses and pectins to thecellulose microfibrils. To prevent the cell wall from becoming toothin (so that it does not blow out like an overinflated balloon),new cell wall components are synthesized and integrated.When cell expansion stops, some types of plant cells depositone or more additional cellulosic layers to form a thick secondarycell wall internal to the primary cell wall (see Figure 34.4).Secondary cell walls provide the mechanical support that allowssome plants to produce large stems. Like the primary wall, thesecondary wall contains layers of ordered cellulose microfibrils.However, rather than being embedded in pectins, the microfibrilsare embedded in a remarkable substance called lignin. Whensecondary walls become lignified, the primary wall and even themiddle lamella are also lignified. Lignin is a complex, carboncontainingpolymer that forms a hydrophobic matrix that isstrong, waterproof, and resistant to digestion by animals. Aftercellulose, lignin is the most abundant biological polymer onEarth, accounting for 20–35 percent of the dry weight of wood.Scientists have just begun to dissect the complexity and dynamicsof plant cell walls. Their basic components—celluloses,hemicelluloses, pectins, and lignins—are classes of moleculesthat can be built from several components and modified in a varietyof ways. Thus the composition of plant cell walls variesamong different types of plant cells. In addition, the compositionof the wall of a single plant cell may not be uniform. Forexample, it is possible that directional growth reflects the depositionof cell wall components that are more easily loosened atone end of the cell. One measure of how much remains unknownis the finding that the genome of the tiny plant Arabidopsisthaliana contains more than a thousand genes related to cellwall biosynthesis, the functions of only a small fraction of whichare currently known.Building a plant body requires cooperation between groupsof cells. Although they may appear to be isolated by their cellwalls, plant cells interact in two ways to build and maintain acomplex organism. First, in most areas, the cell wall is permeableto water and mineral ions and allows small molecules to724 CHAPTER 34 | THE PLANT BODYMiddlelamellaPlant cellsPlasmamembranePrimarycell wallPectin HemicelluloseCellulosemicrofibrils34.5 Plant Cell Wall Structure34.6 Plasmodesmata (A) An electron micrograph shows that plantcell walls are traversed by plasmodesmata (dark stain). The green objectsare cytoskeletal microtubules (see Section 5.3). (B) Plasmodesmata connectthe endoplasmic reticula of adjacent plant cells.reach the plasma membrane. Second, the endoplasmic reticula(ER) of adjacent cells are connected by cytoplasm-filled canalscalled plasmodesmata that pass through the primary wall, allowingdirect communication between plant cells (Figure 34.6).A single plant cell may be connected to its neighbors by up toa thousand plasmodesmata, which permit the movement ofproteins and even RNAs from cell to cell. Some of these plasmodesmataare formed during cytokinesis when the cell plateis deposited.Evolution has given some plant viruses a clever way to usethis intercellular highway to their advantage. Tobacco mosaicvirus (TMV), for example, encodes a protein called movementprotein, or MP, that helps the virus spread throughout the plant.Without MP, the RNA genome of TMV cannot move from cellto cell. However, in some unknown way, the MP–RNA complexis able to move easily from cell to cell via plasmodesmata.34.2 RECAPPlants synthesize a primary cell wall during cell divisionand cell expansion. In some types of plant cells,a secondary cell wall, reinforced with lignin, formswithin the primary cell wall when cell expansionstops, providing additional structural support.• What are the components of plant cell walls in whichmost of the carbon in terrestrial ecosystems is sequestered?See pp. 723–724• How do plant cell walls accommodate an expandingprotoplast? See p. 724 and Figure 34.5• Describe two features that allow plant cells to interactwith one another. See pp. 724–725 and Figure 34.6That there are dramatic differences between plant and animalbody plans should not be surprising, since the multicellularforms of plants and animals evolved independently from entirelydistinct protist ancestors (see Figure 1.10). In the next twosections we will look more closely at the unique characteristicsof the plant body by following its development from a zygoteinto an adult.How Do Plant Tissues and Organs 34.3 Originate?How does a single plant cell (a zygote) divide and grow into anorganism like a redwood tree, which may grow continuouslyfor over a thousand years to a height of over 100 meters? Whilestill in the seed, a plant establishes the basic body plan for itsmature form.Two patterns that contribute to the plant body plan are establishedin the embryo:• The basal–apical axis: the arrangement of cells and tissuesalong the main axis from root to shoot• The radial axis: the concentric arrangement of the tissuesystemsIn addition, two clusters of undifferentiated cells form at thetips of the embryonic root and shoot. These clusters, calledmeristems (from the Greek merizein, “to divide”), will orchestrateall postembryonic development and allow the plant toform organs throughout its lifetime.Both axes and meristems are best understood in developmentalterms. We focus here on embryogenesis (embryo formation)in the model eudicot Arabidopsis thaliana, in which theprocess has been most intensively studied.The first step in the formation of a plant embryo is a mitoticdivision of the zygote that gives rise to two daughter cells (Figure34.7, step 1). These two cells face different fates (see Section19.4). An asymmetrical (uneven) distribution of cytoplasmwithin the zygote causes one daughter cell to produce the embryoproper and the other daughter cell to produce a supportingstructure, the suspensor (Figure 34.7, step 2). This asymmetricaldivision of the zygote establishes polarity as well as thebasal–apical axis of the new plant. Along, thin suspensor and amore spherical or globular embryo are distinguishable after justfour mitotic divisions. The suspensor soon ceases to elongate.In eudicots, the initially globular embryo develops into thecharacteristic heart stage as the cotyledons (“seed leaves”) startto grow (Figure 34.7, step 3). Further elongation of the cotyledonsand of the main axis of the embryogives rise to the torpedo stage, duringwhich some of the internal tissuesbegin to differentiate (Figure 34.7, step4). Between the cotyledons is the shootapical meristem; at the other end of theaxis is the root apical meristem. Eachof these regions contains undifferentiatedcells that will continue to divideto give rise to the organs developingover the life of the plant.34.3 | HOW DO PLANT TISSUES AND ORGANS ORIGINATE? 725Apical daughter cellZygote SuspensorEmbryoBasal daughter cellStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4Heart stage Torpedo stageDevelopingroot apicalmeristemDevelopingshoot apicalCotyledon meristemprimordium34.7 Plant Embryogenesis The basicbody plant of the model eudicot (Arabidopsisthaliana) is established in several steps. Bythe heart stage, the three tissue systems areestablished: the dermal (gold), ground (lightgreen), and vascular (blue) tissue systems.By the end of embryogenesis, the radial axis of the planthas also been established. The embryonic plant contains threetissue systems, arranged concentrically, that will give rise to thetissues of the adult plant body.The plant body is constructed from threetissue systemsA tissue is an organized group of cells thathave features in common and that work togetheras a structural and functional unit. Inplants, tissues, in turn, are grouped into tissuesystems. Despite their structural diversity,all vascular plants are constructed fromthree tissue systems: dermal, vascular, andground. These three tissue systems are establishedduring embryogenesis and ultimatelyextend throughout the plant body in a concentricarrangement (Figure 34.8). Each tissuesystem has distinct functions and is composedof different mixtures of cell types.DERMAL TISSUE SYSTEM The dermal tissue system forms theepidermis, or outer covering, of a plant, which usually consistsof a single cell layer. The stems and roots of woody plants developa dermal tissue called periderm.During plant development, the epidermis must grow tocover the expanding plant body. The cells of the epidermis aresmall and round and usually have a small central vacuole ornone at all. Once cell division ceases in the epidermis of an organ,the epidermal cells expand. Some epidermal cells differentiateto form one of three specialized structures:• Stomatal guard cells, which form stomata (pores) for gas exchangein leaves• Trichomes, or leaf hairs, which provide protection against insectsand damaging solar radiation• Root hairs, which greatly increase root surface area, thusproviding more surface for the uptake of water and mineralnutrients.Aboveground epidermal cells secrete a protective extracellularcuticle made of cutin (a polymer composed of long chains offatty acids), a complex mixture of waxes, and cell wall polysaccharides.The cuticle limits water loss, reflects potentially damagingsolar radiation, and serves as a barrier against pathogens.GROUND TISSUE SYSTEM Virtually all the tissue lying betweendermal tissue and vascular tissue in both shoots and roots ispart of the ground tissue system, which therefore makes upmost of the plant body. Ground tissue functions primarily instorage, support, and photosynthesis. To fulfill these diversefunctions, ground tissues incorporate three cell types that areclassified according to their cell wall structure: parenchyma, collenchyma,and schlerenchyma.The most common cell type in plants is the parenchyma cell(Figure 34.9A). Parenchyma cells have large vacuoles and thinwalls consisting only of a primary wall and the shared middlelamella. They play important roles in photosynthesis (in leaves)and in the storage of, for example, protein (in fruits) and starch(in roots). Many retain the capacity to divide and hence may giverise to new cells, as when a wound results in cell proliferation.Collenchyma cells resemble parenchyma cells that have beenmodified to provide flexible support. Their primary walls arecharacteristically thick at the corners of the cells (Figure 34.9B).Collenchyma cells are generally elongated. In these cells, theprimary wall thickens in part due to the deposition of pectins,but no secondary wall forms. Collenchyma provides support toleaf petioles, nonwoody stems, and growing organs. Tissuemade of collenchyma cells is flexible, permitting stems and petiolesto sway in the wind without snapping. The familiar“strings” in celery consist primarily of collenchyma cells.Sclerenchyma cells have thickened secondary walls that performtheir major function: support. Many sclerenchyma cellsundergo programmed cell death (apoptosis; see Section 11.6) afterlignifying their cell walls, and thus perform their supportingfunction when dead. There are two types of sclerenchymacells: elongated fibers and variously shaped sclereids. Fibersprovide relatively rigid support to wood and other parts ofthe plant, in which they are often organized into bundles (Figure34.9C). The bark of trees owes much of its mechanicalstrength to long fibers. Sclereids may pack together densely, asin a nut’s shell or in some seed coats (Figure 34.9D). Isolatedclumps of sclereids, called stone cells, in pears and some otherfruits give them their characteristic gritty texture.726 CHAPTER 34 | THE PLANT BODYSeedling5 mm DermalLeafStemRootGroundVascularDermalGroundVascularThe dermal tissuesystem is the outercovering of the plant.The vascular tissue systemconducts water and solutesthroughout the plant.The ground tissue system carries outphotosynthesis, stores photosyntheticproducts, and helps support the plant.34.8 Three Tissue Systems Extend Throughout the Plant BodyThe arrangement shown here is typical of eudicots, but the three tissuesystems are continuous in the bodies of all vascular plants.34.3 | HOW DO PLANT TISSUES AND ORGANS ORIGINATE? 727Primarycell walls(A) Parenchyma cells Parenchyma cells (B) Collenchyma cells(D) SclereidsPrimary cell walls Collenchyma cells(C) Fibers(E) Tracheids (F) Vessel elements (G) Sieve tube elementsScle r e id s Secondary cell wallsVesselelementsSecondarycell wallsTracheidsSecondarycell wallsPits50 μm50 μm50 μm 50 μm50 μm50 μmFibers Secondary cell wallsSieve tubeelementCompanioncellSieveplate15 μm34.9 Plant Cell Types (A) Parenchyma cells in the petiole of Coleus.Note the thin, uniform cell walls. (B) Collenchyma cells make up the fiveouter cell layers of this spinach leaf vein. Their walls are thick at the cornersof the cells and thin elsewhere. (C) Sclerenchyma: fibers in a sunflowerstem (Helianthus). The thick secondary walls are stained red. (D)Sclerenchyma: sclereids. The extremely thick secondary walls of sclereidsare laid down in layers. They provide support and a hard texture to structuressuch as nuts and seeds. (E, F ) Tracheary elements: ( E) Tracheids inpinewood. The thick secondary walls are stained dark red. (F) Vessel elementsin the stem of a squash. The secondary walls are stained red; notethe different patterns of thickening, including rings and spirals. (G) Sievetube elements and companion cells in the stem of a cucumber.VASCULAR TISSUE SYSTEM The vascular tissue system is theplant’s plumbing or transport system—the distinguishing featureof vascular plants. Its two constituent tissues, the xylemand phloem, distribute materials throughout the plant. Thexylem distributes water and mineral ions taken up by the rootsto all the cells of the stems and leaves. Phloem, as a result of itscellular complexity, can perform a variety of functions, includingtransport, support, and storage. All the living cells of theplant body require a source of energy and chemical buildingblocks. The phloem meets these needs by transporting carbohydratesfrom sites of production (called sources, primarilyleaves) to sites of utilization or storage (called sinks, such asgrowing tissue, storage tubers, and developing flowers).Let’s take a closer look at the structure of the diverse celltypes that make up these vascular tissues. In Chapter 35 we willsee how they transport water and materials throughout theplant body.Cells of the xylem transport water anddissolved mineralsXylem contains conducting cells called tracheary elements,which undergo apoptosis before assuming their function oftransporting water and dissolved minerals. There are two typesof tracheary elements: tracheids and vessel elements. Tracheids arespindle-shaped cells, found in gymnosperms and other vascularplants, that are evolutionarily more ancient than vessel elements(Figure 34.9E). When the protoplast disintegrates uponcell death, water and minerals can move with little resistancefrom one tracheid to its neighbors by way of pits, interruptionsin the secondary wall that leave the primary wall unobstructed.Flowering plants evolved a water-conducting system madeup of vessels, formed from individual cells, called vessel elements,that are laid down end-to-end. Vessel elements have pitsin their cell walls, as do tracheids, but are generally larger in diameterthan tracheids. Vessel elements secrete lignin into theirsecondary walls, then partially break down their end walls beforeundergoing apoptosis. The result is a continuous hollowtube consisting of many vessel elements, providing an openpipeline for water conduction (Figure 34.9F). In the course ofangiosperm evolution, vessel elements have become shorter,and their end walls have become less and less obliquely orientedand less obstructed, presumably increasing the efficiencyof water transport through them. The xylem of many angiospermsincludes tracheids as well as vessel elements.Cells of the phloem transport the productsof photosynthesisThe transport cells of the phloem, unlike those of the maturexylem, are living cells. In flowering plants, the characteristiccells of the phloem are sieve tube elements (Figure 34.9G). Likevessel elements, these cells meet end-to-end. They form longsieve tubes, which transport carbohydrates and many other materialsfrom their sources to tissues that consume or store them.In plants with mature leaves, for example, products of photosynthesismove from leaves to root tissues.Unlike vessel elements, which break down their end walls,sieve tube elements contain plasmodesmata in their end walls thatenlarge to form pores. The result is end walls that look like sieves,called sieve plates. Although the sieve tube elements remain alive,some components of the protoplast break down. They are closelyconnected to companion cells that retain all their organelles andfunction as a “life support system” for the sieve tube elements.34.3 RECAPPlant embryos have an embryonic root and shootcontaining three concentric tissue systems: dermal,ground, and vascular. These tissue systems carryout different functions through their unique combinationsof specialized cell types.• What distinguishes the three tissue systems in termsof their location and functions? See pp. 726–728 andFigure 34.8• What structural differences make tissues made of collenchymacells more flexible than those consisting primarilyof sclerenchyma cells? See p. 726• Outline the differences between tracheids and vesselelements. See p. 728 and Figure 34.9By the end of embryogenesis, the plant embryo is encased in aseed and is ready to germinate. We will return to seeds and theirgermination in the chapters that follow. For now, let’s considerthe beginning of life as faced by plants and see how the cellsand tissues we have just described allow the embryo to buildan adult plant body.How Do Meristems Build a 34.4 Continuously Growing Plant?As noted at the beginning of this chapter, plants and animalsdevelop and function differently. While animals use their mobilityto forage for food, plants are sessile and must collect scarceresources from above and below ground by growing. Plantsthus grow in two directions—toward sunlight, and toward waterand dissolved minerals in the soil—through the growth ofshoots and roots, respectively.All parts of the animal body grow as an individual developsfrom embryo to adult, but in most animals this growth is determinate—that is, the growth of the individual and all its partsceases when the adult state is reached. Determinate growth isalso characteristic of some plant organs, such as leaves, flowers,and fruits. The growth of shoots and roots, however, is a lifelongprocess. Such open-ended growth is called indeterminate.Plants increase in size through primaryand secondary growthPlants increase their surface area above and below ground bygrowing. All plants experience primary growth, which is characterizedby the lengthening of roots and shoots and by the pro-728 CHAPTER 34 | THE PLANT BODYliferation of new roots and shoots through branching. In addition,many gymnosperms and eudicots, especially trees, experiencesecondary growth, by which they increase in girth.Primary and secondary growth lead to distinctive traits in theplant body. Primary growth develops what is called the primaryplant body, while secondary growth develops the secondary plantbody. All seed plants have a primary plant body, which consistsof all the nonwoody parts of the plant. Many herbaceous plants—monocots in particular—consist entirely of a primary plant body.Woody plants, such as trees and shrubs, have, in addition to theprimary plant body, a secondary plant body consisting of woodand bark. As the tissues of the secondary plant body are laiddown, the stems and roots thicken. The secondary plant bodycontinues to grow and thicken throughout the life of the plant.The primary plant body also continues to grow, lengthening andbranching the shoot and root systems and forming new leaves.A hierarchy of meristems generates the plant bodyMeristems, as we have seen, are localized regions of undifferentiatedcells that are the source of all new organs in the adultplant. Even before seed germination, the plant embryo hastwo meristems: a shoot apical meristem at the end of the embryonicshoot, and a root apical meristem near the end of theembryonic root (see Figure 34.7).Meristematic cells are small and closely packed, with verysmall central vacuoles and a very thin primary cell wall. Meristematiccells are undifferentiated and forever young, retainingthe ability to produce new cells indefinitely. The cells that perpetuatethe meristems, called initials, are comparable to animalstem cells (discussed in Section 19.2). When an initial divides,one daughter cell develops into another meristem cell thesize of its parent, while the other daughter cell differentiatesinto a more specialized cell.While the plant embryo experiences primary growth throughthe activities of the root and shoot apical meristems, growth ofthe adult plant reflects the activity of additional meristem types.Our discussion of postembryonic plant growth begins with acloser look at how the adult plant grows throughout its lifetimeand the critical role of meristems in that growth.Two types of meristems contribute to the growth and developmentof the adult plant (Figure 34.10):• Apical meristems orchestrate primary growth, giving rise tothe primary plant body. This growth is characterized by celldivision followed by cell enlargement (vertical elongation).• Lateral meristems orchestrate secondary growth. Two lateralmeristems, vascular cambium and cork cambium, contributeto the secondary plant body.34.4 | HOW DO MERISTEMS BUILD A CONTINUOUSLY GROWING PLANT? 729ShootapicalmeristemThe terminal bud containsa shoot apical meristem.In woody plants the vascularcambium and cork cambiumthicken the stem and root.Root apicalmeristemLeaf primordiaAxillary budprimordiumAxillary budTerminal budCork cambiumLateral meristems:Root capVascular cambium50 μm100 μm34.10 Apical and LateralMeristems Apical meristems producethe primary plant body, lengtheningit; lateral meristems produce thesecondary plant body, thickening it.Indeterminate primary growth originatesin apical meristemsBecause apical meristems can perpetuate themselves indefinitely,a shoot or root can continue to lengthen and grow indefinitely;in other words, growth of the shoot or root is indeterminate.Primary growth leads to elongation of shoots and rootsand formation of organs (see Figure 34.10). All plant organs ariseultimately from cell divisions in apical meristems, followed bycell expansion and differentiation. Several types of apical meristemsplay roles in organ formation:• Shoot apical meristems supply the cells that extend stems andbranches, allowing more leaves to form and photosynthesize.Apical meristems that form leaves are called vegetativemeristems. Flowers are formed by apical meristems that becomeinflorescence meristems (see Section 38.2 for more onfloral development).• Root apical meristems supply the cells that extend roots, enablingthe plant to penetrate and explore the soil for waterand minerals.Apical meristems in both the shoot and the root give rise toa set of cylindrical primary meristems, which produce the tissuesof the primary plant body. From the outside to the insideof the root or shoot, which are both cylindrical organs, the primarymeristems are the protoderm, the ground meristem, andthe procambium. These meristems, in turn, give rise to the threetissue systems:Because meristems can continue to produce new organsthroughout the lifetime of the plant, the plant body is muchmore variable in form than the animal body, which produceseach organ only once. To see how meristems function, let’slook more closely at how the root apical meristem producesthe root system.The root apical meristem gives rise to the root capand the root primary meristemsThe root apical meristem produces all the cells that contributeto growth in the length of a root (Figure 34.11A). Some of thedaughter cells from the apical (tip) end of the root apical meristemcontribute to a root cap, which protects the delicate growingregion of the root as it pushes through the soil. The root capsecretes a mucopolysaccharide (slime) that acts as a lubricant.Even so, the cells of the root cap are often damaged or scrapedaway and must therefore be replaced constantly. The root capis also the structure that detects the pull of gravity and thus controlsthe downward growth of roots.In the middle of the root apical meristem is a quiescent center,in which cell divisions are rare. The quiescent center canbecome more active when needed—following injury, for example.The daughter cells produced above the quiescent center(that is, away from the root cap) become the three cylindricalprimary meristems: the protoderm, the ground meristem, andthe procambium.The apical and primary meristems constitute the zone of celldivision, the source of all the cells of the root’s primary tissues.Just above this zone is the zone of cell elongation, where thenewly formed cells are elongating and thus pushing the rootfarther into the soil. Above that zone is the zone of maturation,where the cells are differentiating, taking on specialized formsand functions. These three zones grade imperceptibly into oneanother; there is no abrupt line of demarcation.The products of the root’s primary meristemsbecome root tissuesThe products of the three primary meristems (the protoderm,ground meristem, and the procambium) are the tissue systemsof the mature root (Figure 34.12).The protoderm gives rise to the epidermis, an outer layer ofcells that is adapted for protection of the root and absorption ofmineral ions and water. Many of the epidermal cells becomeApical meristems Primary meristemsRoot orshoot apicalmeristemTissue systemsProcambiumProtoderm Dermal tissue systemGround meristem Ground tissue systemVascular tissue system730 CHAPTER 34 | THE PLANT BODYNew daughter cells are producedin the root apical meristem. Mostdaughter cells differentiate into theSome daughter cells primary tissues of the root.become part of the rootcap, which is constantlybeing eroded away.Zone of cellmaturationZone of cellelongationZone of celldivisionQuiescent centerRoot hairsEpidermisPrimary meristems:ProtodermGround meristemProcambium(A) Lateral (B)root34.11 Tissues and Regions of the Root Tip(A) Extensive cell division creates the complex structureof the root. (B) Root hairs, seen with a scanning electronmicroscope.long, delicate root hairs, which vastly increase the surface areaof the root (Figure 34.11B). Root hairs grow out among thesoil particles, probing nooks and crannies and taking up waterand minerals.Internal to the epidermis, the ground meristem gives rise toa region of ground tissue that is many cells thick, called the cortex.The cells of the cortex are relatively unspecialized and oftenserve as storage depots. The innermost layer of the cortex isthe endodermis. Unlike those of other cortical cells, the cell wallsof the endodermal cells contain suberin, a waterproof substance.Strategic placement of suberin in only certain parts of the cellwall enables the cylindrical ring of endodermal cells to controlthe movement of water and dissolved mineral ions into the vasculartissue system.Moving inward past the endodermis, we enter the vascularcylinder, or stele, produced by the procambium. The stele consistsof three tissues: pericycle, xylem, and phloem. The pericycleconsists of one or more layers of relatively undifferentiatedcells. It has three important functions:• It is the tissue within which lateral roots arise (Figure34.13A).• It can contribute to secondary growth by giving rise to lateralmeristems that thicken the root.• Its cells contain membrane transport proteins that exportnutrient ions into the cells of the xylem.At the very center of the root of a eudicot lies the xylem. Seenin cross section, it typically has the shape of a star with a variablenumber of points (Figure 34.13B). Between the points arebundles of phloem. In monocots, a region of parenchyma cells,called the pith, typically lies in the center of the root, surroundedby xylem and phloem (Figure 34.13C). Pith, which often storescarbohydrate reserves, is also found in the stems of both eudicotsand monocots.The products of the stem’s primary meristemsbecome stem tissuesRecall that shoots are composed of repeating modules calledphytomers, each consisting of a node with its attached leaf orleaves, the internode between nodes, and axillary buds in theangle between each leaf and the stem (see Figure 34.1). Shootsgrow by adding new phytomers. Those new phytomers originatefrom cells in shoot apical meristems, which are formed atthe tips of stems and in axillary buds.The shoot apical meristem, like the root apical meristem,forms three primary meristems: protoderm, ground meristem,and procambium. These primary meristems, in turn, give riseto the three shoot tissue systems. The shoot apical meristem34.4 | HOW DO MERISTEMS BUILD A CONTINUOUSLY GROWING PLANT? 731SteleEudicot rootSteleMonocot rootPithXylemPhloemPericycleEndodermisCortexEpidermis34.12 Products of the Root’s Primary Meristems The protodermgives rise to the outermost layer (epidermis). The ground meristem producesthe cortex, the innermost layer of which is the endodermis. Theprimary vascular tissues of the root are found in the stele, which is theproduct of the procambium. The arrangement of tissues in the stele differsin the roots of eudicots and monocots.GO TO Web Activity 34.1 • Eudicot RootAND Web Activity 34.2 • Monocot RootyourBioPortal.com(A) Lateral root (B) Eudicot stele (C) Monocot steleEndodermis PericyclePithEndodermisPhloem XylemEpidermis Developing lateral root Phloem XylemCortex Endodermis Stele CortexCortex34.13 Root Anatomy (A) Cross section through the tip of a lateral rootin a willow tree. Cells in the pericycle divide and the products differentiate,forming the tissues of a lateral root. (B, C) Cross sections of the stele of(B) a representative eudicot (the buttercup, Ranunculus) and (C) a representativemonocot (corn, Zea mays), showing the arrangement of the primaryroot tissues.repetitively lays down the beginningsof leaves and axillary buds. Leavesarise from bulges called leaf primordia,which form as cells divide on the sidesof the shoot apical meristem (see Figure34.10). Bud primordia form at thebases of the leaf primordial and wherethey may become new apical meristemsand initiate new shoots. Thegrowing stem has no protective structureanalogous to the root cap, but theleaf primordia can act as a protectivecovering for the shoot apical meristem.The plumbing of stems differs fromthat of roots. In a root, the vascular tissuelies deep in the interior, with thexylem at or near the center (see Figure34.13B and C). The vascular tissue of ayoung stem, however, is divided intodiscrete vascular bundles (Figure 34.14).Each vascular bundle contains bothxylem and phloem. In eudicots, the vascularbundles generally form a cylinder,but in monocots, they are seeminglyscattered throughout the stem.In addition to the vascular tissues,the stem contains other importantstorage and supportive tissues. In eudicots,the pith lies to the inside of thering of vascular bundles and also extendsbetween them, forming regionscalled pith rays. To the outside lies thecortex, which may contain supportivecollenchyma cells with thickenedwalls. The pith and cortex constitutethe ground tissue system of the stem.The outermost cell layer of the youngstem is the epidermis.Leaves are determinate organs producedby shoot apical meristemsFor most of its life a plant produces leaves from apical meristems.Apical meristems that produce leaves are called vegetativemeristems. As shown in Figure 34.10, leaves originate fromthe edges of the apical meristem as initial cells that differentiateinto leaf primordia. Ahighly simplified way to think of thedevelopment of the leaf from the leaf primordia is to imagineleaves as flattened stems. However, there are two important differences.First, unlike the indeterminate growth of the stem, thegrowth of a leaf is determinate. Second, while the tissues ofthe stem are arranged in a radial pattern, the leaf, as a flat organ,has a distinct top side and bottom side.Leaf anatomy is beautifully adapted to carry out photosynthesisand to support that process by exchanging the gases O2and CO2 with the environment, limiting evaporative water loss,and exporting the products of photosynthesis to the rest of theplant. Figure 34.15A shows a section of a typical eudicot leafin three dimensions.Most eudicot leaves have two zones of photosyntheticparenchyma tissue called mesophyll (which means “middle ofthe leaf”). The upper layer or layers of mesophyll, which consistof elongated cells, constitute a zone called palisade mesophyll.The lower layer or layers, which consist of irregularly shapedcells, constitute a zone called spongy mesophyll. Within the mesophyllis a great deal of air space through which CO2 can diffuseto photosynthesizing cells.732 CHAPTER 34 | THE PLANT BODYThe vascular tissues in stems areorganized into bundles.(A) Eudicot(B) MonocotMonocot vascular bundleFibers Sieve tube elements (phloem)Companioncells(phloem)XylemAir spaceEudicot vascular bundleFibersPhloemXylem500 μm500 μmVascularcambium34.14 Vascular Bundles in Stems (A) In herbaceous eudicot stems,the vascular bundles are arranged in a cylinder, with pith in the center andthe cortex outside the cylinder. (B) A scattered arrangement of vascularbundles is typical of monocot stems.GO TO Web Activity 34.3 • Eudicot StemAND Web Activity 34.4 • Monocot StemyourBioPortal.comVascular tissue branches extensively throughout the leaf,forming a network of veins (Figure 34.15B). Veins extend towithin a few cell diameters of all the cells of the leaf, ensuringthat the mesophyll cells are well supplied with water and minerals.The products of photosynthesis are loaded into the veinsfor export to the rest of the plant.Covering virtually the entire leaf on both its upper and lowersurfaces is a layer of nonphotosynthetic cells, the epidermis. Theepidermal cells have an overlying waxy cuticle that is impermeableto water. Although this impermeability prevents excessivewater loss, it also poses a problem: while the epidermiskeeps water in the leaf, it also keeps out CO2—the other rawmaterial of photosynthesis.The problem of balancing water retention and carbon dioxideavailability is solved by an elegant regulatory system thatwill be discussed in more detail in Section 35.3. Stomatal guardcells are modified epidermal cells that can change their shape,thereby opening or closing pores called stomata (singular stoma),which serve as passageways between the environment andthe leaf’s interior (Figure 34.15C). When the stomata are open,carbon dioxide can enter and oxygen can leave, but water canalso be lost.Many eudicot stems and roots undergosecondary growthAs we have seen, the roots and stems of some eudicots developa secondary plant body, the tissues of which we commonly referto as wood and bark. These tissues are derived by secondarygrowth from the two lateral meristems, the vascular cambiumand the cork cambium.The vascular cambium is a cylindrical tissue consisting predominantlyof elongated cells that divide frequently. It suppliesthe cells of the secondary xylem and secondary phloem, whicheventually become wood and bark. The cork cambium producesmainly waxy-walled protective cells. It supplies some of thecells that become bark.Each year, deciduous trees lose their leaves, leaving barebranches and twigs in winter. These twigs illustrate both primaryand secondary growth (Figure 34.16). The apical meristemsof the twigs are enclosed in buds protected by bud scales.When the buds begin to grow in spring, the scales fall away,leaving scars, which show us where the bud was and allow usto identify each year’s growth. The dormant twig shown in Figure34.16 is the product of primary and secondary growth. Onlythe buds consist entirely of primary tissues.The vascular cambium is initially a single layer of cells lyingbetween the primary xylem and the primary phloem within thevascular bundles (see Figure 34.16). The root or stem increasesin diameter when the cells of the vascular cambium divide, producingsecondary xylem cells toward the inside of the root orstem and producing secondary phloem cells toward the outside(Figure 34.17). In the stem, cells in the pith rays between thevascular bundles also divide, forming a continuous cylinderof vascular cambium running the length of the stem. This cylinder,in turn, gives rise to complete cylinders of secondary xylem(wood) and secondary phloem, which contributes to the bark.It also produces vascular rays for lateral transport, a structurenot found in primary xylem and phloem. The principal cellproducts of the vascular cambium are vessel elements, tracheids,and supportive fibers in the secondary xylem, and sievetube elements, companion cells, fibers, and parenchyma cells inthe secondary phloem.34.4 | HOW DO MERISTEMS BUILD A CONTINUOUSLY GROWING PLANT? 733Vein(A) (B)(C)CuticleUpper epidermisPalisademesophyll cellBundle sheath cellXylemPhloemLower epidermisSpongymesophyll cellsGuard cellStomaCuticleGuard cells Stoma10 μm34.15 The Eudicot Leaf (A) This three-dimensional diagram shows asection of a eudicot leaf. (B) The network of fine veins in this maple leafcarries water to the mesophyll cells and carries photosynthetic productsaway from them. (C) Carbon dioxide enters the leaf through stomata likethis one on the epidermis of a eudicot leaf.GO TO Web Activity 34.5 • Eudicot LeafyourBioPortal.comAs secondary growth of stems or rootscontinues, the expanding vascular tissuestretches and breaks the epidermis and theouter layers of the cortex, which ultimatelyflake away. Tissue derived from the secondaryphloem then becomes the outermostpart of the stem. Before the dermaltissues are broken away, cells lying near thesurface of the secondary phloem begin todivide, forming a cork cambium. Thismeristematic tissue produces layers of cork,a protective tissue composed of cells withthick walls waterproofed with suberin. Thecork soon becomes the outermost tissueof the stem or root (see Figure 34.16). Withoutthe activity of the cork cambium, thesloughing off of the outer primary tissueswould expose the plant to potential damage,such as excessive water loss or invasionby microorganisms. Sometimes thecork cambium produces cells to the insideas well as to the outside; these cells constitutea tissue known as the phelloderm.The cork cambium, cork, and phellodermconstitute a secondary dermal tissuecalled periderm. As the vascular cambiumcontinues to produce secondary vasculartissue, these corky layers are lost, but thecontinuous formation of new cork cambiain the underlying secondary phloem givesrise to new corky layers. The periderm andthe secondary phloem—that is, all the tissuesexternal to the vascular cambium—constitute the bark.734 CHAPTER 34 | THE PLANT BODYTerminal budBud scaleAxillary budLeaf scarScars left by budscales fromprevious yearThisyear,sgrowthLast year,sgrowthGrowthfrom twoyears agoEpidermisCortexPrimaryphloemVascularcambiumPrimary xylemVascularcambiumCork cambiumCortexPrimaryphloemCorkSecondaryphloemSecondaryxylemPrimaryxylemPeridermPithPithPrimary growthSecondary growthWhen a vascular cambium celldivides, it produces either a newxylem cell toward the inside ofthe stem or root, or a newphloem cell toward the outside.The vascular cambiumthickens the stem byproducing secondary xylemand secondary phloem.TimeOutwardgrowthNew secondaryphloem cellNext newsecondaryphloem cellVascularcambiumcell Newsecondaryxylem cellNext newsecondaryxylem cellPithYoungerOlderPrimary xylemVascular cambiumPrimary phloemSecondary phloemSecondary xylemWoody stempcccccpppxxxxxx34.16 A Woody Twig Has BothPrimary and Secondary GrowthThe apical meristems in this dormanttwig will produce primary growth inspring. Lateral meristems are responsiblefor secondary growth.34.17 Vascular Cambium Thickens Stems and Roots Stems and rootsgrow thicker because a thin layer of cells, the vascular cambium, remainsmeristematic. These highly diagrammatic images emphasize the pattern ofdeposition of secondary xylem and phloem by the vascular cambium.GO TO Animated Tutorial 34.1 • Secondary Growth:The Vascular CambiumyourBioPortal.comWhen periderm forms on stems or roots, the underlying tissuesstill need to release carbon dioxide and take up oxygen forcellular respiration. Lenticels are spongy regions in the peridermthat allow such gas exchange (Figure 34.18).Cross sections of most trunks (mature stems) of trees in temperate-zone forests show annual rings of wood (Figure 34.19),which result from seasonal environmental conditions. In spring,when water is relatively plentiful, the tracheids or vessel elementsproduced by the vascular cambium tend to be large in diameterand thin-walled. Such wood is well adapted for transportingwater and minerals. As water becomes less availableduring the summer, narrower cells with thicker walls are produced,making this summer wood darker and perhaps moredense than the wood formed in spring. Thus each growing seasonis usually recorded in a tree trunk by a clearly visible annualring. Trees in the moist tropics do not undergo seasonal growth,so they do not lay down such obvious regular rings. Variationsin temperature or water supply can lead to the formation of morethan one “annual” ring in a single year, but commonly each yearbrings a new annual ring and a new batch of leaves.Only eudicots and other non-monocot angiosperms, alongwith many gymnosperms, have a vascular cambium and a corkcambium and thus undergo secondary growth. The few monocotsthat form thickened stems—palms, for example—do sowithout secondary growth. Palms have a very wide apicalmeristem that produces a wide stem, and dead leaf bases addto the diameter of the stem. All monocots grow in essentiallythis way, as do other angiosperms that lack secondary growth.34.4 RECAPMeristems are localized regions of cell division thatare the source of all new organs in the adult plant.Apical meristems are responsible for primary growth,which is associated with the lengthening andbranching of shoots and roots. Lateral meristems increaseplant girth and form wood and bark in manyeudicots.• Explain how an apical meristem can be maintained foryears while continuing to form leaves. See p. 729 andFigure 34.10• What cells are derived from the root apical meristemand what is the general process of root growth? Seepp. 730-731 and Figure 34.11• How does the vascular cambium give rise to thickerstems and roots? See p. 733 and Figure 34.16The building of the plant body by meristems allows a plant torespond to its environment by redirecting its growth. Thus individualplants of the same species can vary greatly in form.What underlies this variation, and how have humans used it toour advantage?How Has Domestication Altered 34.5 Plant Form?We have seen in this chapter that a very simple plant bodyplan—with roots, stems, leaves, meristems, and relatively fewtissue and cell types—underlies the remarkable diversity of theflowering plants that cover our planet. However, while a differencein plant form between members of different species is expected,members of the same species can be remarkably diversein form as well. From a genetic perspective, this observationsuggests that minor differences in gene content or gene regulationcan underlie dramatic differences in plant form. (Nevertheless,different plant species do differ greatly sometimes ingene content and genome organization.)34.5 | HOW HAS DOMESTICATION ALTERED PLANT FORM? 735Lenticel34.18 Lenticels Allow Gas Exchange through the Periderm Theregion of periderm that appears broken open is a lenticel in a year-oldelderberry (Sambucus) twig; note the spongy tissue that constitutes thelenticel.Secondary phloemSecondaryxylem(one year’s growth)CorkBark cambium CorkPith Spring wood Summer wood34.19 Annual Rings Rings of secondary xylem are the most noticeablefeature of this cross section from a tree trunk.Let’s return to the Doomsday Vault. We saw at the openingof this chapter that the vault will be used as a backup for seedbanks around the world. Many of these seed banks concentrateon seed from a particular crop species, such as the Maize StockCenter at the University of Illinois (corn) or the Genetic ResourcesCenter of the International Rice Research Institute in thePhilippines (rice). In addition to containing large collections ofcultivated varieties, these seed banks also contain seeds frompopulations of their wild relatives.Why maintain collections of seed from both cultivated cropsand their wild relatives? Despite sometimes vast morphologicaldifferences, crops and their wild relatives are still membersof the same species. As such, when they are crossbred, they canproduce viable progeny. These progeny will carry new combinationsof their parents’ traits.It is hard to believe that modern corn was domesticated fromthe wild grass teosinte, which still grows in the hills of Mexico(Figure 34.20). One of the most conspicuous differences is thatteosinte, like other wild grasses, is highly branched, with manyshoots, while domesticated corn has a single shoot. This morphologicaldifference is due in large part to the activity of a singlegene called teosinte branched 1 (tb1). The protein product oftb1 regulates the growth of axillary buds (see Figure 34.1). Theallele of tb1 in domesticated corn represses branching, while theallele in teosinte permits branching.Even harder to believe is that a single species, Brassica oleracea(wild mustard), is the ancestor of so many familiar and morphologicallydiverse crops such as kale, broccoli, Brusselssprouts, and cabbage (see Figure 21.4). An understanding ofhow the basic body plan of plants arises makes it possible to appreciatehow each of these crops was domesticated. Startingwith morphologically diverse populations of the wild ancestor,humans selected and planted the seed from variants with thetrait they found desirable. Many generations of such artificialselection produced the crops that fill the produce section ofthe supermarket or the stands of the farmers’ market.Just as they were for ancient farmers, the genomes of plantsare priceless resources today. The genetic variation in cropplants and their wild relatives can be used to improve our cropplants or adapt them to changing conditions. The improvementof crop plants is a work in progress that is being carried out inplant breeding programs worldwide. In fact, these programsare more important than ever. Increased human activity is dramaticallychanging our planet and leading to the extinction ofmore and more plant species. When seen in this light, theDoomsday Vault is an insurance policy for our crop plantsagainst the loss of our most valuable resource, the genetic diversityunderlying plant form and growth.34.5 RECAPCrop domestication involves artificial selection of certaindesirable traits found in wild plant populations.By understanding the basic body plan of plants, onecan more easily understand the morphological relationshipbetween a crop plant and its wild relatives.• Why is seed from wild relatives of crop plants valuable?See p. 736 and Figure 34.20736 CHAPTER 34 | THE PLANT BODYTeosinte Corn34.20 Modern Corn Was Domesticated from the Wild GrassTeosinte Beginning more than 8,000 years ago in Mexico, farmersfavored plants with minimal branching. Reducing the number of branchesresults in fewer ears per plant, but allows each ear to grow larger andproduce more seeds.34.1 What Is the Basic Body Plan of Plants?• The vegetative organs of flowering plants are roots, which forma root system, and stems and leaves, which form a shoot system.Review Figure 34.1• The two major clades of flowering plants, eudicots and monocots,differ from each other in a number of structural respects.Most eudicots have a taproot system, and most monocots havea fibrous root system. Review Figure 34.2• Stems bear undeveloped shoots called buds. Axillary buds candevelop into new branches. A terminal bud is found at the endof a shoot.• Leaves are the primary sites of photosynthesis. The leaf blade isattached to the stem by a petiole.CHAPTER SUMMARY
34.1 What Is the Basic Body Plan of Plants?• The vegetative organs of flowering plants are roots, which forma root system, and stems and leaves, which form a shoot system.Review Figure 34.1• The two major clades of flowering plants, eudicots and monocots,differ from each other in a number of structural respects.Most eudicots have a taproot system, and most monocots havea fibrous root system. Review Figure 34.2• Stems bear undeveloped shoots called buds. Axillary buds candevelop into new branches. A terminal bud is found at the endof a shoot.• Leaves are the primary sites of photosynthesis. The leaf blade isattached to the stem by a petiole.
34.2 How Does the Cell Wall Support Plant Growthand Form?• Plant cells differ from other eukaryotic cells in having chloroplastsor other plastids, large central vacuoles, and cellulosecontainingcell walls.• Once cytokinesis of a plant cell is complete, each daughterplant cell produces a primary cell wall. The walls of the twocells are separated by a middle lamella. Review Figure 34.4• The primary cell wall is made up of bundles of cellulosemicrofibrils cross-linked by hemicellulose and pectin. ReviewFigure 34.5• The primary cell wall is rigid but dynamic. By loosening the linkagesbetween microfibrils, the cell wall can expand in volumeby up to a million times.• Some cells produce a thick secondary cell wall. Lignin in thesecondary cell wall offers exceptional structural support.• Plasmodesmata connect adjacent plant cells and allow directcommunication between them. Review Figure 34.634.3 How Do Plant Tissues and Organs Originate?• During embryogenesis, the basal–apical axis and the radial axisof the plant body are established. Review Figure 34.7• The shoot apical meristem and the root apical meristem arealso established during embryogenesis. These clusters ofundifferentiated cells will orchestrate all postembryonic development.• Three tissue systems, arranged concentrically, extend throughoutthe plant body: the vascular tissue, dermal tissue, andground tissue systems. Review Figure 34.8• The dermal tissue system protects the plant body surface.Dermal cells form the epidermis and, in woody plants, theperiderm.• The ground tissue system contains cells of three types. Someparenchyma cells carry out photosynthesis; others store starch.Collenchyma cells provide flexible support. Sclerenchyma cellsinclude fibers and sclereids that provide strength and mechanicalsupport. Review Figure 34.9• The vascular tissue system includes xylem, which conductswater and minerals absorbed by the roots, and phloem, whichconducts the products of photosynthesis throughout the plantbody.• Tracheary elements include tracheids and vessel elements,which are the conducting cells of the xylem. Sieve tube elementsare the conducting cells of the phloem.34.4 How Do Meristems Build a ContinuouslyGrowing Plant?• All seed plants possess a primary plant body consisting of nonwoodytissues. Woody plants also possess a secondary plantbody consisting of wood and bark. Apical meristems generatethe primary plant body, and lateral meristems generate thesecondary plant body. Review Figure 34.10• Apical meristems are responsible for primary growth (lengtheningof roots and shoots). Apical meristems at the tips of stemsand roots give rise to three primary meristems (protoderm,ground meristem, and procambium), which in turn producethe three tissue systems of the primary plant body• The root apical meristem gives rise to the root cap and to threeprimary meristems. Root tips have overlapping zones of celldivision, elongation, and maturation. Review Figure 34.11• The vascular tissue of roots is contained within the stele. It isarranged differently in eudicot and monocot roots. ReviewFigures 34.12 and 34.13, WEB ACTIVITIES 34.1 and 34.2• In nonwoody stems, the vascular tissue is divided into vascularbundles, each containing both xylem and phloem. ReviewFigure 34.14, WEB ACTIVITIES 34.3 and 34.4• Eudicot leaves have two zones of photosynthetic mesophyllthat are supplied by veins with water and minerals. Veins alsocarry the products of photosynthesis to other parts of the plantbody. A waxy cuticle limits water loss from the leaf. Guard cellscontrol openings (stomata) in the leaf that allow CO2 to enter,but also allow some water to escape. Review Figure 34.15,WEB ACTIVITY 34.5• Two lateral meristems, the vascular cambium and cork cambium,are responsible for secondary growth. The vascular cambiumproduces secondary xylem (wood) and secondary phloem.The cork cambium produces a protective tissue called cork.Review Figures 34.16 and 34.17, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 34.134.5 How Has Domestication Altered Plant Form?• The plant body plan is simple, yet it can be changed dramaticallyby minor differences in genes, as evidenced by the naturaldiversity of wild plants.• Crop domestication involves artificial selection of certain desirabletraits found in wild populations. Review Figure 34.20