22Transmitting HIV, while irresponsible, is not usuallyprosecuted as a crime. But in one true-crime case, awoman we’ll call “April” went to the police immediatelyupon learning she was HIV-positive. April believedshe was the victim of an attempted murder by “Victor,” aphysician and her former boyfriend, who had repeatedlythreatened violence when she tried to break up with him.April contended that Victor, under the pretense of administeringvitamin therapy, had injected her with blood fromone of his HIV-infected patients.Police investigators discovered that Victor had drawnblood from one of his HIV-positive patients just beforegiving April the injection. The blood draw had no clinicalpurpose, and Victor had tried to hide the records of it. Thepolice were convinced he might indeed have committedthe alleged crime.The district attorney, however, had to show that April’sHIV infection had come from Victor’s patient, and from noother source. To reconstruct the history of the infection,the district attorney turned to phylogenetic analysis—thestudy of the evolutionary relationships among a group oforganisms.The district attorney’s task was complicated by the natureof HIV. HIV is a retrovirus, in which poor repair ofreplication errors leads to a high rate of evolution. Once aperson is infected with HIV, the virus not only replicatesquickly but evolves quickly, so that the infected individualis soon host to a genetically diverse population of viruses.Thus when one person transmits HIV to another, typicallyvery few viral particles (often only one) initiate the infectiousevent. But the person who is the source of theinfection may be host to a large, genetically diversepopulation of viruses—not just the variant he or shetransmits to the recipient.Enter molecular phylogeny. Samples of HIV from aninfected individual can be sequenced to trace theirevolutionary lineages back to the originally transmittedvirus. The virus that is passed to the recipient willbe very closely related to some of the viruses in thesource individual and more distantly related to others.A reconstruction of the evolutionary history of theviruses in both individuals is needed to reveal not onlywhether the two individuals’ viruses are closely related,but also who infected whom.Phylogenetic trees in the courtroomHuman Immunodeficiency Virus A computer image ofthe human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the cause ofacquired immunodeficiency syndrome, or AIDS. To combatAIDS, it is also essential to understand the phylogeny of HIV.22.1 What Is Phylogeny?Phylogeny is the evolutionary history of relationships amongorganisms or their genes. Aphylogenetic tree is a diagram thatportrays a reconstruction of that history. Phylogenetic treesare commonly used to depict the evolutionary history of species,populations, and genes. Each split (or node) in a phylogenetictree represents a point at which lineages diverged in the past.In the case of species, these splits represent past speciationevents, when one lineage divided into two. Thus a phylogenetictree can be used to trace the evolutionary relationships from theancient common ancestor of a group of species, through the variousspeciation events (when lineages split), up to the presentpopulations of the organisms (Figure 22.1). Over the past severaldecades, phylogenetic trees have become important toolsfor studying and describing evolutionary patterns, and for applyingevolutionary theory throughout biology. You will needto understand phylogenetic trees to comprehend many articlesand books about biology, including this one.A phylogenetic tree may portray the evolutionary historyof all life forms; of a major evolutionary group (such as the insects);of a small group of closely related species; or in somecases, even the history of individuals, populations, or geneswithin a species. The common ancestor of all the organisms inthe tree forms the root of the tree. The phylogenetic trees inthis book depict time flowing from left (earliest) to right (mostrecent) (Figure 22.2A). It is also common practice to draw treeswith the earliest times at the bottom.The timing of splitting events in lineages is shown by theposition of nodes on a time axis, sometimes called a divergenceaxis. These splits represent events where one lineage divergedinto two, such as a speciation event (for a tree of species), a geneduplication event (for a tree of genes), or a transmission event(for a tree of viral lineages transmitted through a host population).The divergence axis may have an explicit scale or simplyshow the relative timing of splitting events. In this book,the order of nodes along the horizontal (time) axis have meaning,but the vertical distance between the branches does not.Vertical distances are adjusted for legibility and clarity of presentation;they do not correlate with the degree of similarity ordifference between groups. Note too that lineages can be rotatedaround nodes in the tree, so the vertical order of lineagesis also largely arbitrary (Figure 22.2B). The important informationin the tree is the branching order along the horizontal axis,as this indicates when the various lineages last shared a commonancestor.Any group of species that we designate or name is called ataxon (plural taxa). Some examples of familiar taxa include humans,primates, mammals, and vertebrates (note that in thisIN THIS CHAPTER we will examine the field of systematics,the scientific study of the diversity of life. We willsee how phylogenetic methods are used to reconstruct evolutionaryhistory and to study diversity across genes, populations,species, and larger groups of organisms. We willsee how systematists reconstruct the past and use phylogeniesto make predictions in biology. We will end the chapterwith a look at taxonomy, the theory and practice of classifyingorganisms.To prove attempted murder, the district attorneyneeded to demonstrate that April’s HIV was more closelyrelated to that of Victor’s patient than to other HIV variantsin her community. Samples of HIV were isolatedfrom the blood of the patient, from April, and from otherHIV-positive individuals in the community. Phylogeneticanalysis revealed that April’s HIV was indeed closely relatedto a subset of the patient’s HIV, and more distantlyrelated to the other HIV sources in the community. Giventhis fact, along with other evidence in the case, Victorwas convicted of attempted murder.CHAPTER OUTLINE22.1 What Is Phylogeny?22.2 How Are Phylogenetic Trees Constructed?22.3 How Do Biologists Use Phylogenetic Trees?22.4 How Does Phylogeny Relate to Classification?A Source of the Virus AIDS is a zoonotic disease, meaningthat the virus was transferred to humans from another animal.Phylogenetic analyses of immunodeficiency viruses show thathumans acquired HIV-1 from chimpanzees (see Figure 22.9).Other forms of the virus have been passed to humans bydifferent simians.series, each taxon in the list is also a member of the next,more inclusive taxon). Any taxon that consists of all theevolutionary descendants of a common ancestor is calleda clade. Clades can be identified by picking any point ona phylogenetic tree and then tracing all the descendantlineages to the tips of the terminal branches (Figure 22.3).Two species that are each other’s closest relatives arecalled sister species; similarly, any two clades that areeach other’s closest relatives are called sister clades.Before the 1980s, phylogenetic trees tended to beseen only in the literature on evolutionary biology, especiallyin the area of systematics: the study and classificationof biodiversity. But almost every journal in thelife sciences published during the last few years containsphylogenetic trees. Trees are widely used in molecularbiology, biomedicine, physiology, behavior, ecology, and virtuallyall other fields of biology. Why have phylogenetic studiesbecome so important?All of life is connected through evolutionary historyIn biology, we study life at all levels of organization—fromgenes, cells, organisms, populations, and species to the majordivisions of life. In most cases, however, no individual gene ororganism (or other unit of study) is exactly like any other geneor organism that we investigate.Consider the individuals in your biology class. We recognizeeach person as an individual human, but we know that no twoare exactly alike. If we knew everyone’s family tree in detail, thegenetic similarity of any pair of students would be more predictable.We would find that more closely related students havemany more traits in common (from the color of their hair to theirsusceptibility or resistance to diseases). Likewise, biologists usephylogenies to make comparisons and predictions about sharedtraits across genes, populations, and species.466 CHAPTER 22 | RECONSTRUCTING AND USING PHYLOGENIESThe lineagescontinue tosplit, and aphylogenetictree emerges.5…and each lineagecontinues to evolveindependently asdifferent traits(represented by reddots) arise.4…becomes a lineage as we followits descendants through time.A split occurs when theancestral lineage divides intotwo descendant lineages…32A species, population, orgene at one point in time…1TimeNodeThe splits in branchesare called nodes andindicate a division ofone lineage into two.The positions of thenodes on the time scale(if present) indicate thetimes of the correspondingspeciation events.In this book, all phylogenetictrees show the commonancestor for the group onthe left; this is called the rootof the tree.Branches can berotated around anynode without changingthe meaning of the tree.ChimpanzeeGorillaHumanOrangutanChimpanzeeGorillaHumanOrangutanChimpanzeeGorillaHumanOrangutanCommonancestor15Past Present10 5 0Time (millions of years ago)(A)(B)22.1 A Phylogenetic Tree Evolutionary relationships amonglineages, as well as the evolution of new traits, can be representedin a treelike diagram.22.2 How to Read a Phylogenetic Tree (A) A phylogenetic treedisplays the evolutionary relationships among organisms. Such treescan be produced with time scales, as shown here, or with no indicationof time. If no time scale is shown, then the branch lengths show relativerather than absolute times of divergence. (B) Lineages can be rotatedaround a given node, so the vertical order of taxa is largely arbitrary.One of the great unifying concepts in biology is that all lifeis connected through its evolutionary history. The completeevolutionary history of life is known as the tree of life. Biologistsestimate that there are tens of millions of species on Earth.Only about 1.8 million have been formally described andnamed. New species are being discovered and named all thetime, and phylogenetic analyses reviewed and revised, but ourknowledge of the tree of life is far from complete, even forknown species. Yet knowledge of evolutionary relationships isessential for making comparisons in biology, so biologists buildphylogenies for groups of interest as the need arises. The evolutionaryrelationships among species, as shown in the tree oflife, form the basis for biological classification. This evolutionaryframework allows biologists to make many predictionsabout the behavior, ecology, physiology, genetics, and morphologyof species that have not yet been studied in detail.Comparisons among species require anevolutionary perspectiveWhen biologists make comparisons among species, they observetraits that differ within the group of interest and try to ascertainwhen these traits evolved. In many cases, investigatorsare interested in how the evolution of a trait depends on environmentalconditions or selective pressures. For instance, scientistshave used phylogenetic analyses to discover changesin the genome of HIV that confer resistance to particular drugtreatments. The association of a particular genetic change in HIVwith a particular treatment provides a hypothesis about the evolutionof resistance that can be tested experimentally.Any features shared by two or more species that have beeninherited from a common ancestor are said to be homologous.Homologous features may be any heritable traits, includingDNAsequences, protein structures, anatomical structures, andeven some behavior patterns. Traits that are shared across agroup of interest are likely to have been inherited from a commonancestor. For example, all living vertebrates have a vertebralcolumn, and all known fossil vertebrates had a vertebralcolumn. Therefore, the vertebral column is judged to be homologousin all vertebrates.In tracing the evolution of a trait, biologists distinguish betweenancestral and derived traits. Atrait that was already presentin the ancestor of a group is known as an ancestral trait forthat group. A trait found in a descendent that differs from itsancestral form is called a derived trait. Derived traits that areshared among a group of organisms, and are viewed as evidenceof the common ancestry of the group, are called synapomorphies(syn, “shared”; apo, “derived”; morph, “form,” referringto the “form” of a trait). Thus the vertebral column isconsidered a synapomorphy—a shared, derived trait—of thevertebrates.Not all similar traits are evidence of relatedness, however.Similar traits in unrelated groups of organisms can developfor either of the following reasons:• Independently evolved traits subjected to similar selectionpressures may become superficially similar, a phenomenoncalled convergent evolution. For example, although thewing bones of bats and birds are homologous, having beeninherited from a common ancestor, the wings of bats andthe wings of birds are not homologous because theyevolved independently from the forelimbs of different nonflyingancestors (Figure 22.4).• Acharacter may revert from a derived state back to an ancestralstate in an event called an evolutionary reversal. Forexample, most frogs lack teeth in the lower jaw, but theancestor of frogs did have such teeth. Teeth have been regainedin the lower jaw of one South American species, andthus represent an evolutionary reversal in that species.Similar traits generated by convergent evolution and evolutionaryreversals are called homoplastic traits or homoplasies.Aparticular trait may be ancestral or derived, depending onour point of reference in a phylogeny. For example, all birdshave feathers, which are highly modified scales. We infer fromthis that feathers were present in the common ancestor of modernbirds. Therefore, we consider the presence of feathers to bean ancestral trait for any particular group of modern birds, suchas the songbirds. However, feathers are not present in any otherliving animals. If we were reconstructing a phylogeny of all22.1 | WHAT IS PHYLOGENY? 467PigeonCrocodileLizardSalamanderPerchLampreyChimpanzeeMouseCommonancestorMammalsAmniotesTetrapodsVertebrates22.3 Clades Represent All the Descendants of a CommonAncestor All clades are subsets of larger clades, with all of life asthe most inclusive taxon. In this example, the groups called mammals,amniotes, tetrapods, and vertebrates represent successivelylarger clades. Only a few species within each clade are representedon the tree.living vertebrates, the presence of feathers would be a derivedtrait that is found only among birds (and thus a synapomorphyof the birds).22.1 RECAPA phylogenetic tree is a description of evolutionaryrelationships—how a group of genes, populations, orspecies have evolved from a common ancestor. Allliving organisms share a common ancestor and arerelated through the phylogenetic tree of life.• Do you understand the different elements of a phylogenetictree? See pp. 465–466 and Figure 22.2• Explain the difference between an ancestral and aderived trait. See p. 467• Do you see how similar traits might arise independentlyin species that are only distantly related?See p. 467 and Figure 22.4Phylogenetic analyses have become increasingly important tomany types of biological research in recent years, and they arethe basis for the comparative nature of biology. For the mostpart, however, evolutionary history cannot be observed directly.How, then, do biologists reconstruct the past? One way is by usingphylogenetic analyses to construct a tree.How Are Phylogenetic Trees 22.2 Constructed?To illustrate how a phylogenetic tree is constructed, let’s considerthe eight vertebrate animals listed in Table 22.1: lamprey,perch, salamander, lizard, crocodile, pigeon, mouse, andchimpanzee. We will assume initially that a given derived traitevolved only once during the evolution of these animals (thatis, there has been no convergent evolution), and that no derivedtraits were lost from any of the descendant groups (there hasbeen no evolutionary reversal). For simplicity, we have selectedtraits that are either present (+) or absent (–).In a phylogenetic study, the group of organisms of primaryinterest is called the ingroup. As a point of reference, an ingroupis compared with an outgroup. a closely related species or groupknown to be phylogenetically outside the group of interest. If theoutgroup is known to have diverged before the ingroup, the outgroupcan be used to determine which traits of the ingroup arederived (evolved within the ingroup) and which are ancestral(evolved before the origin of the ingroup). As we will see in Chapter33, a group of jawless fishes called the lampreys is thoughtto have separated from the lineage leading to the other vertebratesbefore the jaw arose. Therefore, we have included the lampreyas the outgroup for our analysis. Because derived traits aretraits acquired by other members of the vertebrate lineage afterthey diverged from the outgroup, any trait that is present in boththe lamprey and the other vertebrates is judged to be ancestral.We begin by noting that the chimpanzee and mouse sharetwo derived traits—mammary glands and fur—that are absentin both the outgroup and in the other species of the ingroup.Therefore, we infer that mammary glands and fur arederived traits that evolved in a common ancestor of chimpanzeesand mice after that lineage separated from the lineagesleading to the other vertebrates. In other words, we provisionallyassume that mammary glands and fur evolved onlyonce among the animals in our ingroup. These characters aresynapomorphies that unite chimpanzees and mice (as wellas all other mammals, although we have not included othermammalian species in this example). By the same reasoning,we can infer that the other shared derived traits are synapomorphiesfor the various groups in which they are expressed.For instance, keratinous scales are a synapomorphy of thelizard, crocodile, and pigeon.Table 22.1 also tells us that, among the animals in our ingroup,the pigeon has a unique trait: the presence of feathers.Feathers are a synapomorphy of birds, but since we only haveone bird in this example, the presence of feathers provides noclues concerning relationships among the eight species of vertebrateswe have sampled. However, gizzards are found in birdsand crocodiles, so this trait is evidence of a close relationshipbetween birds and crocodilians.By combining information about the various synapomorphies,we can construct a phylogenetic tree. We infer, for example,that mice and chimpanzees, the only two animals thatshare fur and mammary glands in our example, share a morerecent common ancestor with each other than they do with468 CHAPTER 22 | RECONSTRUCTING AND USING PHYLOGENIESBones shown in the samecolor are homologous.Bat wingBird wing22.4 The Bones Are Homologous, the Wings Are Not The supportingbone structures of both bat wings and bird wings are derivedfrom a common four-limbed ancestor and are thus homologous.However, the wings themselves—an adaptation for flight—evolvedindependently in the two groups.pigeons and crocodiles. Otherwise, we would need to assumethat the ancestors of pigeons and crocodiles also had fur andmammary glands but subsequently lost them—unnecessaryadditional assumptions.Figure 22.5 shows a phylogenetic tree for the vertebrates inTable 22.1, based on the shared derived traits we examined andthe assumption that each derived trait evolved only once. Thisparticular tree was easy to construct because the animals andcharacters we chose met the assumptions that derived traits appearedonly once and were never lost after they appeared. Hadwe included a snake in the group, our second assumptionwould have been violated, because we know that the lizard ancestorsof snakes had limbs that were subsequently lost. Wewould need to examine additional characters to determine thatthe lineage leading to snakes separated from the one leading tolizards long after the lineage leading to lizards separated from22.2 | HOW ARE PHYLOGENETIC TREES CONSTRUCTED? 469TABLE 22.1Eight Vertebrates Ordered According to Unique Shared Derived TraitsDERIVED TRAITaCLAWS MAMMARY KERATINOUSTAXON JAWS LUNGS OR NAILS GIZZARD FEATHERS FUR GLANDS SCALESLamprey (outgroup) – – – – – – – –Perch + – – – – – – –Salamander + + – – – – – –Lizard + + + – – – – +Crocodile + + + + – – – +Pigeon + + + + + – – +Mouse + + + – – + + _Chimpanzee + + + – – + + _aA plus sign indicates the trait is present, a minus sign that it is absent.The earliest branch in the treerepresents the evolutionary splitbetween the outgroup (lamprey)and the ingroup (the remainingspecies of vertebrates).Derived traits areindicated alonglineages in whichthey evolved.The lamprey isdesignated asthe outgroup.PigeonCrocodileLizardSalamanderPerchLamprey(outgroup)ChimpanzeeMouseCommonancestorJawsLungsClawsor nailsKeratinousscalesFeathersGizzardIngroupFur; mammaryglands22.5 Inferring a Phylogenetic Tree This phylogenetic tree was constructedfrom the information given in Table 22.1 using the parsimony principle. Each cladein the tree is supported by at least one shared derived trait, or synapomorphy.the others. In fact, the analysis of several characters shows thatsnakes evolved from burrowing lizards that became adapted toa subterranean existence.Parsimony provides the simplest explanationfor phylogenetic dataThe phylogenetic tree shown in Figure 22.5 is based on only avery small sample of traits. Typically, biologists construct phylogenetictrees using hundreds or thousands of traits. Withlarger data sets, we would expect to observe some traits thathave changed more than once, and thus we would expect to seesome convergence and evolutionary reversal. How do we determinewhich traits are synapomorphies and which are homoplasies?One way is to invoke the principle of parsimony.In its most general form, the parsimony principle states thatthe preferred explanation of observed data is the simplest explanation.Applying the principle of parsimony to the reconstructionof phylogenies entails minimizing the number of evolutionarychanges that need to be assumed over all characters in allgroups in the tree. In other words, the best hypothesis under theparsimony principle is one that requires the fewest homoplasies.This application of parsimony is a specific case of a general principleof logic called Occam’s razor: the best explanation is the onethat fits the data best while making the fewest assumptions.We apply the parsimony principle in constructing phylogenetictrees not because all evolutionary changes always occurredparsimoniously, but because it is logical to adopt the simplestexplanation that can account for the observed data. More complicatedexplanations are accepted only when the evidence requiresthem. Phylogenetic trees represent our best estimatesabout evolutionary relationships. They are continually modifiedas additional evidence becomes available.Phylogenies are reconstructed from manysources of dataNaturalists have constructed various forms of phylogenetic treesfor more than 150 years. In fact, the only figure in the first editionof Darwin’s Origin of Species was a phylogenetic tree. Treeconstruction has been revolutionized, however, by the advent ofcomputer software for trait analysis and tree construction, allowingus to consider far more data than could ever before beprocessed. Combining this with the massive comparative datasets being generated through studies of genomes, biologists arelearning details about the tree of life at a remarkable pace.Any trait that is genetically determined, and therefore heritable,can be used in a phylogenetic analysis. Evolutionary relationshipscan be revealed through studies of morphology, development,the fossil record, behavioral traits, and moleculartraits such as DNA and protein sequences. Let’s take a closerlook at the types of data used in modern phylogenetic analyses.MORPHOLOGY An important source of phylogenetic informationis morphology: the presence, size, shape, and other attributesof body parts. Since living organisms have been observed,depicted, and studied for millenia, we have a wealth of recordedmorphological data as well as extensive museum and herbariumcollections of organisms whose traits can be measured.New technological tools, such as the electron microscope andcomputed tomography (CT) scans, enable systematists to examineand analyze the structures of organisms at much finerscales than was formerly possible.Most species are described and known primarily by theirmorphology, and morphology provides the most comprehensivedata set available for many taxa. The features of morphologythat are important for phylogenetic analysis are often specificto a particular group of organisms. For example, thepresence, development, shape, and size of various features ofthe skeletal system are important for the study of vertebratephylogeny, whereas floral structures are important for studyingthe relationships among flowering plants (angiosperms).Although often useful, morphological approaches to phylogeneticanalysis have some limitations. Some taxa exhibit littlemorphological diversity, despite great species diversity. For example,the phylogeny of the leopard frogs of North and CentralAmerica would be difficult to infer from morphological differencesalone, because the many species look very similar,despite important differences in their behavior and physiology.At the other extreme, few morphological traits can be comparedacross distantly related species (consider earthwormsand mammals, for instance). Some morphological variation hasan environmental (rather than a genetic) basis and so must beexcluded from phylogenetic analyses. An accurate phylogeneticanalysis often requires information beyond that suppliedby morphology.DEVELOPMENT Observations of similarities in developmentalpatterns may reveal evolutionary relationships. Some organismsexhibit similarities in early developmental stages only. The larvaeof marine creatures called sea squirts, for example, have aflexible gelatinous rod in the back—the notochord—that disappearsas the larvae develop into adults. All vertebrate animalsalso have a notochord at some time during their development(Figure 22.6). This shared structure is one of the reasons for inferringthat sea squirts are more closely related to vertebrates thanwould be suspected if only adult sea squirts were examined.PALEONTOLOGY The fossil record is another important source ofinformation on evolutionary history. Fossils show us where andwhen organisms lived in the past and give us an idea of whatthey looked like. Fossils provide important evidence that helpsus distinguish ancestral from derived traits. The fossil record canalso reveal when lineages diverged and began their independentevolutionary histories. Furthermore, in groups with few speciesthat have survived to the present, information on extinct speciesis often critical to an understanding of the large divergencesamong the surviving species. The fossil record does have limitations,however. Few or no fossils have been found for somegroups, and the fossil record for many groups is fragmentary.470 CHAPTER 22 | RECONSTRUCTING AND USING PHYLOGENIESGO TO Web Activity 22.1 • Constructing aPhylogenetic TreeyourBioPortal.comBEHAVIOR Some behavioral traits are culturally transmittedand some are inherited. If a particular behavior is culturallytransmitted, it may not accurately reflect evolutionary relationships(but may nonetheless reflect cultural connections). Birdsongs, for instance, are often learned and may be inappropriatetraits for phylogenetic analysis. Frog calls, however, are geneticallydetermined and appear to be acceptable sources of informationfor reconstructing phylogenies.MOLECULAR DATA All heritable variation is encoded in DNA,and so the complete genome of an organism contains an enormousset of traits (the individual nucleotide bases of DNA) thatcan be used in phylogenetic analyses. In recent years, DNA sequenceshave become among the most widely used sources ofdata for constructing phylogenetic trees. Comparisons of nucleotidesequences are not limited to the DNA in the cell nucleus.Eukaryotes have genes in their mitochondria as well asin their nuclei; plant cells also have genes in their chloroplasts.The chloroplast genome (cpDNA), which is used extensively inphylogenetic studies of plants, has changed slowly over evolutionarytime, so it is often used to study relatively ancient phylogeneticrelationships. Most animal mitochondrial DNA(mtDNA) has changed more rapidly, so mitochondrial geneshave been used extensively to study evolutionary relationshipsamong closely related animal species (the mitochondrial genesof plants evolve more slowly). Many nuclear gene sequencesare also commonly analyzed, and now that several entiregenomes have been sequenced, they too are used to constructphylogenetic trees. Information on gene products (such as theamino acid sequences of proteins) is also widely used for phylogeneticanalyses, as we discuss in Chapter 24.Mathematical models expand the powerof phylogenetic reconstructionAs biologists began to use DNA sequences to infer phylogeniesin the 1970s and 1980s, they developed explicit mathematicalmodels describing how DNA sequences change over time.These models account for multiple changes at a given positionin a DNA sequence. They also take into account different ratesof change at different positions in a gene, at different positionsin a codon, and among different nucleotides (see Section 24.1).For example, transitions (changes between two purines or betweentwo pyrimidines) are usually more likely than are transversions(changes between a purine and pyrimidine).Mathematical models can be used to compute how a treemight evolve given the observed data. A maximum likelihoodmethod will identify the tree that most likely produced the observeddata, given the assumed model of evolutionary change.Maximum likelihood methods can be used for any kind of characters,but they are most often used with molecular data, forwhich explicit mathematical models of evolutionary change areeasier to develop. The principal advantages to maximum likelihoodanalyses are that they incorporate more informationabout evolutionary change than do parsimony methods, andthey are easier to treat in a statistical framework. The principaldisadvantages are that they are computationally intensive andrequire explicit models of evolutionary change (which may notbe available for some kinds of character change).The accuracy of phylogenetic methodscan be testedIf phylogenetic trees represent reconstructions of past events,and if many of these events occurred before any humans wereDespite the similarity of theirlarvae, the morphology of adultfrogs and sea squirts provideslittle evidence of the commonancestry of these two groups.Sea squirt and frog larvae (tadpoles) shareseveral morphological similarities, includingthe presence of a notochord for body support.Neural tube NotochordNotochordNeuraltubeSea squirt larvaFrog larva AdultAdult22.6 The Evolutionary Relationship Between Sea Squirts andVertebrates All chordates—a taxonomic group that includes seasquirts and frogs—have notochords at some stage of their development.The larvae share similarities that are not apparent in the adults. Such similaritiesin development can provide useful evidence of evolutionary relationships.The notochord is lost in adult sea squirts. In adult frogs, as inall vertebrates, the vertebral column replaces the notochord as the supportstructure.around to witness them, how can we test the accuracyof phylogenetic methods? Biologists have conductedexperiments both in living organisms and with computersimulations that have demonstrated the effectivenessand accuracy of phylogenetic methods.In one experiment designed to test the accuracy ofphylogenetic analysis, a single viral culture of bacteriophageT7 was used as a starting point, and lineageswere allowed to evolve from this ancestral virus in thelaboratory (Figure 22.7). The initial culture was split intotwo separate lineages, one of which became the ingroupfor analysis and the other of which became the outgroupfor rooting the tree. The lineages in the ingroupwere split in two after every 400 generations, and samplesof the virus were saved for analysis at each branchingpoint. The lineages were allowed to evolve untilthere were eight lineages in the ingroup. Mutagens wereadded to the viral cultures to increase the mutation rateso that the amount of change and the degree of homoplasywould be typical of the organisms analyzed in averagephylogenetic analyses. The investigators then sequencedsamples from the end points of the eightlineages, as well as from the ancestors at the branchingpoints. They then gave the sequences from the endpoints of the lineages to other investigators to analyze,without revealing the known history of the lineages orthe sequences of the ancestral viruses.After the phylogenetic analysis was completed, theinvestigators asked two questions: Did phylogeneticmethods reconstruct the known history correctly, andwere the sequences of the ancestral viruses reconstructedaccurately? The answer in both cases was yes:the branching order of the lineages was reconstructedexactly as it had occurred, more than 98 percent of thenucleotide positions of the ancestral viruses were reconstructedcorrectly, and 100 percent of the aminoacid changes in the viral proteins were reconstructedcorrectly.The experiment shown in Figure 22.7 demonstratedthat phylogenetic analysis was accurate under the conditionstested, but it did not examine all possible conditions.Other experimental studies have taken otherfactors into account, such as the sensitivity of phylogeneticanalysis to convergent environments andhighly variable rates of evolutionary change. In addition,computer simulations based on evolutionarymodels have been used extensively to study the effectivenessof phylogenetic analysis. These studies havealso confirmed the accuracy of phylogenetic methodsand have been used to refine those methods andextend them to new applications.472 CHAPTER 22 | RECONSTRUCTING AND USING PHYLOGENIESHYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODPhylogenetic analysis of DNA sequences canaccurately reconstruct evolutionary history.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: The lineages in this experiment evolved undersimilar conditions. How might changingenvironmental conditions for some of thelineages affect the result?22.7 The Accuracy of Phylogenetic AnalysisTo test whether analysis of gene sequences can accurately reconstructevolutionary phylogeny, we must have an unambiguously knownphylogeny to compare against the reconstruction. Will the observedphylogeny match the reconstruction?A phylogeny reconstructed from analysis of the DNAsequences of living organisms can accurately matchthe known evolutionary history of the organisms.RESULTSINVESTIGATING LIFEThe true phylogeny and ancestral DNA sequences wereaccurately reconstructed solely from the DNA sequences of theviruses at the tips of the tree.1 Select single placque(source of commonancestor).3 Sequencegenes fromthe end points(blue dots)and use thesesequences toconstruct aphylogenetictree.2 Split each lineageevery 400 generations,sequencing eachancestor at time of split.In the laboratory, researchers produced an unambiguousphylogeny of nine viral lineages, enhancing the mutationrate to increase variation among the lineages.Viral sequences from the end points of each lineage (blue dots) weresubjected to phylogenetic analysis by investigators who wereunaware of the history of the lineages or the gene sequences of theancestral viruses. These investigators reconstructed the phylogenybased solely on their analyses of the descendants’ genomes.Growth inpresenceof mutagenOutgrouplineageA lineageD lineageC lineageE lineageF lineageH lineageB lineageG lineage400 400Generations400Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.GO TO Animated Tutorial 22.1 • Using PhylogeneticAnalysis to Reconstruct Evolutionary HistoryyourBioPortal.com22.2 RECAPPhylogenetic trees can be constructed by using theparsimony principle to find the simplest explanationfor the evolution of traits. Maximum likelihood methodsincorporate more explicit models of evolutionarychange to reconstruct evolutionary history.• Do you understand how a phylogenetic tree is constructed?See pp. 468–471 and Figure 22.5• Is there a way to test whether phylogenetic trees provideaccurate reconstructions of evolutionary history?See p. 474 and Figure 22.7Biologists in many fields now routinely reconstruct phylogeneticrelationships. Let’s examine some of the many uses ofthese phylogenetic trees.How Do Biologists Use 22.3 Phylogenetic Trees?Information about the evolutionary relationships among organismsis useful to scientists investigating a wide variety of biologicalquestions. In this section we will illustrate how phylogenetictrees can be used to ask questions about the past, andto compare aspects of the biology of organisms in the present.Phylogenies help us reconstruct the pastMost flowering plants reproduce by mating with another individual—a process called outcrossing. Many outcrossing specieshave mechanisms to prevent self-fertilization, and so are referredto as self-incompatible. Individuals of some species, however,regularly fertilize themselves with their own pollen; theyare termed selfing species, which of course requires that they beself-compatible. How can we tell how often self-compatibility hasevolved in a group of plants? We can do so by conducting a phylogeneticanalysis of outcrossing and selfing species and testingthe species for self-compatibility.The evolution of fertilization mechanisms was examined inLinanthus, a genus in the phlox family that exhibits a diversityof breeding systems and pollination mechanisms. The outcrossingspecies of Linanthus have long petals, are pollinated by longtonguedflies, and are self-incompatible. The self-pollinatingspecies of Linanthus, in contrast, all have short petals and do notrequire insect pollinators to reproduce successfully. Investigatorsreconstructed a phylogeny for 12 species in the genus usingnuclear ribosomal DNA sequences (Figure 22.8). Theydetermined whether each species was self-compatible by artificiallypollinating flowers with the plant’s own pollen or withpollen from other individuals and observing whether viableseeds formed.Several lines of evidence suggest that self-incompatibility isthe ancestral state in Linanthus. Multiple origins of self-incompatibilityhave not been found in any flowering plant familyto date. Self-incompatibility depends on physiological mechanismsin both the pollen and the stigma (the female organ onwhich pollen lands) and is under the control of least three differentalleles. Therefore, a change from self-incompatibility to22.3 | HOW DO BIOLOGISTS USE PHYLOGENETIC TREES? 473Convergent floral morphologyassociated with self-compatibilityarose independently in threedifferent Linanthus lineages…Self-compatibilitySelf-compatibilityL. androsaceusL. “bicolor”L. parviflorusL. latisectusL. liniflorusL. acicularisL. “bicolor”L. jepsoniiL. “bicolor”Commonancestor1…“fooling” taxonomistsinto classifyingthree separatespecies as L. bicolor.222.8 Phylogeny of a Section ofthe Plant Genus LinanthusSelf-compatibility apparently evolvedindependently three times in thisgroup. Because the appearanceand structure of the flowers convergedin the three selfing lineages,taxonomists mistakenly thought theywere varieties of the same species.self-compatibility would be easier than the reversechange. In addition, in all self-incompatible speciesof Linanthus, the site of pollen rejection is the stigma,even though sites of pollen rejection vary greatlyamong other plant families.Assuming that self-incompatibility is the ancestralstate, the reconstructed phylogeny suggests thatself-compatibility evolved three times within thisgroup of Linanthus (see Figure 22.8). The change toself-compatibility has been accompanied by the evolutionof reduced petal size. Interestingly, the strikingsimilarity of the flowers in the self-compatiblegroups once led to their being classified as membersof a single species. The phylogenetic analysis usingribosomal DNA showed them to be members ofthree distinct lineages, however.Reconstructing the past is important for understandingmany biological processes. In the case of zoonotic diseases(diseases caused by infectious organisms transmitted to humansfrom another animal host), it is important to understandwhen, where, and how the disease first entered a human population.Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is the cause of sucha zoonotic disease, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, orAIDS. As we described in the opening to this chapter, phylogeneticanalyses have become important for studying the transmissionof viruses such as HIV. Phylogenies are also important forunderstanding the present global diversity of HIV and for determiningthe virus’s origins in human populations. Abroader phylogeneticanalysis of immunodeficiency viruses shows that humansacquired these viruses from two different hosts: HIV-1 fromchimpanzees, and HIV-2 from sooty mangabeys (Figure 22.9).HIV-1 is the common form of the virus in human populationsin central Africa, where chimpanzees are hunted for food, andHIV-2 is the common form in human populations in westernAfrica, where sooty mangabeys are hunted for food. Thus it seemslikely that these viruses entered human populations throughhunters who cut themselves while skinning chimpanzees andsooty mangabeys. The relatively recent global pandemic of AIDSoccurred when these infections in local African populations rapidlyspread through human populations around the world.Phylogenies allow us to compare and contrastliving organismsMale swordtails—a group of fishes in the genus Xiphophorus—have a long, colorful tail extension (Figure 22.10A), and theirreproductive success is closely associated with this appendage.Males with a long sword are more likely to mate successfullythan are males with a short sword (an example of sexual selection;see Chapters 21 and 23). Several explanations have beenadvanced for the evolution of this structure, including the hypothesisthat the sword simply exploits a preexisting bias in thesensory system of the females. This sensory exploitation hypoth-474 CHAPTER 22 | RECONSTRUCTING AND USING PHYLOGENIESVirus transferred from simian host to humansHIV-1 (humans)SIVcpz(chimpanzees)SIVhoest(L’Hoest monkeys)SIVsun(sun-tailed monkeys)SIVmnd (mandrills)SIVagm (Africangreen monkeys)SIVsm (sootymangabeys)HIV-2 (humans)SIVsyk(Sykes’ monkeys)CommonancestorEvolution ofmale swordEvolution of femalesensory biasSwordtailfishesPlatyfish(A)(B)(C)22.9 Phylogenetic Tree of Immunodeficiency VirusesImmunodeficiency viruses have been transmitted to humans fromtwo different simian hosts: HIV-1 from chimpanzees and HIV-2 fromsooty mangabeys. (SIV stands for simian immunodeficiency virus.)22.10 The Origin of a SexuallySelected Trait (A) The large tailof male swordtail fishes (genusXiphophorus) apparently evolvedthrough sexual selection, withfemales mating preferentially withmales with a longer “sword.” (B) Amale platyfish, member of a relatedspecies. (C) Phylogenetic analysisreveals that the platyfishes split fromthe swordtails before the evolution ofthe sword. The independent findingthat female platyfishes prefer maleswith an artificial sword further supportsthe idea that this appendageevolved as a result of a preexistingpreference in the females.esis suggests that female swordtails had a preference for maleswith long tails even before the tails evolved (perhaps becausefemales assess the size of males by their total body length—including the tail—and prefer larger males).To test the sensory exploitation hypothesis, a phylogeny wasused to identify the swordtail relatives that had split most recentlyfrom their lineage before the evolution of sword extensions.These closest relatives turned out to be the platyfishes,another group of Xiphophorus (Figure 22.10B). Even thoughmale platyfishes do not normally have swords, when researchersattached artificial swordlike structures to the tails ofsome male platyfishes, female platyfishes preferred the maleswith an artificial sword, thus providing support for the hypothesisthat female Xiphophorus had a preexisting sensory bias favoringtail extensions even before the trait evolved (Figure22.10C). Thus, a long tail became a sexually selected trait becauseof the preexisting preference of the females.Ancestral states can be reconstructedIn addition to using phylogenetic methods to infer evolutionaryrelationships among lineages, biologists can use them to reconstructthe morphology, behavior, or nucleotide and amino acidsequences of ancestral species (as was demonstrated for the ancestralsequences of bacteriophage T7 in the experiment shownin Figure 22.7). For instance, a phylogenetic analysis was usedto reconstruct an opsin protein in the ancestral archosaur (themost recent common ancestor of birds, dinosaurs, and crocodiles).Opsins are pigment proteins involved in vision; differentopsins (with different amino acid sequences) are excited bydifferent wavelengths of light. Knowledge of the opsin sequencein the ancestral archosaur would provide clues about the animal’svisual capabilities and therefore about some of its probablebehaviors. Investigators used phylogenetic analysis of opsinfrom living vertebrates to estimate the amino acid sequence ofthe pigment that existed in the ancestral archosaur. A proteinwith this same sequence was then constructed in the laboratory.The investigators tested the reconstructed opsin and found a significantshift toward the red end of the spectrum in the light sensitivityof this protein compared with that of most modernopsins. Modern species that exhibit similar sensitivity areadapted for nocturnal vision, so the investigators inferred thatthe ancestral archosaur might have been active at night. Thus,reminiscent of the movie Jurassic Park, phylogenetic analyses arebeing used to reconstruct extinct species, one protein at a time.Molecular clocks help date evolutionary eventsFor many applications, biologists want to know not only the orderin which evolutionary lineages split but also the timing ofthose splits. In 1965, Emile Zuckerkandl and Linus Paulinghypothesized that rates of molecular change were constantenough that they could be used to predict evolutionary divergencetimes—an idea that has become known as the molecularclock hypothesis.Of course, different genes evolve at different rates, and thereare also differences in evolutionary rates among species relatedto differing generation times, environments, efficiencies of DNArepair systems, and other biological factors. Nonetheless, amongclosely related species, a given gene usually evolves at a reasonablyconstant rate. Therefore, the protein encoded by the genealso accumulates amino acid substitutions at a relatively constantrate (Figure 22.11). A molecular clock uses the average rateat which a given gene or protein accumulates changes to gaugethe time of divergence for a particular split in the phylogeny.Molecular clocks must be calibrated using independent data,such as the fossil record, known times of divergence, or biogeographicdates (such as the dates for separations of continents).Using such calibrations, times of divergence have been estimatedfor many groups of species that have diverged over millionsof years.Molecular clocks are not only used to date ancient events;they are also used to study the timing of comparatively recentevents. Most samples of HIV-1 have been collected from humansonly since the early 1980s, although a few isolates frommedical biopsies are available from as early as the 1950s. But biologistscan use the observed changes in HIV-1 over the pastseveral decades to project back to the common ancestor of allHIV-1 isolates, and estimate when HIV-1 first entered humanpopulations from chimpanzees. The clock can be calibrated usingthe samples from the 1980s and 1990s, and then tested usingthe samples from the 1950s. As shown in Figure 22.12C, asample from a 1959 biopsy is dated by molecular clock analysisat 1957 ± 10 years. The molecular clock was also used to projectback to the common ancestor of this group of HIV-1 samples.Extrapolation suggests a date of origin for this group ofviruses of about 1930. Although AIDS was unknown to Westernmedicine until the 1980s, this analysis shows that HIV-1 waspresent (probably at very low frequency) in human populationsin Africa for at least a half-century before its emergence as a22.3 | HOW DO BIOLOGISTS USE PHYLOGENETIC TREES? 475The slope represents anaverage rate of change inamino acid sequences(the molecular clock).Proportion of amino acid differences0 100 200 300 400 500Time (myr)0.100.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.922.11 A Molecular Clock of the Protein Hemoglobin Amino acidreplacements in hemoglobin have occurred at a relatively constant rateover nearly 500 million years of evolution. The graph shows the relationshipbetween time of divergence and proportion of amino acid change for13 pairs of vertebrate hemoglobin proteins. The average rate of changerepresents the molecular clock for hemoglobin in vertebrates.global pandemic (Figure 22.12). Biologists have used similaranalyses to conclude that immunodeficiency viruses have beentransmitted repeatedly into human populations from multipleprimates for more than a century (see also Figure 22.9).22.3 RECAPPhylogenetic trees are used to reconstruct the pasthistory of lineages, to determine when and wheretraits arose, and to make relevant biological comparisonsamong genes, populations, and species. Theycan also be used to reconstruct ancestral traits andto estimate the timing of evolutionary events.• Explain how phylogenetic trees can help determinethe number of times a particular trait evolved. Seepp. 473–474 and Figure 22.8• How does the reconstruction of ancestral traits helpbiologists explain the evolution of visual pigmentproteins? See p. 475• How do molecular clocks add a time dimension tophylogenetic trees? See p. 475 and Figure 22.12All of life is connected through evolutionary history, and the relationshipsamong organisms provide a natural basis for makingbiological comparisons. For these reasons, biologists usephylogenetic relationships as the basis for organizing life intoa coherent classification system, described in the next section.How Does Phylogeny Relate 22.4 to Classification?The biological classification system in widespread use today isderived from a system developed by the Swedish biologist CarolusLinnaeus in the mid-1700s. Linnaeus developed a namingsystem called binomial nomenclature that has allowed scientiststhroughout the world to refer unambiguously to thesame organisms by the same names (Figure 22.13).Linnaeus gave each species two names, one identifying thespecies itself and the other the genus to which it belongs. Agenus (plural, genera) is a group of closely related species. Optionally,the name of the taxonomist who first proposed thespecies name may be added at the end. Thus Homo sapiens Linnaeusis the name of the modern human species. Homo is thegenus to which the species belongs, and sapiens identifies theparticular species in the genus Homo; Linnaeus proposed thespecies name Homo sapiens. You can think of the generic nameHomo as equivalent to your surname and the specific name sapiensas equivalent to your first name. The name of the genus isalways capitalized, and the name identifying the species is alwayslowercased. Both names are italicized, whereas commonnames of organisms are not. Rather than repeating the nameof a genus when it is used several times in the same discussion,biologists often spell it out only once and abbreviate it to the initialletter thereafter (D. melanogaster rather than Drosophilamelanogaster, for example).476 CHAPTER 22 | RECONSTRUCTING AND USING PHYLOGENIESAverage rate of divergence(molecular clock).Estimated date for originof HIV-1 main group.Commonancestor ofof HIV-1(main group)1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 20001990199719831984199419961959198419931995198319911983198819871986198919831998Year0.0300.060.090.120.150.181959 sampleConfidencelimitsBranch length from common ancestor1980 1985 1990 1995 2000Year0.110.100.120.130.140.150.160.170.180(A) (B)0.03 0.06 0.09 0.12 0.15 0.18Branch length from common ancestorPredictedsampling date1957±10 years(C)22.12 Dating the Origin of HIV-1 in Human Populations(A) A phylogenetic analysis of the main group of HIV-1 viruses. The datesindicate the years in which samples were taken. (For clarity, only a smallfraction of the samples that were examined in the original study are shown.)(B) A plot of year of isolation versus genetic divergence from the commonancestor provides an average rate of divergence, or a molecular clock.(C) The molecular clock is used to date a sample taken in 1959 (as a testof the clock) and the unknown date of origin of the HIV-1 main group (about1930).As we noted earlier, any group of organisms that is treatedas a unit in a biological classification system, such as the genusDrosophila, or all insects, is called a taxon. In the Linnaean system,species and genera are further grouped into a hierarchicalsystem of higher taxonomic categories. The taxon above thegenus in the Linnaean system is the family. The names of animalfamilies end in the suffix “-idae.” Thus Formicidae is thefamily that contains all ant species, and the family Hominidaecontains humans and our recent fossil relatives, as well as ourclosest living relatives, the chimpanzees and gorillas. Familynames are based on the name of a member genus; Formicidaeis based on the genus Formica, and Hominidae is based on Homo.The same rules are used in classifying plants, except that thesuffix “-aceae” is used for plant family names instead of “-idae.”Thus Rosaceae is the family that includes the genus of roses(Rosa) and its close relatives. In the Linnaean system, familiesare grouped into orders, orders into classes, and classes intophyla (singular phylum), and phyla into kingdoms. However,Linnaean classification is often subjective; whether a particulartaxon is considered, say, an order or a class is often a subjectivedecision. Today, Linnaean terms are used largely for convenience.Although families are always grouped within orders,orders within classes, and so forth, there is nothing that makesa “family” in one group equivalent (in number of genera or inevolutionary age, for instance) to a “family” in another group.Linnaeus recognized the overarching hierarchy of life, buthe developed his system before evolutionary thought had becomewidespread. Biologists today recognize the tree of life asthe basis for biological classification and often name clades withoutplacing them into any Linnaean rank. But regardless ofwhether they rank organisms into Linnaean categories or useunranked clade names, modern biologists use evolutionary relationshipsas the basis for distinguishing biological taxa.Evolutionary history is the basis for modernbiological classificationBiological classification systems are used to express relationshipsamong organisms. The kind of relationship we wish to express influenceswhich features we use to classify organisms. If, for instance,we were interested in a system that would help us decidewhat plants and animals were desirable as food, we might devisea classification based on tastiness, ease of capture, and the numberof edible parts each organism possessed. Early Hindu classificationsof organisms were designed according to these criteria.Such systems served the needs of the people who developed them,but are not adequate for formal scientific classification.Taxonomists today use biological classifications to expressthe evolutionary relationships of organisms. Taxa are expectedto be monophyletic, meaning that the taxon contains an ancestorand all descendants of that ancestor, and no other organisms(Figure 22.14). In other words, the taxon is an historical groupof related species, or a complete branch on the tree of life (aclade). Although biologists seek to describe and name onlymonophyletic taxa, the detailed phylogenetic informationneeded to do so is not always available. A group that does notinclude its common ancestor is called a polyphyletic group. Agroup that does not include all the descendants of a commonancestor is called a paraphyletic group.A true monophyletic group (i.e., a clade) can be removedfrom a phylogenetic tree by a single “cut” in the tree, as shownin Figure 22.14. Note that there are many monophyletic groupson any phylogenetic tree, and that these groups are successivelysmaller subsets of larger monophyletic groups. This hierarchyof biological taxa, with all of life as the most inclusive taxon andmany smaller taxa within larger taxa, down to the individualspecies, is the modern basis for biological classification.Virtually all taxonomists now agree that polyphyletic andparaphyletic groups are inappropriate as taxonomic units, becausethey do not correctly reflect evolutionary history. The classificationsused today still contain such groups because someorganisms have not been evaluated phylogenetically. As mistakesin prior classifications are detected, taxonomic names22.4 | HOW DOES PHYLOGENY RELATE TO CLASSIFICATION? 477(C) Mertensia virginica(A) Campanula rotundifolia(B) Endymion non-scriptus22.13 Many Different Plants Are Called Bluebells All three of thesedistantly related plant species are called “bluebells.” Binomial nomenclatureallows us to communicate exactly what is being described. (A)Campanula rotundifolia, found on the North American Great Plains,belongs to a larger group of bellflowers. (B) Endymion non-scriptus,English bluebell, is related to hyacinths. (C) Mertensia virginica, Virginiabluebell, belongs in a very different group of plants known as borages.are revised and polyphyletic and paraphyletic groups are eliminatedfrom the classifications.Several codes of biological nomenclaturegovern the use of scientific namesSeveral sets of explicit rules govern the use of scientific names.Biologists around the world follow these rules voluntarily to facilitatecommunication and dialogue. Although there may bedozens of common names for an organism in many different languages,the rules of biological nomenclature are designed so thatthere is only one correct scientific name for any single recognizedtaxon and (ideally) a given scientific name applies only to asingle taxon (that is, each scientific name is unique). Sometimesthe same species is named more than once (when more than onetaxonomist has taken up the task); the rules specify that the validname is the first name that was proposed. Ifthe same name is inadvertently given to twodifferent species, then a replacement namemust be given to the species that was namedsecond.Because of the historical separation of thefields of zoology, botany (including, originally,the study of fungi), and microbiology,different sets of taxonomic rules were developedfor each of these groups. Yet another setof rules for classifying viruses emerged later.This has resulted in many duplicated namesin groups that are governed by different setsof rules: Drosophila, for instance, is both agenus of fruit flies and a genus of fungi, andthere are species in both groups that haveidentical names. Until recently these duplicatednames caused little confusion, since traditionallybiologists who studied fruit flieswere unlikely to read the literature on fungi (and vice versa).Today, however, given the use of large, universal biological databases(such as GenBank, which includes DNA sequences fromacross all life), it is increasingly important that each taxon havea unique name. Taxonomists are now working to develop commonsets of rules that can be applied across all living organisms.22.4 RECAPBiologists organize and classify life by identifyingand naming monophyletic groups. Several sets ofrules govern the use of scientific names so that eachspecies and higher taxon can be identified andnamed unambiguously.• Explain the difference between monophyletic, paraphyletic,and polyphyletic groups. See p. 477 andFigure 22.14• Do you understand why biologists prefer monophyleticgroups in formal classifications? See p. 477Now that we have seen how evolution occurs and how phylogeniescan be used to study evolutionary relationships, we areready to consider the process of speciation. Speciation is whatleads to the splitting events on the tree of life, and is the processthat results in the millions of species that constitute biodiversity.478 CHAPTER 22 | RECONSTRUCTING AND USING PHYLOGENIESA paraphyletic group(pink box) includes thecommon ancestor andsome, but not all, of theancestor’s decendants.A polyphyletic group(yellow box) does notinclude the commonancestor of the group.A monophyletic group(blue box) includes thecommon ancestor andall descendants of thatancestor.A monophyletic groupcan be removed from thetree with a single “cut.”ABEFGJIHCDCommon ancestorof polyphyleticgroup E + F + GCommon ancestorof monophyleticgroup H + I + JCommon ancestorof paraphyleticgroup B + C + D22.14 Monophyletic, Polyphyletic, and Paraphyletic GroupsMonophyletic groups are the basis of biological taxa in modern classifications.Polyphyletic and paraphyletic groups do not accurately reflectevolutionary history.GO TO Web Activity 22.2 • Types of TaxayourBioPortal.com22.1 What Is Phylogeny?• Phylogeny is the history of descent of organisms from theircommon ancestor. Groups of evolutionarily related species arerepresented as related branches in a phylogenetic tree.Review Figure 22.2• A group of species that consists of all the evolutionary descendantsof a common ancestor is called a clade. Named cladesand species are called taxa.• Homologies are similar traits that have been inherited from acommon ancestor. Review Figure 22.4CHAPTER SUMMARY
22.1 What Is Phylogeny?• Phylogeny is the history of descent of organisms from theircommon ancestor. Groups of evolutionarily related species arerepresented as related branches in a phylogenetic tree.Review Figure 22.2• A group of species that consists of all the evolutionary descendantsof a common ancestor is called a clade. Named cladesand species are called taxa.• Homologies are similar traits that have been inherited from acommon ancestor. Review Figure 22.4
A trait that is shared by two or more taxa and is derivedthrough evolution from a common ancestral form is called asynapomorphy.• Similar traits may occur among species that do not result fromcommon ancestry. Convergent evolution and evolutionaryreversals can give rise to such traits, which are calledhomoplasies.22.2 How Are Phylogenetic Trees Constructed?SEE WEB ACTIVITY 22.1• Phylogenetic trees can be inferred from synapomorphies usingthe principle of parsimony. Review Figure 22.5• Sources of phylogenetic information include morphology,patterns of development, the fossil record, behavioral traits,and molecular traits such as DNA and protein sequences.• Phylogenetic trees can also be inferred with maximum likelihoodmethods, which calculate the probability that a particulartree will have generated the observed data.22.3 How Do Biologists Use Phylogenetic Trees?• Phylogenetic trees are used to reconstruct the past and understandthe origin of traits. Review Figure 22.8• Phylogenetic trees are used to make appropriate evolutionarycomparisons among living organisms.• Biologists can use phylogenetic trees to reconstruct ancestralstates. SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 22.1• Phylogenetic trees may include estimates of times of divergenceof lineages determined by molecular clock analysis.Review Figure 22.1222.4 How Does Phylogeny Relate to Classification?• Taxonomists organize biological diversity on the basis of evolutionaryhistory.• Taxa in modern classifications are expected to be monophyleticgroups. Paraphyletic and polyphyletic groups are not consideredappropriate taxonomic units. Review Figure 22.14, WEBACTIVITY 22.2• Several sets of rules govern the use of scientific names, with thegoal of providing unique and universal names for biological taxa.