The Nazis were infamous for plundering the art collectionsof Europe during World War II, but why didthey also spirit away a collection of seeds? The answerlies in the power and promise offered by the scientificunderstanding of genetics, the science of heredity.A key step in the rise of human civilizations was the developmentof agriculture—the cultivation of plants andanimals for food and other human needs. Some 10,000years ago, early farmers began preferentially cultivatingplants with certain traits (e.g., that survived drought better).Over time, the cultivated varieties (cultivars) becamequite different from their wild relatives, an example ofevolution by selection. In this case, it was not the result ofnatural selection (see Chapter 21), but of artificial selectionby the practices of ancient farmers.Early in the twentieth century, Russian scientist NicolaiVavilov began systematically collecting seeds from thousandsof cultivars and their wild relatives. He convincedLenin, the leader of the new Communist regime, that hisseed collection would be useful in breeding crops thatwould be more productive in the difficult Russian climate.Lenin put Vavilov in charge of a large research institute.But when Lenin died in 1929, his successor, Josef Stalin,had little interest in science.A politically ambitious student of Vavilov’s, Trofim Lysenko,proposed to Stalin that favorable characteristics inplants could be rendered heritable by manipulating theparent plant’s phenotype (physical state). This idea was atodds with what scientists knew about heredity andevolution, but it appealed to Stalin’s political ideology.Stalin put Lysenko in charge of Vavilov’s institute and sentVavilov to a prison camp, where he died in 1943. Vavilov’sunique seed collection—a gene bank—was ignored.Meanwhile, in Germany, the Nazi leader HeinrichHimmler learned of the collection and was convinced thatVavilov’s seeds could be a valuable key to providing bettercrops for the expanding German empire. Himmler putHeinz Brücher, a young SS officer with a doctorate inbotany, in charge of obtaining the seeds. When the Germanarmy invaded Russia, Brücher’s team removed thousandsof seeds to a castle in Austria that already housed aseed collection Brücher had brought from Tibet.Brücher’s aim was to cross-breed plants from Tibet withplants from Russia to develop new crops that would growwell at high elevations and in cold climates; these planscame to a halt with the end of World War II. However,Genetic piracy12Genetics Pioneer Collecting thousands of crop plant varietiesfrom all over the world, Nikolai Vavilov laid the foundations fortheories about the genetic origins of modern crops.What Are the Mendelian Laws 12.1 of Inheritance?Much of the early study of biological inheritance was done withplants and animals of economic importance. Records show thatpeople were deliberately cross-breeding date palm trees andhorses as early as 5,000 years ago. By the early nineteenth centuryplant breeding was widespread, especially for ornamentalflowers such as tulips. Plant breeders of that time were operatingunder two key assumptions about how inheritance worked.Only one of those assumptions turned out to be supported byexperimental evidence.• Each parent contributes equally to offspring (supported by experiments).In the 1770s, the German botanist Josef GottliebKölreuter studied the offspring of reciprocal crosses, inwhich plants were crossed (mated with each other) in bothdirections. For example, in one cross, plants with whiteflowers were used as males to pollinate related plants withred flowers. In the complementary crosses, the red-floweredplants were used as males in crosses with the whiteflowered plants. In Kölreuter’s studies, such reciprocalcrosses always gave identical results, showing that bothparents contributed equally to the offspring.• Hereditary determinants blend in offspring (not supported byexperiments). Kölreuter and others proposed that therewere hereditary determinants in the egg and sperm cells.When these determinants came together in a single cell aftermating, they were believed to blend together. If a plantwith one form of a character (say, red flowers) was crossedwith a plant with a different form of that character (blueflowers), the offspring would have a blended combinationof the two parents’ characteristics (purple flowers). Accordingto the blending theory, once heritable elements werecombined, they could not be separated again (like inks ofdifferent colors mixed together). The red and blue hereditarydeterminants were thought to be forever blended intothe new purple one.In his experiments in the 1860s, Gregor Mendel confirmed thefirst of these two assumptions but refuted the second.Mendel brought new methods to experimentson inheritanceGregor Mendel was an Austrian monk, not an academic scientist(Figure 12.1). He was well qualified, however, to under-IN THIS CHAPTER we will discuss how the units of inheritance—genes—are transmitted from generation togeneration. We will show that many of the rules that governinheritance can be explained by the behavior of chromosomesduring meiosis. We will describe the interactionsof genes with one another and with the environment, andwe will see how the specific positions of genes on chromosomesaffect diversity.Brücher ignored a superior’s order to blow up the castle,thus preserving most of Vavilov’s seed bank. The collectionwas returned to Russia, where it continued to beused in breeding programs.The ideas of Vavilov and the breeding plans ofBrücher depended on the principles of genetics, a scienceborn in an Austrian monastery in the 1860s, whereGregor Mendel performed—and, importantly, correctlyinterpreted—experiments on pea plants. It was almost50 years before the scientific community recognized thesignificance of Mendel’s work, but once that recognitionwas achieved, science and medicine sprang forward at arapid pace.CHAPTER OUTLINE12.1 What Are the Mendelian Laws of Inheritance?12.2 How Do Alleles Interact?12.3 How Do Genes Interact?12.4 What Is the Relationship between Genes andChromosomes?12.5 What Are the Effects of Genes Outside theNucleus?12.6 How Do Prokaryotes Transmit Genes?Hardy Grain Early geneticists hoped to increase food productionby breeding crop varieties adapted to harsh climates(such as those in Tibet) with varieties with other desirable traits.take scientific investigations. In 1850 he failed an examinationfor a teaching certificate in natural science, so he undertookintensive studies in physics, chemistry, mathematics, and variousaspects of biology at the University of Vienna. His studiesin physics and mathematics under the famous physicistChristian Doppler strongly influenced his use of experimentaland quantitative methods in his studies of heredity, and itwas those quantitative experiments that were key to his successfuldeductions.Over the seven years he spent working out some principlesof inheritance in plants, Mendel made crosses with hundredsof plants and noted the resulting characteristics of 24,034 progeny.Analysis of his meticulously gathered data suggested tohim a new theory of how inheritance might work. He presentedthis theory in a public lecture in 1865 and a detailed written publicationin 1866. Mendel’s paper appeared in a journal that wasreceived by 120 libraries, and he sent reprinted copies (of whichhe had obtained 40) to several distinguished scholars, includingCharles Darwin. However, his theory was not readily accepted.In fact, it was mostly ignored.One reason Mendel’s paper received so little attention wasthat most prominent biologists of his time were not in the habitof thinking in mathematical terms, even the simple termsMendel used. Even Charles Darwin, whose theory of evolutionby natural selection was predicated on heritable variationsamong individuals, failed to understand the significance ofMendel’s findings. In fact, Darwin performed breeding experimentson snapdragons that were similar to Mendel’s work withpeas. Although Darwin’s data were similar to Mendel’s, hefailed to question the assumption that parental contributionsblend in the offspring.By 1900, the events of meiosis had been observed and described,and Mendel’s discoveries burst into sudden prominenceas a result of independent experiments by three plant geneticists:Hugo DeVries, Carl Correns, and Erich von Tschermak.Each carried out crossing experiments, each published his principalfindings in 1900, and each cited Mendel’s 1866 paper.These three men realized that chromosomes and meiosis provideda physical explanation for the theory that Mendel hadproposed to explain the data from his crosses.That Mendel was able to achieve his remarkable insights beforethe discovery of genes and meiosis was largely due to hisexperimental methods. His work is a definitive example of extensivepreparation, meticulous execution, and imaginative yetlogical interpretation. He was also fortunate in his choice of experimentalsubjects. Let’s take a closer look at these experimentsand the conclusions and hypotheses that emerged.Mendel devised a careful research planMendel chose to study the common garden pea because of itsease of cultivation, the feasibility of controlled pollination, and238 CHAPTER 12 | INHERITANCE, GENES, AND CHROMOSOMES12.1 Gregor Mendel and His Garden The Austrian monk GregorMendel (left) did his groundbreaking genetics experiments in a gardenat the monastery at Brno, in what is now the Czech Republic.the availability of varieties with contrasting traits. He controlledpollination, and thus fertilization, of his parent plants by manuallymoving pollen from one plant to another (Figure 12.2).Thus he knew the parentage of the offspring in his experiments.The pea plants Mendel studied produce male and female sexorgans and gametes—sex cells such as eggs and sperm—in thesame flower. If untouched, they naturally selfpollinate—that is, the female organ of eachflower receives pollen from the male organs ofthe same flower. Mendel made use of this naturalphenomenon in some of his experiments.Mendel began by examining different varietiesof peas in a search for heritable charactersand traits suitable for study:• Acharacter is an observable physical feature,such as flower color.• Atrait is a particular form of a character,such as purple flowers or white flowers.• Aheritable trait is one that is passed fromparent to offspring.Mendel looked for characters with well-defined,contrasting alternative traits, such aspurple flowers versus white flowers. Furthermore,these traits had to be true-breeding,meaning that the observed trait was the onlyform present for many generations. In otherwords, if they were true-breeding, peas withwhite flowers would give rise only to progenywith white flowers when self-pollinated orcrossed with one another for repeated generations.Similarly, tall plants bred with other tallplants would produce only tall progeny.Mendel isolated each of his true-breedingstrains by repeated inbreeding (done by crossingsibling plants that were seemingly identicalor by allowing individuals to self-pollinate)and selection. In most of his work, Mendel concentratedon the seven pairs of contrastingtraits shown in Table 12.1 (left side). His use oftrue-breeding strains for experimental crosseswas an essential feature of his work.Mendel then performed his crosses in thefollowing manner:• He removed the anthers from the flowers ofone parental strain so that it couldn’t selfpollinate.Then he collected pollen from theother parental strain and placed it on thestigmas of flowers of the strain whose anthershad been removed. The plants providingand receiving the pollen were theparental generation, designated P.• In due course, seeds formed and wereplanted. The seeds and the resultingnew plants constituted the first filial generation,or F1. (The word “filial” refers to therelationship between offspring and parents,from the Latin, filius, “son.”) Mendeland his assistants examined each F1 plantto see which traits it bore and thenrecorded the number of F1 plantsexpressing each trait.12.1 | WHAT ARE THE MENDELIAN LAWS OF INHERITANCE? 23912.2 A Controlled Cross between Two PlantsPlants were widely used in early genetic studies because it is easy to control whichindividuals mate with which. Mendel used the garden pea (Pisum sativum) in manyof his experiments.TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE1 Pollen is transferred from anthersof one flower to the stigma ofanother flower whose anthershave been snipped off.2 The resulting seeds are allowedto grow into new plants.3 Analysis of physical characteristicsof the offspring (see Table 12.1)over 2 generations providesevidence of hereditary transmissionfrom both parents.The stigma is where thepollen lands.Anthers at the tip of thestamen are the sites ofpollen production.Stamens are the malesex organs.The ovary contains theovules.Anatomy of a pea flower(shown in long section)Pea flowercross-pollinationPea podParent plantPollenParent plantSeeds(peas)• In some experiments the F1 plants were allowed to self-pollinateand produce a second filial generation, the F2. Again,each F2 plant was characterized and counted.Mendel’s first experiments involvedmonohybrid crossesThe term hybrid refers to the offspring of crosses between organismsdiffering in one or more traits. In Mendel’s first experiment,he crossed two true-breeding parental (P) lineages differing injust one trait, producing monohybrids in the F1 generation. Hesubsequently planted the F1 seeds and allowed the resultingplants to self-pollinate to produce the F2 generation. This techniqueis referred to as a monohybrid cross, even though in thiscase, the monohybrid plants were not literally crossed, but selfpollinated.Mendel performed the same experiment for all seven peatraits. His method is illustrated in Figure 12.3, using the seedshape trait as an example. He took pollen from pea plants of atrue-breeding strain with wrinkled seeds and placed it on thestigmas of flowers of a true-breeding strain with spherical seeds.He also performed the reciprocal cross, in which the parentalsource of each trait is reversed: he placed pollen from the spherical-seeded strain on the stigmas of flowers of the strain withwrinkled seeds. In all cases, the F1 seeds were spherical—it wasas if the wrinkled seed trait had disappeared completely.The following spring, Mendel grew 253 F1 plants from thesespherical seeds. Each of the F1 plants was allowed to self-pollinateto produce F2 seeds. In all, 7,324 F2 seeds were produced,of which 5,474 were spherical, and 1,850 wrinkled (see Figure12.3 and Table 12.1).Mendel observed that the wrinkled seed trait was never expressedin the F1 generation, even though it reappeared in theF2 generation. This led him to conclude that the spherical seedtrait was dominant to the wrinkled seed trait, which he calledrecessive. In each of the other six pairs of traits Mendel studied,one trait proved to be dominant over the other trait. Thetrait that disappears in the F1 generation of a true-breeding crossis always the recessive trait.Mendel also observed that the ratio of the two traits in the F2generation was always the same—approximately 3:1—for eachof the seven pea-plant traits that he studied. That is, three-fourthsof the F2 generation showed the dominant trait and one-fourthshowed the recessive trait (see Table 12.1). For example, Mendel’smonohybrid cross for seed shape produced a ratio of 5,474:1,850= 2.96:1. The two reciprocal crosses in the parental generationyielded similar outcomes in the F2; it did not matter which parentcontributed the pollen, just as Kölreuter had shown.REJECTION OF THE BLENDING THEORY Mendel’s monohybridcross experiments showed that inheritance cannot be the resultof a blending phenomenon. According to the blending theory,Mendel’s F1 seeds should have had an appearance that was intermediatebetween those of the two parents—for example, theF1 seeds from the cross between strains with wrinkled and sphericalseeds should have been slightly wrinkled. Furthermore, theblending theory offered no explanation for the reappearance ofthe recessive trait in the F2 seeds after its absence in the F1 seeds.240 CHAPTER 12 | INHERITANCE, GENES, AND CHROMOSOMESTABLE 12.1Mendel’s Results from Monohybrid CrossesPARENTAL GENERATION PHENOTYPES F2 GENERATION PHENOTYPESDOMINANT RECESSIVE DOMINANT RECESSIVE TOTAL RATIOSpherical seeds × Wrinkled seeds 5,474 1,850 7,324 2.96:1Yellow seeds × Green seeds 6,022 2,001 8,023 3.01:1Purple flowers × White flowers 705 224 929 3.15:1Inflated pods × Constricted pods 882 299 1,181 2.95:1Green pods × Yellow pods 428 152 580 2.82:1Axial flowers × Terminal flowers 651 207 858 3.14:1Tall stems × Dwarf stems 787 277 1,064 2.84:1(1 m) (0.3 m)SUPPORT FOR THE PARTICULATE THEORY Given the absence ofblending and the reappearance of the recessive seed traits in theF2 generations of his monohybrid cross experiments, Mendelproposed that the units responsible for the inheritance of specifictraits are present as discrete particles that occur in pairs andsegregate (separate) from one another during the formation ofgametes. According to his particulate theory, the units of inheritanceretain their integrity in the presence of other units.Mendel concluded that each pea plant has two units (particles)of inheritance for each character, one from each parent. Wenow use the term diploid to refer to the two copies of each heritableunit in an organism. Mendel proposed that during theproduction of gametes, only one of these paired units is givento a gamete. We now use the term haploid to refer to the singleset of heritable units. Mendel concluded that while each gametecontains one unit, the resulting zygote contains two, because itis produced by the fusion of two gametes. This conclusion is thecore of Mendel’s model of inheritance. Mendel’s unit of inheritanceis now called a gene. The totality of all the genes of an organismis that organism’s genome.Mendel reasoned that in his experiments, the two true-breedingparent plants had different forms of the gene affecting a particularcharacter, such as seed shape (although he did not use theterm “gene”). The true-breeding spherical-seeded parent had twogenes of the same form, which we will call S, and the parent withwrinkled seeds had two copies of an alternative form of the gene,which we will call s. The SS parent would produce gametes havinga single S gene, and the ss parent would produce gameteshaving a single s gene. The cross producing the F1 generationwould donate an S from one parent and an s from the other toeach seed; the F1 offspring would thus be Ss. We say that S isdominant over s because the trait specified by s is not evident—is not expressed—when both forms of the gene are present.Alleles are different forms of a geneThe different forms of a gene (S and s in this case) are calledalleles. Individuals that are true-breeding for a trait contain twocopies of the same allele. For example, all the individuals in apopulation of true-breeding peas with wrinkled seeds musthave the allele pair ss; if the dominant S allele were present,some of the plants would produce spherical seeds.We say that the individuals that produce wrinkled seeds arehomozygous for the allele s, meaning that they have two copiesof the same allele (ss). Some peas with spherical seeds—the oneswith the genotype SS—are also homozygous. However, notall plants with spherical seeds have the SS genotype. Somespherical-seeded plants, like Mendel’s F1, are heterozygous: theyhave two different alleles of the gene in question (in this case,Ss). An individual that is homozygous for a character is sometimescalled a homozygote; an individual that is heterozygousfor a character is termed a heterozygote.As a somewhat more complex example of inheritance, let’sconsider three gene pairs. An individual with the three genesand alleles AABbcc is homozygous for the A and C genes, becauseit has two A alleles and two c alleles, but heterozygousfor the B gene, because it contains the B and b alleles.12.1 | WHAT ARE THE MENDELIAN LAWS OF INHERITANCE? 241Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESIS When two strains of peas with contrastingtraits are bred, their characteristics areirreversibly blended in succeeding generations.CONCLUSIONMETHODINVESTIGATING LIFE12.3 Mendel’s Monohybrid ExperimentsMendel performed crosses with pea plants and carefullyanalyzed the outcomes to show that genetic determinantsare particulate.2P plants arecross-pollinated.1Plant a sphericalF1 seed.3 Allow F1 plantsto self-pollinate.4 F2 seeds: 3/4 are spherical,1/4 are wrinkled (3:1 ratio).F1 seeds areall spherical.Parental (P) seedsParental (P) plantsPlant a true-breedingspherical seedPlant a true-breedingwrinkled seedF1 seedsGrowthPollenGrowthPollenF2 seeds from F1 plantF1 plantRESULTSThe hypothesis is rejected. There is noirreversible blending of characteristics, anda recessive trait can reappear in succeedinggenerations.The physical appearance of an organism is its phenotype.Mendel correctly supposed the phenotype to be the result ofthe genotype, or genetic constitution, of the organism showingthe phenotype. Spherical seeds and wrinkled seeds are twophenotypes, which are the result of three genotypes: the wrinkledseed phenotype is produced by the genotype ss, whereasthe spherical seed phenotype is produced by either of the genotypesSS or Ss.Mendel’s first law says that the two copies ofa gene segregateHow does Mendel’s model of inheritance explain the ratios oftraits seen in the F1 and F2 generations? Consider first the F1,in which all progeny have the spherical seed phenotype. Accordingto Mendel’s model, when any individual produces gametes,the two copies of a gene separate, so that each gamete receives only onecopy. This is Mendel’s first law, the law of segregation. Thus,every individual in the offspring from a cross between the Pgeneration parents inherits one gene copy from each parent, andhas the genotype Ss (Figure 12.4).Now let’s consider the composition of the F2 generation. Halfof the gametes produced by the F1 generation have the S alleleand the other half the s allele. Since both SS and Ss plants producespherical seeds while ss plants produce wrinkled seeds, inthe F2 generation there are three ways to get a spherical-seededplant (SS, Ss, or sS), but only one way to get a plant with wrinkledseeds (ss). Therefore, we predict a 3:1 ratio, remarkablyclose to the values Mendel found experimentally for all sevenof the traits he compared (see Table 12.1).The allele combinations that will result from a cross can bepredicted using a Punnett square, a method devised in 1905by the British geneticist Reginald Crundall Punnett. This deviceensures that we consider all possible combinations of gameteswhen calculating expected genotype frequencies. A Punnettsquare looks like this:It is a simple grid with all possible male gamete (haploid sperm)genotypes shown along the top and all possible female gamete(haploid egg) genotypes along the left side. The grid is completedby filling in each square with the diploid genotype thatcan be generated from each combination of gametes (see Figure12.4). In this example, to fill in the top right square, we put inthe S from the egg (female gamete) and the s from the pollen(male gamete), yielding Ss.Mendel did not live to see his theory placed on a soundphysical footing with the discoveries of chromosomes andDNA. Genes are now known to be regions of the DNA moleculesin chromosomes. More specifically, a gene is a sequenceof DNA that resides at a particular site on a chromosome, calleda locus (plural loci). Genes are expressed in the phenotypemostly as proteins with particular functions, such as enzymes.So, in many cases, a dominant gene can be thought of as a regionof DNA that is expressed as a functional protein, while arecessive gene typically expresses a nonfunctional protein, ora protein whose function is overshadowed by the dominantform. Mendel arrived at his law of segregation with no knowledgeof chromosomes or meiosis, but today we can picture thedifferent alleles of a gene segregating as the chromosomes separateduring meiosis I (Figure 12.5).Mendel verified his hypothesis by performinga test crossMendel set out to test his hypothesis that there were two possibleallele combinations (SS and Ss) in the spherical-seeded F1generation. He did so by performing a test cross, which is away of finding out whether an individual showing a dominanttrait is homozygous or heterozygous. In a test cross, the individualin question is crossed with an individual that is knownto be homozygous for the recessive trait—an easy individual toidentify, because all individuals with the recessive phenotypeare homozygous for the recessive trait.FemalegametesMalegametesSsS s242 CHAPTER 12 | INHERITANCE, GENES, AND CHROMOSOMESA plant homozygousfor S is crossed with onehomozygous for s.14325The parental gametescombine to produce F1plants with the Ss genotypeand a spherical seedphenotype.The heterozygous F1 plantproduces haploid gametesand self-pollinates.Different combinations ofalleles from each parentproduce two different seedphenotypes in the F2generation.The seed phenotypesappear in a 3:1 ratio.Parental (P)generationSS ssS SS ssGametes s sF1 generationF2 generation×Ss SsS s Gametes S s×SpermEggsSSS SsSs ssS SsSpermEggssSs SsSs Ss12.4 Mendel’s Explanation of Inheritance Mendel concluded thatinheritance depends on discrete factors from each parent that do notblend in the offspring.4321 This site on thechromosome is thelocus of the genewith the alleles S ands, for seed shape.Before meiosis I,each of thehomologouschromosomesreplicates.At the end ofmeiosis I, the twochromosomesare segregatedinto separatedaughter cells.At the end of meiosis II, each haploid gamete containsone member of each pair of homologous chromosomes,and thus one allele for each gene.S sMeiotic interphaseHomologouschromosomesMeiosis IMeiosis IIFour haploid gametesS Ss sSsSsS SS sS S s sS Ss ss sDiploid parentSsFor the seed shape gene that we have been considering, therecessive homozygote used for the test cross is ss. The individualbeing tested may be described initially as S_ because we donot yet know the identity of the second allele. We can predicttwo possible results:• If the individual being tested is homozygous dominant(SS), all offspring of the test cross will be Ss and show thedominant trait (spherical seeds) (Figure 12.6, left).12.1 | WHAT ARE THE MENDELIAN LAWS OF INHERITANCE? 24312.5 Meiosis Accounts for the Segregation of Alleles AlthoughMendel had no knowledge of chromosomes or meiosis, we now knowthat a pair of alleles resides on homologous chromosomes, and thatthose alleles segregate during meiosis.HYPOTHESIS The progeny of a test cross can reveal whetheran organism is homozygous or heterozygous.CONCLUSION CONCLUSIONThe plantbeing tested isheterozygous.METHODINVESTIGATING LIFE12.6 Homozygous or Heterozygous?An individual with a dominant phenotype may have either ahomozygous or a heterozygous genotype. The test crossdetermines which.RESULTSTest spherical peas ofundetermined genotype…If the plant being testedis homozygous…If the plant being testedis heterozygous……by crossing themwith wrinkled peas witha known genotype(homozygous recessive).Ss×SS×ss ssS_×ssS S s s Gametes S s s ss sSSpermEggsSSs SsSs Sss ssSpermEggsSSs Ssss ssFURTHER INVESTIGATIONS: What would be the result if the"tester" plant was homozygous forspherical instead of wrinkled seeds?Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations,discussions, and relevant links for allINVESTIGATING LIFE figures.The plantbeing tested ishomozygous.…then all progeny will showthe dominant phenotype(spherical).…then half the seeds from thecross will be wrinkled, and halfwill be spherical.1a1b2a 2b3a 3bGO TO Web Activity 12.1 • Homozygous or Heterozygous?yourBioPortal.com• If the individual being tested is heterozygous (Ss), then approximatelyhalf of the offspring of the test cross will beheterozygous and show the dominant trait (Ss), but theother half will be homozygous for, and will show, the recessivetrait (ss) (Figure 12.6, right).Mendel obtained results consistent with both of these predictions;thus Mendel’s hypothesis accurately predicted the resultsof his test crosses.With his first hypothesis confirmed, Mendel went on to askanother question: How do different pairs of genes behave incrosses when considered together?Mendel’s second law says that copies of differentgenes assort independentlyConsider an organism that is heterozygous for two genes (SsYy),in which the S and Y alleles came from its mother, and the s andy alleles came from its father. When this organism produces gametes,do the alleles of maternal origin (S and Y) go together inone gamete and those of paternal origin (s and y) in another gamete?Or can a single gamete receive one maternal and one paternalallele, S and y (or s and Y)?To answer these questions, Mendel performed another seriesof experiments. He began with peas that differed in two seedcharacters: seed shape and seed color. One true-breedingparental strain produced only spherical, yellow seeds (SSYY),and the other produced only wrinkled, green ones (ssyy). A crossbetween these two strains produced an F1 generation in whichall the plants were SsYy. Because the S and Y alleles are dominant,the F1 seeds were all spherical and yellow.Mendel continued this experiment into the F2 generation byperforming a dihybrid cross (a cross between individuals thatare identical double heterozygotes) with the F1 plants (althoughagain, in this case, this was done by allowing the F1 plants toself-pollinate). There are two possible ways in which such doublyheterozygous plants might produce gametes, as Mendelsaw it (remember that he had never heard of chromosomes ormeiosis):1. The alleles could maintain the associations they had in the parentalgeneration (that is, they could be linked).In this case, the F1 plants should produce two types of gametes(SY and sy), and the F2 progeny resulting from self-pollinationof the F1 plants should consist of three times as many plantsbearing spherical, yellow seeds as plants with wrinkled, greenseeds. If such results were obtained, there might be no reasonto suppose that two different genes regulated seed shape andseed color, because spherical seeds would always be yellow andwrinkled ones always green.2. The segregation of S from s could be independent of the segregationof Y from y (that is, the two genes could be unlinked).In this case, four kinds of gametes should be produced by theF1 in equal numbers: SY, Sy, sY, and sy. When these gametescombine at random, they should produce an F2 having nine differentgenotypes. The F2 progeny could have any of three possiblegenotypes for shape (SS, Ss, or ss) and any of three possiblegenotypes for color (YY, Yy, or yy). The combined nine genotypesshould produce four phenotypes (spherical yellow, sphericalgreen, wrinkled yellow, wrinkled green). Putting these possibilitiesinto a Punnett square, we can predict that these fourphenotypes will occur in a ratio of 9:3:3:1 (Figure 12.7).Mendel’s dihybrid crosses supported the second prediction:four different phenotypes appeared in the F2 generation in a ratioof about 9:3:3:1. The parental traits appeared in new combinations(spherical green and wrinkled yellow) in some progeny.Such new combinations are called recombinant phenotypes.These results led Mendel to the formulation of what is nowknown as Mendel’s second law: alleles of different genes assort independentlyof one another during gamete formation. That is, the segregationof gene A alleles is independent of the segregation ofgene B alleles. We now know that this law of independent assortmentis not as universal as the law of segregation, becauseit applies to genes located on separate chromosomes, but not tothose located near one another on the same chromosome, as wewill see in Section 12.4. However, it is correct to say that chromosomessegregate independently during the formation of gametes,and so do any two genes on separate homologous chromosomepairs (Figure 12.8).244 CHAPTER 12 | INHERITANCE, GENES, AND CHROMOSOMESWhen F1 plants self-pollinate, thegametes combine randomly toproduce an F2 generation with fourphenotypes in a 9:3:3:1 ratio.Parental (P)generation×ssyySsYyF1 generationF2 generationSY Sy sY syGametesSSYYSSYYSSYySsYYSsYySYSysYsySSYySSyySsYySsyySsYY SsYySsYy SsyyssYY ssYyssYy ssyySY Sy sY sySpermEggs12.7 Independent Assortment The 16 possible combinations ofgametes in this dihybrid cross result in nine different genotypes. BecauseS and Y are dominant over s and y, respectively, the nine genotypesresult in four phenotypes in a ratio of 9:3:3:1. These results show that thetwo genes segregate independently.When homologs line up oneither side of the metaphaseplate during metaphase I,where S and s go…1…does not determinewhere Y and y go.2Meiosis continues inone of two orientationsYySsYS ysDiploid parentSsYyFour haploid gamete genotypesSY, sy, Sy, sYSYY yySsssY ys SySSY syYsyYsYsySySS YOne of Mendel’s major contributions to the science of geneticswas his use of the rules of statistics and probability to analyzehis masses of data from hundreds of crosses resulting inthousands of progeny plants. His mathematical analyses revealedclear patterns in the data that allowed him to formulatehis hypotheses. Ever since his work became widely recognized,geneticists have used simple mathematics in the same ways thatMendel did.Punnett squares or probability calculations:A choice of methodsPunnett squares provide one way of solving problems in genetics,and probability calculations provide another. Many peoplefind it easier to use the principles of probability, some ofwhich are intuitive and familiar. For example, when we flip acoin, the law of probability states that it has an equal probabilityof landing “heads” or “tails.” For any given toss of a fair coin,the probability of heads is independent of what happened in allthe previous tosses. Arun of ten straight heads implies nothingabout the next toss. No “law of averages” increases the likelihoodthat the next toss will come up tails, and no “momentum”makes an eleventh occurrence of heads anymore likely. On the eleventh toss, the odds ofgetting heads are still 50-50.The basic conventions of probability aresimple:• If an event is absolutely certain to happen,its probability is 1.• If it cannot possibly happen, its probabilityis 0.• All other events have a probability between0 and 1.Acoin toss results in heads approximately halfthe time, so the probability of heads is 1⁄2—asis the probability of tails.MULTIPLYING PROBABILITIES How can we determinethe probability of two independentevents happening together? If two coins (saya penny and a dime) are tossed, each acts independentlyof the other. What is the probabilityof both coins coming up heads? In half of the tosses, thepenny comes up heads; of that fraction, the dime also comes upheads half of the time. Therefore, the joint probability of bothcoins coming up heads is half of one-half, or 1⁄2 × 1⁄2 = 1⁄4. So, tofind the joint probability of independent events, we multiplythe probabilities of the individual events (Figure 12.9). Howdoes this method apply to genetics?To see how joint probability is calculated in genetics problems,let’s consider the monohybrid cross. The probabilitiesof two events are involved: gamete formation and randomfertilization.Calculating the probabilities involved in gamete formationis straightforward. Ahomozygote can produce only one type ofgamete, so, for example, the probability of an SS individual producinggametes with the genotype S is 1. The heterozygote Ssproduces S gametes with a probability of 1⁄2 and s gametes witha probability of 1⁄2.Now let’s see how the rules of probability might predict theratio of the F2 progeny of the cross shown in Figure 12.4. Theseplants are obtained by the self-pollination of F1 plants of genotypeSs. The probability that an F2 plant will have the genotypeSS must be 1⁄2 × 1⁄2 = 1⁄4, because there is a 50-50 chance that the12.1 | WHAT ARE THE MENDELIAN LAWS OF INHERITANCE? 24512.8 Meiosis Accounts for Independent Assortment of Alleles Wenow know that copies of genes on different chromosomes are segregatedindependently during metaphase I of meiosis. Thus a parent of genotypeSsYy can form gametes with four different genotypes.GO TO Animated Tutorial 12.1 • Independent Assortment of AllelesyourBioPortal.comsperm will have the genotype S, and an independent chance of50-50 that the egg will have the genotype S. Similarly, the probabilityof ss offspring is also 1⁄2 × 1⁄2 = 1⁄4.ADDING PROBABILITIES How are probabilities calculated whenan event can happen in different ways? The probability of anF2 plant getting an S allele from the sperm and an s allele fromthe egg is 1⁄4. In addition, there is a probability of 1⁄4 that theF2 plant will get an s from the sperm and an S from the egg,resulting in the same genotype of Ss. The probability of anevent that can occur in two or more different ways is the sumof the individual probabilities of those ways. Thus the probabilitythat an F2 plant will be a heterozygote is equal to the sumof the probabilities of the two ways of forming a heterozygote:1⁄4 + 1⁄4 = 1⁄2 (see Figure 12.9). The three genotypes are thereforeexpected to occur in the ratio 1⁄4 SS : 1⁄2 Ss : 1⁄4 ss, resultingin the 1:2:1 ratio of genotypes and the 3:1 ratio of phenotypesseen in Figure 12.4.PROBABILITY AND THE DIHYBRID CROSS If F1 plants heterozygousfor two independent characters self-pollinate, the resulting F2plants express four different phenotypes. The proportions ofthese phenotypes are easily determined by probability calculations.Let’s see how this works for the experiment shown inFigure 12.7.Using the principles described above, we can calculate thatthe probability that an F2 seed will be spherical is 3⁄4. This isfound by adding the probability of an Ss heterozygote (1⁄2) andthe probability of an SS homozygote (1⁄4) = a total of 3⁄4. By thesame reasoning, the probability that a seed will be yellow is also3⁄4. The two characters are determined by separate genes andare independent of each other, so the joint probability that a seedwill be both spherical and yellow is 3⁄4 × 3⁄4 = 9⁄16. What is theprobability of F2 seeds being both wrinkled and yellow? Theprobability of being yellow is again 3⁄4; the probability of beingwrinkled is 1⁄2 × 1⁄2 = 1⁄4. The joint probability that a seed willbe both wrinkled and yellow is 1⁄4 × 3⁄4 = 3⁄16.The same probability applies, for similar reasons, to spherical,green F2 seeds. Finally, the probability that F2 seeds willbe both wrinkled and green is 1⁄4 × 1⁄4 = 1⁄16. Looking at all fourphenotypes, we see that they are expected to occur in the ratioof 9:3:3:1.Probability calculations and Punnett squares give the sameresults. Learn to do genetics problems both ways, and then decidewhich method you prefer.Mendel’s laws can be observed in human pedigreesHow are Mendel’s laws of inheritance applied to humans?Mendel worked out his laws by performing many plannedcrosses and counting many offspring. Neither of these approachesis possible with humans, so human geneticists rely onpedigrees: family trees that show the occurrence of phenotypes(and alleles) in several generations of related individuals.Because humans have such small numbers of offspring, humanpedigrees do not show the clear proportions of offspringphenotypes that Mendel saw in his pea plants. For example,when a man and a woman who are both heterozygous for arecessive allele (say, Aa) have children together, each child hasa 25 percent probability of being a recessive homozygote (aa).Thus if this couple were to have dozens of children, one-fourthof them would be recessive homozygotes. But the offspring ofa single couple are likely to be too few to show the exact onefourthproportion. In a family with only two children, for example,both could easily be aa (or Aa, or AA).What if we want to know whether a recessive allele is carriedby both the mother and the father? Human geneticists assumethat any allele that causes an abnormal phenotype (suchas a genetic disease) is rare in the human population. Thismeans that if some members of a given family have a rare allele,it is highly unlikely that an outsider marrying into that familywill have that same rare allele.Human geneticists may wish to know whether a particularrare allele that causes an abnormal phenotype is dominant orrecessive. Figure 12.10A is a pedigree showing the pattern of246 CHAPTER 12 | INHERITANCE, GENES, AND CHROMOSOMES12Two coin tosses are independent events,each with an outcome probability (P) of 1/2.This outcome is theresult of twoindependent events.The joint probabilityis 1/2 x 1/2 = 1/4(multiplication rule).Because there are two ways to arrive at aheterozygote, we add the probabilities of the twoindividual outcomes: 1/4 + 1/4 = 1/2 (addition rule).S ssSP = 1/2 P = 1/2P = 1/2P = 1/21/2 × 1/2 = 1/4 1/2 × 1/2 = 1/41/2 × 1/2 = 1/4 1/2 × 1/2 = 1/4sSsssSSS12.9 Using Probability Calculations in Genetics Like the results of a coin toss, theprobability of any given combination of alleles appearing in the offspring of a cross can beobtained by multiplying the probabilities of each event. Since a heterozygote can be formedin two ways, these two probabilities are added together.inheritance of a rare dominant allele. The following are thekey features to look for in such a pedigree:• Every affected person has an affected parent.• About half of the offspring of an affected parent are alsoaffected.• The phenotype occurs equally in both sexes.Compare this pattern with the one shown in Figure 12.10B,which is typical for the inheritance of a rare recessive allele:• Affected people usually have two parents who are notaffected.• In affected families, about one-fourth of the children ofunaffected parents are affected.• The phenotype occurs equally in both sexes.In pedigrees showing inheritance of a recessive phenotype,it is not uncommon to find a marriage of two relatives. This observationis a result of the rarity of recessive alleles that give riseto abnormal phenotypes. For two phenotypically normal parentsto have an affected child (aa), the parents must both be heterozygous(Aa). If a particular recessive allele is rare in the generalpopulation, the chance of two people marrying who areboth carrying that allele is quite low. On the other hand, if thatallele is present in a family, two cousins might share it (see Figure12.10B). For this reason, studies on populations that are isolatedeither culturally (by religion, as with the Amish in theUnited States) or geographically (as on islands) have been extremelyvaluable to human geneticists. People in these groupsare more likely to marry relatives who may carry the same rarerecessive alleles.Because the major use of pedigree analysis is in the clinicalevaluation and counseling of patients with inherited abnormalitiesin their families, a single pair of alleles is usually followed.However, pedigree analysis can also show independent assortmentif two different allele pairs are considered.12.1 | WHAT ARE THE MENDELIAN LAWS OF INHERITANCE? 247Every affectedindividual has anaffected parent.About 1/2 of the offspring(of both sexes) of anaffected parent are affected.One parent is heterozygous…Mating of heterozygous recessive parents mayproduce homozygous recessive (affected) offspring.Generation I(parents)Generation IIGeneration IIIGeneration IVHeterozygote(unaffectedphenotype)MatingbetweenrelativesGeneration I (parents)Generation IIGeneration IIISiblingsOldest YoungestMatingUnaffected AffectedFemaleMale(A) Dominant inheritance(B) Recessive inheritance…and the recessive allele ispassed on to about 1/2 of thephenotypically unaffected offspring.12.10 Pedigree Analysis and Inheritance (A) This pedigree representsa family affected by Huntington’s disease, which results from a raredominant allele. Everyone who inherits this allele is affected. (B) The familyin this pedigree carries the allele for albinism, a recessive trait. Becausethe trait is recessive, heterozygotes do not have the albino phenotype,but they can pass the allele on to their offspring. Affected persons mustinherit the allele from two heterozygous parents, or (rarely) from onehomozygous recessive and one heterozygous parent, or (very rarely) twohomozygous recessive parents. In this family, in generation III the heterozygousparents are cousins; however, the same result could occur ifthe parents were unrelated but heterozygous.12.1 RECAPMendel showed that genetic determinants are particulateand do not “blend” or disappear when thegenes from two gametes combine. Mendel’s first lawof inheritance states that the two copies of a genesegregate during gamete formation. His secondlaw states that genes assort independently duringgamete formation. The frequencies with which differentallele combinations will be expressed in offspringcan be calculated with a Punnett square or usingprobability theory.• What results seen in the F1 and F2 generations ofMendel’s monohybrid cross experiments refuted theblending theory of inheritance? See p. 240, Figures12.3 and 12.4, and Table 12.1• How do events in meiosis explain Mendel’s monohybridcross results? See pp. 242–244 and Figure 12.5• How do events in meiosis explain the independent assortmentof alleles in Mendel’s dihybrid cross experiments?See p. 244 and Figures 12.7 and 12.8• Draw human pedigrees for dominant and recessiveinheritance. See pp. 246–247 and Figure 12.10The laws of inheritance as articulated by Mendel remain validtoday; his discoveries laid the groundwork for all future studiesof genetics. Inevitably, however, we have learned that thingsare more complicated. Let’s take a look at some of these complications,beginning with the interactions between alleles atdifferent loci.12.2 How Do Alleles Interact?Existing alleles are subject to change, and thus may give riseto new alleles, so there can be many alleles for a single character.In addition, alleles do not always show simple dominantrecessiverelationships. Furthermore, a single allele may havemultiple phenotypic effects.New alleles arise by mutationGenes are subject to mutations, which are rare, stable, and inheritedchanges in the genetic material. In other words, an allelecan mutate to become a different allele. For example, youcan envision that at one time all pea plants were tall and hadthe height allele T. A mutation occurred in that allele that resultedin a new allele, t (short). If this mutation was in a cell thatunderwent meiosis to form gametes, some of the resulting gameteswould carry the t allele, and some offspring of this peaplant would carry the t allele. Mutation will be discussed in detailin Chapter 15. By creating variety, mutations are the rawmaterial for evolution.Geneticists usually define one particular allele of a gene asthe wild type; this allele is the one that is present in most individualsin nature (“the wild”) and gives rise to an expected traitor phenotype. Other alleles of that gene, often called mutant alleles,may produce a different phenotype. The wild-type andmutant alleles reside at the same locus and are inherited accordingto the rules set forth by Mendel. Agenetic locus with a wildtypeallele that is present less than 99 percent of the time (therest of the alleles being mutant) is said to be polymorphic (Greekpoly, “many”; morph, “form”).Many genes have multiple allelesBecause of random mutations, more than two alleles of a givengene may exist in a group of individuals. (Any one individualhas only two alleles—one from its mother and one from its father.But different individuals may carry several different alleles.)In fact, there are many examples of such multiple alleles, and theyoften show a hierarchy of dominance.Coat color in rabbits, for example, is determined by one genewith four alleles:• C determines dark gray• c determines albino• cch determines chinchilla• ch determines light gray248 CHAPTER 12 | INHERITANCE, GENES, AND CHROMOSOMESPossible genotypes CC, Ccch, Cch, Cc cchcch cchch, cchc chch, chc ccPhenotype Dark gray Chinchilla Light gray Point restricted Albino12.11 Inheritance of Coat Color in Rabbits There are four alleles ofthe gene for coat color in these Netherlands dwarf rabbits. Different combinationsof two alleles give different coat colors. The dominance hierarchyis C > cch > ch > c.Any rabbit with the C allele (paired with any of the four) is darkgray, and a rabbit with cc is albino. The intermediate colors resultfrom the different allele combinations shown in Figure 12.11.Multiple alleles increase the number of possible phenotypes.Each of Mendel’s monohybrid crosses involved just one pair ofalleles (for example, S and s) and two possible phenotypes (resultingfrom SS or Ss and ss). The four alleles of the rabbit coatcolor gene produce five different phenotypes.Dominance is not always completeIn the pairs of alleles studied by Mendel, dominance is completewhen an individual is heterozygous. That is, an Ss individual alwaysexpresses the S phenotype. However, many genes have allelesthat are not dominant or recessive to one another. Instead,the heterozygotes show an intermediate phenotype—at firstglance, like that predicted by the old blending theory of inheritance.For example, if a true-breeding red snapdragon is crossedwith a true-breeding white one, all the F1 flowers are pink. However,further crosses indicate that this apparent blending phenomenoncan still be explained in terms of Mendelian genetics(Figure 12.12). The red and white alleles have not disappeared,as those colors reappear when the F1 plants are interbred.We can understand these results in terms of the Mendelianlaws of inheritance. When heterozygotes show a phenotype thatis intermediate between those of the two homozygotes, the geneis said to be governed by incomplete dominance. In other words,neither of the two alleles is dominant. Incompletedominance is common in nature,and at the biochemical level, most examplesof incomplete dominance are actuallycodominance (see below). In fact, Mendel’sstudy of seven pea-plant traits is unusualin that all seven traits happened to be characterizedby complete dominance.In codominance, both alleles at alocus are expressedSometimes the two alleles at a locus producetwo different phenotypes that bothappear in heterozygotes, a phenomenoncalled codominance. Note that this is differentfrom incomplete dominance, wherethe phenotype of a heterozygote is a blendof the phenotypes of the parents. A goodexample of codominance is seen in theABO blood group system in humans.There are numerous glycoproteins onthe surfaces of red blood cells and they areall encoded by genes. One genetic locus iscalled the ABO locus, with three alleles, IA, IB and IO, that encodevariants of a surface glycoprotein designated A, B, and O(the “ABO system”). Since people inherit one allele from eachparent, they may have any combination of these alleles: IAIB,IAIO, IAIA, and so on. In terms of gene expression, it is importantto note that in a codominant system, all alleles are expressedin a heterozygote. So people with IAIB express both IA and IBalleles on their red blood cell surfaces.Early attempts at blood transfusion frequently killed the patient.Around 1900, the Austrian scientist Karl Landsteiner mixedblood cells and serum (blood from which cells have been removed)from different individuals. He found that only certaincombinations of blood and serum are compatible. In other combinations,the red blood cells from one individual form clumpsin the presence of serum from the other individual. This discoveryled to our ability to administer compatible blood transfusionsthat do not kill the recipient.Incompatible transfusions result in the formation of clumpsbecause of genetic systems like the ABO locus. People make specificproteins in the serum, called antibodies, that react with foreign,or “nonself,” molecules called antigens. The Aand B glycoproteinscan act as antigens if present on the surfaces of red12.2 | HOW DO ALLELES INTERACT? 249When true-breeding red andwhite parents are crossed,the F1 generation are all pink.Heterozygous snapdragonsproduce pink flowers—anintermediate phenotype—because the allele for redflowers is incompletelydominant over the allele forwhite ones.When F1 plants self-pollinate,they produce white, pink,and red F2 offspring in a ratioof 1:2:1.A test cross confirms that pinksnapdragons are heterozygous.rrRrrrRr Rr Rr Rr rrRRRr RR Rr rrPink Pink Pink White1/2 WhiteParental (P) generation1/4 White 1/2 Pink 1/4 Red 1/2 PinkWhite RedF1 generationF2 generation12.12 Incomplete Dominance Follows Mendel’s Laws An intermediatephenotype can occur in heterozygotes when neither allele is dominant. The heterozygousphenotype (here, pink flowers) may give the appearance of a blendedtrait, but the traits of the parental generation reappear in their original forms insucceeding generations, as predicted by Mendel’s laws of inheritance.blood cells in donated blood. If the person receiving the blooddoes not carry the IA or IB alleles, their antibodies will react withthe nonself glycoproteins and the red blood cells will formclumps. The O glycoprotein does not act as an antigen. You cansee these relationships in Figure 12.13. We will learn much moreabout the functions of antibodies and antigens in Chapter 42.Interestingly, a recent development may make it possible tocircumvent the ABO system of blood incompatibility. Enzymeshave been isolated from bacteria that can convert the A and Bglycoproteins into O glycoprotein. So blood from any genotypein the ABO system could be treated with these enzymes to makeO-type blood, which is not antigenic. Since IO is not a commonallele in most human populations, this technology may be importantin overcoming shortages of genetically suitable bloodfor transfusions.Some alleles have multiple phenotypic effectsMendel’s principles were further extended when it was discoveredthat a single allele can influence more than one phenotype.When a single allele has more than one distinguishable phenotypiceffect, we say that the allele is pleiotropic. A familiar exampleof pleiotropy involves the allele responsible for the colorationpattern (light body, darker extremities) of Siamese cats.The same allele is also responsible for the characteristic crossedeyes of Siamese cats. Although these effects appear to be unrelated,both are caused by the protein encoded by this allele.12.2 RECAPGenes are subject to random mutations that giverise to new alleles; thus many genes have more thantwo alleles within a population. Dominance is notnecessarily an all-or-nothing phenomenon.• How does the experiment in Figure 12.12 demonstrateincomplete dominance? See p. 249• Explain how blood type AB results from codominance.See pp. 249–250 and Figure 12.13Thus far we have treated the phenotype of an organism, withrespect to a given character, as a simple result of the alleles ofa single gene. In many cases, however, several genes interact todetermine a phenotype. To complicate things further, the physicalenvironment may interact with the genetic constitution ofan individual in determining the phenotype.12.3 How Do Genes Interact?We have just seen how two alleles of the same gene can interactto produce a phenotype. If you consider most complex phenotypes,such as human height, you will realize that they areinfluenced by the products of many genes. We now turn to thegenetics of such gene interactions.Epistasis occurs when the phenotypic expression of one geneis affected by another gene. For example, two genes (B and E)determine coat color in Labrador retrievers:• Allele B (black pigment) is dominant to b (brown)• Allele E (pigment deposition in hair) is dominant to e (nodeposition, so hair is yellow)So an EE or Ee dog with BB or Bb is black; one with bb is brown;and one with ee is yellow regardless of the Bb alleles present.Clearly, gene E determines the expression of Bb (Figure 12.14).Hybrid vigor results from new genecombinations and interactionsIn 1876, Charles Darwin reported that when hecrossed two different true-breeding, homozygous geneticstrains of corn, the offspring were 25 percenttaller than either of the parent strains. Darwin’s observationwas largely ignored for the next 30 years.In 1908, George Shull “rediscovered” this idea, reportingthat not just plant height but the weight ofthe corn grain produced was dramatically higher inthe offspring. Agricultural scientists took note, andShull’s paper had a lasting impact on the field of appliedgenetics (Figure 12.15).Farmers have known for centuries that matingsamong close relatives (known as inbreeding) can resultin offspring of lower quality than matings between unrelatedindividuals. Agricultural scientists call this in-250 CHAPTER 12 | INHERITANCE, GENES, AND CHROMOSOMESRed blood cells thatdo not react withantibody remainevenly dispersed.Red blood cells thatreact with antibodyclump together(speckledappearance).Bloodtypeof cells GenotypeAntibodiesmade bybodyA Anti-BB Anti-AABOBothanti-A andanti-BNeitheranti-A noranti-BIAIA or IAiOIBIB or IBiOIAIBiOiOReaction toadded antibodiesAnti-A Anti-B12.13 ABO Blood Reactions Are Important in Transfusions Thistable shows the results of mixing red blood cells of types A, B, AB, and Owith serum containing anti-A or anti-B antibodies. As you look down thecolumns, note that each of the types, when mixed separately with anti-Aand with anti-B, gives a unique pair of results; this is the basic method bywhich blood is typed. People with type O blood are good blood donorsbecause O cells do not react with either anti-A or anti-B antibodies.People with type AB blood are good recipients, since they make neithertype of antibody. When blood transfusions are incompatible, the reaction(clumping of red blood cells) can have severely adverse consequences forthe recipient.breeding depression. The problems with inbreeding arise becauseclose relatives tend to have the same recessive alleles, some ofwhich may be harmful. The “hybrid vigor” after crossing inbredlines is called heterosis (short for heterozygosis). The cultivationof hybrid corn spread rapidly in the United States and all over theworld, quadrupling grain production. Unfortunately, as we sawin the opening story, this scientific advance was not universallyadopted, and regions such as the Russian empire fell far behindin corn production. The practice of hybridization has spread tomany other crops and animals used in agriculture. For example,beef cattle that are crossbred are larger and live longer than cattlebred within their own genetic strain.The mechanism by which heterosis works is not known. Awidely accepted hypothesis is overdominance, in which the heterozygouscondition in certain important genes whose productsinteract is superior to the homozygous condition in eitheror both genes. Another hypothesis is that the homozygotes havealleles that inhibit growth, and these are less active or absent inthe heterozygote.The environment affects gene actionThe phenotype of an individual does not result from its genotypealone. Genotype and environment interact to determine the phenotypeof an organism. This is especially important to remember inthe era of genome sequencing (see Chapter 17). When the sequenceof the human genome was completed in 2003, it washailed as the “book of life,” and public expectations of the benefitsgained from this knowledge were (and are) high. But this kindof “genetic determinism” is wrong. Common knowledge tells usthat environmental variables such as light, temperature, and nutritioncan affect the phenotypic expression of a genotype.12.3 | HOW DO GENES INTERACT? 251A dog with alleles Band E is black.A dog with allelesbb and E is brown.A dog with ee is yellow,regardless of its Bb alleles.BEBlackBBEEBlackBBEeBlackBbEEBlackBbEeBlackBBEeYellowBBeeBlackBbEeYellowBbeeBlackBbEEBlackBbEeBrownbbEEBrownbbEeBlackBbEeYellowBbeeBrownbbEeYellowbbeeBEBeEggsBeSpermbEbEbebe(A) Black labrador (B_E_) (B) Chocolate labrador (bbE_) (C) Yellow labrador (_ _ee)×BbEe BbEe12.14 Genes May Interact Epistatically Epistasis occurs when one genealters the phenotypic effect of another gene. In Labrador retrievers, the Ee genedetermines the expression of the Bb gene.B73 Hybrid Mo1712.15 Hybrid Vigor in Corn Two homozygous parent lines of corn(cobs shown), B73 (left) and Mo17 (right), were crossed to produce themore vigorous hybrid line (center).A familiar example of this phenomenon involves “point restriction”coat patterns found in Siamese cats and certain rabbitbreeds (Figure 12.16). These animals carry a mutant allele of agene that controls the growth of black fur all over the body. As aresult of this mutation, the enzyme encoded by the gene is inactiveat temperatures above a certain point (usually around 35°C).The animals maintain a body temperature above this point, andso their fur is mostly light. However, the extremities—feet, ears,nose, and tail—are cooler, about 25°C, so the fur on these regionsis dark. These animals are all white when they are born, becausethe extremities were kept warm in the mother’s womb.Asimple experiment shows that the dark fur is temperaturedependent.If a patch of white fur on a point-restricted rabbit’sback is removed and an ice pack is placed on the skin where thepatch was, the fur that grows back will be dark. This indicatesthat although the gene for dark fur was expressed all along, theenvironment inhibited the activity of the mutant enzyme.Two parameters describe the effects of genes and environmenton the phenotype:• Penetrance is the proportion of individuals in a group witha given genotype that actually show the expected phenotype.• Expressivity is the degree to which a genotype is expressedin an individual.Penetrance affects, for example, the incidence of Huntington’sdisease in humans. The disease results from the presence of adominant allele, but 5 percent of people with the allele do notexpress the disease. So this allele is said to be 95 percent penetrant.For an example of environmental effects on expressivity,consider how Siamese cats kept indoors or outdoors in differentclimates might look.Most complex phenotypes are determined by multiplegenes and the environmentThe differences between individual organisms in simple characters,such as those that Mendel studied in pea plants, arediscrete and qualitative. For example, the individuals in a populationof pea plants are either short or tall. For most complexcharacters, however, such as height in humans, the phenotypevaries more or less continuously over a range. Some people areshort, others are tall, and many are in between the two extremes.Such variation within a population is called quantitative, or continuous,variation (Figure 12.17).252 CHAPTER 12 | INHERITANCE, GENES, AND CHROMOSOMESThe temperature of theextremities is lower andallows expression of theblack coat color gene.The temperature of mostof the body is too high forthe expression of theblack coat color gene.12.16 The Environment Influences Gene Expression This rabbitexpresses a coat pattern known as “chocolate point.” Its genotype specifiesdark fur, but the enzyme for dark fur is inactive at normal body temperature,so only the rabbit’s extremities—the coolest regions of thebody—express this phenotype.12.17 Quantitative Variation Quantitative variation is produced by theinteraction of genes at multiple loci and the environment. These students(women in white on the left are shorter; men in blue on the right are taller)show continuous variation in height that is the result of interactionsbetween many genes and the environment.Sometimes this variation is largely genetic. For instance,much of human eye color is the result of a number of genes controllingthe synthesis and distribution of dark melanin pigment.Dark eyes have a lot of it, brown eyes less, and green, gray, andblue eyes even less. In the latter cases, the distribution of otherpigments in the eye is what determines light reflection and color.In most cases, however, quantitative variation is due to bothgenes and environment. Height in humans certainly falls into thiscategory. If you look at families, you often see that parents andtheir offspring all tend to be tall or short. However, nutritionalso plays a role in height: American 18-year-olds today areabout 20 percent taller than their great-grandparents were at thesame age. Three generations are not enough time for mutationsthat would exert such a dramatic effect to occur, so the heightdifference must not be due to genetics.Geneticists call the genes that together determine such complexcharacters quantitative trait loci. Identifying these loci is amajor challenge, and an important one. For example, the amountof grain that a variety of rice produces in a growing season is determinedby many interacting genetic factors. Crop plant breedershave worked hard to decipher these factors in order to breedhigher-yielding rice strains. In a similar way, human characteristicssuch as disease susceptibility and behavior are caused inpart by quantitative trait loci. Recently, one of the many genesinvolved with human height was identified. The gene, HMGA2,has an allele that apparently has the potential to add 4 mm tohuman height.12.3 RECAPIn epistasis, one gene affects the expression ofanother. Perhaps the most challenging problem forgenetics is the explanation of complex phenotypesthat are caused by many interacting genes and theenvironment.• Explain the difference between penetrance and expressivity.See p. 252• How is quantitative variation different from qualitativevariation? See pp. 252–253In the next section we’ll see how the discovery that genes occupyspecific positions on chromosomes enabled Mendel’s successorsto provide a physical explanation for his model of inheritance,and to provide an explanation for those cases where Mendel’ssecond law does not apply.What Is the Relationship between 12.4 Genes and Chromosomes?There are far more genes than chromosomes. Studies of differentgenes that are physically linked on the same chromosome revealinheritance patterns that are not Mendelian. These patterns havebeen useful not only in detecting linkage of genes, but also indetermining how far apart they are from one another on thechromosome.The organism that revealed genetic linkage is the fruit flyDrosophila melanogaster. Its small size, the ease with which it canbe bred, and its short generation time make this animal an attractiveexperimental subject. Beginning in 1909, Thomas Hunt Morganand his students at Columbia University pioneered the studyof Drosophila, and it remains a very important organism in studiesof genetics.Genes on the same chromosome are linkedSome of the crosses Morgan performed with fruit flies yieldedphenotypic ratios that were not in accordance with those predictedby Mendel’s law of independent assortment. Morgan crossedDrosophila with two known genotypes, BbVgvg × bbvgvg,* fortwo different characters, body color and wing shape:• B (wild-type gray body), is dominant over b (black body)• Vg (wild-type wing) is dominant over vg (vestigial, a verysmall wing)Morgan expected to see four phenotypes in a ratio of 1:1:1:1, butthat is not what he observed. The body color gene and the wingsize gene were not assorting independently; rather, they were,for the most part, inherited together (Figure 12.18).These results became understandable to Morgan when heconsidered the possibility that the two loci are on the samechromosome—that is, that they might be linked. Suppose thatthe B and Vg loci are indeed located on the same chromosome.Why didn’t all of Morgan’s F1 flies have the parental phenotypes—that is, why didn’t his cross result in gray flies with normalwings (wild type) and black flies with vestigial wings, ina 1:1 ratio? If linkage were absolute—that is, if chromosomesalways remained intact and unchanged—we would expect tosee just those two types of progeny. However, this does notalways happen.Genes can be exchanged between chromatidsABSOLUTE LINKAGE IS RARE If linkage were absolute, Mendel’slaw of independent assortment would apply only to loci on differentchromosomes. What actually happens is more complex,and therefore more interesting. Genes at different loci on thesame chromosome do sometimes separate from one anotherduring meiosis. Genes may recombine when two homologouschromosomes physically exchange corresponding segmentsduring prophase I of meiosis—that is, by crossing over (Figure12.19; see also Figures 11.18 and 11.19). As described in Section11.2, DNA is replicated during the S phase, so that byprophase I, when homologous chromosome pairs come togetherto form tetrads, each chromosome consists of two chromatids.12.4 | WHAT IS THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GENES AND CHROMOSOMES? 253GO TO Animated Tutorial 12.2 • Alleles That Do NotSort IndependentlyyourBioPortal.com*Do you recognize this type of cross? It is a test cross for the twogene pairs; see Figure 12.6.Genes at differentloci on the samechromosomecan recombineand separate bycrossing over.The result is two recombinant gametesfrom each event of crossing over.Meiosis IMeiosis IIRecombinantchromosomesbVgbvgBVgBvgBVgbVgBvgbvgHomologouschromosomesBVgbvgBVgbvgCrossoverTetradChromatidNote that the exchange event involves only two of the four chromatidsin a tetrad, one from each member of the homologous pair,and can occur at any point along the length of the chromosome.The chromosome segments involved are exchanged reciprocally,so both chromatids involved in crossing over become recombinant(that is, each chromatid ends up with genes from both ofthe organism’s parents). Usually several exchangeevents occur along the length of each homologous pair.When crossing over takes place between two linkedgenes, not all the progeny of a cross have the parentalphenotypes. Instead, recombinant offspring appear aswell, as they did in Morgan’s cross. They appear inproportions called recombinant frequencies, which arecalculated by dividing the number of recombinantprogeny by the total number of progeny (Figure12.20). Recombinant frequencies will be greater for locithat are farther apart on the chromosome than for locithat are closer together because an exchange event ismore likely to occur between genes that are far apart.Genetic recombination is another way to generate thediversity that is the raw material for natural selectionand evolution.254 CHAPTER 12 | INHERITANCE, GENES, AND CHROMOSOMES12.19 Crossing Over Results in Genetic RecombinationRecombination accounts for why linked alleles are not always inheritedtogether. Alleles at different loci on the same chromosome can be recombinedby crossing over, and separated from one another. Such recombinationoccurs during prophase I of meiosis.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESIS Alleles for different characteristics always assortindependently.CONCLUSION The hypothesis is rejected. These twogenes do not assort independently, butare linked (on the same chromosome).METHODINVESTIGATING LIFE12.18 Some Alleles Do Not Assort IndependentlyMorgan’s studies showed that the genes for body color and wing size inDrosophila are linked, so that their alleles do not assort independently.These are the results expectedfrom Mendel’s second law(independent assortment)……but the actualresults wereinconsistentwith the law.GenotypesExpectedphenotypesObservedphenotypes(number ofindividuals)ParentalphenotypesRecombinantphenotypesBbVgvgWildtype575bbvgvgBlackvestigial575bbvgvg(black body,vestigialwings)×575bbVgvgBlacknormal575BbvgvgGrayvestigial965 944 206 185Parent (P)F1BbVgvgWild type(gray body,normalwings)67FURTHER INVESTIGATIONS: Look again at Mendel’s dihybrid cross (see Figure12.7). If the genes for seed shape and seedcolor were linked, what would the results be?RESULTSGeneticists can make mapsof chromosomesIf two loci are very close together on achromosome, the odds of a crossover occurringbetween them are small. In contrast,if two loci are far apart, crossing overcould occur between them at many points.This pattern is a consequence of the mechanismof crossing over: the farther aparttwo genes are, the more places there are inthe chromosome for breakage and reunionof chromatids to occur. In a population ofcells undergoing meiosis, a greater proportionof the cells will undergo recombinationbetween two loci that are farapart than between two loci that are closetogether. In 1911, Alfred Sturtevant, thenan undergraduate student in T. H. Morgan’sfly room, realized how this simpleinsight could be used to show where differentgenes lie on a chromosome in relationto one another.The Morgan group had determined recombinantfrequencies for many pairs of linked Drosophilagenes. Sturtevant used those recombinant frequencies tocreate genetic maps that showed the arrangements ofgenes along the chromosomes (Figure 12.21). Ever sinceSturtevant demonstrated this method, geneticists havemapped the chromosomes of eukaryotes, prokaryotes, andviruses, assigning distances between genes in map units. Amap unit corresponds to a recombinant frequency of 0.01;it is also referred to as a centimorgan (cM), in honor of thefounder of the fly room. You, too, can work out a geneticmap (Figure 12.22).6 7GrayvestigialBlacknormalBlackvestigialWildtypeGray normal (wild type) Black vestigialRecombinant frequency = = 0.17391 recombinants2,300 total offspringParental genotypes Recombinant genotypesParentalphenotypesRecombinant (nonparental)phenotypes944 965 206 185B vgvgVgb vgb vg B Vg B vg b Vg b vgb vg b vg b vg b vgb vg B Vg B vg b Vgb b RecombinationNumber ofindividuals12.20 Recombinant Frequencies The frequencyof recombinant offspring (those with aphenotype different from either parent) can becalculated.y is chosen as an arbitrary reference point, 0.Genetic map inmap units (cM)RecombinantfrequenciesYellowbodyWhiteeyeVermilioneyeMiniaturewingRudimentarywingy w v m r0 1 31 34 58y and m = 0.355y and v = 0.322w and m = 0.327v and m = 0.030v and r = 0.269y and w = 0.010w and v = 0.300Chromosome12.21 Steps toward a Genetic Map The chance of a crossing overbetween two loci on a chromosome increases with the distance between theloci. Thus, Sturtevant was able to derive this partial map of a Drosophilachromosome using the Morgan group’s data on the recombinant frequenciesof five recessive traits. He used an arbitrary unit of distance—the map unit, orcentimorgan (cM)—equivalent to a recombinant frequency of 0.01.12.4 | WHAT IS THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GENES AND CHROMOSOMES? 255Linkage is revealed by studies of the sex chromosomesIn Mendel’s work, reciprocal crosses always gave identical results;it did not matter whether a dominant allele was contributedby the mother or by the father. But in some cases, theparental origin of a chromosome does matter. For example, humanmales inherit a bleeding disorder called hemophilia fromtheir mothers, not from their fathers. To understand the typesof inheritance in which the parental origin of an allele is important,we must consider the ways in which sex is determined indifferent species.SEX DETERMINATION BY CHROMOSOMES In corn, every diploidadult has both male and female reproductive structures. The tissuesin these two types of structure are genetically identical, justas roots and leaves are genetically identical. Plants such as corn,in which the same individual produces both male and femalegametes, are said to be monoecious (Greek, “one house”). Otherplants, such as date palms and oak trees, and most animals aredioecious (“two houses”), meaning that some individuals canproduce only male gametes and the others can produce only femalegametes. In other words, in dioecious organisms the differentsexes are different individuals.In most dioecious organisms, sex is determined by differencesin the chromosomes, but such determination operates indifferent ways in different groups of organisms. For example,in many animals including mammals, sex is determined by asingle sex chromosome, or by a pair of them. Both males andfemales have two copies of each of the rest of the chromosomes,which are called autosomes. In other animals, the chromosomalbasis of sex determination is different from that of mammals(Table 12.2).The sex chromosomes of female mammals consist of a pairof X chromosomes. Male mammals, on the other hand, have oneX chromosome and a sex chromosome that is not found in fe-256 CHAPTER 12 | INHERITANCE, GENES, AND CHROMOSOMESAt the outset, we have no idea of the individual distances between thegenes, and there are several possible sequences (a-b-c, a-c-b, b-a-c).We make a cross AABB × aabb, and obtain an F1 generationwith a genotype AaBb. We test cross these AaBb individualswith aabb. Here are the genotypes of the first 1,000 progeny:How far apart are the a and b genes?What is the recombinant frequency? Which are the recombinanttypes, and which are the parental types?Recombinant frequency (a to b) = (50 + 50)/1,000 = 0.1So the map distance isNow we make a cross AACC × aacc, obtain an F1 generation,and test cross it, obtainingHow far apart are the a and c genes?How far apart are the b and c genes?Recombinant frequency (a to c) = (40 + 40)/1,000 = 0.08Which of the three genes is between the other two?Because a and b are the farthest apart, c must be between them.Recombinant frequency (b to c) = (10 + 10)/1,000 = 0.02These numbers add up perfectly. In most real cases, theywill not add up perfectly because of multiple crossovers.We make a cross BBCC × bbcc, obtain an F1 generation,and test cross it, obtaining450 AaBb, 450 aabb, 50 Aabb, and 50 aaBb.(parental types) (recombinant types)460 AaCc, 460 aacc, 40 Aacc, and 40 aaCc490 BbCc, 490 bbcc, 10 Bbcc, and 10 bbCca b ca ba c bb a c10 cM b a10 cMa c8 cMb cc2 cM8 cM 2 cM12345Map distance = 100 × recombinant frequency =100 × 0.1 = 10 cMMap distance = 100 × recombinant frequency =100 × 0.08 = 8 cMMap distance = 100 × recombinant frequency =100 × 0.02 = 2 cM12.22 Map These Genes The object of this exercise is to determinethe order of three loci (a, b, and c) on a chromosome, as well as the mapdistances (in cM) between them.TABLE 12.2Sex Determination in AnimalsANIMAL GROUP MECHANISMBees Males are diploid, females are haploidFruit Flies Fly is female if ratio of sex chromosomes toautosomes is ≥ 1Birds Males WW (homogametic), females WZ(heterogametic)Mammals Males XY (heterogametic), females XX(homogametic)males, the Y chromosome. Females may be represented as XXand males as XY.MALE MAMMALS PRODUCE TWO KINDS OF GAMETES Each gameteproduced by a male mammal has a complete set of autosomes,but half the gametes carry an X chromosome, and the other halfcarry a Y. When an X-bearing sperm fertilizes an egg, the resultingXX zygote is female; when a Y-bearing sperm fertilizes anegg, the resulting XY zygote is male.SEX CHROMOSOME ABNORMALITIES REVEALED THE GENE THATDETERMINES SEX Can we determine which chromosome, X orY, carries the sex-determining gene, and can the gene be identified?One way to determine cause (e.g., the presence of a geneon the Y chromosome) and effect (e.g., maleness) is to look atcases of biological error, in which the expected outcome doesnot happen.Abnormal sex chromosome arrangements resulting fromnondisjunction during meiosis (see Section 11.5) tell us somethingabout the functions of the X and Y chromosomes. As you will recall,nondisjunction occurs when a pair of homologous chromosomes(in meiosis I) or sister chromatids (in meiosis II) fail toseparate. As a result, a gamete may have one too few or one toomany chromosomes. If this gamete fuses with another gamete thathas the full haploid chromosome set, the resulting offspring willbe aneuploid, with fewer or more chromosomes than normal.In humans, XO individuals sometimes appear. (The O impliesthat a chromosome is missing—that is, individuals thatare XO have only one sex chromosome.) Human XO individualsare females who are moderately abnormal physically butnormal mentally; usually they are also sterile. The XO conditionin humans is called Turner syndrome. It is the only knowncase in which a person can survive with only one member ofa chromosome pair (here, the XY pair), although most XO conceptionsare spontaneously terminated early in development.XXY individuals also occur; this condition, which affects males,is called Klinefelter syndrome, and results in overlong limbsand sterility.These observations suggest that the gene controlling malenessis located on the Y chromosome. Observations of peoplewith other types of chromosomal abnormalities helped researchersto pinpoint the location of that gene:• Some women are genetically XY but lack a small portion ofthe Y chromosome.• Some men are genetically XX but have a small piece of theY chromosome attached to another chromosome.The Y fragments that are respectively missing and present inthese two cases are the same and contain the maleness-determininggene, which was named SRY (sex-determining regionon the Y chromosome).The SRY gene encodes a protein involved in primary sexdetermination—that is, the determination of the kinds of gametesthat an individual will produce and the organs that willmake them. In the presence of the functional SRY protein, anembryo develops sperm-producing testes. (Notice that italic typeis used for the name of a gene, but roman type is used for thename of a protein.) If the embryo has no Y chromosome, the SRYgene is absent, and thus the SRY protein is not made. In theabsence of the SRY protein, the embryo develops egg-producingovaries. In this case, a gene on the X chromosome calledDAX1 produces an anti-testis factor. So the role of SRY in a maleis to inhibit the maleness inhibitor encoded by DAX1. The SRYprotein does this in male cells, but since it is not present in females,DAX1 can act to inhibit maleness.Primary sex determination is not the same as secondary sexdetermination, which results in the outward manifestations ofmaleness and femaleness (such as body type, breast development,body hair, and voice). These outward characteristicsare not determined directly by the presence or absence of theY chromosome. Instead, they are determined by genes that arescattered on the autosomes and the X chromosome. Thesegenes control the actions of hormones, such as testosterone andestrogen.Genes on sex chromosomes are inheritedin special waysGenes on sex chromosomes do not show the Mendelian patternsof inheritance. In Drosophila and in humans, the Y chromosomecarries few known genes, but the X chromosome carriesa substantial number of genes that affect a great variety ofcharacters. These genes are present in two copies in females butonly one copy in males. Therefore, males are always hemizygousfor genes on the X chromosome—they have only one copyof each, and it is expressed. So reciprocal crosses do not giveidentical results for characters whose genes are carried on thesex chromosomes, and these characters do not show the usualMendelian inheritance ratios.Eye color in Drosophila is a good example of inheritance of acharacter that is governed by a locus on a sex chromosome (sexlinkedinheritance). The wild-type eye color of these flies isred. In 1910, Morgan discovered a mutation that causes whiteeyes. He crossed flies of the wild-type and mutant phenotypes,and demonstrated that the eye color locus is on the X chromosome.If we abbreviate the eye color alleles as R (red eyes) andr (white eyes), the presence of the alleles on the X chromosomeis designated by XR and Xr.When a homozygous red-eyed female (XRXR) was crossedwith a (hemizygous) white-eyed male (XrY), all the sons anddaughters had red eyes, because red (R) is dominant over white(r) and all the progeny had inherited a wild-type X chromosome(XR) from their mothers (Figure 12.23A).In the reciprocal cross, in which a white-eyed female (XrXr)was mated with a red-eyed male (XRY), all the sons were whiteeyedand all the daughters were red-eyed (Figure 12.23B). Thesons from the reciprocal cross inherited their only X chromosomefrom their white-eyed mother; the Y chromosome they inheritedfrom their father did not carry the eye color locus. On the otherhand, the daughters got an X chromosome bearing the white allelefrom their mother and an X chromosome bearing the red allelefrom their father; therefore they were red-eyed heterozygotes.When heterozygous females were mated with red-eyedmales, half their sons had white eyes, but all their daughters12.4 | WHAT IS THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GENES AND CHROMOSOMES? 257258 CHAPTER 12 | INHERITANCE, GENES, AND CHROMOSOMESAll daughtersare red-eyedheterozygotes.All sons arered-eyedhemizygotes.All sons arewhite-eyedhemizygotes.All daughtersare red-eyedheterozygotes.Homozygousred-eyedfemaleHemizygouswhite-eyedmaleHomozygouswhite-eyedfemaleHemizygousred-eyedmaleNo allele at allWild-type allele Allele for white eyes×SpermEggsSpermEggs(A)(B)XR XR XrY Xr Xr Xr Y6 76 7 6 7×6 712.23 Eye Color Is a Sex-Linked Trait in Drosophila Morgandemonstrated that a mutant allele that causes white eyes in Drosophilais carried on the X chromosome. Note that in this case, the reciprocalcrosses do not have the same results.A heterozygous carrierhas a normal phenotype.This man inherited the mutant Xfrom his mother and expressesthe mutant phenotype.Two siblings inherited the mutant Xfrom their mother. The son expressesthe mutation; his sister is a carrier.This woman inherited themutant X from her mother.Generation I (Parents)Generation IIGeneration IIIGeneration IVFemale who carriesallele for phenotypeof interest on oneX chromosome12.24 Red-Green Color Blindness Is aSex-Linked Trait in Humans The mutantallele for red-green color blindness isexpressed as an X-linked recessive trait,and therefore is always expressed in maleswhen they carry that allele.had red eyes. Together, these three results showed that eye colorwas carried on the X chromosome and not on the Y.Humans display many sex-linked charactersThe human X chromosome carries about 2,000 known genes. Thealleles at these loci follow the same pattern of inheritance as thosefor eye color in Drosophila. For example, one gene on the humanX chromosome has a mutant recessive allele that leads to red–green color blindness, and it appears in individuals who are homozygousor hemizygous for the recessive mutant allele.Pedigree analyses of X-linked recessive phenotypes (like theone in Figure 12.24) reveal the following patterns:• The phenotype appears much more often in males than infemales, because only one copy of the rare allele is neededfor its expression in males, while two copies must be presentin females.• Amale with the mutation can pass it on only to his daughters;all his sons get his Y chromosome.• Daughters who receive one X-linked mutation are heterozygouscarriers. They are phenotypically normal, butthey can pass the mutant allele to either sons or daughters.(On average only half their children inherit the mutantallele, since half of their X chromosomes carry the normalallele.)• The mutant phenotype can skip a generation if the mutationpasses from a male to his daughter (who will be phenotypicallynormal) and thus to her son.The small human Y chromosome carries several dozen genes.Among them is the maleness determinant, SRY. Interestingly,for some genes on the Y chromosome there are similar, but notidentical, genes on the X chromosome. For example, one of theproteins that make up ribosomes is encoded by a gene on the Ychromosome that is expressed only in male cells, while the Xlinkedcounterpart is expressed in both sexes. This means thatthere are “male” and “female” ribosomes; the significance ofthis phenomenon is unknown. Y-linked alleles are passed onlyfrom father to son. (Verify this with a Punnett square.)12.4 RECAPSimple Mendelian ratios are not observed whengenes are linked on the same chromosome. Linkageis indicated by atypical frequencies of phenotypes inthe offspring from a test cross. Sex linkage in humansrefers to genes on the X chromosome thathave no counterpart on the Y chromosome.• What is the concept of linkage and what are its implicationsfor the results of genetic crosses? See pp.253–254 and Figures 12.19 and 12.20• How does a sex-linked gene behave differently in geneticcrosses than a gene on an autosome? See pp.257–259 and Figure 12.23The genes we’ve discussed so far in this chapter are all in the cellnucleus. But other organelles, including mitochondria and plastids,also carry genes. What are they, and how are they inherited?What Are the Effects of Genes 12.5 Outside the Nucleus?The nucleus is not the only organelle in a eukaryotic cell thatcarries genetic material. As described in Section 5.5, mitochondriaand plastids contain small numbers of genes, which areremnants of the entire genomes of colonizing prokaryotes thateventually gave rise to these organelles. For example, in humans,there are about 24,000 genes in the nuclear genome and37 in the mitochondrial genome. Plastid genomes are aboutfive times larger than those of mitochondria. In any case, severalof the genes carried by cytoplasmic organelles are importantfor organelle assembly and function, so it is not surprisingthat mutations of these genes can have profound effectson the organism.The inheritance of organelle genes differs from that of nucleargenes for several reasons:• In most organisms, mitochondria and plastids are inheritedonly from the mother. As you will learn in Chapter 43, eggscontain abundant cytoplasm and organelles, but the only partof the sperm that survives to take part in the union of haploidgametes is the nucleus. So you have inherited your mother’smitochondria (with their genes), but not your father’s.• There may be hundreds of mitochondria or plastids in acell. So a cell is not diploid for organelle genes.• Organelle genes tend to mutate at much faster rates than nucleargenes, so there are multiple alleles of organelle genes.The phenotypes resulting from mutations in organelle genes reflectthe organelles’ roles. For example, in plants and some photosyntheticprotists, certain plastid gene mutations affect theproteins that assemble chlorophyll molecules into photosystems.These mutations result in a phenotype that is essentiallywhite instead of green. The inheritance of this phenotype followsa non-Mendelian, maternal pattern (Figure 12.25).Mitochondrial gene mutations that affect one of the complexesin the respiratory chain result in less ATP production.These mutations have particularly noticeable effects in tissueswith high energy requirements, such as the nervous system,muscles, and kidneys. In 1995, Greg LeMond, a professional cyclistwho had won the famous Tour de France three times, wasforced to retire because of muscle weakness caused by a mitochondrialmutation.12.5 RECAPGenes in the genomes of organelles, specificallyplastids and mitochondria, do not behave in aMendelian fashion.• Why are genes carried in the organelle genomesusually inherited only from the mother?12.5 | WHAT ARE THE EFFECTS OF GENES OUTSIDE THE NUCLEUS? 259Mendel and those who followed him scientifically focused oneukaryotes, with diploid organisms and haploid gametes. Ahalf-century after the rediscovery of Mendel’s work, a sexualprocess that allows genetic recombination was discovered inprokaryotes as well. We now turn to that process.12.6 How Do Prokaryotes Transmit Genes?As you saw in Chapter 5, prokaryotic cells lack a nucleus butcontain their genetic material as mostly a single chromosomein a central region of the cell. In Chapter 11, you saw that bacteriareproduce asexually by cell division, a process that givesrise to virtually genetically identical products. That is, the offspringof cell reproduction in bacteria constitute a clone. However,mutations occur in bacteria just as they do in eukaryotes;the resulting new alleles increase genetic diversity.You might expect, therefore, that there is no way for individualsof these species to exchange genes, as in sexual reproduction.It turns out, though, that prokaryotes do have a sexual process.Bacteria exchange genes by conjugationThe bacterial chromosome, like the bacterial cell, is considerablysmaller than its eukaryotic counterpart. In humans, eachof the 23 chromosomes in a haploid set may have thousandsof linked genes and be a highly compacted linear strand severalcentimeters in length. In contrast, E. coli has a single, circularchromosome that carries a few thousand genes and is onlyabout 1 μm in circumference. Genetic recombination in bacteriaoccurs after a chromosome is transferred from one cell to another,which brings the chromosomes of two cells into closeproximity within a single cell.Joshua Lederberg and Edward Tatum discovered this recombinationprocess in 1946. They worked with two genetic strainsof E. coli that had different alleles for each of six genes (each ofthe genes coded for the synthesis of certain small molecules).Simply put, the two strains had the following genotypes (rememberthat bacteria are haploid):ABCdef and abcDEFwhere capital letters stand for wild-type alleles and lower caseletters stand for mutant alleles.When the two strains were grown in the same environmentin the laboratory, most of the cells produced clones. That is, almostall of the cells that grew had the original genotypes:ABCdef and abcDEFHowever, very rarely, Lederberg and Tatum detected bacteriathat had the genotypeABCDEFHow could these completely wild-type bacteria have arisen?One possibility was mutation: the d allele could have mutatedto D, and so on for e and f. The problem with this explanationwas that the probabilities of mutation from d to D, e to E, and fto F were each very low. The probability of all three events occurringin the same cell would be the product of the three individualprobabilities—an extremely low number and millionsof times lower than the actual rate of appearance of cells withthe genotype ABCDEF.Electron microscopy showed how sexual transmission in bacteriamight happen, via physical contact between the cells (Figure12.26A). Physical contact is initiated by a thin projectioncalled a sex pilus (plural pili). Once sex pili bring the two cellstogether, the actual transfer of the chromosome occurs througha thin cytoplasmic bridge called a conjugation tube that formsbetween the cells.The chromosome moves in a linear fashion from a donor cellto a recipient cell. Since the bacterial chromosome is circular, itmust be made linear (cut) before it can pass through the tube.Contact between the cells is brief—only rarely long enoughfor the entire donor genome to enter the recipient cell. Therefore,the recipient cell usually receives only a portion of thedonor chromosome. There is no reciprocal transfer of a chromosomefrom the recipient to the donor.Once the donor chromosome fragment is inside the recipientcell, it can recombine with the recipient cell’s chromosome.In much the same way that chromosomes pair up, gene forgene, in prophase I of meiosis, the donor chromosome can lineup beside its homologous genes in the recipient, and crossingover can occur. Gene(s) from the donor can become integratedinto the genome of the recipient, thus changing the recipient’sgenetic constitution (Figure 12.26B), although only about halfthe transferred genes become integrated in this way. When therecipient cells proliferate, the donor genes are passed on to allprogeny cells.260 CHAPTER 12 | INHERITANCE, GENES, AND CHROMOSOMESPollen plant (7)Seed plant (6)White GreenWhiteWhite WhiteGreenGreen Green12.25 Cytoplasmic Inheritance In four o’clock plants, leaf color is inheritedthrough the female plant only. The white leaf color is caused by a chloroplastmutation that occurs during the life of the parent plant; the leaves thatform before the mutation occurs are green. The mutation is passed on to thegerm cells, and the offspring that inherit the mutation are entirely white.Plasmids transfer genes between bacteriaIn addition to their main chromosome, many bacteria harboradditional smaller, circular chromosomes called plasmids.They typically contain at most a few dozen genes, which, dependingon the particular plasmid, may fall into one of severalcategories:• Genes for unusual metabolic capacities, such as the abilityto break down hydrocarbons; bacteria carrying these plasmidscan be used to clean up oil spills.• Genes for conjugation, including the ability to make a sexpilus; bacteria carrying this type of plasmid, called fertilityfactor, are designated F+ and conjugate with bacteria thatlack the plasmid (F–).• Genes for antibiotic resistance; bacteria carrying suchgene(s)—the plasmids are called R factors—are a majorthreat to human health.Plasmids can move between cells during conjugation, therebytransferring new genes to the recipient bacterium (Figure 12.27).Because plasmids can replicate independently of the main chromosome,they do not need to recombine with the main chromosometo add their genes to the recipient cell’s genome.12.6 | HOW DO PROKARYOTES TRANSMIT GENES? 261DNA from a donor cell isincorporated into therecipient cell’s chromosomeThe reciprocal through crossing over.a–b–C+ segment,not being linkedto an origin ofreplication, is lost.The sequence A+B+c–becomes a permanentpart of the recipient’sgenotype.Sex pilus1 μmDNA (from donor chromosome)Chromosome of recipient cellSites of crossing overA+ B+ C+a– b–c–A+B+C+a– b– c–(A)(B)a–b– C+A+ B+c–DivisionA+ B+c– A+ B+c–12.26 Bacterial Conjugation and Recombination (A) Sex pili drawtwo bacteria into close contact, so that a cytoplasmic conjugation tubecan form. DNA is transferred from one cell to the other via the conjugationtube. (B) DNA from a donor cell can become incorporated into a recipientcell’s chromosome through crossing over.1A plasmid has an origin (ori) of DNAreplication and genes for other functions.When bacteria conjugate,plasmids can pass throughthe conjugation tube tothe recipient bacterium.2 The plasmids becomepart of the recipientcell’s genome.PlasmidConjugationtubeBacterialchromosomeoriBacterium withplasmidsBacterium withoutplasmids12.27 Gene Transfer by Plasmids When plasmids enter a cell viaconjugation, their genes can be expressed in the recipient cell.262 CHAPTER 12 | INHERITANCE, GENES, AND CHROMOSOMES12.1 What Are the Mendelian Laws of Inheritance?• Physical features of organisms, or characters, can exist in differentforms, or traits. A heritable trait is one that can be passedfrom parent to offspring. A phenotype is the physical appearanceof an organism; a genotype is the genetic constitution ofthe organism.• The different forms of a gene are called alleles. Organisms thathave two identical alleles for a trait are called homozygous;organisms that have two different alleles for a trait are calledheterozygous. A gene resides at a particular site on a chromosomecalled a locus.• Mendel’s experiments included reciprocal crosses and monohybridcrosses between true-breeding pea plants. Analysis ofhis meticulously tabulated data led Mendel to propose a particulatetheory of inheritance stating that discrete units (nowcalled genes) are responsible for the inheritance of specifictraits, to which both parents contribute equally.• Mendel’s first law, the law of segregation, states that when anyindividual produces gametes, the two copies of a gene separate,so that each gamete receives only one member of the pair.Thus every individual in the F1 inherits one copy from each parent.Review Figures 12.4 and 12.5• Mendel used a test cross to find out whether an individualshowing a dominant phenotype was homozygous or heterozygous.Review Figure 12.6, WEB ACTIVITY 12.1• Mendel’s use of dihybrid crosses to study the inheritance oftwo characters led to his second law: the law of independentassortment. The independent assortment of genes in meiosisleads to recombinant phenotypes. Review Figures 12.7 and12.8, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 12.1• Probability calculations and pedigrees help geneticists traceMendelian inheritance patterns. Review Figures 12.9 and 12.1012.2 How Do Alleles Interact?• New alleles arise by random mutation. Many genes have multiplealleles. A wild-type allele gives rise to the predominantform of a trait. When the wild-type allele is present at a locusless than 99 percent of the time, the locus is said to be polymorphic.Review Figure 12.11• In incomplete dominance, neither of two alleles is dominant.The heterozygous phenotype is intermediate between thehomozygous phenotypes. Review Figure 12.12• Codominance exists when two alleles at a locus produce twodifferent phenotypes that both appear in heterozygotes.• An allele that affects more than one trait is said to be pleiotropic.12.3 How Do Genes Interact?• In epistasis, one gene affects the expression of another.Review Figure 12.14• Environmental conditions can affect the expression of agenotype.• Penetrance is the proportion of individuals in a group with agiven genotype that show the expected phenotype.Expressivity is the degree to which a genotype is expressed inan individual.• Variations in phenotypes can be qualitative (discrete) or quantitative(graduated, continuous). Most quantitative traits arethe result of the effects of several genes and the environment.Genes that together determine quantitative characters arecalled quantitative trait loci.12.4 What Is the Relationship between Genes andChromosomes?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 12.2• Each chromosome carries many genes. Genes on the samechromosome are referred to as a linkage group.• Genes on the same chromosome can recombine by crossingover. The resulting recombinant chromosomes have new combinationsof alleles. Review Figures 12.19 and 12.20• Sex chromosomes carry genes that determine whether theorganism will produce male or female gametes. All other chromosomesare called autosomes. The specific functions of X andY chromosomes differ among different groups of organisms.• Primary sex determination in mammals is usually a functionof the presence or absence of the SRY gene. Secondary sexdetermination results in the outward manifestations of malenessor femaleness.• In fruit flies and mammals, the X chromosome carries manygenes, but the Y chromosome has only a few. Males have onlyone allele (are hemizygous) for X-linked genes, so recessivesex-linked mutations are expressed phenotypically more oftenin males than in females. Females may be unaffected carriers ofsuch alleles.CHAPTER SUMMARYAlthough they are haploid and reproduce primarilyasexually, prokaryotes have the ability to transfer genesfrom one cell to another. These genes can be part ofthe main single chromosome or on a small chromosomecalled a plasmid.• How were prokaryotic gene transfer and recombinationdiscovered? See p. 260• What are the differences between recombination afterconjugation in prokaryotes and recombination duringmeiosis in eukaryotes?12.6 RECAP
12.1 What Are the Mendelian Laws of Inheritance?• Physical features of organisms, or characters, can exist in differentforms, or traits. A heritable trait is one that can be passedfrom parent to offspring. A phenotype is the physical appearanceof an organism; a genotype is the genetic constitution ofthe organism.• The different forms of a gene are called alleles. Organisms thathave two identical alleles for a trait are called homozygous;organisms that have two different alleles for a trait are calledheterozygous. A gene resides at a particular site on a chromosomecalled a locus.• Mendel’s experiments included reciprocal crosses and monohybridcrosses between true-breeding pea plants. Analysis ofhis meticulously tabulated data led Mendel to propose a particulatetheory of inheritance stating that discrete units (nowcalled genes) are responsible for the inheritance of specifictraits, to which both parents contribute equally.• Mendel’s first law, the law of segregation, states that when anyindividual produces gametes, the two copies of a gene separate,so that each gamete receives only one member of the pair.Thus every individual in the F1 inherits one copy from each parent.Review Figures 12.4 and 12.5• Mendel used a test cross to find out whether an individualshowing a dominant phenotype was homozygous or heterozygous.Review Figure 12.6, WEB ACTIVITY 12.1• Mendel’s use of dihybrid crosses to study the inheritance oftwo characters led to his second law: the law of independentassortment. The independent assortment of genes in meiosisleads to recombinant phenotypes. Review Figures 12.7 and12.8, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 12.1• Probability calculations and pedigrees help geneticists traceMendelian inheritance patterns. Review Figures 12.9 and 12.1012.2 How Do Alleles Interact?• New alleles arise by random mutation. Many genes have multiplealleles. A wild-type allele gives rise to the predominantform of a trait. When the wild-type allele is present at a locusless than 99 percent of the time, the locus is said to be polymorphic.Review Figure 12.11• In incomplete dominance, neither of two alleles is dominant.The heterozygous phenotype is intermediate between thehomozygous phenotypes. Review Figure 12.12• Codominance exists when two alleles at a locus produce twodifferent phenotypes that both appear in heterozygotes.• An allele that affects more than one trait is said to be pleiotropic.12.3 How Do Genes Interact?• In epistasis, one gene affects the expression of another.Review Figure 12.14• Environmental conditions can affect the expression of agenotype.• Penetrance is the proportion of individuals in a group with agiven genotype that show the expected phenotype.Expressivity is the degree to which a genotype is expressed inan individual.• Variations in phenotypes can be qualitative (discrete) or quantitative(graduated, continuous). Most quantitative traits arethe result of the effects of several genes and the environment.Genes that together determine quantitative characters arecalled quantitative trait loci.12.4 What Is the Relationship between Genes andChromosomes?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 12.2• Each chromosome carries many genes. Genes on the samechromosome are referred to as a linkage group.• Genes on the same chromosome can recombine by crossingover. The resulting recombinant chromosomes have new combinationsof alleles. Review Figures 12.19 and 12.20• Sex chromosomes carry genes that determine whether theorganism will produce male or female gametes. All other chromosomesare called autosomes. The specific functions of X andY chromosomes differ among different groups of organisms.• Primary sex determination in mammals is usually a functionof the presence or absence of the SRY gene. Secondary sexdetermination results in the outward manifestations of malenessor femaleness.• In fruit flies and mammals, the X chromosome carries manygenes, but the Y chromosome has only a few. Males have onlyone allele (are hemizygous) for X-linked genes, so recessivesex-linked mutations are expressed phenotypically more oftenin males than in females. Females may be unaffected carriers ofsuch alleles.
Although they are haploid and reproduce primarilyasexually, prokaryotes have the ability to transfer genesfrom one cell to another. These genes can be part ofthe main single chromosome or on a small chromosomecalled a plasmid.• How were prokaryotic gene transfer and recombinationdiscovered? See p. 260• What are the differences between recombination afterconjugation in prokaryotes and recombination duringmeiosis in eukaryotes?
12.5 What Are the Effects of Genes Outside the Nucleus?• Cytoplasmic organelles such as plastids and mitochondria containsmall numbers of genes. In many organisms, cytoplasmicgenes are inherited only from the mother because the malegamete contributes only its nucleus (i.e., no cytoplasm) to thezygote at fertilization. Review Figure 12.2512.6 How Do Prokaryotes Transmit genes?• Prokaryotes reproduce primarily asexually but can exchangegenes in a sexual process called conjugation. Review Figure 12.26• Plasmids are small, extra chromosomes in bacteria that carrygenes involved in important metabolic processes and that canbe transmitted from one cell to another. Review Figure 12.27SEE WEB ACTIVITIES 12.2 and 12.3 for a conceptreview of this chapter.