Ruth felt healthy and was surprised when she wascalled back to her physician’s office a week after herannual checkup. “Your lab report indicates you haveearly cervical cancer,” said the doctor. “I ordered a followuptest, and it came back positive—at some point, youwere infected with HPV.”Ruth felt numb as soon as she heard the word “cancer.”Her mother had died of breast cancer in the previous year.The doctor’s statement about HPV (human papillomavirus)did not register in her consciousness. Sensing Ruth’sdiscomfort, the doctor quickly reassured her that the cancerwas caught at an early stage, and that a simple surgicalprocedure would remove it. Two weeks later, the cancerwas removed and Ruth remains cancer-free. She wasfortunate that her annual medical exam included aPapanicolau (Pap) test, in which the cells lining the cervixare examined for abnormalities. Since they were begunalmost 50 years ago in Europe, Pap tests have resulted inthe early detection and removal of millions of early cervicalcancers, and the death rate from this potentially lethaldisease has plummeted.Only recently was HPV found to be the cause of mostcervical cancers. The German physician Harald Zur-Hansenwas awarded the Nobel Prize in 2008 for this discoveryand it has led to a vaccine to prevent future infections.There are many different types of HPV and many of theones that infect humans cause warts, which are small,rough growths on the skin. The types of HPV that infecttissues at the cervix get there by sexual transmission, andthis is a common infection in Western societies.When HPV arrives at the tissues lining the cervix, it hasone of two fates. Most of the time, it gets into the cells,turning them into HPV factories,producing a lot of HPV in the mucusoutside the uterus. Theseviruses can infect another personduring a sexual encounter. Insome cases, however, the virus followsa different and—for the hostcells—more sinister path. It infectsthe cervical cells and causes themto make a viral protein called E7, aprotein that can deregulate humancell reproduction.Cell reproduction in healthy humansis tightly controlled, and oneof the strongest regulators thatprevent a cell from dividing is theAn enemy of the cell reproduction cycle11Abnormal Cells In this Pap test,cervical cancer cells at right differ fromthe normal cells at left. The cancercells have larger nuclei.PART FOUR GENES AND HEREDITYIN THIS CHAPTER we will see how cells give rise tomore cells. We first describe how prokaryotic cells divideto produce new, single-celled organisms. Then we turn tothe two types of nuclear division in eukaryotes—mitosis andmeiosis—and relate them to asexual and sexual reproduction.Cell reproduction is linked to cell death, so we then considerthe process of programmed cell death, also known asapoptosis. Finally, we relate these processes to the loss ofcell reproduction control in cancer cells.retinoblastoma protein (RB), which you will encounterlater in the chapter. One of the viral gene products is theprotein E7, which has a three-dimensional shape thatjust fits into the protein-binding site of RB, thereby inactivatingit. With no active RB to put the brakes on, cell divisionproceeds. As you know, uncontrolled cell reproductionis a hallmark of cancer—and so cervical cancerbegins.Understanding the cell division cycle and its control isclearly an important subject for understanding cancer.But cell division is not just important in medicine. It underliesthe growth, development and reproduction of allorganisms.E7, RB, and Cell Reproduction The E7 protein (blue) fromhuman papillomavirus binds to the RB protein (red) to inhibitRB’s ability to block cell division. This results in cancer.How Do Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic 11.1 Cells Divide?The life cycle of an organism, from birth to death, is intimatelylinked to cell division. Cell division plays important roles in thegrowth and repair of tissues in multicellular organisms, as wellas in the reproduction of all organisms (Figure 11.1).In order for any cell to divide, four events must occur:• There must be a reproductive signal. This signal initiatescell division and may originate from either inside or outsidethe cell.• Replication of DNA (the genetic material) must occur sothat each of the two new cells will have identical genes andcomplete cell functions.• The cell must distribute the replicated DNA to each of thetwo new cells. This process is called segregation.• In addition to synthesizing needed enzymes and organelles,new material must be added to the plasma membrane (andthe cell wall, in organisms that have one), in order to separatethe two new cells by a process called cytokinesis.These four events proceed somewhat differently in prokaryotesand eukaryotes.Prokaryotes divide by binary fissionIn prokaryotes, cell division results in the reproduction of theentire single-celled organism. The cell grows in size, replicatesits DNA, and then separates the cytoplasm and DNA into twonew cells by a process called binary fission.REPRODUCTIVE SIGNALS The reproductive rates of many prokaryotesrespond to conditions in the environment. The bacterium Escherichiacoli, a species commonly used in genetic studies, is a “celldivision machine”; if abundant sources of carbohydrates and mineralnutrients are available, it can divide as often as every 20 minutes.Another bacterium, Bacillus subtilis, does not just slow itsgrowth when nutrients are low but stops dividing and then resumesdividing when conditions improve. Clearly, external factorssuch as environmental conditions and nutrient concentrationsare signals for the initiation of cell division in prokaryotes.REPLICATION OF DNA As we saw in Section 5.3, a chromosomecan be defined in molecular terms as a DNA molecule containinggenetic information. When a cell divides, all of its chromo-CHAPTER OUTLINE11.1 How Do Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells Divide?11.2 How Is Eukaryotic Cell Division Controlled?11.3 What Happens during Mitosis?11.4 What Role Does Cell Division Play in a SexualLife Cycle?11.5 What Happens during Meiosis?11.6 In a Living Organism, How Do Cells Die?11.7 How Does Unregulated Cell Division Leadto Cancer?somes must be replicated, and one copy of each chromosomemust find its way into one of the two new cells.Most prokaryotes have only one chromosome—a single longDNAmolecule with proteins bound to it. In E. coli, the ends ofthe DNA molecule are joined to create a circular chromosome.Circular chromosomes are characteristic of most prokaryotes aswell as some viruses, and are also found in the chloroplasts andmitochondria of eukaryotic cells.If the E. coli DNA were spread out into an actual circle, itwould be about 500 μm in diameter. The bacterium itself is onlyabout 2 μm long and 1μm in diameter. Thus if the bacterial DNAwere fully extended, it would form a circle over 200 times largerthan the cell! To fit into the cell, bacterial DNA must be compacted.The DNA folds in on itself, and positively charged (basic)proteins bound to the negatively charged (acidic) DNA contributeto this folding.Two regions of the prokaryotic chromosome play functionalroles in cell reproduction:• ori: the site where replication of the circular chromosomestarts (the origin of replication)• ter: the site where replication ends (the terminus ofreplication)Chromosome replication takes place as the DNA is threadedthrough a “replication complex” of proteins near the center of thecell. (These proteins include the enzyme DNA polymerase, whoseimportant role in replication is discussed further in Section 13.3.)Replication begins at the ori site and moves toward the ter site.While the DNA replicates, anabolic metabolism is active andthe cell grows. When replication is complete, the two daughterDNAmolecules separate and segregate from one another at oppositeends of the cell. In rapidly dividing prokaryotes, DNAreplication occupies the entire time between cell divisions.SEGREGATION OF DNAS Replication begins near the center of thecell, and as it proceeds, the ori regions move toward oppositeends of the cell (Figure 11.2A). DNA sequences adjacent to theori region bind proteins that are essential for this segregation.This is an active process, since the binding proteins hydrolyzeATP. The prokaryotic cytoskeleton (see Section 5.2) may be involvedin DNA segregation, either actively moving the DNAalong, or passively acting as a “railroad track” along whichDNAmoves.CYTOKINESIS The actual division of a single cell and its contentsinto two cells is called cytokinesis and begins immediatelyafter chromosome replication is finished in rapidly growingcells. The first event of cytokinesis is a pinching in of the plasmamembrane to form a ring of fibers similar to a purse string. Themajor component of these fibers is a protein that is related toeukaryotic tubulin (which makes up microtubules). As themembrane pinches in, new cell wall materials are deposited,which finally separate the two cells (Figure 11.2B).Eukaryotic cells divide by mitosis or meiosisfollowed by cytokinesisAs in prokaryotes, cell reproduction in eukaryotes entails reproductivesignals, DNA replication, segregation, and cytokinesis.The details, however, are quite different:• Signal. Unlike prokaryotes, eukaryotic cells do not constantlydivide whenever environmental conditions are adequate.In fact, most eukaryotic cells that are part of a multicellularorganism and have become specialized seldomdivide. In a eukaryotic organism, the signals for cell divisionare related not to the environment of a single cell, butto the needs of the entire organism.• Replication. While most prokaryotes have a single mainchromosome, eukaryotes usually have many (humans have46). Consequently the processes of replication and segregationare more intricate in eukaryotes than in prokaryotes. Ineukaryotes, DNA replication is usually limited to a portionof the period between cell divisions.11.1 | HOW DO PROKARYOTIC AND EUKARYOTIC CELLS DIVIDE? 211(A) Reproduction (B) Growth (C) RegenerationThese yeast cellsdivide by budding.Cell division contributesto the regeneration of alizard’s tail.Cell division contributesto the growth of thisroot tissue.11.1 ImportantConsequences of CellDivision Cell division is thebasis for (A) reproduction, (B)growth, and (C) repair andregeneration of tissues.• Segregation. In eukaryotes, the newly replicated chromosomesare closely associated with each other (thus theyare known as sister chromatids), and a mechanism calledmitosis segregates them into two new nuclei.• Cytokinesis. Cytokinesis proceeds differently in plant cells(which have a cell wall) than in animal cells (which do not).The cells resulting from mitosis are identical to the parent cellin the amount and kind of DNA that they contain. This contrastswith the second mechanism of nuclear division, meiosis.Meiosis is the process of nuclear division that occurs in cellsinvolved with sexual reproduction. While the two products ofmitosis are genetically identical to the cell that produced them—they both have the same DNA—the products of meiosis are not.As we will see in Section 11.5, meiosis generates diversity byshuffling the genetic material, resulting in new gene combinations.Meiosis plays a key role in the sexual life cycle.11.1 RECAPFour events are required for cell division: a reproductivesignal, replication of the genetic material (DNA),segregation of replicated DNA, and separation of thetwo daughter cells (cytokinesis). In prokaryotes, celldivision can be rapid; in eukaryotes, the process ismore intricate, and the chromosomes must be duplicatedbefore cell division can occur.• What is the reproductive signal that leads the bacteriumBacillus subtilis to divide? See p. 210• Explain why DNA must be replicated and segregatedbefore a cell can divide. See p. 210• What are the differences between cell division inprokaryotes (binary fission) and mitosis in eukaryotes?See pp. 211–212What determines whether a cell will divide? How does mitosislead to identical cells, and meiosis to diversity? Why do mosteukaryotic organisms reproduce sexually? In the sections thatfollow, we will describe the details of mitosis and meiosis, anddiscuss their roles in development and evolution.How Is Eukaryotic Cell Division 11.2 Controlled?As you will see throughout the book, different cells have differentrates of cell division. Some cells, such as those in an earlyembryo, stem cells in bone marrow, or cells in the growing tipof a plant root, divide rapidly and continuously. Others, suchas neurons in the brain or phloem cells in a plant stem, don’t divideat all. Clearly, the signaling pathways for cells to divide arehighly controlled.The period between cell divisions is referred to as the cell cycle.The cell cycle can be divided into mitosis/cytokinesis and interphase.During interphase, the cell nucleus is visible and typicalcell functions occur, including DNA replication. This phase of212 CHAPTER 11 | THE CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISIONPlasma membranes have completelyformed, separating the cytoplasm of onecell from that of the other. Only a smallgap of cell wall remains to be filled in.DNA replication begins atthe origin of replication atthe center of the cell.1The chromosomalDNA replicates asthe cell grows.2Cytokinesis is complete;two new cells are formed.4The daughter DNAsseparate, led by theregion including ori. Thecell begins to divide.3Plasma membraneChromosome(A)ori(B)Chromosome11.2 Prokaryotic Cell Division (A) The process of cell division in abacterium. (B) These two cells of the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosahave almost completed cytokinesis.the cell cycle begins when cytokinesis is completed and endswhen mitosis begins (Figure 11.3). In this section we will describethe events of interphase, especially those that trigger mitosis.Cells, even when rapidly dividing, spend most of their timein interphase. So if we take a snapshot through the microscopeof a cell population, most of the cells will be in interphase; onlya small percentage will be in mitosis or cytokinesis at any givenmoment.Interphase has three subphases, called G1, S, and G2. Thecell’s DNA replicates during S phase (the S stands for synthesis)(see Figure 11.3). The period between the end of cytokinesisand the onset of S phase is called G1, or Gap 1. Another gapphase—G2—separates the end of S phase and the beginningof mitosis. Mitosis and cytokinesis are referred to as the M phaseof the cell cycle.Let’s look at the events of interphase in more detail:• G1 phase. During G1, a cell is preparing for S phase, so atthis stage each chromosome is a single, unreplicated structure.G1 is quite variable in length in different cell types.Some rapidly dividing embryonic cells dispense with it entirely,while other cells may remain in G1 for weeks or evenyears. In many cases these cells enter a resting phase calledG0. Special internal and external signals are needed toprompt a cell to leave G0 and reenter the cell cycle at G1.• The G1-to-S transition. At the G1-to-S transition, called the restrictionpoint (R), the commitment is made to DNA replicationand subsequent cell division (and thus another cell cycle).• S phase. DNAreplication occurs during S phase (see Section13.3 for a detailed description). Each chromosome is duplicatedand thereafter consists of two sister chromatids joinedtogether and awaiting segregation into two new cells.• G2 phase. During G2, the cell makes preparations for mitosis—for example, by synthesizing components of the microtubulesthat will move the chromatids to opposite ends ofthe dividing cell.The initiation, termination, and operations of these phases areregulated by specific signals.Specific signals trigger events in the cell cycleWhat events cause a cell to enter the S or M phases? A first indicationthat there were substances that control these transitionscame from experiments involving cell fusion. Polyethylene glycolcan be used to make different cells fuse together. Membranelipids tend to partially dissolve in this nonpolar solvent, so thatwhen it is present, cells will fuse their plasma membranes. Experimentsinvolving the fusion of mammalian cells at differentphases of the cell cycle showed that a cell in S phase producesa substance that activates DNA replication (Figure 11.4).11.2 | HOW IS EUKARYOTIC CELL DIVISION CONTROLLED? 213Nuclear divisionoccurs duringmitosis.DNA is replicatedduring the S phase.Cells that donot divide areusually arrestedin the G1 phase.Cell division—cytokinesis—occurs at theend of the Mphase.Mitosis(M)Gap 1(G1)Restrictionpoint (R)Gap 2(G2)DNA synthesis(S)Interphase11.3 The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle The cell cycle consists of a mitotic(M) phase, during which mitosis and cytokinesis take place, and a longperiod of growth known as interphase. Interphase has three subphases(G1, S, and G2) in cells that divide.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESIS A cell in S phase contains an activator ofDNA replication.METHODRESULTSINVESTIGATING LIFE11.4 Regulation of the Cell CycleNuclei in G1 do not undergo DNA replication, but nuclei in Sphase do. To determine if there is some signal in the S cellsthat stimulates G1 cells to replicate their DNA, cells in G1 andS phases were fused together, creating cells with both G1 andS properties.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: How would you use this method toshow that a cell in M phase producesan activator of mitosis?CONCLUSION The S phase cell produces a substance thatdiffuses to the G1 nucleus and activatesDNA replication.Cells are fused inpolyethylene glycol.Both nuclei inthe fused cellenter S phase.In S phaseThe fused cellhas two nucleiIn G1 phaseDNAreplicationDNAreplicationSimilar experiments point to a molecular activator for entry intoM phase. As you will see, the signals that control progressthrough the cell cycle act through protein kinases.Progress through the cell cycle depends on the activities ofcyclin-dependent kinases, or Cdk’s. Recall from Section 7.1 thata protein kinase is an enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of a phosphategroup from ATP to a target protein; this phosphate transferis called phosphorylation.protein kinaseprotein + ATP⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→protein -P + ADPBy catalyzing the phosphorylation of certain target proteins,Cdk’s play important roles at various points in the cell cycle. Thediscovery that Cdk’s induce cell division is a beautiful exampleof how research on different organisms and different cell typescan converge on a single mechanism. One group of scientists,led by James Maller at the University of Colorado, was studyingimmature sea urchin eggs, trying to find out how they arestimulated to divide and eventually form a mature egg. A proteincalled maturation promoting factor was purified from maturingeggs, which by itself prodded immature egg cells to divide.Meanwhile, Leland Hartwell at the University of Washingtonwas studying the cell cycle in yeast (a single-celled eukaryote,see Figure 11.1A), and found a strain that was stalled at theG1–S boundary because it lacked a Cdk. It turned out that thisyeast Cdk and the sea urchin maturation promoting factor hadsimilar properties, and further work confirmed that the seaurchin protein was indeed a Cdk. Similar Cdk’s were soonfound to control the G1-to-S transition in many other organisms,including humans. Then others were found to control otherparts of the cell cycle.Cdk’s are not active by themselves. As their name implies,cyclin-dependent kinases need to be activated by binding to asecond type of protein, called cyclin. This binding—an exampleof allosteric regulation (see Section 8.5)—activates the Cdk byaltering its shape and exposing its active site (Figure 11.5).The cyclin–Cdk that controls passage from G1 to S phase isnot the only such complex involved in regulating the eukaryoticcell cycle. There are different cyclin–Cdk’s that act at differentstages of the cycle (Figure 11.6). Let’s take a closer look atG1–S cyclin–Cdk, which was the first to be discovered.G1–S cyclin–Cdk catalyzes the phosphorylation of a proteincalled retinoblastoma protein (RB). In many cells, RB or a proteinlike it acts as an inhibitor of the cell cycle at the R (for “restriction”)point in late G1. To begin S phase, a cell must get by the RB block.Here is where G1–S cyclin–Cdk comes in: it catalyzes the additionof a phosphate to RB. This causes a change in the three-dimensionalstructure of RB, thereby inactivating it. With RB out of theway, the cell cycle can proceed. To summarize:G1–S cyclin–CdkRB⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→RB-P(active—blocks cell cycle) (inactive—allows cell cycle)Progress through the cell cycle is regulated by the activitiesof Cdk’s, and so regulating them is a key to regulating cell division.An effective way to regulate Cdk’s is to regulate the presenceor absence of cyclins (Figure 11.7). Simply put, if a cyclinis not present, its partner Cdk is not active. As their name suggests,the presence of cyclins is cyclic: they are made only at certaintimes of in the cell cycle.The different cyclin–Cdk’s act at cell cycle checkpoints,points at which a cell cycle’s progress is regulated. For example,if a cell’s DNA is substantially damaged by radiation or214 CHAPTER 11 | THE CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISIONThe G2–M cyclin–Cdkregulates entry into M. The M cyclin–Cdk regulatesprogress through mitosis.The G1–S phase cyclin–Cdk’s regulateentry into the cell cycle at R.Mitosis(M)Gap 1(G1)Restrictionpoint (R)Gap 2(G2)DNA synthesis(S)CyclinCdkCyclinCdkCyclinCdkCyclinCdk11.6 Cyclin-Dependent Kinases Regulate Progress Through theCell Cycle By acting at checkpoints (red lines), different cyclin–Cdkcomplexes regulate the orderly sequence of events in the cell cycle.Cyclin bindingchanges Cdk,exposing itsactive site.Cdk protein isalways present,but its active siteis not exposed.Cyclin proteinis made only ata certain pointin the cell cycle.1A protein substrate andATP bind to Cdk. Theprotein substrate isphosphorylated.2The phosphorylatedprotein regulates thecell cycle. Each Cdkhas specific proteintargets.3Cdk CyclinCyclinATPADPCdkCyclinCdkCyclinCdkProteinsubstrate11.5 Cyclin Binding Activates Cdk Binding of a cyclin changes thethree-dimensional structure of an inactive Cdk, making it an active proteinkinase. Each cyclin–Cdk complex phosphorylates a specific target proteinin the cell cycle.toxic chemicals, it may be prevented from successfully completinga cell cycle. For DNA damage, there are three checkpoints:• During G1, before the cell enters S phase (restriction point)• During S phase• After S phase, during G2Let’s consider the G1 checkpoint. If DNA is damaged by radiationduring G1, a protein called p21 is made. (The p standsfor “protein” and the 21 stands for its molecular weight—about21,000 daltons.) The p21 protein can bind to the G1–S Cdk, preventingits activation by cyclin. So the cell cycle stops while repairsare made to the DNA (you will learn more about DNA repairin Section 13.4). The p21 protein breaks down after theDNAis repaired, allowing cyclin to bind to the Cdk so that thecell cycle can proceed. If DNA damage is severe and it cannotbe repaired, the cell will undergo programmed cell death (apoptosis,which we will discuss in Section 11.6).In addition to these internal signals, the cell cycle is influencedby signals from the extracellular environment.Growth factors can stimulate cells to divideCyclin–Cdk’s provide cells with internal controls of theirprogress through the cell cycle. Not all cells in an organism gothrough the cell cycle on a regular basis. Some cells either nolonger go through the cell cycle and enter G0, or go through itslowly and divide infrequently. If such cells are to divide, theymust be stimulated by external chemical signals called growthfactors. These proteins activate a signal transduction pathwaythat often ends up with the activation of Cdk’s (signal transductionis discussed in Chapter 7):• If you cut yourself and bleed, specialized cell fragmentscalled platelets gather at the wound to initiate blood clotting.The platelets produce and release a protein called plateletderivedgrowth factor that diffuses to the adjacent cells in theskin and stimulates them to divide and heal the wound.• Red and white blood cells have limited lifetimes and mustbe replaced through the division of immature, unspecializedblood cell precursors in the bone marrow. Two types ofgrowth factors, interleukins and erythropoietin, stimulate thedivision and specialization, respectively, of precursor cells.In these and other examples, growth factors bind to specificreceptors on target cells, and activate signal transduction pathwaysthe end with cyclin synthesis, thereby activating Cdk’sand the cell cycle. As you can see from the examples, growthfactors are important in maintaining homeostasis.11.2 RECAPThe eukaryotic cell cycle is under both external andinternal control. Cdk’s control the eukaryotic cell cycleand are themselves controlled by cyclins. Externalsignals such as growth factors can initiate thecell cycle.• Draw a cell cycle diagram showing the various stagesof interphase. See pp. 212–213 and Figure 11.3• How do cyclin–Cdk’s control the progress of the cellcycle? See pp. 214–215 and Figure 11.6• What are the differences between external and internalcontrols of the cell cycle? See p. 21511.3 What Happens during Mitosis?The third essential step in the process of cell division—segregationof the replicated DNA—occurs during mitosis. Prior to segregation,the huge DNA molecules and their associated proteinsin each chromosome become condensed into more compactstructures. After segregation by mitosis, cytokinesis separatesthe two cells. Let’s now look at these steps more closely.Prior to mitosis, eukaryotic DNA is packed into verycompact chromosomesA eukaryotic chromosome consists of one or two gigantic, linear,double-stranded DNA molecules complexed with manyproteins (the complex of DNA and proteins is referred to aschromatin). Before S phase, each chromosome contains only onedouble-stranded DNA molecule. After it replicates during Sphase, however, there are two double-stranded DNA molecules,known as sister chromatids. The sister chromatids are held togetheralong most of their length by a protein complex calledcohesin. They stay this way throughout interphase G2 until mitosis,when most of the cohesin is removed, except in a regioncalled the centromere at which the chromatids remain held together.At the end of G2, a second group of proteins called condensinscoat the DNA molecules and makes them more compact(Figure 11.8).11.3 | WHAT HAPPENS DURING MITOSIS? 215Cdk is present, but withoutcyclin it is not active.Cyclin synthesisbegins during G1.Cyclin binds to Cdk,which becomes active.Cyclin breaksCdk is down.inactive.Mitosis(M)Gap 1(G1)Gap 2(G2)DNA synthesis(S)CyclinCdkCdkCdk CdkCdkCdkCdk11.7 Cyclins Are Transient in the Cell Cycle Cyclins are made at aparticular time and then break down. In this case, the cyclin is presentduring G1 and activates a Cdk at that time.If all the DNA in a typical human cell were put end to end,it would be nearly 2 meters long. Yet the nucleus is only 5 μm(0.000005 meters) in diameter. So eukaryotic DNA, like that inprokaryotes, is extensively packaged in a highly organized way(Figure 11.9). This packing is achieved largely by proteins thatare closely associated with the DNA; these proteins are calledhistones (histos, “web” or “loom”). They are positively chargedat cellular pH levels because of their high content of the basicamino acids lysine and arginine. These positive charges attractthe negative phosphate groups on DNA. These DNA–histone interactions, as well as histone–histone interactions, resultin the formation of beadlike units called nucleosomes.During interphase, the chromatin that makes up each chromosomeis much less densely packaged, and consists of singleDNA molecules running around vast numbers of nucleosomeslike beads on a string. During this phase of the cellcycle, the DNA is accessible to proteins involved in replicationand transcription. Once a mitotic chromosome is formedits compact nature makes it inaccessible to replication andtranscription factors, and so these processes cannot occur.During the early stages of both mitosis and meiosis, thechromatin becomes ever more tightly coiled and condensedas the nucleosomes pack together. Further coiling of the chromatincontinues up to the time at which the chromatids beginto move apart.Overview: Mitosis segregates copies ofgenetic informationIn mitosis, a single nucleus gives rise to two nuclei that are geneticallyidentical to each other and to the parent nucleus. Mitosis (theM phase of the cell cycle) ensures the accurate segregation ofthe eukaryotic cell’s multiple chromosomes into the daughternuclei. While mitosis is a continuous process in which eachevent flows smoothly into the next, it is convenient to subdivideit into a series of stages: prophase, prometaphase, metaphase,anaphase, and telophase. Before we consider each ofthese stages, we will describe two cellular structures that contributeto the orderly segregation of the chromosomes duringmitosis—the centrosome and the spindle.The centrosomes determine the plane of cell divisionBefore the spindle apparatus for chromosome segregationforms, the orientation of this spindle is determined. This is accomplishedby the centrosome (“central body”), an organellein the cytoplasm near the nucleus. In many organisms, each centrosomeconsists of a pair of centrioles, each one a hollow tubeformed by nine triplets of microtubules. The two tubes are atright angles to each other.During S phase the centrosome doubles to form a pair of centrosomes.At the G2-to-M transition, the two centrosomes separatefrom one another, moving to opposite ends of the nuclearenvelope. Eventually these will identify “poles” toward whichchromosomes will move during segregation. The positions ofthe centrosomes determine the plane at which the cell will divide;therefore they determine the spatial relationship betweenthe two new cells. This relationship may be of little consequenceto single free-living cells such as yeasts, but it is important forcells in a multicellular organism. For example, during developmentfrom a fertilized egg to an embryo, the daughter cells fromsome divisions must be positioned correctly to receive signalsto form new tissues.The centrioles are surrounded by high concentrations oftubulin dimers, and these proteins aggregate to form the microtubulesthat orchestrate chromosomal movement. (Plant cellslack centrosomes, but distinct microtubule organizing centersat each end of the cell play the same role.) These microtubulesare the major part of the spindle structure, which is required forthe orderly segregation of the chromosomes.The spindle begins to form during prophaseDuring interphase, only the nuclear envelope, the nucleoli (seeSection 5.3), and a barely discernible tangle of chromatin arevisible under the light microscope. The appearance of the nucleuschanges as the cell enters prophase—the beginning of mitosis.Most of the cohesin that has held the two products ofDNA replication together since S phase is removed, so the individualchromatids become visible. They are still held togetherby a small amount of cohesin at the centromere. Late inprophase, specialized three-layered structures called kinetochoresdevelop in the centromere region, one on each chro-216 CHAPTER 11 | THE CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISIONIn an interphase nucleus, chromosomesare threadlike structures dispersedthroughout the nucleus.In the M phase cell, the DNA and proteins in eachchromosome form highly compact structures.During interphase, DNA is replicated.Only a tiny portion of one chromosomeof many is shown.G1MG2SInterphase11.8 Chromosomes, Chromatids, and Chromatin DNA in the interphasenucleus is diffuse and becomes compacted as mitosis begins.matid. These structures will be important for chromosomemovement.Each of the two centrosomes, now on opposite sides of thenucleus, serves as a mitotic center, or pole, toward which the chromosomeswill move (Figure 11.10A). Microtubules form betweenthe poles and the chromosomes to make up a spindle. Thespindle begins to form during prophase, and its formation iscompleted during prometaphase, after the nuclear envelopebreaks down (see below). The spindle serves as a structure towhich the chromosomes attach and as a framework keeping thetwo poles apart. Each half of the spindle develops as tubulindimers aggregate from around the centrioles and form longfibers that extend into the middle region of the cell. The microtubulesare initially unstable, constantly forming and fallingapart, until they contact kinetochores or microtubules fromthe other half-spindle and become more stable.There are two types of microtubule in the spindle:• Polar microtubules form the framework of the spindle, andrun from one pole to the other.• Kinetochore microtubules, which form later, attach to thekinetochores on the chromosomes. The two sister chromatidsin each chromosome pair become attached to kinetochoremicrotubules in opposite halves of the spindle(Figure 11.10B). This ensures that the two chromatidswill eventually move to opposite poles.Movement of the chromatids is the central feature of mitosis.It accomplishes the segregation that is needed for cell divisionand completion of the cell cycle. Prophase prepares for thismovement, and the actual segregation takes place in the nextthree phases of mitosis.11.3 | WHAT HAPPENS DURING MITOSIS? 217“Tails” protrude from histonesand allow them to interact withother molecules in the nucleus.Nucleosomes pack into a coil thattwists into another larger coil, andso forth, producing condensed,supercoiled chromatin fibers.The fibers foldto form loops.The loops coil evenfurther, forming achromosome.DNA wraps around histones,forming a vast number ofnucleosomes.Nucleosomes form“beads” on a DNA “string.”700 nm1400 nm 700 nmCore of eighthistone moleculesHistoneDNA double helix30 nmMetaphase chromosomeNucleosomeChromatin“Linker” DNA2 nm300 nmScaffoldassociatedchromatin11.9 DNA is Packed into a MitoticChromosome The nucleosome, formed byDNA and histones, is the essential building blockin this highly compacted structure.218 CHAPTER 11 | THE CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISIONPolar microtubules extend fromeach pole of the spindle.Kinetochore microtubules attach to thekinetochores and to the spindle poles.PolarmicrotubuleCentrosomeCentrioleKinetochoreKinetochoremicrotubuleKinetochoremicrotubules Kinetochore(A) (B)11.10 The Mitotic Spindle Consists of Microtubules(A) The spindle apparatus in an animal cell at metaphase. In plantcells, centrioles are not present. (B) An electron micrograph ofmetaphase emphasizing the kinetochore microtubules.During the S phase of interphase, the nucleusreplicates its DNA and centrosomes.1 The chromatin coils and supercoils, becoming moreand more compact and condensing into visiblechromosomes. The chromosomes consist ofidentical, paired sister chromatids. Centrosomesmove to opposite poles.2 The nuclear envelope breaks down.Kinetochore microtubules appear andconnect the kinetochores to the poles.3Interphase Prophase PrometaphaseNuclearenvelopeKinetochoremicrotubulesKinetochoreNuclearenvelopeNucleus NucleolusCentrosomesDevelopingspindleChromatids ofchromosome11.11 The Phases of Mitosis Mitosis results in two new nuclei that aregenetically identical to each other and to the nucleus from which they wereformed. In the micrographs, the green dye stains microtubules (and thus thespindle); the red dye stains the chromosomes. The chromosomes in the diagramsare stylized to emphasize the fates of the individual chromatids.GO TO Web Activity 11.1 • The Mitotic SpindleyourBioPortal.comGO TO Web Activity 11.2 • Images of MitosisyourBioPortal.comChromosome separation and movementare highly organizedDuring the next three phases, prometaphase, metaphase, andanaphase, dramatic changes take place in the cell and the chromosomes.• Prometaphase. The nuclear envelope breaks down and thecompacted chromosomes consisting of two chromatids attachto the kinetochore microtubules.• Metaphase. The chromosomes line up at the midline of thecell (equatorial position).• Anaphase. The chromatids separate and move away fromeach other toward the poles.You will find these events depicted and described in Figure11.11. Here, we will consider two key processes: separation ofthe chromatids, and the mechanism of their actual movementtoward the poles.CHROMATID SEPARATION The separation of chromatids occursat the beginning of anaphase. It is controlled by M phase cyclin–Cdk (see Figure 11.6), which activates another protein complexcalled the anaphase-promoting complex (APC). Separation occursbecause one subunit of the cohesin protein holding thesister chromatids together is hydrolyzed by a specific protease,appropriately called separase (Figure 11.12). After they separate,the chromatids are called daughter chromosomes.CHROMOSOME MOVEMENT The migration of the two sets ofdaughter chromosomes to the poles of the cell is a highly organized,active process. Two mechanisms operate to move the chromosomesalong. First, the kinetochores contain a protein calledcytoplasmic dynein that acts as a “molecular motor.” It hydrolyzesATP to ADP and phosphate, thus releasing energy that maymove the chromosomes along the microtubules toward thepoles. This accounts for about 75 percent of the force of motion.Second, the kinetochore microtubules shorten from the poles,drawing the chromosomes toward them, accounting for about25 percent of the force of motion.• Telophase occurs after the chromosomes have separatedand is the last phase of mitosis. During this period, a nuclearenvelope forms around each set of chromosomes, nucleoliappear, and the chromosomes become less compact.The spindle also disappears at this time. As a result, thereare two new nuclei in a single cell.Cytokinesis is the division of the cytoplasmMitosis refers only to the division of the nucleus. The divisionof the cell’s cytoplasm, which follows mitosis, is called cytoki-11.3 | WHAT HAPPENS DURING MITOSIS? 219The centromeres become aligned in a plane atthe cell’s equator.4 The paired sister chromatids separate, andthe new daughter chromosomes begin tomove toward the poles.5 The daughter chromosomes reach the poles.As telophase concludes, the nuclearenvelopes and nucleoli re-form, the chromatindecondenses, and, after cytokinesis, thedaughter cells enter interphase once again.6Metaphase Anaphase TelophaseEquatorial(metaphase)plateDaughterchromosomesnesis. Cytokinesis occurs in different ways, depending on thetype of organism. In particular there are substantial differencesbetween the process in plants and in animals.In animal cells, cytokinesis usually begins with a furrowingof the plasma membrane, as if an invisible thread were cinchingthe cytoplasm between the two nuclei (Figure 11.13A). Thiscontractile ring is composed of microfilaments of actin andmyosin (see Figure 5.18), which form a ring on the cytoplasmicsurface of the plasma membrane. These two proteinsinteract to produce a contraction, just as they do in muscles,thus pinching the cell in two. The microfilaments assemblerapidly from actin monomers that are present inthe interphase cytoskeleton. Their assembly is under thecontrol of calcium ions that are released from storage sitesin the center of the cell.The plant cell cytoplasm divides differently becauseplants have cell walls that are rigid. In plant cells, as thespindle breaks down after mitosis, membranous vesiclesderived from the Golgi apparatus appear along the planeof cell division, roughly midway between the two daughternuclei. The vesicles are propelled along microtubules by themotor protein kinesin, and fuse to form a new plasma membrane.At the same time they contribute their contents to a cellplate, which is the beginning of a new cell wall (Figure 11.13B).Following cytokinesis, each daughter cell contains all thecomponents of a complete cell. A precise distribution of chromosomesis ensured by mitosis. In contrast, organelles such asribosomes, mitochondria, and chloroplasts need not be distributedequally between daughter cells as longas some of each are present in each cell. Accordingly,there is no mechanism with a precisioncomparable to that of mitosis to providefor their equal allocation to daughtercells. As we will see in Chapter 19, the unequaldistribution of cytoplasmic componentsduring development can have functional significancefor the two new cells.220 CHAPTER 11 | THE CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISIONAfter replication, thesister chromatids areheld together bycohesin.1 By metaphase,most cohesin hasbeen removed,except for someat the centromere.2 At anaphase, the enzymeseparase hydrolyzes theremaining cohesin andthe chromosomesseparate.3CohesinProphase Metaphase AnaphaseSisterchromatidsDaughterchromosomesThe contractile ring has completely separatedthe cytoplasms of these two daughter cells,although their surfaces remain in contact.This row of vesicles will fuse to form a cell platebetween the cell above and the cell below.(A) (B)ContractileringCell plate11.12 Chromatid Attachment and Separation The cohesinprotein complex holds sister chromatids together at the centromere.The enzyme separase hydrolyzes cohesin at the onset ofanaphase, allowing the chromatids to separate into daughterchromosomes.11.13 Cytokinesis Differs in Animaland Plant Cells (A) A sea urchin zygote(fertilized egg) that has just completedcytokinesis at the end of the first cell divisionof its development into an embryo.(B) A dividing plant cell in late telophase.Plant cells divide differently from animalcells because plant cells have cell walls.GO TO Animated Tutorial 11.1 • MitosisyourBioPortal.com11.3 RECAPMitosis is the division of the nucleus of a eukaryoticcell into two nuclei identical to each other and to theparent nucleus. The process of mitosis, while continuous,can be viewed as a series of events (prophase,prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase).Once two identical nuclei have formed, thecell divides into two cells by cytokinesis.• What is the difference between a chromosome, a chromatid,and a daughter chromosome? See Figures 11.8and 11.11• What are the various levels of “packing” by which thegenetic information contained in linear DNA is condensedduring prophase? See p. 216 and Figure 11.9• Describe how chromosomes move during mitosis.See p. 219 and Figure 11.11• What are the differences in cytokinesis between plantand animal cells? See p. 220 and Figure 11.13The intricate process of mitosis results in two cells that are geneticallyidentical. But, as mentioned earlier, there is anothereukaryotic cell division process, called meiosis, that results ingenetic diversity. What is the role of that process?What Role Does Cell Division Play 11.4 in a Sexual Life Cycle?The mitotic cell cycle repeats itself and by this process, a singlecell can give rise to a vast number of cells with identical nuclearDNA. Meiosis, on the other hand, produces just four daughtercells. Mitosis and meiosis are both involved in reproduction,but they have different roles: asexual reproduction involves onlymitosis, while sexual reproduction involves both mitosis andmeiosis.Asexual reproduction by mitosis results ingenetic constancyAsexual reproduction, sometimes called vegetative reproduction,is based on the mitotic division of the nucleus. An organism thatreproduces asexually may be single-celled like yeast, reproducingitself with each cell cycle, or it may be multicellular likethe cholla cactus, that breaks off a piece to produce a new multicellularorganism (Figure 11.14). Asexual reproduction is arapid and effective means of making new individuals, and it iscommon in nature. In asexual reproduction, the offspring areclones of the parent organism; that is, the offspring are geneticallyidentical to the parent. Any genetic variation among the offspringis most likely due to small environmentally causedchanges in the DNA, called mutations. As you will see, this smallamount of variation contrasts with the extensive variation possiblein sexually reproducing organisms.Sexual reproduction by meiosis results ingenetic diversityUnlike asexual reproduction, sexual reproduction results in anorganism that is not identical to its parents. Sexual reproductionrequires gametes created by meiosis; two parents each contributeone gamete to each of their offspring. Meiosis can producegametes—and thus offspring—that differ genetically fromeach other and from the parents. Because of this genetic variation,some offspring may be better adapted than others to sur-11.4 | WHAT ROLE DOES CELL DIVISION PLAY IN A SEXUAL LIFE CYCLE? 221(B)(A) 11.14 Asexual Reproduction in the Large and the Small (A) Some cacti likethis cholla have brittle stems that break off easily. Fragments on the ground set downroots and develop by mitotic cell divisions into new plants that are genetically identicalto the plant they came from. (B) These strings of cells are asexual spores formedby a fungus. Each spore contains a nucleus produced by a mitotic division and isgenetically identical to the parent that produced it. It can divide to form a new fungus.vive and reproduce in a particular environment. Meiosis thusgenerates the genetic diversity that is the raw material for naturalselection and evolution.In most multicellular organisms, the body cells that are notspecialized for reproduction, called somatic cells, each containtwo sets of chromosomes, which are found in pairs. One chromosomeof each pair comes from each of the organism’s twoparents; for example, in humans with 46 chromosomes, 23 comefrom the mother and 23 from the father. The members of sucha homologous pair are similar in size and appearance, exceptfor the sex chromosomes found in some species (see Section12.4). The two chromosomes in a homologous pair (called homologs)bear corresponding, though often not identical, geneticinformation. For example, a homologous pair of chromosomesin a plant may carry different versions of a gene that controlsseed shape. One homolog may carry the version for wrinkledseeds while the other may carry the version for smooth seeds.Gametes, on the other hand, contain only a single set of chromosomes—that is, one homolog from each pair. The number ofchromosomes in a gamete is denoted by n, and the cell is saidto be haploid. Two haploid gametes fuse to form a zygote, in aprocess called fertilization. The zygote thus has two sets of chromosomes,just as somatic cells do. Its chromosome number isdenoted by 2n, and the zygote is said to be diploid. Dependingon the organism, the zygote may divide by either meiosis or mitosis.Either way, a new mature organism develops that is capableof sexual reproduction.All sexual life cycles involve meiosis to produce gametes orcells that are haploid. Eventually, the haploid cells or gametesfuse to produce a zygote, beginning the diploid stage of the lifecycle.Since the origin of sexual reproduction, evolution has generatedmany different versions of the sexual life cycle. Figure11.15 presents three examples.• In haplontic organisms, including most protists, fungi, andsome green algae, the tiny zygote is the only diploid cell inthe life cycle. After it is formed it immediately undergoesmeiosis to produce more haploid cells. These are usuallyspores, which are the dispersal units for the organism, likethe seeds of a plant. Aspore germinates to form a new haploidorganism, which may be single-celled or multicellular.Cells of the mature haploid organism fuse to form thediploid zygote.• Most plants and some fungi display alternation of generations.As for many haplontic organisms, meiosis gives rise222 CHAPTER 11 | THE CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISIONIn the haplontic life cycle, the matureorganism is haploid and the zygote isthe only diploid stage.In alternation of generations, theorganism passes through haploid anddiploid stages that are both multicellular.In the diplontic life cycle, theorganism is diploid and the gametesare the only haploid stage.Sporophyte(2n)Zygote (2n)GametesMale (n) Female (n)Spore (n)Gametophyte(n)Mature organism(n)GametesMale (n) Female (n)Matureorganism (2n)Zygote (2n)GametesMale (n) Female (n)Fungus (Rhizopus oligosporus)(haploid organism)Fern (Humata tyermanii)(diploid sporophyte)Elephant (Loxodonta africana)(diploid organism)DIPLOID(2n)DIPLOID (2n)HAPLOID (n) HAPLOID (n)DIPLOID (2n)HAPLOID(n)Spores (n)Zygote (2n)MeiosisMeiosisMeiosisFertilizationFertilizationFertilization11.15 Fertilization and Meiosis Alternate in Sexual ReproductionIn sexual reproduction, haploid (n) cells or organisms alternate with diploid(2n) cells or organisms.GO TO Web Activity 11.3 • Sexual Life CycleyourBioPortal.comto haploid spores, which divide by mitosis to form a haploidlife stage called the gametophyte. The gametophyteforms gametes by mitosis, which fuse to form a diploid zygote.The zygote divides by mitosis to become the diploidsporophyte, which in turn produces the gametes by meiosis.• In diplontic organisms, which include animals, brown algaeand some fungi, the gametes are the only haploid cells inthe life cycle, and the mature organism is diploid.These life cycles are described in greater detail in Part Seven.For now we will focus on the role of sexual reproduction in generatingdiversity among individual organisms.The essence of sexual reproduction is the random selection ofhalf of the diploid chromosome set to make a haploid gamete, followedby fusion of two haploid gametes to produce a diploidcell. Both of these steps contribute to a shuffling of genetic informationin the population, so that no two individuals haveexactly the same genetic constitution. The diversity providedby sexual reproduction opens up enormous opportunities forevolution.The number, shapes, and sizes of the metaphasechromosomes constitute the karyotypeWhen cells are in metaphase of mitosis, it is often possible tocount and characterize their individual chromosomes. If a photomicrographof the entire set of chromosomes is made, theimages of the individual chromosomes can be manipulated,pairing and placing them in an orderly arrangement. Such a rearrangedphotomicrograph reveals the number, shapes, andsizes of the chromosomes in a cell, which together constitute itskaryotype (Figure 11.16). In humans, karyotypes can aid inthe diagnosis of certain diseases, and this has led to an entirebranch of medicine called cytogenetics. However, as you will seein Chapter 15, chromosome analysis with the microscope is beingreplaced by direct analysis of DNA.Individual chromosomes can be recognized by their lengths,the positions of their centromeres, and characteristic bandingpatterns that are visible when the chromosomes are stained andobserved at high magnification. In diploid cells, the karyotypeconsists of homologous pairs of chromosomes—for example,there are 23 pairs and a total of 46 chromosomes in humans.There is no simple relationship between the size of an organismand its chromosome number. A housefly has 5 chromosomepairs and a horse has 32, but the smaller carp (a fish)has 52 pairs. Probably the highest number of chromosomes inany organism is in the fern Ophioglossum reticulatum, which has1,260 (630 pairs)!11.4 RECAPMeiosis is necessary for sexual reproduction, inwhich haploid gametes fuse to produce a diploid zygote.Sexual reproduction results in genetic diversity,the foundation of evolution.• What is the difference, in terms of genetics, betweenasexual and sexual reproduction? See p. 221• How does fertilization produce a diploid organism?See p. 222• What general features do all sexual life cycles have incommon? See p. 222 and Figure 11.15Meiosis, unlike mitosis, results in daughter cells that have halfas many chromosomes as the parent cell. Next we will look atthe processes of meiosis.11.4 | WHAT ROLE DOES CELL DIVISION PLAY IN A SEXUAL LIFE CYCLE? 223Centromeres (arrows) occupy characteristicpositions on homologous chromosomes.Humans have 23 pairs ofchromosomes, includingthe sex chromosomes.This female’s sexchromosomes are X andX; a male would have Xand Y chromosomes.(A) (B)11.16 The Human Karyotype (A) Chromosomes from a human cell inmetaphase. The DNA of each chromosome pair has a specific nucleotidesequence that is stained by a particular colored dye, so that the chromosomesin a homologous pair share a distinctive color. Each chromosomeat this stage is composed of two chromatids, but they cannot be distinguished.At the upper right is an interphase nucleus. (B) This karyogram,produced by computerized analysis of the image on the left, showshomologous pairs lined up together and numbered, clearly revealing theindividual’s karyotype.11.5 What Happens during Meiosis?In the last section we described the role and importance of meiosisin sexual reproduction. Now we will see how meiosis accomplishesthe orderly and precise generation of haploid cells.Meiosis consists of two nuclear divisions that reduce thenumber of chromosomes to the haploid number, in preparationfor sexual reproduction. Although the nucleus divides twice duringmeiosis, the DNAis replicated only once. Unlike the productsof mitosis, the products of meiosis are genetically different fromone another and from the parent cell. To understand the processof meiosis and its specific details, it is useful to keep in mindthe overall functions of meiosis:The chromatin begins to condense followinginterphase.1The chromosomes condense again,following a brief interphase (interkinesis)in which DNA does not replicate.7 8 9Synapsis aligns homologs, and chromosomescondense further.2 The chromosomes continue to coil and shorten.The chiasmata reflect crossing over, theexchange of genetic material between nonsisterchromatids in a homologous pair. In prometaphasethe nuclear envelope breaks down.3The centromeres of the paired chromatids lineup across the equatorial plates of each cell.The chromatids finally separate, becomingchromosomes in their own right, and arepulled to opposite poles. Because of crossingover and independent assortment, each newcell will have a different genetic makeup.Early prophase I Mid-prophase I Late prophase I–PrometaphaseProphase II Metaphase II Anaphase IIPairs ofhomologsTetradChiasmaCentrosomesEquatorial plateMEIOSIS IMEIOSIS II• To reduce the chromosome number from diploid to haploid• To ensure that each of the haploid products has a completeset of chromosomes• To generate genetic diversity among the productsThe events of meiosis are illustrated in Figure 11.17. In this section,we discuss some of the key features that distinguish meiosisfrom mitosis.Meiotic division reduces thechromosome numberAs noted above, meiosis consists of two nucleardivisions, meiosis I and meiosis II. Twounique features characterize meiosis I.• Homologous chromosomes come together topair along their entire lengths. No suchpairing occurs in mitosis.• The homologous chromosome pairs separate,but the individual chromosomes, eachconsisting of two sister chromatids, remainintact. (The chromatids will separate during meiosis II.)Like mitosis, meiosis I is preceded by an interphase with anS phase, during which each chromosome is replicated. As a result,each chromosome consists of two sister chromatids, heldtogether by cohesin proteins. At the end of meiosis I, two nucleiform, each with half of the original chromosomes (one memberof each homologous pair). Since the centromeres did notThe homologous pairs line up on the equatorial(metaphase) plate.4The chromosomes gather into nuclei, and thecells divide.10 11The homologous chromosomes (each withtwo chromatids) move to opposite poles ofthe cell.5 The chromosomes gather into nuclei, and theoriginal cell divides.6Each of the four cells has a nucleus with ahaploid number of chromosomes.Metaphase I Anaphase I Telophase ITelophase II ProductsEquatorialplate11.17 Meiosis: Generating Haploid CellsIn meiosis, two sets of chromosomes are dividedamong four daughter nuclei, each of which hashalf as many chromosomes as the original cell.Four haploid cells are the result of two successivenuclear divisions. The micrographs show meiosis inthe male reproductive organ of a lily; the diagramsshow the corresponding phases in an animal cell.(For instructional purposes, the chromosomes fromone parent are colored blue and those from theother parent are red.)GO TO Web Activity 11.4 • Images of MeiosisyourBioPortal.com11.5 | WHAT HAPPENS DURING MEIOSIS? 225separate, these chromosomes are still double—composed of twosister chromatids. The sister chromatids are separated duringmeiosis II, which is not preceded by DNA replication. As a result,the products of meiosis I and II are four cells, each containingthe haploid number of chromosomes. But these four cellsare not genetically identical.Chromatid exchanges during meiosis I generategenetic diversityMeiosis I begins with a long prophase I (the first three panels ofFigure 11.17), during which the chromosomes change markedly.The homologous chromosomes pair by adhering along theirlengths in a process called synapsis. (This does not happen inmitosis.) This pairing process lasts from prophase I to the endof metaphase I. The four chromatids of each pair of homologouschromosomes form a tetrad, or bivalent. For example, in a humancell at the end of prophase I there are 23 tetrads, each consistingof four chromatids. The four chromatids come from thetwo partners in each homologous pair of chromosomes.Throughout prophase I and metaphase I, the chromatin continuesto coil and compact, so that the chromosomes appear everthicker. At a certain point, the homologous chromosomes appearto repel each other, especially near the centromeres, butthey remain held together by physical attachments mediatedby cohesins. Later in prophase, regions having these attachmentstake on an X-shaped appearance (Figure 11.18) and arecalled chiasmata (singular chiasma, “cross”).Achiasma reflects an exchange of genetic material between nonsisterchromatids on homologous chromosomes—what geneticistscall crossing over (Figure 11.19). The chromosomes usuallybegin exchanging material shortly after synapsis begins, but chiasmatado not become visible until later, when the homologs arerepelling each other. Crossing over results in recombinant chromatids,and it increases genetic variation among the products ofmeiosis by reshuffling genetic information among the homologouspairs. In Chapter 12 we explore further the genetic consequencesof crossing over. Mitosis seldom takes more than anhour or two, but meiosis can take much longer. In human males,the cells in the testis that undergo meiosis take about a weekfor prophase I and about a month for the entire meiotic cycle. Infemales, prophase I begins long before a woman’s birth, duringher early fetal development, and ends as much as decades later,during the monthly ovarian cycle.During meiosis homologous chromosomes separateby independent assortmentA diploid organism has two sets of chromosomes (2n); one setderived from its male parent, and the other from its female parent.As the organism grows and develops, its cells undergomitotic divisions. In mitosis, each chromosome behaves independentlyof its homolog, and its two chromatids are sent to oppositepoles during anaphase. Each daughter nucleus ends upwith 2n chromosomes. In meiosis, things are very different. Figure11.20 compares the two processes.226 CHAPTER 11 | THE CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISIONChiasmataCentromeresHomologouschromosomesChiasmataCentromeresHomologouschromosomes11.18 Chiasmata: Evidence of Genetic Exchange betweenChromatids This micrograph shows a pair of homologous chromosomes,each with two chromatids, during prophase I of meiosis in asalamander. Two chiasmata are visible.During prophase I,homologouschromosomes, eachwith a pair of sisterchromatids, line up toform a tetrad.Adjacent chromatids ofdifferent homologs breakand rejoin. Because thereis still sister chromatidcohesion, a chiasma forms.The chiasma is resolved.Recombinant chromatidscontain genetic materialfrom different homologs.HomologouschromosomesChiasmaRecombinantchromatidsSisterchromatids11.19 Crossing Over Forms Genetically Diverse ChromosomesThe exchange of genetic material by crossing over results in new combinationsof genetic information on the recombinant chromosomes. Thetwo different colors distinguish the chromosomes contributed by the maleand female parents.11.5 | WHAT HAPPENS DURING MEIOSIS? 227No pairing ofhomologouschromosomes.1Individualchromosomesalign at theequatorial plate.2Centromeres separate.Sister chromatids separateduring anaphase, becomingdaughter chromosomes.3Pairing and crossingover of homologs.1Homologous pairsalign at the equatorialplate.2Centromeres do notseparate; sisterchromatids remaintogether duringanaphase; homologsseparate; DNA doesnot replicate beforeprophase II.3Mitosis is a mechanism for constancy:The parent nucleus produces twogenetically identical daughter nuclei.At the end oftelophase I, thetwo homologs aresegregated fromone another.Meiosis II produces four haploid daughtercells that are genetically distinct. Meiosisis thus a mechanism for generating diversity.Pairs ofhomologsProphaseMetaphaseAnaphaseMITOSIS MEIOSISParent cell (2n) Parent cell (2n)Prophase IMetaphase IAnaphase ITwo daughter cells (each 2n)2n 2nn n n nFour daughter cells (each n)Telophase I11.20 Mitosis and Meiosis: A Comparison Meiosis differs frommitosis chiefly by the pairing of homologs and by the failure of the centromeresto separate at the end of metaphase I.In meiosis I, chromosomes of maternal origin pair with theirpaternal homologs during synapsis. This pairing does not occurin mitosis. Segregation of the homologs during meiotic anaphaseI (see steps 4–6 of Figure 11.17) ensures that each pole receivesone member of each homologous pair. For example, at the endof meiosis I in humans, each daughter nucleus contains 23 ofthe original 46 chromosomes. In this way, the chromosomenumber is decreased from diploid to haploid. Furthermore,meiosis I guarantees that each daughter nucleus gets one fullset of chromosomes.Crossing over is one reason for the genetic diversity amongthe products of meiosis. The other source of diversity is independentassortment. It is a matter of chance which member ofa homologous pair goes to which daughter cell at anaphase I.For example, imagine there are two homologous pairs of chromosomesin the diploid parent nucleus. Aparticular daughternucleus could receive the paternal chromosome 1 and the maternalchromosome 2. Or it could get paternal 2 and maternal1, or both maternal, or both paternal chromosomes. It alldepends on the way in which the homologous pairs line upat metaphase I. This phenomenon is termed independentassortment.Note that of the four possible chromosome combinations justdescribed, only two produce daughter nuclei with full complementsof either maternal or paternal chromosome sets (apartfrom the material exchanged by crossing over). The greater thenumber of chromosomes, the less probable that the original parentalcombinations will be reestablished, and the greater the potential forgenetic diversity. Most species of diploid organisms have morethan two pairs of chromosomes. In humans, with 23 chromosomepairs, 223 (8,388,608) different combinations can be producedjust by the mechanism of independent assortment. Takingthe extra genetic shuffling afforded by crossing over intoaccount, the number of possible combinations is virtually infinite.Crossing over and independent assortment, along with theprocesses that result in mutations, provide the genetic diversityneeded for evolution by natural selection.We have seen how meiosis I is fundamentally different frommitosis. On the other hand, meiosis II is similar to mitosis, inthat it involves the separation of chromatids into daughter nuclei(see steps 7–11 in Figure 11.17). The final products of meiosisI and meiosis II are four haploid daughter cells, each withone set (n) of chromosomes.Meiotic errors lead to abnormal chromosomestructures and numbersIn the complex process of meiosis, things occasionally go wrong.A pair of homologous chromosomes may fail to separate duringmeiosis I, or sister chromatids may fail to separate duringmeiosis II. Conversely, homologous chromosomes may fail toremain together during metaphase I, and then both may migrateto the same pole in anaphase I. This phenomenon is callednondisjunction and it results in the production of aneuploid cells.Aneuploidy is a condition in which one or more chromosomesare either lacking or present in excess (Figure 11.21).There are many different causes of aneuploidy, but one ofthem may result from a breakdown in the cohesins that keepsister chromatids and tetrads joined together during prophaseI (see Figure 11.17). These and other proteins ensure that whenthe chromosomes line up at the equatorial plate, one homologwill face one pole and the other homolog will face the otherpole. If the cohesins break down at the wrong time, both homologsmay go to one pole. If, for example, during the formationof a human egg, both members of the chromosome 21 pairgo to the same pole during anaphase I, the resulting eggs willcontain either two copies of chromosome 21 or none at all. If anegg with two of these chromosomes is fertilized by a normalsperm, the resulting zygote will have three copies of the chromosome:it will be trisomic for chromosome 21. Achild with anextra chromosome 21 has the symptoms of Down syndrome: im-GO TO Animated Tutorial 11.2 • MeiosisyourBioPortal.comOnly one pair of homologouschromosomes is emphasized.In humans, there are a total of22 other pairs.Nondisjunction canoccur if, duringanaphase of meiosis I,both homologs go tothe same pole.Meiosis IMeiosis IIFertilizationby normal spermChromosomemissingChromosome fromnormal gameteExtrachromosomeMonosomy Trisomy228 CHAPTER 11 | THE CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION11.21 Nondisjunction Leads to Aneuploidy Nondisjunction occurs ifhomologous chromosomes fail to separate during meiosis I, or if chromatidsfail to separate during meiosis II. The first case is shown here. Theresult is aneuploidy: one or more chromosomes are either lacking or presentin excess. Generally, aneuploidy is lethal to the developing embryo.paired intelligence; characteristic abnormalities of the hands,tongue, and eyelids; and an increased susceptibility to cardiacabnormalities and diseases such as leukemia. If an egg thatdid not receive chromosome 21 is fertilized by a normal sperm,the zygote will have only one copy: it will be monosomic forchromosome 21, and this is lethal.Trisomies and the corresponding monosomies are surprisinglycommon in human zygotes, with 10–30 percent of all conceptionsshowing aneuploidy. But most of the embryos that developfrom such zygotes do not survive to birth, and those thatdo often die before the age of 1 year (trisomies for chromosome21 are the viable exception). At least one-fifth of all recognizedpregnancies are spontaneously terminated (miscarried) duringthe first 2 months, largely because of trisomies and monosomies.The actual proportion of spontaneously terminated pregnanciesis certainly higher, because the earliest ones often go unrecognized.Other abnormal chromosomal events can also occur. In aprocess called translocation, a piece of a chromosome may breakaway and become attached to another chromosome. For example,a particular large part of one chromosome 21 may betranslocated to another chromosome. Individuals who inheritthis translocated piece along with two normal chromosomes 21will have Down syndrome.Polyploids have more than two complete setsof chromosomesAs mentioned in Section 11.4, mature organisms are often eitherdiploid (for example, most animals) or haploid (for example,most fungi). Under some circumstances, triploid (3n), tetraploid(4n), or higher-order polyploid nuclei may form. Each of theseploidy levels represents an increase in the number of completechromosome sets present. Organisms with complete extra setsof chromosomes may sometimes be produced by artificialbreeding or by natural accidents. Polyploidy occurs naturallyin some animals and many plants, and it has probably led tospeciation (the evolution of a new species) in some cases.A diploid nucleus can undergo normal meiosis becausethere are two sets of chromosomes to make up homologouspairs, which separate during anaphase I. Similarly, a tetraploidnucleus has an even number of each kind of chromosome, soeach chromosome can pair with its homolog. However, atriploid nucleus cannot undergo normal meiosis because onethirdof the chromosomes would lack partners. Polyploidy hasimplications for agriculture, particularly in the production ofhybrid plants. For example, ploidy must be taken into accountin wheat breeding because there are diploid, tetraploid, andhexaploid wheat varieties. Polyploidy can be a desirable traitin crops and ornamental plants because it often leads to morerobust plants with larger flowers, fruits, and seeds. Triploidycan be useful in some circumstances. For example, rivers andlakes can be stocked with triploid trout, which are sterile andwill not escape to reproduce in waters where they might upsetthe natural ecology.11.5 RECAPMeiosis produces four daughter cells in which thechromosome number is reduced from diploid to haploid.Because of the independent assortment ofchromosomes and the crossing over of homologouschromatids, the four products of meiosis are not geneticallyidentical. Meiotic errors, such as the failureof a homologous chromosome pair to separate, canlead to abnormal numbers of chromosomes.• How do crossing over and independent assortmentresult in unique daughter nuclei? See p. 226 andFigure 11.19• What are the differences between meiosis andmitosis? See pp. 224–228 and Figure 11.20• What is aneuploidy, and how can it arise from nondisjunctionduring meiosis? See p. 228 and Figure 11.21An essential role of cell division in complex eukaryotes is to replacecells that die. What happens to those cells?In a Living Organism, How Do 11.6 Cells Die?Cells die in one of two ways. The first type of cell death, necrosis,occurs when cells are damaged by mechanical means ortoxins, or are starved of oxygen or nutrients. These cells usuallyswell up and burst, releasing their contents into the extracellularenvironment. This process often results in inflammation(see Section 42.2).More typically, cell death is due to apoptosis (Greek, “fallingapart”). Apoptosis is a programmed series of events thatresult in cell death. Why would a cell initiate apoptosis, whichis essentially cell suicide? In animals, there are two possiblereasons:• The cell is no longer needed by the organism. For example, beforebirth, a human fetus has weblike hands, with connectivetissue between the fingers. As development proceeds,this unneeded tissue disappears as its cells undergo apoptosisin response to specific signals.• The longer cells live, the more prone they are to genetic damagethat could lead to cancer. This is especially true of epithelialcells of the surface of an organism, which may be exposedto radiation or toxic substances. Such cells normally die afteronly days or weeks and are replaced by new cells.The outward events of apoptosis are similar in many organisms.The cell becomes detached from its neighbors, cuts upits chromatin into nucleosome-sized pieces, and forms membranouslobes, or “blebs,” that break up into cell fragments (Figure11.22A). In a remarkable example of the economy of nature,the surrounding living cells usually ingest the remains of thedead cell by phagocytosis. Neighboring cells digest the apop-11.6 | IN A LIVING ORGANISM, HOW DO CELLS DIE? 229Inactive caspasechanges its structureto become active.A cell in apoptosisdisplays extensivemembrane blebbing.A normal whiteblood cell.2External signalscan bind to areceptor protein.Caspase hydrolyzesnuclear proteins,nucleosomes, etc.,resulting in apoptosis.31aInternal signals canbind to mitochondria,releasing other signals.1b(A) (B)totic cell contents in their lysosomes and the digested componentsare recycled.Apoptosis is also used by plant cells, in an important defensemechanism called the hypersensitive response. Plants can protectthemselves from disease by undergoing apoptosis at the siteof infection by a fungus or bacterium. With no living tissue togrow in, the invading organism is not able to spread to otherparts of the plant. Because of their rigid cell wall, plant cellsdo not form blebs the way that animal cells do. Instead, they digesttheir own cell contents in the vacuole and then release thedigested components into the vascular system.Despite these differences between plant and animal cells,they share many of the signal transduction pathways that leadto apoptosis. Like the cell division cycle, programmed cell deathis controlled by signals, which may come from inside or outsidethe cell (Figure 11.22B). Internal signals may be linked to theabsence of mitosis or the recognition of damaged DNA. Externalsignals (or a lack of them) can cause a receptor protein in theplasma membrane to change its shape, and in turn activate asignal transduction pathway. Both internal and external signalscan lead to the activation of a class of enzymes called caspases.These enzymes are proteases that hydrolyze target moleculesin a cascade of events. As a result, the cell dies as the caspaseshydrolyze proteins of the nuclear envelope, nucleosomes, andplasma membrane.11.6 RECAPCell death can occur either by necrosis or by apoptosis.Apoptosis is governed by precise molecularcontrols.• What are some differences between apoptosis andnecrosis? See p. 229• In what situation is apoptosis necessary?See p. 229• How is apoptosis regulated? See Figure 11.22How Does Unregulated Cell Division 11.7 Lead to Cancer?Perhaps no malady affecting people in the industrialized worldinstills more fear than cancer, and most people realize that it involvesan inappropriate increase in cell numbers. One in threeAmericans will have some form of cancer in their lifetimes, andat present, one in four will die of it. With 1.5 million new casesand half a million deaths in the United States annually, cancerranks second only to heart disease as a killer.Cancer cells differ from normal cellsCancer cells differ from the normal cells from which they originatein two ways:• Cancer cells lose control over cell division.• Cancer cells can migrate to other locations in the body.Most cells in the body divide only if they are exposed to extracellularsignals such as growth factors. Cancer cells do notrespond to these controls, and instead divide more or less continuously,ultimately forming tumors (large masses of cells). Bythe time a physician can feel a tumor or see one on an X-ray filmor CAT scan, it already contains millions of cells. Tumors can bebenign or malignant.Benign tumors resemble the tissue they came from, growslowly, and remain localized where they develop. For example,a lipoma is a benign tumor of fat cells that may arise in thearmpit and remain there. Benign tumors are not cancers, butthey must be removed if they impinge on an organ, obstructingits function.11.22 Apoptosis: Programmed Cell Death (A) Many cells are programmedto “self-destruct” when they are no longer needed, or whenthey have lived long enough to accumulate a burden of DNA damage thatmight harm the organism. (B) Both external and internal signals stimulatecaspases, the enzymes that break down specific cell constituents, resultingin apoptosis.230 CHAPTER 11 | THE CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISIONMalignant tumors do not look like their parent tissue at all. Aflat, specialized epithelial cell in the lung wall may turn into a relativelyfeatureless, round, malignant lung cancer cell (Figure11.23). Malignant cells often have irregular structures, such asvariable nucleus sizes and shapes. Recall the opening story of thischapter, in which cervical cancer was diagnosed by cell structure.The second and most fearsome characteristic of cancer cellsis their ability to invade surrounding tissues and spread to otherparts of the body by traveling through the bloodstream or lymphaticducts. When malignant cells become lodged in some distantpart of the body they go on dividing and growing, establishinga tumor at that new site. This spreading, called metastasis,results in organ failures and makes the cancer very hardto treat.Cancer cells lose control over the cell cycleand apoptosisEarlier in this chapter you learned about proteins that regulatethe progress of a eukaryotic cell through the cell cycle:• Positive regulators such as growth factors stimulate the cellcycle: they are like “gas pedals.”• Negative regulators such as RB inhibit the cell cycle: theyare like “brakes.”Just as driving a car requires stepping on the gas pedal and releasingthe brakes, a cell will go through a division cycle onlyif the positive regulators are active and the negative regulatorsare inactive.In most cells, the two regulatory systems ensure that cells divideonly when needed. In cancer cells, these two processes areabnormal.• Oncogene proteins are positive regulators in cancer cells.They are derived from normal positive regulators that havebecome mutated to be overly active or that are present inexcess, and they stimulate the cancer cells to divide moreoften. Oncogene products could be growth factors, their receptors,or other components in the signal transductionpathway. An example of an oncogene protein is the growthfactor receptor in a breast cancer cell (Figure 11.24A). Normalbreast cells have relatively low numbers of the growthfactor receptor HER2. So when this growth factor is made,it doesn’t find many breast cell receptors with which tobind and initiate cell division. In about 25 percent of breastcancers, a DNA change results in the increased productionof the HER2 receptor. This results in positive stimulation ofthe cell cycle, and a rapid proliferation of cells with the alteredDNA.• Tumor suppressors are negative regulators in both cancerand normal cells, but in cancer cells they are inactive. An exampleis the RB protein that acts at R (the restriction point)in G1 (see Figure 11.6). When RB is active the cell cycle doesnot proceed, but it is inactive in cancer cells, allowing the11.7 | HOW DOES UNREGULATED CELL DIVISION LEAD TO CANCER? 23111.23 A Cancer Cell with its Normal Neighbors This lung cancercell (yellow-green) is quite different from the normal lung cells surroundingit. The cancer cell can divide more rapidly than its normal counterparts,and it can spread to other organs. This form of small-cell cancer is lethal,with a 5-year survival rate of 10 percent. Most cases are caused bytobacco smoking.XXXThere are few copies of thegrowth factor receptor HER2on normal breast cells.In breast cancer, changes in DNAmay result in many receptors,making the cell sensitive to growthfactor stimulation.In normal cervical cells, RBprotein acts to inhibit cellcycle initiation.In cervical cancer, a virus makes aprotein that inactivates RB, so thecell cycle can proceed.(A)(B)HER2RB11.24 Molecular Changes in Cancer Cells In cancer, oncogeneproteins become active (A) and tumor suppressor proteins becomeinactive (B).cell cycle to occur. Some viral proteins can inactivate tumorsuppressors. For example, in the opening story of this chapterwe saw how HPV infects cells of the cervix and producesa protein called E7. E7 binds to the RB protein and preventsit from inhibiting the cell cycle (Figure 11.24B).The discovery of apoptosis and its importance (see Section11.6) has changed the way biologists think about cancer. In apopulation of organisms, the net increase in the number ofindividuals over time (the growth rate) is a function of the individualsadded (the birth rate) and lost (the death rate). Cellpopulations behave the same way:rate of cell rate ofgrowth rate ofcell population = division – apoptosis(“births”) (“deaths”)Cancer cells may lose the ability to respond to positive regulatorsof apoptosis (see Figure 11.22). This lowers the cellular“death rate” so that the overall cell population grows rapidly.Cancer treatments target the cell cycleThe most successful and widely used treatment for cancer issurgery. While physically removing a tumor is optimal, it isoften difficult for a surgeon to get all of the tumor cells. (A tumorabout 1 cm in size already has a billion cells!) Tumors aregenerally embedded in normal tissues. Added to this is theprobability that cells of the tumor may have broken off andspread to other organs. This makes it unlikely that localized surgerywill be curative. So other approaches are taken to treat orcure cancer, and these generally target the cell cycle (Figure11.25).An example of a cancer drug that targets the cell cycle is 5-fluorouracil, which blocks the synthesis of thymine, one of thefour bases in DNA. The drug taxol prevents the functioning ofmicrotubules in the mitotic spindle. Both drugs inhibit the cellcycle, and apoptosis causes tumor shrinkage. More dramaticis radiation treatment, in which a beam of high-energy radiationis focused on the tumor. DNA damage is extensive, and thecell cycle checkpoint for DNA repair is overwhelmed. As a result,the cell undergoes apoptosis. Amajor problem with thesetreatments is that they target normal cells as well as the tumorcells. These treatments are toxic to tissues with large populationsof normal dividing cells such as those in the intestine, skinand bone marrow (producing blood cells).A major effort in cancer research is to find treatments thattarget only cancer cells. Apromising recent example is Herceptin,which targets the HER2 growth factor receptor that is expressedat high levels on the surfaces of some breast cancer cells (seeFigure 11.24A). Herceptin binds specifically to the HER2 receptorbut does not stimulate it. This prevents the natural growthfactor from binding, and so the cells are not stimulated to divide.As a result, the tumor shrinks because the apoptosis rateremains the same. More such treatments are on the way.11.7 RECAPCancer cells differ from normal cells in terms of theirrapid cell division and their ability to spread (metastasis).Many proteins regulate the cell cycle, eitherpositively or negatively. In cancer, one or another ofthese proteins is altered in some way, making its activityabnormal. Radiation and many cancer drugstarget proteins involved in the cell cycle.• How are oncogene proteins and tumor suppressorproteins involved in cell cycle control in normal andcancer cells? Review p. 231 and Figure 11.24• How does cancer treatment target the cell cycle?Review p. 232 and Figure 11.25We have now looked at the cell cycle and at cell division by binaryfission, mitosis, and meiosis. We have described the normalcell cycle and how it is upset in cancer. We have seen how meiosisproduces haploid cells in sexual life cycles. In the coming chapterswe examine heredity, genes, and DNA. In Chapter 12 we seehow Gregor Mendel studied heredity in the nineteenth centuryand how the enormous power of his discoveries founded the scienceof genetics, and changed forever the science of biology.232 CHAPTER 11 | THE CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISIONSome drugs, such as taxol,block the mitotic spindle.Radiation damagesDNA and causesapoptosis at the Sand G2 checkpoints.Some drugs, such as 5-fluorouracil,block DNA replication.Some drugs,such asetoposide, inhibitgrowth factorstimulation atthe restrictionG1 point.MG2SInterphaseRestrictionpoint (R)11.25 Cancer Treatment and the Cell Cycle To prevent cancer cellsfrom dividing, physicians use combinations of therapies that attack thecell cycle at different points.CHAPTER SUMMARY 23311.1 How Do Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells Divide?• Cell division is necessary for the reproduction, growth, andrepair of organisms.• Cell division must be initiated by a reproductive signal. Before acell can divide, the genetic material (DNA) must be replicatedand segregated to separate portions of the cell. Cytokinesisthen divides the cytoplasm into two cells.• In prokaryotes, most cellular DNA is a single molecule, usually inthe form of a circular chromosome. Prokaryotes reproduce bybinary fission. Review Figure 11.2• In eukaryotes, cells divide by either mitosis or meiosis.Eukaryotic cell division follows the same general pattern asbinary fission, but with significant differences. For example, aeukaryotic cell has a distinct nucleus that must be replicatedprior to separating the two daughter cells.• Cells that produce gametes undergo a special kind of nucleardivision called meiosis; the four daughter cells produced bymeiosis are not genetically identical.11.2 How Is Eukaryotic Cell Division Controlled?• The eukaryotic cell cycle has two main phases: interphase, duringwhich cells are not dividing and the DNA is replicating, andmitosis or M phase, when the cells are dividing.• During most of the eukaryotic cell cycle, the cell is in interphase,which is divided into three subphases: S, G1, and G2. DNA isreplicated during the S phase. Mitosis (M phase) and cytokinesisfollow. Review Figure 11.3• Cyclin–Cdk complexes regulate the passage of cells throughcheckpoints in the cell cycle. The suppressor protein RBinhibits the cell cycle. The G1–S cyclin–Cdk functions by inactivatingRB and allows the cell cycle to progress beyond therestriction point. Review Figures 11.5 and 11.6• External controls such as growth factors can also stimulate thecell to begin a division cycle.11.3 What Happens during Mitosis?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 11.1• In mitosis, a single nucleus gives rise to two nuclei that aregenetically identical to each other and to the parent nucleus.• DNA is wrapped around proteins called histones, formingbeadlike units called nucleosomes. A eukaryotic chromosomecontains strings of nucleosomes bound to proteins in a complexcalled chromatin. Review Figure 11.9• At mitosis, the replicated chromosomes, called sister chromatids,are held together at the centromere. Each chromatidconsists of one double-stranded DNA molecule. Review Figure11.10, WEB ACTIVITY 11.1• Mitosis can be divided into several phases called prophase,prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase.• During mitosis sister chromatids, attached by cohesin, line upat the equatorial plate and attach to the spindle. The chromatidsseparate (becoming daughter chromosomes) andmigrate to opposite ends of the cell. Review Figure 11.11,WEB ACTIVITY 11.2• Nuclear division is usually followed by cytokinesis. Animal cellcytoplasms divide via a contractile ring made up of actin microfilaments.In plant cells, cytokinesis is accomplished by vesiclesthat fuse to form a cell plate. Review Figure 11.1311.4 What Role Does Cell Division Play in a SexualLife Cycle?• Asexual reproduction produces clones, new organisms thatare genetically identical to the parent. Any genetic variation isthe result of mutations.• In sexual reproduction, two haploid gametes—one fromeach parent—unite in fertilization to form a geneticallyunique, diploid zygote. There are many different sexual lifecycles that can be haplontic, diplontic, or involve alternationof generations. Review Figure 11.15, WEB ACTIVITY11.3• In sexually reproducing organisms, certain cells in the adultundergo meiosis, a process by which a diploid cell produceshaploid gametes.• Each gamete contains of one of each pair of homologouschromosomes from the parent.• The numbers, shapes, and sizes of the chromosomes constitutethe karyotype of an organism.11.5 What Happens during Meiosis?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 11.2• Meiosis consists of two nuclear divisions, meiosis I and meiosisII, that collectively reduce the chromosome number fromdiploid to haploid. It ensures that each haploid cell contains onemember of each chromosome pair, and results in four geneticallydiverse haploid cells, usually gametes. Review Figure11.17, WEB ACTIVITY 11.4• In meiosis I, entire chromosomes, each with two chromatids,migrate to the poles. In meiosis II, the sister chromatids separate.• During prophase I, homologous chromosomes undergo synapsisto form pairs in a tetrad. Chromatids can form junctions calledchiasmata and genetic material may be exchanged between thetwo homologs by crossing over. Review Figure 11.18• Both crossing over during prophase I and independentassortment of the homologs as they separate during anaphaseI ensure that the gametes are genetically diverse.• In nondisjunction, two members of a homologous pair of chromosomesgo to the same pole during meiosis I, or two chromatidsgo to the same pole during meiosis II. This leads to onegamete having an extra chromosome and another lacking thatchromosome. Review Figure 11.21• The union between a gamete with an abnormal chromosomenumber and a normal haploid gamete results in aneuploidy.Such genetic abnormalities are harmful or lethal to the organism.11.6 In a Living Organism, How Do Cells Die?• A cell may die by necrosis, or it may self-destruct by apoptosis,a genetically programmed series of events that includes thefragmentation of its nuclear DNA.CHAPTER SUMMARY
11.1 How Do Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells Divide?• Cell division is necessary for the reproduction, growth, andrepair of organisms.• Cell division must be initiated by a reproductive signal. Before acell can divide, the genetic material (DNA) must be replicatedand segregated to separate portions of the cell. Cytokinesisthen divides the cytoplasm into two cells.• In prokaryotes, most cellular DNA is a single molecule, usually inthe form of a circular chromosome. Prokaryotes reproduce bybinary fission. Review Figure 11.2• In eukaryotes, cells divide by either mitosis or meiosis.Eukaryotic cell division follows the same general pattern asbinary fission, but with significant differences. For example, aeukaryotic cell has a distinct nucleus that must be replicatedprior to separating the two daughter cells.• Cells that produce gametes undergo a special kind of nucleardivision called meiosis; the four daughter cells produced bymeiosis are not genetically identical.11.2 How Is Eukaryotic Cell Division Controlled?• The eukaryotic cell cycle has two main phases: interphase, duringwhich cells are not dividing and the DNA is replicating, andmitosis or M phase, when the cells are dividing.• During most of the eukaryotic cell cycle, the cell is in interphase,which is divided into three subphases: S, G1, and G2. DNA isreplicated during the S phase. Mitosis (M phase) and cytokinesisfollow. Review Figure 11.3• Cyclin–Cdk complexes regulate the passage of cells throughcheckpoints in the cell cycle. The suppressor protein RBinhibits the cell cycle. The G1–S cyclin–Cdk functions by inactivatingRB and allows the cell cycle to progress beyond therestriction point. Review Figures 11.5 and 11.6• External controls such as growth factors can also stimulate thecell to begin a division cycle.11.3 What Happens during Mitosis?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 11.1• In mitosis, a single nucleus gives rise to two nuclei that aregenetically identical to each other and to the parent nucleus.• DNA is wrapped around proteins called histones, formingbeadlike units called nucleosomes. A eukaryotic chromosomecontains strings of nucleosomes bound to proteins in a complexcalled chromatin. Review Figure 11.9• At mitosis, the replicated chromosomes, called sister chromatids,are held together at the centromere. Each chromatidconsists of one double-stranded DNA molecule. Review Figure11.10, WEB ACTIVITY 11.1• Mitosis can be divided into several phases called prophase,prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase.• During mitosis sister chromatids, attached by cohesin, line upat the equatorial plate and attach to the spindle. The chromatidsseparate (becoming daughter chromosomes) andmigrate to opposite ends of the cell. Review Figure 11.11,WEB ACTIVITY 11.2• Nuclear division is usually followed by cytokinesis. Animal cellcytoplasms divide via a contractile ring made up of actin microfilaments.In plant cells, cytokinesis is accomplished by vesiclesthat fuse to form a cell plate. Review Figure 11.1311.4 What Role Does Cell Division Play in a SexualLife Cycle?• Asexual reproduction produces clones, new organisms thatare genetically identical to the parent. Any genetic variation isthe result of mutations.• In sexual reproduction, two haploid gametes—one fromeach parent—unite in fertilization to form a geneticallyunique, diploid zygote. There are many different sexual lifecycles that can be haplontic, diplontic, or involve alternationof generations. Review Figure 11.15, WEB ACTIVITY11.3• In sexually reproducing organisms, certain cells in the adultundergo meiosis, a process by which a diploid cell produceshaploid gametes.• Each gamete contains of one of each pair of homologouschromosomes from the parent.• The numbers, shapes, and sizes of the chromosomes constitutethe karyotype of an organism.11.5 What Happens during Meiosis?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 11.2• Meiosis consists of two nuclear divisions, meiosis I and meiosisII, that collectively reduce the chromosome number fromdiploid to haploid. It ensures that each haploid cell contains onemember of each chromosome pair, and results in four geneticallydiverse haploid cells, usually gametes. Review Figure11.17, WEB ACTIVITY 11.4• In meiosis I, entire chromosomes, each with two chromatids,migrate to the poles. In meiosis II, the sister chromatids separate.• During prophase I, homologous chromosomes undergo synapsisto form pairs in a tetrad. Chromatids can form junctions calledchiasmata and genetic material may be exchanged between thetwo homologs by crossing over. Review Figure 11.18• Both crossing over during prophase I and independentassortment of the homologs as they separate during anaphaseI ensure that the gametes are genetically diverse.• In nondisjunction, two members of a homologous pair of chromosomesgo to the same pole during meiosis I, or two chromatidsgo to the same pole during meiosis II. This leads to onegamete having an extra chromosome and another lacking thatchromosome. Review Figure 11.21• The union between a gamete with an abnormal chromosomenumber and a normal haploid gamete results in aneuploidy.Such genetic abnormalities are harmful or lethal to the organism.11.6 In a Living Organism, How Do Cells Die?• A cell may die by necrosis, or it may self-destruct by apoptosis,a genetically programmed series of events that includes thefragmentation of its nuclear DNA.
• Apoptosis is regulated by external and internal signals. Thesesignals result in activation of a class of enzymes called caspasesthat hydrolyze proteins in the cell. Review Figure 11.2211.7 How Does Unregulated Cell Division Leadto Cancer?• Cancer cells divide more rapidly than normal cells and can bemetastatic, spreading to distant organs in the body.• Cancer can result from changes in either of two types of proteinsthat regulate the cell cycle. Oncogene proteins stimulatecell division and are activated in cancer. Tumor suppressorproteins normally inhibit the cell cycle but in cancer they areinactive. Review Figure 11.24• Cancer treatment often targets the cell cycle in tumor cells.Review Figure 11.25