3About 68 million years ago, a Tyrannosaurus rex,the fearsome dinosaur of movie stardom, died inwhat is now Wyoming in the United States. Overtime, the giant carcass became buried 60 feet below thesurface of what geologists call the Hell Creek Formation.In 2003, a thigh bone from the long-dead beast was foundby the famous dinosaur hunter/biologist, John Hornerfrom the Museum of the Rockies. Mary Schweitzer, a molecularpaleontologist, was visiting Horner’s Montana labfrom North Carolina State University. She cut into thebone and found that it contained the remnants of soft tissues(such as bone marrow). This discovery was remarkable,because up until then scientists had thought that afterabout a million years, all the soft tissues in bone werereplaced with minerals.Back on the east coast, Lewis Cantley, a biochemist atHarvard University, read about Schweitzer’s find in a newspaperand saw the possibility for a unique opportunity: forthe first time, a scientist would be able to isolate and studythe complex molecules of soft tissues from an extinct organism.He asked Schweitzer to send him a sample, andwhen he and his colleagues analyzed the dinosaur material,they found fragments of protein molecules.Protein molecules are composed of long chains of individualmolecules called amino acids. The protein fragmentsextracted from the T. rex bone were identifiedas collagen, a substance found in manymodern animals. Moreover, the identity and specificorder of the amino acids in the dinosaur collagenfragments closely matched that of collagenfrom chickens, and the dinosaur collagenfolded into shapes very similar to those ofbird collagen. This similarity to birds isnot surprising, because, based on otherevidence, scientists believe that birdsare evolutionarily closely related todinosaurs. Cantley’s molecular analysisfurther confirmed this belief.Proteins are one of the four major kinds oflarge molecules that characterize living systems.These macromolecules, which also include carbohydrates,lipids, and nucleic acids, differ in severalsignificant ways from the small molecules andions described in Chapter 2. First—no surprise—they are larger; the molecular weights of someMolecular fossilsMolecular Clues A thigh bone from aTyrannosaurus rex that died 68 million years agocontained fragments of the protein collagen.What Kinds of Molecules 3.1 Characterize Living Things?Four kinds of molecules are characteristic of living things: proteins,carbohydrates, lipids, and nucleic acids. With the exceptionof the lipids, these biological molecules are polymers (poly,“many”; mer, “unit”) constructed by the covalent bonding ofsmaller molecules called monomers. The monomers that makeup each kind of biological molecule have similar chemicalstructures:• Proteins are formed from different combinations of 20 aminoacids, all of which share chemical similarities.• Carbohydrates can form giant molecules by linking togetherchemically similar sugar monomers (monosaccharides) toform polysaccharides.• Nucleic acids are formed from four kinds of nucleotidemonomers linked together in long chains.• Lipids also form large structures from a limited set ofsmaller molecules, but in this case noncovalent forces maintainthe interactions between the lipid monomers.Polymers with molecular weights exceeding 1,000 grams permole are considered to be macromolecules. The proteins, carbohydrates,and nucleic acids of living systems certainly fallinto this category. Although large lipid structures are not polymersin the strictest sense, it is convenient to treat them as a specialtype of macromolecule (see Section 3.4).How the macromolecules function and interact with othermolecules depends on the properties of certain chemical groupsin their monomers, the functional groups.Functional groups give specific propertiesto biological moleculesCertain small groups of atoms, called functional groups, are consistentlyfound together in very different biological molecules.You will encounter several functional groups repeatedly in yourstudy of biology (Figure 3.1). Each functional group has specificchemical properties and, when it is attached to a larger molecule,it confers those properties on the larger molecule. One ofthese properties is polarity. Looking at the structures in Figure3.1, can you determine which functional groups are the mostIN THIS CHAPTER we will describe the chemical andbiological properties of proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids.We will identify the components that make up these largermolecules, describe their assembly and geometries, as wellas the roles they play in living organisms.nucleic acids reach billions of daltons. Second, thesemolecules all contain carbon atoms, and so belong to agroup of what are known as organic chemicals. Third, theatoms of individual macromolecules are held togethermostly by covalent bonds, which gives them importantstructural stability and distinctive three-dimensionalgeometries. These distinctive shapes are the basis ofmany of the functions of macromolecules, particularlythe proteins.Finally, carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and nucleicacids are all unique to the living world. None of thesemolecular classes occurs in inanimate nature. You aren’tlikely to find protein in a rock—but if you do, you can besure it came from a living organism.CHAPTER OUTLINE3.1 What Kinds of Molecules Characterize LivingThings?3.2 What Are the Chemical Structures and Functions ofProteins?3.3 What Are the Chemical Structures and Functions ofCarbohydrates?3.4 What Are the Chemical Structures and Functions ofLipids?Molecular Evolution The sequence of amino acids in collagendictates the shape the protein folds into. Collagen’s aminoacid sequence is similar in T. rex and in chickens, indicatingthat the two species share a common evolutionary ancestor.GO TO Animated Tutorial 3.1 • MacromoleculesyourBioPortal.compolar? (Hint: Look for C—O, N—H, and P—O bonds.) The consistentchemical behavior of functional groups helps us understandthe properties of the molecules that contain them.Because macromolecules are so large, they contain many differentfunctional groups (see Figure 3.1). Asingle large proteinmay contain hydrophobic, polar, and charged functionalgroups, each of which gives different specific properties to localsites on the macromolecule. As we will see, sometimes thesedifferent groups interact on the same macromolecule. These diversegroups and their properties help determine the shapesof macromolecules as well as how they interact with othermacromolecules and with smaller molecules.Isomers have different arrangements of the same atomsIsomers are molecules that have the same chemical formula—thesame kinds and numbers of atoms—but the atoms are arrangeddifferently. (The prefix iso-, meaning “same,” is encountered inmany biological terms.) Of the different kinds of isomers, we willconsider two: structural isomers and optical isomers.Structural isomers differ in how their atoms are joined together.Consider two simple molecules, each composed of fourcarbon and ten hydrogen atoms bonded covalently, both withthe formula C4H10. These atoms can be linked in two differentways, resulting in different molecules:The different bonding relationships in butane and isobutane aredistinguished by their structural formulas, and the two moleculeshave different chemical properties.Optical isomers occur when a carbon atom has four differentatoms or groups of atoms attached to it. This pattern allowstwo different ways of making the attachments, each the mirrorimage of the other (Figure 3.2). Such a carbon atom is called anasymmetrical carbon, and the two resulting molecules are opticalisomers of each other. You can envision your right and lefthands as optical isomers. Just as a glove is specific for a particularhand, some biochemical molecules that can interact withone optical isomer of a carbon compound are unable to “fit”the other.The structures of macromolecules reflecttheir functionsThe four kinds of biological macromolecules are present inroughly the same proportions in all living organisms (Figure3.3). Furthermore, a protein that has a certain function in an appletree probably has a similar function in a human being becauseits chemistry is the same wherever it is found. Such biochemicalunity reflects the evolution of all life from a commonancestor, by descent with modification. An important advantageof biochemical unity is that some organisms can acquireCHHHHH C HHHCHHCCHHCHHH CH HC HHHButane Isobutane40 CHAPTER 3 | PROTEINS, CARBOHYDRATES, AND LIPIDSO O –OHOO –PC CHHHHH OHCHOCHHHHOCOC CHHHHH C HOCOHOCHHHOHONHHCHHH NHHCCHH O O–OO–PH OHC–O OSH C CHHHHHO SHCCClass of compoundsand an example PropertiesEthanolAlcoholsAldehydesKetonesHydroxylAldehyde AcetaldehydeKeto AcetoneAcetic acidAminesCarboxylic acidsCarboxylAmino MethylaminePhosphate 3-PhosphoglycerateMercaptoethanolThiolsOrganic phosphatesSulfhydrylFunctional groupRR RRRRRRPolar. Hydrogen bondswith water to help dissolvemolecules. Enables linkageto other molecules bydehydration.C==O group is very reactive.Important in buildingmolecules and inenergy-releasingreactions.C==O group is importantin carbohydrates and inenergy reactions.Acidic. Ionizes in livingtissues to form —COO–and H+. Enters into dehydrationsynthesis by givingup —OH. Some carboxylicacids important in energyreleasingreactions.Basic. Accepts H+ in livingtissues to form —NH3Enters into dehydrationsynthesis by giving up H+.Negatively charged. Entersinto dehydration synthesisby giving up —OH. Whenbonded to another phosphate,hydrolysis releasesmuch energy.By giving up H, two —SHgroups can react to form adisulfide bridge, thusstabilizing protein structure.+.3.1 Some Functional Groups Important to Living SystemsHighlighted here are the seven functional groups most commonly found inbiologically important molecules. “R” is a variable chemical grouping.GO TO Web Activity 3.1 • Functional GroupsyourBioPortal.comneeded raw materials by eating other organisms. When you eatan apple, the molecules you take in include carbohydrates,lipids, and proteins that can be broken down and rebuilt intothe varieties of those molecules needed by humans.Each type of macromolecule performs some combination offunctions, such as energy storage, structural support, protection,catalysis (speeding up a chemical reaction), transport, defense,regulation, movement, and information storage. These roles arenot necessarily exclusive; for example, both carbohydrates andproteins can play structural roles, supporting and protecting tissuesand organs. However, only the nucleic acids specialize ininformation storage and transmission. These macromoleculesfunction as hereditary material, carrying the traits of both speciesand individuals from generation to generation.The functions of macromolecules are directly related to theirthree-dimensional shapes and to the sequences and chemicalproperties of their monomers. Some macromolecules fold intocompact spherical forms with surface features that make themwater-soluble and capable of intimate interaction with other molecules.Some proteins and carbohydrates form long, fibrous systems(such as those found in hair) that provide strength andrigidity to cells and tissues. The long, thin assemblies of proteinssuch as those in muscles can contract, resulting in movement.Most macromolecules are formed by condensationand broken down by hydrolysisPolymers are constructed from monomers by a series of reactionscalled condensation reactions (sometimes calleddehydration reactions; both terms refer to the loss of water).Condensation reactions result in covalent bonds betweenmonomers. Amolecule of water is released with each covalentbond formed (Figure 3.4A). The condensation reactions thatproduce the different kinds of polymers differ in detail, but in3.1 | WHAT KINDS OF MOLECULES CHARACTERIZE LIVING THINGS? 41Fit to template isimpossible forthe other isomer.One isomer fitsthe template.Asymmetricalcarbon atoms(A)(B)MirrorimageMirrorimageMoleculeHandLiving tissues are70% water by weight.Every living organism contains about these sameproportions of the four kinds of macromolecules.NucleicacidsProteins(polypeptides)MacromoleculesIons andsmall moleculesCarbohydrates(polysaccharides)LipidsWater3.2 Optical Isomers (A) Optical isomers are mirror images of eachother. (B) Molecular optical isomers result when four different atoms orgroups are attached to a single carbon atom. If a template (representinga larger biological molecule in a living system) is laid out to match thegroups on one carbon atom, the groups on that carbon’s optical isomercannot be rotated to fit the same template. This is a source of specificityin biological structure and biochemical transformations.3.3 Substances Found in Living Tissues The substances shownhere make up the nonmineral components of living tissues (bone wouldbe an example of a mineral component).Water is removedin condensation.Water is addedin hydrolysis.A covalent bondforms betweenmonomers.A covalent bondbetweenmonomers isbroken.H OH H OHH H OHHOHOHH OHH2OH2OH2OH2OH OH H OHH OH H OHMonomer(A) Condensation(B) Hydrolysis++++3.4 Condensation and Hydrolysis of Polymers (A) Condensationreactions link monomers into polymers and produce water. (B) Hydrolysisreactions break polymers into individual monomers and consume water.all cases, polymers form only if water molecules are removedand energy is added to the system. In living systems, specificenergy-rich molecules supply the necessary energy.The reverse of a condensation reaction is a hydrolysis reaction(hydro, “water”; lysis, “break”). Hydrolysis reactions resultin the breakdown of polymers into their component monomers.Water reacts with the covalent bonds that link the polymer together.For each covalent bond that is broken, a water moleculesplits into two ions (H+ and OH–), which each become part ofone of the products (Figure 3.4B). The linkages betweenmonomers can thus be formed and broken inside living tissues.3.1 RECAPThe four kinds of large molecules that distinguish livingtissues are proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, andnucleic acids. These biological molecules carry out awide range of life-sustaining functions. Most of themare polymers, made up of linked monomeric subunits.Very large polymers are called macromolecules.• How do functional groups affect the structure andfunction of macromolecules? (Keep this question inmind as you read the rest of this chapter.) Seepp. 39–40 and Figure 3.1• Why is biochemical unity, as seen in the proportions ofthe four types of macromolecules present in all organisms,important for life? See p. 40 and Figure 3.3• How do monomers link up to make polymers and howdo they break down into monomers again? See pp.41–42 and Figure 3.4The four types of macromolecules can be seen as the buildingblocks of life. The unique properties of the nucleic acidswill be covered in Chapter 4. The remainder of this chapter describesthe structures and functions of the proteins, carbohydrates,and lipids.What Are the Chemical Structures 3.2 and Functions of Proteins?While all of the kinds of large molecules are essential to the functionof organisms, few have such diverse roles as the proteins.In virtually every chapter of this book, you will be studying examplesof their extensive functions:• Enzymes are catalytic proteins that speed up biochemicalreactions.• Defensive proteins such as antibodies recognize and respondto non-self substances that invade the organism from theenvironment.• Hormonal and regulatory proteins such as insulin controlphysiological processes.• Receptor proteins receive and respond to molecular signalsfrom inside and outside the organism.• Storage proteins store chemical building blocks—aminoacids—for later use.• Structural proteins such as collagen provide physical stabilityand movement.• Transport proteins such as hemoglobin carry substanceswithin the organism.• Genetic regulatory proteins regulate when, how, and to whatextent a gene is expressed.Among the functions of macromolecules listed earlier, onlytwo—energy storage and information storage—are not usuallyperformed by proteins.All proteins are polymers made up of different proportionsand sequences of 20 amino acids. Proteins range in size fromsmall ones such as insulin, which has a molecular weight of5,733 daltons and 51 amino acids, to huge molecules such as themuscle protein titin, with a molecular weight of 2,993,451 daltonsand 26,926 amino acids. All proteins consist of one or morepolpeptide chains—unbranched (linear) polymer of covalentlylinked amino acids. The composition of a protein refers to the relativeamounts of the different amino acids present in itspolypeptide chains. Variation in the sequence of the amino acidsin polypeptide chains is the source of the diversity in proteinstructure and function, because each chain folds into specificthree-dimensional shape that is defined by the precise sequenceof the amino acids present in the chain.Many proteins are made up of more than one polypeptidechain. For example, the oxygen-carrying protein hemoglobinhas four chains that are folded separately and come together tomake up the functional protein. Proteins can also associate withone another, forming multi-protein complexes that carry out intricatetasks such as DNA synthesis.To understand the many functions of proteins, we must firstexplore protein structure. We begin by examining the propertiesof amino acids and how they link together to form polypeptidechains. Then we will describe how a linear chain of amino acidsis consistently folded into a specific, compact, three-dimensionalshape. Finally, we will see how this three-dimensional structureprovides a definitive physical and chemical environment that influenceshow other molecules can interact with the protein.Amino acids are the building blocks of proteinsThe amino acids have both a carboxyl functional group and anamino functional group (see Figure 3.1) attached to the samecarbon atom, called the α (alpha) carbon. Also attached to theα carbon atom are a hydrogen atom and a side chain, or Rgroup, designated by the letter R.The α carbon is asymmetrical because it is bonded to four differentatoms or groups of atoms. Therefore, amino acids existH3N+ C COO–HRSide chainα carbonAminogroupCarboxylgroup42 CHAPTER 3 | PROTEINS, CARBOHYDRATES, AND LIPIDSin two isomeric forms, called D-amino acids and L-amino acids.D and L are abbreviations of the Latin terms for right (dextro) andleft (levo). Only L-amino acids are commonly found in proteinsin most organisms, and their presence is an important chemical“signature” of life.At the pH values commonly found in cells, both the carboxyland amino groups of amino acids are ionized: the carboxylgroup has lost a hydrogen ion, and the amino group has gainedone. Thus amino acids are simultaneously acids and bases.The side chains of amino acids contain functional groups thatare important in determining the three-dimensional structureand thus the function of the protein. As Table 3.1 shows, the20 amino acids found in living organisms are grouped and distinguishedby their side chains:• The five amino acids that have electrically charged sidechains (+1, –1) attract water (are hydrophilic) and attractoppositely charged ions of all sorts.• The five amino acids that have polar side chains (δ+, δ–)tend to form hydrogen bonds with water and with otherpolar or charged substances. These amino acids are alsohydrophilic.• Seven amino acids have side chains that are nonpolar hydrocarbonsor very slightly modified hydrocarbons. In thewatery environment of the cell, these hydrophobic sidechains may cluster together in the interior of the protein.These amino acids are hydrophobic.3.2 | WHAT ARE THE CHEMICAL STRUCTURES AND FUNCTIONS OF PROTEINS? 43The Twenty Amino AcidsC CC C CC C C C C C CC C C C CAmino acids have both three-letterand single-letter abbreviations.The generalstructure of allamino acids isthe same……but eachhas a differentside chain.H2N+CH2CH2H2CCH2H3N+CCH2CH3H3N+H3C CH3CHH3N+CH2H3N+H3N+CH2OH HH3N+ H3N+CH2COO–CH2COO–CH2OCH2NH2N OCH2H3N+CH3CHH3N+H3CH3N+CH2CH2SCH3H3N+H3N+CCH2CH2CHH3N+CH2OHHCNHNHCH2CH2CH2+NH3H3N+CH2CH2CH2NHCNH2NH2+H3N+H3N+CH3CH2SHH C OHH3N+CH2CH3H C CH3H3N+CH2H3N+CH2C CHNH+HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–HCOO–Proline(Pro; P)Tyrosine(Tyr; Y)Glutamine(Gln; Q)A. Amino acids with electrically charged hydrophilic side chainsB. Amino acids with polar but uncharged side chains (hydrophilic)D. Amino acids with nonpolar hydrophobic side chainsC. Special casesLeucine(Leu; L)Serine(Ser; S)Glycine(Gly; G)Glutamic acid(Glu; E)Aspartic acid(Asp; D)Asparagine(Asn; N)Valine(Val; V)Methionine(Met; M)Arginine(Arg; R)Lysine(Lys; K)Threonine(Thr; T)Cysteine(Cys; C)Histidine(His; H)Positive NegativePhenylalanine(Phe; F)Tryptophan(Trp; W)+ –Alanine(Ala; A)Isoleucine(Ile; I)TABLE 3.1C C CThree amino acids—cysteine, glycine, and proline—are specialcases, although the side chains of the latter two are generallyhydrophobic.• The cysteine side chain, which has a terminal —SH group,can react with another cysteine side chain in an oxidationreaction to form a covalent bond called a disulfide bridge,or disulfide bond (—S—S—) (Figure 3.5). Disulfide bridgeshelp determine how a polypeptide chain folds.• The glycine side chain consists of a single hydrogen atomand is small enough to fit into tight corners in the interior ofa protein molecule, where a larger side chain could not fit.• Proline possesses a modified amino group that lacks a hydrogenand instead forms a covalent bond with the hydrocarbonside chain, resulting in a ring structure. This limitsboth its hydrogen-bonding ability and its ability to rotateabout the α carbon. Thus proline is often found where aprotein bends or loops.Peptide linkages form the backbone of a proteinWhen amino acids polymerize, the carboxyl and amino groupsattached to the α carbon are the reactive groups. The carboxylgroup of one amino acid reacts with the amino group of another,undergoing a condensation reaction that forms a peptidelinkage (also called a peptide bond). Figure 3.6 gives a simplifieddescription of this reaction.Just as a sentence begins with a capital letter and ends witha period, polypeptide chains have a beginning and an end. The“capital letter” marking the beginning of a polypeptide is theamino group of the first amino acid added to the chain and isknown as the N terminus. The “period” is the carboxyl group ofthe last amino acid added; this is the C terminus.Two characteristics of the peptide bond are especially importantin the three-dimensional structure of proteins:• In the C—N linkage, the adjacent α carbons (αC—C—N—αC) are not free to rotate fully, which limits the folding ofthe polypeptide chain.• The oxygen bound to the carbon (C=O) in the carboxylgroup carries a slight negative charge (δ –), whereas the hydrogenbound to the nitrogen (N—H) in the amino group isslightly positive (δ+). This asymmetry of charge favors hydrogenbonding within the protein molecule itself and withother molecules, contributing to both the structure and thefunction of many proteins.Before we explore the significance of these characteristics of thepeptide linkage, however, we will describe the significance ofthe sequence of amino acids in determining a protein’s structure.The primary structure of a protein is itsamino acid sequenceThere are four levels of protein structure: primary, secondary,tertiary, and quaternary. We will consider each of these in turnover the next few pages. The precise sequence of amino acidsin a polypeptide chain held together by peptide linkages constitutesthe primary structure of a protein (Figure 3.7A). The peptidebackbone of the polypeptide chain consists of the repeatingsequence —N—C—C—made up of the N atom from the44 CHAPTER 3 | PROTEINS, CARBOHYDRATES, AND LIPIDSS S2 HH CH2CSH SHNC HHCH2CCNCH CH2CC CH2NCN…resulting in the formationof a disulfide bridge.The —SH groups oftwo cysteine sidechains react to form acovalent bond betweenthe two sulfur atoms…Cysteine moleculesin polypeptide chainSide chains3.5 A Disulfide Bridge Two cysteine molecules in a polypeptide chaincan form a disulfide bridge (—S—S—) by oxidation (removal of H atoms).N +HHH C NOHHO –H O–OCHN +HHH CH OHNH O–OCHH2O+Repetition of this reactionlinks many amino acidstogether into a polypeptide.The amino group ofone amino acid reactswith the carboxyl groupof another to form apeptide linkage.A molecule of water islost (condensation) aseach linkage forms.N terminus(+H3N)Amino group Carboxyl groupPeptide linkageC terminus(COO–)+RRRRC CC C3.6 Formation of Peptide Linkages In living things, the reactionleading to a peptide linkage (also called a peptide bond) has many intermediatesteps, but the reactants and products are the same as thoseshown in this simplified diagram.GO TO Web Activity 3.2 • Features of Amino AcidsyourBioPortal.comamino group, the α carbon atom, and the C atom from the carboxylgroup of each amino acid.Scientists have determined the primary structure of manyproteins. The single-letter abbreviations for amino acids (seeTable 3.1) are used to record the amino acid sequence of a protein.Here, for example, are the first 20 amino acids (out of atotal of 124) in the protein ribonuclease from a cow:KETAAAKFERQHMDSSTSAAThe theoretical number of different proteins is enormous. Sincethere are 20 different amino acids, there could be 20 × 20 = 400distinct dipeptides (two linked amino acids), and 20 × 20 × 20 =8,000 different tripeptides (three linked amino acids). Imaginethis process of multiplying by 20 extended to a protein madeup of 100 amino acids (which would be considered a small protein).There could be 20100 (that’s approximately 10130) suchsmall proteins, each with its own distinctive primary structure.How large is the number 20100? Physicists tell us that there aren’tthat many electrons in the entire universe.At the higher levels of protein structure (secondary, tertiaryand quaternary), local coiling and folding of the polypeptide3.2 | WHAT ARE THE CHEMICAL STRUCTURES AND FUNCTIONS OF PROTEINS? 45Primary structureAmino acid monomers are joined,forming polypeptide chains.Secondary structurePolypeptide chains may formα helices or β pleated sheets.Tertiary structurePolypeptides fold, forming specific shapes.Folds are stabilized by bonds, includinghydrogen bonds and disulfide bridges. Quaternary structureTwo or more polypeptides assemble to form largerprotein molecules. The hypothetical molecule hereis a tetramer, made up of four polypeptide subunits.CCRONHHC CC CROORNNHHHHC CC CROORNNHHHHAmino acid monomers Peptide linkage(B)α helix(A)(D)(E)(C)β pleated sheetSubunit 1 Subunit 2Subunit 3 Subunit 4Disulfide bridgeHydrogen bondHydrogen bondHydrogen bondC CC CROORNNHHHHα helix β pleated sheet3.7 The Four Levels of Protein Structure Secondary, tertiary, andquaternary structure all arise from the primary structure of the protein.chain(s) give the molecule its final functional shape. All of theselevels, however, derive from the protein’s primary structure—that is, the precise location of specific amino acids in thepolypeptide chain. The properties associated with a precisesequence of amino acids determine how the protein can twistand fold, thus adopting a specific stable structure that distinguishesit from every other protein.Primary structure is established by covalent bonds. The nextlevel of protein structure makes use of weaker hydrogen bonds.The secondary structure of a protein requireshydrogen bondingAprotein’s secondary structure consists of regular, repeated spatialpatterns in different regions of a polypeptide chain. Thereare two basic types of secondary structure, both determined byhydrogen bonding between the amino acids that make up theprimary structure, the α helix and the β pleated sheet.THE a HELIX The a (alpha) helix is a right-handed coil that turnsin the same direction as a standard wood screw (Figure 3.7B).The R groups extend outward from the peptide backbone of thehelix. The coiling results from hydrogen bonds that form betweenthe δ+ hydrogen of the N—H of one amino acid and theδ– oxygen of the C=O of another. When this pattern of hydrogenbonding is established repeatedly over a segment of theprotein, it stabilizes the coil.THE b PLEATED SHEET A b (beta) pleated sheet is formed fromtwo or more polypeptide chains that are almost completelyextended and aligned. The sheet is stabilized by hydrogenbonds between the N—H groups on one chain and the C=Ogroups on the other (Figure 3.7C). A β pleated sheet may formbetween separate polypeptide chains, as in spider silk, or betweendifferent regions of a single polypeptide chain that is bentback on itself. Many proteins contain regions of both α helix andβ pleated sheet in the same polypeptide chain.The tertiary structure of a protein is formed bybending and foldingIn many proteins, the polypeptide chain is bent at specific sitesand then folded back and forth, resulting in the tertiary structureof the protein (Figure 3.7D). Although α helices and βpleated sheets contribute to the tertiary structure, usually onlyportions of the macromolecule have these secondary structures,and large regions consist of tertiary structure unique to a particularprotein. Tertiary structure results in a macromolecule’sdefinitive three-dimensional shape, often including a buried interioras well as a surface that is exposed to the environment.The protein’s exposed outer surfaces present functionalgroups capable of interacting with other molecules in the cell.These molecules might be other proteins (as happens in quaternarystructure, as we will see below) or smaller chemical reactants(as in enzymes; see Section 7.4).While hydrogen bonding between the N—H and C=Ogroups within and between chains is responsible for secondarystructure, the interactions between R groups—the amino acidside chains—determine tertiary structure. We described the variousstrong and weak interactions between atoms in Section 2.2.Many of these interactions are involved in determining andmaintaining tertiary structure.46 CHAPTER 3 | PROTEINS, CARBOHYDRATES, AND LIPIDSA realistic depiction of lysozyme showsdense packing of its atoms.The “backbone” of lysozyme consists ofrepeating N—C—C units of amino acids.C C NC C Na helixb pleated sheeta helixb pleated sheet(A) Space-filling model (B) Stick model (C) Ribbon model3.8 Three Representations of Lysozyme Different molecular representationsof a protein emphasize different aspects of its tertiary structure:surface features, sites of bends and folds, sites where alpha or betastructure predominate. These three representations of lysozyme are similarlyoriented.• Covalent disulfide bridges can form between specificcysteine side chains (see Figure 3.5), holding afolded polypeptide in place.• Hydrogen bonds between side chains also stabilizefolds in proteins.• Hydrophobic side chains can aggregate together inthe interior of the protein, away from water, foldingthe polypeptide in the process.• van der Waals forces can stabilize the close interactionsbetween hydrophobic side chains.• Ionic bonds can form between positively and negativelycharged side chains, forming salt bridges betweenamino acids. Ionic bonds can also be burieddeep within a protein, away from water.A complete description of a protein’s tertiary structurewould specify the location of every atom in the moleculein three-dimensional space relative to all the otheratoms. Such a description is available for the proteinlysozyme (Figure 3.8).The different ways of depicting the molecule havetheir uses. The space-filling model might be used tostudy how other molecules interact with specific sitesand R groups on a protein’s surface. The stick model emphasizesthe sites where bends occur in order to makethe folds of the polypeptide chain. The ribbon model,perhaps the most widely used, shows the different typesof secondary structure and how they fold into the tertiarystructure.Remember that both secondary and tertiary structurederive from primary structure. If a protein is heatedslowly, the heat energy will disrupt only the weak interactions,causing the secondary and tertiary structure tobreak down. The protein is then said to be denatured.But the protein can return to its normal tertiary structurewhen it cools, demonstrating that all the informationneeded to specify the unique shape of a protein iscontained in its primary structure. This was first shown(using chemicals instead of heat to denature the protein)by biochemist Christian Anfinsen for the protein ribonuclease(Figure 3.9).The quaternary structure of a proteinconsists of subunitsMany functional proteins contain two or more polypeptidechains, called subunits, each of them folded into itsown unique tertiary structure. The protein’s quaternarystructure results from the ways in which these subunitsbind together and interact (Figure 3.7E).The models of hemoglobin in Figure 3.10 illustratequaternary structure. Hydrophobic interactions, van derWaals forces, hydrogen bonds, and ionic bonds all helphold the four subunits together to form a hemoglobinmolecule. However, the weak nature of these forces permitssmall changes in the quaternary structure to aid the3.2 | WHAT ARE THE CHEMICAL STRUCTURES AND FUNCTIONS OF PROTEINS? 47CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE3.9 Primary Structure Specifies Tertiary StructureUsing the protein ribonuclease, Christian Anfinsen showed that proteinsspontaneously fold into a functionally correct three-dimensionalconfiguration. As long as the primary structure is not disrupted, theinformation for correct folding under the right conditions is retained.HYPOTHESIS Under controlled conditions that simulate normalcellular environment in the laboratory, the primarystructure of a denatured protein can reestablish theprotein’s three-dimensional structure.In normal cellular conditions, the primary structureof a protein specifies how it folds into a functional,three-dimensional structure.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSExtract and purify afunctional protein,ribonuclease, fromtissue.Add chemicals that disrupthydrogen and ionic bonds(urea) and disulfide bridges(mercaptoethanol).Slowly remove thechemical agents.Chemically denature functional ribonuclease, disruptingdisulfide bridges and other intramolecular interactions thatmaintain the protein’s shape, so that only primary structure(i.e., the amino acid sequence) remains. Once denaturationis complete, remove the disruptive chemicals.When the disruptive agents are removed, three-dimensionalstructure is restored and the protein once again is functional.123Disulfide bridgeDenatured proteinβ pleated sheetα helixprotein’s function—which is to carry oxygen in red blood cells.As hemoglobin binds one O2 molecule, the four subunits shifttheir relative positions slightly, changing the quaternary structure.Ionic bonds are broken, exposing buried side chains thatenhance the binding of additional O2 molecules. The quaternarystructure changes again when hemoglobin releases its O2 moleculesto the cells of the body.Shape and surface chemistry contributeto protein functionThe shape and structure of a protein allow specific sites on itsexposed surface to bind noncovalently to another molecule,which may be large or small. The binding is said to be specificbecause only certain compatible chemical groups will bind toone another. The specificity of protein binding depends on twogeneral properties of the protein: its shape, and the chemistryof its exposed surface groups.• Shape. When a small molecule collides with and binds to amuch larger protein, it is like a baseball being caught by acatcher’s mitt: the mitt has a shape that binds to the balland fits around it. Just as a hockey puck or a ping-pong balldoes not fit a baseball catcher’s mitt, a given molecule willnot bind to a protein unless there is a general “fit” betweentheir two three-dimensional shapes.• Chemistry. The exposed amino acid R groups on the surfaceof a protein permit chemical interactions with other substances(Figure 3.11). Three types of interactions may be involved:ionic, hydrophobic, and hydrogen bonding. Manyimportant functions of proteins involve interactions betweenexposed-surface R groups and other molecules.Environmental conditions affect protein structureBecause it is determined by weak forces, the three-dimensionalstructure of proteins is influenced by environmental conditions.Conditions that would not break covalent bonds can disrupt theweaker, noncovalent interactions that determine secondary andtertiary structure. Such alterations may affect a protein’s shapeand thus its function. Various conditions can alter the weak,noncovalent interactions:• Increases in temperature cause more rapid molecular movementsand thus can break hydrogen bonds and hydrophobicinteractions.• Alterations in pH can change the pattern of ionization of exposedcarboxyl and amino groups in the R groups of aminoacids, thus disrupting the pattern of ionic attractions andrepulsions.• High concentrations of polar substances such as urea can disruptthe hydrogen bonding that is crucial to protein structure.This was used in the experiment on reversible proteindenaturation shown in Figure 3.9.• Nonpolar substances may also disrupt normal protein structurein cases where hydrophobic groups are essential tomaintain the structure.Denaturation can be irreversible when amino acids that wereburied in the interior of the protein become exposed at the surface,and vice versa, causing a new structure to form or differentmolecules to bind to the protein. Boiling an egg denaturesits proteins and is, as you know, not reversible.48 CHAPTER 3 | PROTEINS, CARBOHYDRATES, AND LIPIDS(A) (B)Hemeα subunitsβ subunits3.10 Quaternary Structure of a Protein Hemoglobinconsists of four folded polypeptide subunits that assemblethemselves into the quaternary structure shown here. Inthese two graphic representations, each type of subunit is adifferent color. The heme groups contain iron and are theoxygen-carrying sites.Ionic interactions occurbetween charged R groups.Two nonpolar groupsinteract hydrophobically.Hydrogen bonds formbetween two polar groups.COO– +H3NH OHMolecule 1Molecule 23.11 Noncovalent Interactions Between Proteins and OtherMolecules Noncovalent interactions allow a protein (brown) to bindtightly to another molecule (green) with specific properties. Noncovalentinteractions also allow regions within the same protein to interact withone another.Molecular chaperones help shape proteinsBecause of their specific shapes and the exposure of chemicalgroups on their surfaces, proteins can bind specific substances.Within a living cell, a polypeptide chain is sometimes in dangerof binding the wrong substance. Two important examplesof such a situation are:• Following denaturation: Inappropriate environmental conditionsin a cell, such as elevated temperature, can causethe denatured protein to re-fold incorrectly.• Just after a protein is made: When a protein has not yetfolded completely, it can present a surface that binds thewrong molecule.In these cases, change may be irreversible. Eukaryotic cells havea special class of proteins that act to counteract threats to threedimensionalstructure. Proteins in this class, called chaperones,act as molecular caretakers for other proteins. Like the chaperonesat a high school dance, they prevent inappropriate interactionsand enhance the appropriate ones.Molecular chaperones were discovered by accident in 1962,when the temperature of an incubator holding fruit flies was accidentallyturned up. Italian geneticist Ferruccio Ritossa noticedthat this “heat shock” did not kill the flies. Instead, there wasenhanced synthesis of a set of proteins that were later describedas chaperones. They bound to many target proteins in the fruitfly cells and kept them from being denatured, and in some casesfacilitated the correct refolding of proteins.The general class of stress-induced chaperone proteins is calledthe heat shock proteins (HSPs), after this discovery. HSPs aremade by most eukaryotic cells, and many enhance protein foldingin addition to their protective role during periods of stress.As an example, HSP60 forms a cage that sucks a protein in, causesit to fold into the correct shape, and then releases it (Figure 3.12).Tumors make abundant HSPs, possibly to stabilize proteins importantin the cancer process, and so HSP-inhibiting drugs arebeing designed. In some clinical situations, treatment with theseinhibitors results in the inappropriate folding of tumor-cell proteins,causing the tumors to stop growing and even disappear.3.2 RECAPProteins are polymers of amino acids. The sequenceof amino acids in a protein determines its primarystructure. Secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structuresarise through interactions between the aminoacids. A protein’s three-dimensional shape and exposedchemical groups establish binding specificityfor other substances.• What are the attributes of an amino acid’s R group thatwould make it hydrophobic? Hydrophilic? See pp.42–43 and Table 3.1• Sketch and explain how two amino acids link togetherto form a peptide linkage. See p. 44 and Figure 3.6• What are the four levels of protein structure and howare they all ultimately determined by the protein’s primarystructure (i.e., its amino acid sequence)? See pp.44–48 and Figure 3.7• How do environmental factors such as temperatureand pH affect the weak interactions that give a proteinits specific shape and function? See p. 48The seemingly infinite number of protein configurations madepossible by the biochemical properties of the 20 amino acids hasdriven the evolution of life’s diversity. The linkage configurationsof sugar monomers (monosaccharides) drives the structureof the next group of macromolecules, the carbohydratesthat provide energy for life.What Are the Chemical Structures 3.3 and Functions of Carbohydrates?Carbohydrates are a large group of molecules that all have asimilar atomic composition but differ greatly in size, chemicalproperties, and biological functions. Carbohydrates have thegeneral formula Cn(H2O)n, which makes them appear as hydratesof carbon (association between water molecules and carbonin the ratio C1H2O1), hence their name. When their molecularstructures are examined, the linked carbon atoms are seento be bonded with hydrogen atoms (—H) and hydroxyl groups3.3 | WHAT ARE THE CHEMICAL STRUCTURES AND FUNCTIONS OF CARBOHYDRATES? 49A denatured protein bindsto HSP60 and enters it.1 A “lid” sealsthe “cage.”2 3 The protein folds into its appropriateshape and is released.HSP60 “cage”“Lid”Denaturedprotein3.12 Chaperones Protect Proteins from Inappropriate BindingChaperone proteins surround new or denatured proteins and preventthem from binding to the wrong substance. Heat shock proteins such asHSP60, whose actions are illustrated here, are one class of chaperoneproteins.(—OH), the components of water. Carbohydrates have threemajor biochemical roles:• They are a source of stored energy that can be released in aform usable by organisms.• They are used to transport stored energy within complexorganisms.• They serve as carbon skeletons that can be rearranged toform new molecules.Some carbohydrates are relatively small, with molecularweights of less than 100 Da. Others are true macromolecules,with molecular weights in the hundreds of thousands.There are four categories of biologically important carbohydrates:• Monosaccharides (mono, “one”; saccharide, “sugar”), such asglucose, ribose, and fructose, are simple sugars. They are themonomers from which the larger carbohydrates are constructed.• Disaccharides (di, “two”) consist of two monosaccharideslinked together by covalent bonds. The most familiar is sucrose,which is made up of covalently bonded glucose andfructose molecules.• Oligosaccharides (oligo, “several”) are made up of several(3–20) monosaccharides.• Polysaccharides (poly, “many”), such as starch, glycogen,and cellulose, are polymers made up of hundreds or thousandsof monosaccharides.Monosaccharides are simple sugarsAll living cells contain the monosaccharide glucose; it is the familiar“blood sugar,” used to transport energy in humans. Cellsuse glucose as an energy source, breaking it down through a seriesof reactions that release stored energy and produce waterand carbon dioxide; this is a cellular form of the combustion reactiondescribed in Chapter 2.Glucose exists in straight chains and in ring forms. The ringforms predominate in virtually all biological circumstancesbecause they are more stable under physiological conditions.There are two versions of glucose ring, called α- and β-glucose,which differ only in the orientation of the —H and —OH attachedto carbon 1 (Figure 3.13). The α and β forms interconvertand exist in equilibrium when dissolved in water.Different monosaccharides contain different numbers of carbons.Some monosaccharides are structural isomers, with thesame kinds and numbers of atoms, but in different arrangements(Figure 3.14). Such seemingly small structural changes can significantlyalter properties. Most of the monosaccharides in livingsystems belong to the D (right-handed) series of isomers.Pentoses (pente, “five”) are five-carbon sugars. Two pentosesare of particular biological importance: the backbones of the nucleicacids RNA and DNA contain ribose and deoxyribose, respectively(see Section 4.1). These two pentoses are not isomersof each other; rather, one oxygen atom is missing from carbon2 in deoxyribose (de-, “absent”). The absence of this oxygenatom is an important distinction between RNA and DNA.The hexoses (hex, “six”), a group of structural isomers, allhave the formula C6H12O6. Included among the hexoses are glucose,fructose (so named because it was first found in fruits),mannose, and galactose.Glycosidic linkages bond monosaccharidesThe disaccharides, oligosaccharides, and polysaccharides are allconstructed from monosaccharides that are covalently bondedtogether by condensation reactions that form glycosidic linkages.Asingle glycosidic linkage between two monosaccharides formsa disaccharide. For example, sucrose—common table sugar inthe human diet and a major disaccharide in plants—is a disaccharideformed from a glucose and a fructose molecule.50 CHAPTER 3 | PROTEINS, CARBOHYDRATES, AND LIPIDSOHHHH OOHHO HHHH OHOHHOorH2OHH HOHHHH OHOHHOH2OHHHHH OHOHHOH2OHH OHHHHH OHOHHOCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCC CCCCCC CC123456346512 345216345216O H O OThe dark line indicates that the edge ofthe molecule extends toward you; thethin line extends back away from you.The numbers in red indicate the standardconvention for numbering the carbons.AldehydegroupStraight-chain form Intermediate form α-D-glucose β-D-glucoseThe straight-chain form ofglucose has an aldehydegroup at carbon 1.A reaction between the aldehydegroup and the hydroxyl group atcarbon 5 gives rise to a ring form.Depending on the orientation of the aldehyde group whenthe ring closes, either of two molecules—α-D-glucose orβ-D-glucose—forms.Hydroxyl group3.13 From One Form of Glucose to the Other All glucose molecules have the formula C6H12O6,but their structures vary. When dissolved in water, the α and β “ring” forms of glucose interconvert. Theconvention used here for numbering the carbon atoms is standard in biochemistry.GO TO Web Activity 3.3 • Forms of GlucoseyourBioPortal.comThe disaccharides maltose and cellobiose are made from twoglucose molecules (Figure 3.15). Maltose and cellobiose arestructural isomers, both having the formula C12H22O11. However,they have different chemical properties and are recognizedby different enzymes in biological tissues. For example, maltosecan be hydrolyzed into its monosaccharides in the humanbody, whereas cellobiose cannot.Oligosaccharides contain several monosaccharides bound byglycosidic linkages at various sites. Many oligosaccharides haveadditional functional groups, which give them special properties.Oligosaccharides are often covalently bonded to proteins andlipids on the outer cell surface, where they serve as recognitionsignals. The different human blood groups (for example, the ABOblood types) get their specificity from oligosaccharide chains.1 11233452634526543 254 13 2654 3211HH OH OHH OHH2OHH2OH H2OHH2OHH2OHOH HOHHHH OHOHHHOHH2OHHHHOH HOHHOOHHOHH HHHOHHOHH HOHHOHOHH OHHHO OO O OCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCC CC CCC CCCCC CC CCThree-carbon sugarFive-carbon sugars (pentoses)Six-carbon sugars (hexoses)α-mannose α-galactose FructoseRiboseGlyceraldehydeDeoxyriboseThese hexoses are structural isomers. All have the formulaC6H12O6, but each has distinct biochemical properties.Ribose and deoxyriboseeach have five carbons,but very different chemicalproperties and biologicalroles.Glyceraldehyde is thesmallest monosaccharideand exists only as thestraight-chain form.3.14 Monosaccharides Are Simple Sugars Monosaccharides are made up of varying numbersof carbons. Some hexoses are structural isomers that have the same kind and number of atoms,but the atoms are arranged differently. Fructose, for example, is a hexose, but forms a five-memberedring like the pentoses.4 1 4 1 4 44 4 1111CH2OHHα αβ βββ βOHH OH+HOHCH2OHHHOH OHHOHOH H OH HH HCH2OHHOHH OHHCH2OHH OHHOHOOH H OH HH H+CH2OHHHOH OHHOHOH HCH2OHHH OHHOHOH HCH2OHHH OHHOH HOH OHH H HO O O OO O OHH2OH2OH2OHOH HH OHHOOCH2OHO1+CH2OHHH OHOHHOH HOHHO 2CH2OHCH2OHHOHH OHHHHOO1CH2OHHH OHHOH HOHHO2CH2OHCH2OHHOHH OHHO4 4βH1OH1The presence of a carbon atom (C)at a junction such as this is implied.Formationof α linkageFormationof α linkageα-D-glucose β-D-glucoseα-1,4 glycosidic linkageβ-1,4 glycosidic linkageα-D-glucose β-D-glucoseMaltoseFormationof β linkageβ-D-glucose β-D-glucoseα-D-glucoseβ-D-glucose β-D-glucoseCellobioseMaltose is produced when an α-1,4glycosidic linkage forms betweentwo glucose molecules. The hydroxylgroup on carbon 1 of one D-glucosein the α (down) position reacts with thehydroxyl group on carbon 4 of theother glucose.In cellobiose, two glucoses are linkedby a β-1,4 glycosidic linkage.In sucrose, glucose and fructose arelinked by an α-1,2 glycosidic linkage.α-1,2 glycosidic linkageFructose α-D-glucose FructoseSucrose3.15 Disaccharides Form by Glycosidic Linkages Glycosidic linkagesbetween two monosaccharides can create many different disaccharides.Which disaccharide is formed depends on which monosaccharidesare linked; on the site of linkage (i.e., which carbon atoms are involved);and on the form (α or β) of the linkage.3.3 | WHAT ARE THE CHEMICAL STRUCTURES AND FUNCTIONS OF CARBOHYDRATES? 51Polysaccharides store energy and providestructural materialsPolysaccharides are large (sometimes gigantic) polymers ofmonosaccharides connected by glycosidic linkages (Figure3.16). In contrast to proteins, polysaccharides are not necessarilylinear chains of monomers. Each monomer unit has severalsites that may be capable of forming glycosidic linkages, andthus branched molecules are possible.STARCH Starches comprise a family of giant molecules ofbroadly similar structure. While all starches are polysaccharidesof glucose with α-glycosidic linkages (α−1,4 and α−1,6 glycosidicbonds; Figure 3.16A), the different starches can be distinguishedby the amount of branching that occurs at carbons 1 and 6 (Figure3.16B). Starch is the principal energy storage compound ofplants. Some plant starches, such as amylose, are unbranched;others are moderately branched (amylopectin, for example).Starch readily binds water. When that water is removed, however,hydrogen bonds tend to form between the unbranchedpolysaccharide chains, which then aggregate, as in the largestarch grains observed in the storage material of plant seeds (seeFigure 3.16C).52 CHAPTER 3 | PROTEINS, CARBOHYDRATES, AND LIPIDSHydrogen bonding to other cellulosemolecules can occur at these points.Branching occurs here.HOH HH OHHOHOCH2OHHOH HH OHHOHOCH2HOH HH OHHOHHOH HH OHHOHHOH HH OHHOHHOH HHHHO OH HHHH OHHOH HHHO HO OH HHHH OHO H H OCH2OHCH2OHCH2OHCH2OHCH2OH CH2OHCH2OHO OOO OOO OOOH OHLinear (cellulose) Branched (starch) Highly branched (glycogen)(B) Macromolecular structure(C) Polysaccharides in cellsStarch and glycogenCellulose(A) Molecular structureCellulose is an unbranched polymer of glucose withβ-1,4 glycosidic linkages that are chemically very stable.Glycogen and starch are polymers of glucose with α-1,4 glycosidiclinkages. α-1,6 glycosidic linkages produce branching at carbon 6.Parallel cellulose molecules formhydrogen bonds, resulting in thin fibrils.Branching limits the number ofhydrogen bonds that can form instarch molecules, making starchless compact than cellulose.The high amount of branching inglycogen makes its solid depositsmore compact than starch.Layers of cellulose fibrils, as seen inthis scanning electron micrograph,give plant cell walls great strength.Within these plant cells, starch deposits(dyed purple in this micrograph) have agranular shape.The pink-stained granules in thiselectron micrograph are glycogendeposits in the human liver.3.16 Representative Polysaccharides Cellulose, starch, andglycogen have different levels of branching and compaction of thepolysaccharides.GLYCOGEN Glycogen is a water-insoluble, highly branchedpolymer of glucose. It stores glucose in liver and muscle, servingas an energy storage compound for animals as starch doesfor plants. Both glycogen and starch are readily hydrolyzed intoglucose monomers, which in turn can be broken down to liberatetheir stored energy.But if it is glucose that is needed for fuel, why store it in theform of glycogen? The reason is that 1,000 glucose moleculeswould exert 1,000 times the osmotic pressure of a single glycogenmolecule, causing water to enter the cells (see Section 6.3). If itwere not for polysaccharides, many organisms would expenda lot of energy expelling excess water from their cells.CELLULOSE As the predominant component of plant cell walls,cellulose is by far the most abundant organic compound onEarth. Like starch and glycogen, cellulose is a polysaccharide ofglucose, but its individual monosaccharides are connected byβ- rather than by α-glycosidic linkages. Starch is easily degradedby the actions of chemicals or enzymes. Cellulose, however, ischemically more stable because of its β-glycosidic linkages.Thus, whereas starch is easily broken down to supply glucosefor energy-producing reactions, cellulose is an excellent structuralmaterial that can withstand harsh environmental conditionswithout substantial change.Chemically modified carbohydrates contain additionalfunctional groupsSome carbohydrates are chemically modified by the addition offunctional groups, such as phosphate and amino groups (Figure3.17). For example, carbon 6 in glucose may be oxidizedfrom —CH2OH to a carboxyl group (—COOH), producing glucuronicacid. Or a phosphate group may be added to one ormore of the —OH sites. Some of the resulting sugar phosphates,such as fructose 1,6-bisphosphate, are important intermediatesin cellular energy reactions, which will be discussed inChapter 9.When an amino group is substituted for an —OH group,amino sugars, such as glucosamine and galactosamine, are produced.These compounds are important in the extracellular matrix(see Section 5.4), where they form parts of glycoproteins,which are molecules involved in keeping tissues together.Galactosamine is a major component of cartilage, the materialthat forms caps on the ends of bones and stiffens the ears andnose. A derivative of glucosamine is present in the polymerchitin, the principal structural polysaccharide in the externalskeletons of insects and many crustaceans (e.g., crabs and lobsters)and a component of the cell walls of fungi. Because theseorganisms are among the most abundant eukaryotes on Earth,chitin rivals cellulose as one of the most abundant substancesin the living world.3.3 | WHAT ARE THE CHEMICAL STRUCTURES AND FUNCTIONS OF CARBOHYDRATES? 5316Galactosamine is an importantcomponent of cartilage, a connectivetissue in vertebrates.The external skeletons of insectsare made up of chitin.CH2H2COO–O P O–OHOHH HOHHOCH2OHCH2OHH HOHHHHOHHOONH2OONCCH3HONCCH3HOOHHHHHOHNCCH3HOCH2OHHHHHHOHHHHCH2HHOHOOCH2OHOO––O P OOHHO HOHHHHHOHONH2OOFructosePhosphate groupsGlucosamine GalactosamineAminogroupN-acetyl groupGlucosamineChitinFructose 1,6 bisphosphateN-acetylglucosamine(A) Sugar phosphate(B) Amino sugars(C) ChitinFructose 1,6 bisphosphate isinvolved in the reactions thatliberate energy from glucose.(The numbers in its namerefer to the carbon sitesof phosphate bonding;bis- indicates that twophosphates are present.)The monosaccharidesglucosamine andgalactosamine are aminosugars with an amino groupin place of a hydroxyl group.Chitin is a polymer ofN-acetylglucosamine;N-acetyl groups provideadditional sites forhydrogen bonding betweenthe polymers.3.17 Chemically Modified Carbohydrates Added functionalgroups can modify the form and properties of a carbohydrate.3.3 RECAPCarbohydrates are composed of carbon, hydrogen,and oxygen in the general ratio of 1:2:1. They provideenergy and structure to cells and are precursorsof numerous important biological molecules. Monosaccharidemonomers can be connected by glycosidiclinkages to form disaccharides, oligosaccharides,and polysaccharides.• Draw the chemical structure of a disaccharide formedby two monosaccharides. See Figure 3.15• What qualities of the polysaccharides starch andglycogen make them useful for energy storage? Seepp. 52–53 and Figure 3.16• From looking at the cellulose molecules in Figure3.16A, can you see where a large number of hydrogenbonds are present in the linear structure of celluloseshown in Figure 3.16B? Why is this structure so strong?We have seen how amino acid monomers form protein polymersand how sugar monomers form the polymers of carbohydrates.Now we will look at the lipids, which are unique amongthe four classes of large biological molecules in that they are not,strictly speaking, polymers.What Are the Chemical Structures 3.4 and Functions of Lipids?Lipids—colloquially called fats—are hydrocarbons that are insolublein water because of their many nonpolar covalent bonds.As we saw in Section 2.2, nonpolar hydrocarbon molecules arehydrophobic and preferentially aggregate among themselves,away from water (which is polar). When nonpolar hydrocarbonsare sufficiently close together, weak but additive van der Waalsforces hold them together. The hugemacromolecular aggregations that canform are not polymers in a strict chemicalsense, because the individual lipidmolecules are not covalently bonded. Withthis understanding, it is still useful to consideraggregations of individual lipids asa different sort of polymer.There are several different types oflipids, and they play a number of rolesin living organisms:• Fats and oils store energy.• Phospholipids play important structuralroles in cell membranes.• Carotenoids and chlorophylls helpplants capture light energy.• Steroids and modified fatty acids playregulatory roles as hormones andvitamins.• Fat in animal bodies serves as thermal insulation.• Alipid coating around nerves provides electrical insulation.• Oil or wax on the surfaces of skin, fur, and feathers repelswater.Fats and oils are hydrophobicChemically, fats and oils are triglycerides, also known as simplelipids. Triglycerides that are solid at room temperature (around20°C) are called fats; those that are liquid at room temperatureare called oils. Triglycerides are composed of two types of buildingblocks: fatty acids and glycerol. Glycerol is a small moleculewith three hydroxyl (—OH) groups (thus it is an alcohol). Afattyacid is made up of a long nonpolar hydrocarbon chain and apolar carboxyl group (—COOH). These chains are very hydrophobic,with their abundant C—H and C—C bonds, whichhave low electronegativity and are nonpolar (see Section 2.2).A triglyceride contains three fatty acid molecules and onemolecule of glycerol. Synthesis of a triglyceride involves threecondensation (dehydration) reactions. In each reaction, the carboxylgroup of a fatty acid bonds with a hydroxyl group of glycerol,resulting in a covalent bond called an ester linkage and therelease of a water molecule (Figure 3.18). The three fatty acidsin a triglyceride molecule need not all have the same hydrocarbonchain length or structure; some may be saturated fatty acids,while others may be unsaturated:• In saturated fatty acids, all the bonds between the carbonatoms in the hydrocarbon chain are single bonds—there areno double bonds. That is, all the bonds are saturated with54 CHAPTER 3 | PROTEINS, CARBOHYDRATES, AND LIPIDSOHH2COHCH2OHCO COHCH2CH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH3H2CCH2CH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH3H2CCH2CH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH3H2CCH2CH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH3H2CCH2CH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH3H2CCH2CH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH3H2CO COHO COH O CHOH2C C CH2O OHO C O CThe synthesis of an ester linkage releaseswater and thus is a condensation reaction.TriglycerideEsterlinkage+ 3 H2OGlycerol(an alcohol)3Fatty acidmolecules3.18 Synthesis of a Triglyceride In living things, the reaction thatforms a triglyceride is more complex, but the end result is the same asshown here.hydrogen atoms (Figure 3.19A). These fatty acid moleculesare relatively rigid and straight, and they pack togethertightly, like pencils in a box.• In unsaturated fatty acids, the hydrocarbon chain containsone or more double bonds. Linoleic acid is an example of apolyunsaturated fatty acid that has two double bonds nearthe middle of the hydrocarbon chain, which causes kinks inthe molecule (Figure 3.19B). Such kinks prevent the unsaturatedfat molecules from packing together tightly.The kinks in fatty acid molecules are important in determiningthe fluidity and melting point of a lipid. The triglyceridesof animal fats tend to have many long-chain saturated fattyacids, packed tightly together; these fats are usually solids atroom temperature and have a high melting point. The triglyceridesof plants, such as corn oil, tend to have short or unsaturatedfatty acids. Because of their kinks, these fatty acids packtogether poorly and have a low melting point, and these triglyceridesare usually liquids at room temperature.Fats are excellent storehouses for chemical energy. As youwill see in Chapter 9, when the C—H bond is broken, it releasessignificant energy that an organism can use for its own purposes,such as movement or building up complex molecules.On a per weight basis, broken-down fats yield more than twiceas much energy as do degraded carbohydrates.Phospholipids form biological membranesWe have mentioned the hydrophobic nature of the manyC—C and C—H bonds in fatty acids. But what about the carboxylfunctional group at the end of the molecule? When it ionizesand forms COO–, it is strongly hydrophilic. So a fatty acidis a molecule with a hydrophilic end and a long hydrophobictail. It has two opposing chemical properties; the technical termfor this is amphipathic. This explains what happens when oil(fatty acid) and water mix: the fatty acids orient themselves sothat their polar ends face outward (i.e., toward the water) andtheir nonpolar tails face inward (away from water). Althoughno covalent bonds link individual lipids in large aggregations,such stable aggregations form readily in aqueous conditions. Sothese large lipid structures can be considered a different kindof macromolecule.Like triglycerides, phospholipids contain fatty acids boundto glycerol by ester linkages. In phospholipids, however, anyone of several phosphate-containing compounds replaces oneof the fatty acids, giving these molecules amphipathic properties—that is properties of both water soluble and water insolublemolecules (Figure 3.20A). The phosphate functional grouphas a negative electric charge, so this portion of the moleculeis hydrophilic, attracting polar water molecules. But the twofatty acids are hydrophobic, so they tend to avoid water and aggregatetogether or with other hydrophobic substances.In an aqueous environment, phospholipids line up in such away that the nonpolar, hydrophobic “tails” pack tightly togetherand the phosphate-containing “heads” face outward, wherethey interact with water. The phospholipids thus form a bilayer:a sheet two molecules thick, with water excluded from the core(Figure 3.20B). Biological membranes have this kind of phospholipidbilayer structure, and we will devote Chapter 6 to theirbiological functions.Lipids have roles in energy conversion, regulation,and protectionIn the previous section, we focused on lipids involved in energystorage and cell structure, whose molecular structures are variationson the glycerol–fatty acid structure. However, there areother nonpolar and amphipathic lipids that are not based onthis structure.3.4 | WHAT ARE THE CHEMICAL STRUCTURES AND FUNCTIONS OF LIPIDS? 55All bonds between carbonatoms are single in a saturatedfatty acid (chain is straight).The straight chainallows a moleculeto pack tightlyamong other similarmolecules.Double bonds between two carbonsmake an unsaturated fatty acid(carbon chain has kinks).Kinks prevent close packing.chaO COHCH2CH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CCH2H2CO COHCH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2HCHCHCHCCH2H2CCH2H2CCH3H2COxygenHydrogenCarbon(A) Palmitic acid(B) Linoleic acid3.19 Saturated and Unsaturated FattyAcids (A) The straight hydrocarbonchain of a saturated fatty acid allows themolecule to pack tightly with other, similarmolecules. (B) In unsaturated fatty acids,kinks in the chain prevent close packing.The color convention in the modelsshown here (gray, H; red, O; black, C) iscommonly used.CAROTENOIDS The carotenoids are a family of light-absorbingpigments found in plants and animals. Beta-carotene (β-carotene)is one of the pigments that traps light energy in leaves duringphotosynthesis. In humans, a molecule of β-carotene can be brokendown into two vitamin A molecules (Figure 3.21), fromwhich we make the pigment cis-retinal, which is required forvision. Carotenoids are responsible for the colors of carrots,tomatoes, pumpkins, egg yolks, and butter.STEROIDS The steroids are a family of organic compounds whosemultiple rings share carbons (Figure 3.22). The steroid cholesterolis an important constituent of membranes. Other steroidsfunction as hormones, chemical signals that carry messages fromone part of the body to another (see Chapter 41). Cholesterol issynthesized in the liver and is the starting material for makingtestosterone and other steroid hormones, such as estrogen.VITAMINS Vitamins are small molecules that are not synthesizedby the human body and so must be acquired from the diet (seeChapter 50). For example, vitamin A is formedfrom the β-carotene found in green and yellowvegetables (see Figure 3.21). In humans, a deficiencyof vitamin A leads to dry skin, eyes,and internal body surfaces, retarded growthand development, and night blindness, whichis a diagnostic symptom for the deficiency. VitaminsD, E, and K are also lipids.56 CHAPTER 3 | PROTEINS, CARBOHYDRATES, AND LIPIDSThe hydrophilic “head” isattracted to water, which is polar.In an aqueous environment, “tails”stay away from water and “heads”interact with water, forming a bilayer.The hydrophobic “tails” arenot attracted to water.–O P OOH2C CHH3C N+CH2CH2OCH2CH2OC OCH3CH2C OOCH3CholineHydrophilicheadPhosphateGlycerolHydrocarbonchainsPositivechargeNegativechargeHydrophobictailHydrophilic“heads”Hydrophilic“heads”Hydrophobicfatty acid “tails”WaterWater+–+ –(A) Phosphatidylcholine(B) Phospholipid bilayerH3CH3CH3CCH3CH3CH3 CH3CHHCHCCH3 CH3CH3H3CH3CH3CCH3CH3CH3 CH3CH3 CH3CH3OHHOb-caroteneVitamin A Vitamin ACentraldouble bond3.20 Phospholipids (A) Phosphatidylcholine (lecithin) demonstratesthe structure of a phospholipid molecule. In other phospholipids,the amino acid serine, the sugar alcohol inositol, orother compounds replace choline. (B) In an aqueous environment,hydrophobic interactions bring the “tails” of phospholipidstogether in the interior of a bilayer. The hydrophilic “heads” faceoutward on both sides of the bilayer, where they interact with thesurrounding water molecules.3.21 b-Carotene is the Source of Vitamin A Thecarotenoid β-carotene is symmetrical around its centraldouble bond. When that bond is broken, two moleculesof vitamin A are formed. The structural formulapresented here is standard chemical shorthand forlarge organic molecules with many carbon atoms; it issimplified by omitting the C (indicating a carbon atom)at the intersections representing covalent bonds. Thepresence of hydrogen atoms (H) to fill all the availablebonding sites on each C is assumed.WAXES The sheen on human hair is more than cosmetic. Glandsin the skin secrete a waxy coating that repels water and keepsthe hair pliable. Birds that live near water have a similar waxycoating on their feathers. The shiny leaves of plants such as holly,familiar during winter holidays, also have a waxy coating. Finally,bees make their honeycombs out of wax. All waxes havethe same basic structure: they are formed by an ester linkage betweena saturated, long-chain fatty acid and a saturated, longchainalcohol. The result is a very long molecule, with 40–60 CH2groups. For example, here is the structure of beeswax:This highly nonpolar structure accounts for the impermeabilityof wax to water.3.4 RECAPLipids include both nonpolar and amphipathic moleculesthat are largely composed of carbon and hydrogen.They are important in energy storage, lightabsorption, regulation and biological structures. Cellmembranes contain phospholipids, which are composedof hydrophobic fatty acids linked to glyceroland a hydrophilic phosphate group.• Draw the molecular structures of fatty acids and glyceroland show how they are linked to form a triglyceride.See p. 54 and Figure 3.18• What is the difference between fats and oils? See p. 54• How does the polar nature of phospholipids result intheir forming a bilayer? See p. 55 and Figure 3.20• Why are steroids and some vitamins classified aslipids? See p. 56All the types of molecules we have discussed in this chapter arefound only in living organisms, but a final class of biologicalmacromolecules has special importance to the living world. Thefunction of the nucleic acids is nothing less than the transmissionof life’s “blueprint” to each new organism. This chaptershowed the wonderful biochemical unity of life, a unity that impliesall life has a common origin. Essential to this origin werethe monomeric nucleotides and their polymers, nucleic acids.In the next chapter, we turn to the related topics of nucleic acidsand the origin of life.H3C (CH2)14 — C CH2OO (CH2)28 — CH3Fatty acid Ester Alcohollinkage3.4 | WHAT ARE THE CHEMICAL STRUCTURES AND FUNCTIONS OF LIPIDS? 57OOHH3CH3CHOH3CH3CH3CCH3CH3CH3HOH3CH3CH3CCH3CH3OHOO CH2OHCHOH3CH3CCholesterol is a constituentof membranes and is thesource of steroid hormones.Vitamin D2 can be producedin the skin by the action of lighton a cholesterol derivative.Cortisol is a hormone secretedby the adrenal glands.Testosterone is a male sexhormone.3.22 All Steroids Have the Same Ring Structure Thesteroids shown here, all important in vertebrates, are composedof carbon and hydrogen and are highly hydrophobic. However,small chemical variations, such as the presence or absence of ahydroxyl group, can produce enormous functional differencesamong these molecules.3.1 What Kinds of Molecules Characterize LivingThings?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 3.1• Macromolecules are polymers constructed by the formation ofcovalent bonds between smaller molecules called monomers.Macromolecules in living organisms include polysaccharides,proteins, and nucleic acids. Large lipid structures may also beconsidered macromolecules.• Functional groups are small groups of atoms that are consistentlyfound together in a variety of different macromolecules.Functional groups have particular chemical properties that theyconfer on any larger molecule of which they are a part. ReviewFigure 3.1, WEB ACTIVITY 3.1• Structural and optical isomers have the same kinds and numbersof atoms, but differ in their structures and properties.Review Figure 3.2• The many functions of macromolecules are directly related totheir three-dimensional shapes, which in turn result from thesequences and chemical properties of their monomers.• Monomers are joined by condensation reactions, which releasea molecule of water for each bond formed. Hydrolysis reactionsuse water to break polymers into monomers. ReviewFigure 3.4CHAPTER SUMMARY
3.2 What Are the Chemical Structures and Functions ofProteins?• The functions of proteins include support, protection, catalysis,transport, defense, regulation, and movement.• Amino acids are the monomers from which proteins are constructed.Four groups are attached to a central carbon atom: ahydrogen atom, an amino group, a carboxyl group, and a variableR group. The particular properties of each amino acidsdepend on its side chain, or R group, which may be charged,polar, or hydrophobic. Review Table 3.1, WEB ACTIVITY 3.2• Peptide linkages, also called peptide bonds, covalently linkamino acids into polypeptide chains. These bonds form by condensationreactions between the carboxyl and amino groups.Review Figure 3.6• The primary structure of a protein is the sequence of aminoacids in the chain. This chain is folded into a secondary structure,which in different parts of the protein may form an a helixor a b pleated sheet. Review Figure 3.7A–C• Disulfide bridges and noncovalent interactions between aminoacids cause polypeptide chains to fold into three-dimensionaltertiary structures and allow multiple chains to interact in aquaternary structure. Review Figure 3.7D,E• Heat, alterations in pH, or certain chemicals can all result in proteindenaturation, which involves the loss of tertiary and/orsecondary structure as well as biological function. ReviewFigure 3.9• The specific shape and structure of a protein allows it to bindnoncovalently to other molecules. Review Figure 3.11• Chaperone proteins enhance correct protein folding and preventbinding to inappropriate ligands. Review Figure 3.123.3 What Are the Chemical Structures and Functions ofCarbohydrates?• Carbohydrates contain carbon bonded to hydrogen and oxygenatoms in a ratio of 1:2:1, or (CH2O)n.