23When biologists first explored the CuatroCiénegas basin of northern Mexico, theyfound many organisms that are not foundanywhere else in the world. So far researchers have describedabout 150 species of plants and animals that arerestricted to this small region. Even though Cuatro Ciénegasis in a desert, about 30 of these unique species areaquatic, living in the isolated springs and marshes of thebasin. An unusual aquatic box turtle, beautiful cichlidfishes, and tiny crustaceans are among the many aquaticspecies that are confined to Cuatro Ciénegas. Why are somany different species found here and nowhere else?Biologists and geologists found that, over the past severalmillion years, this desert oasis has repeatedly beenisolated by a succession of geological events that cut itoff from the river systems and mountain ranges of northernMexico. Many different speciation events associatedwith these geological events make Cuatro Ciénegas anatural laboratory for studying speciation by geographicisolation.Each time gene flow between organisms in the basinand the surrounding areas ceased, populations living insideand outside the basin began to diverge from one another.Over thousands of generations of such isolation,new species developed. These new species no longershare the same gene pool, are adapted to different environments,and look different from one another. And—extremelyimportant—the organisms have diverged to thepoint that they are no longer capable of reproducing withone another—one of the hallmarks of distinct species.Although speciation is often studied in natural settingssuch as Cuatro Ciénegas, some aspects of speciation canbe studied in controlled laboratory experiments, using organismswith short generation times. For example,William Rice and George Salt conducted an experiment inwhich fruit flies were allowed to choose food sources indifferent habitats, where mating also took place. The habitatswere vials in different parts of an experimental cage.The habitats differed in three parameters: (1) light; (2) thedirection in which the fruit flies could move (up or down);and (3) concentrations of two aromaticchemicals, ethanol and acetaldehyde.In just 35 generations,two groups of flies were geneticallyand reproductively isolated from oneanother because they had evolveddistinct preferences for different habitats.In controlled experiments likethese, biologists are beginning tostudy and understand the genetic detailsof speciation.Catching speciation in the actA Natural Laboratory A swimmer surveysseveral of the fish species that areisolated in the desert oasis of the CuatroCiénegas basin in northern Mexico.23.1 What Are Species?Although “species” is a useful and commonly used term in biology,the concept of “species” sometimes varies among differentbiologists. Biologists are interested in several different aspectsof the divergence of biological lineages. Differentbiologists think about species differently because they ask differentquestions about species: How can we recognize and identifyspecies? How do new species arise? How do differentspecies remain separate? Why do rates of speciation differamong groups? In answering these questions, biologists focuson different attributes of species, leading to several differentways of thinking about what species are and how they form.Most of the various species concepts proposed by biologists arenot mutually exclusive—they are just different ways of approachingthe question “What are species?”We can recognize many species by their appearanceBiological diversity does not always vary in a smooth, incrementalway; groups of organisms often differ in distinct, obviousways. People have long recognized groups of similar organismsthat mate with one another, and there are usuallydistinct morphological breaks between these groups. Groups oforganisms that mate with one another are commonly calledspecies (note that this is both the plural and singular form of theword). Someone who is knowledgeable about a group of organisms,such as birds or flowering plants, usually can distinguishthe different species found in a particular area simply by lookingat them. Standard field guides to birds, mammals, insects,and wildflowers are possible only because many species changelittle in appearance over large geographic distances. A casualbirdwatcher can easily recognize male red-winged blackbirds(Agelaius phoeniceus) from the east and west coasts of NorthAmerica as members of the same species (Figure 23.1A).More than 250 years ago, the Swedish biologist Carolus Linnaeusdeveloped the binomial system of biological nomenclatureby which species are named today (see Section 22.4). Linnaeusdescribed thousands of species, and because he knewnothing about genetics or the mating behavior of the organismshe was naming, he classified them only on the basis of their appearance.Linnaeus differentiated species using a morphologicalspecies concept, a construct that assumes a species consistsof individuals that “look alike,” and that individuals that don’tlook alike belong to different species. Although Linnaeus didnot know it, members of many of the groups that he classifiedas species by their appearance look alike because they sharemany of the alleles that code for their body structures.IN THIS CHAPTER we will describe what species areand discuss how Earth’s millions of species came into being.We will examine the mechanisms by which a lineage splitsinto new species and how such separations are maintained.Finally, we will look at different factors that can make speciationa rapid or a very slow process.The origin of species—the splitting and diverging of asingle lineage into two or more distinct and evolutionarilyindependent lineages—is one of the most importantphenomena in biological science. Charles Darwinrecognized its preeminence when he chose the title ofThe Origin of Species. But without the underlying knowledgesupplied by the modern science of genetics, Darwinwas primarily viewing the consequences of speciation,not its underlying causes. Today biologists areactively searching for and finding answers to the manyquestions about the process of speciation, somethingbiologists have been known to call “the mystery ofmysteries.”CHAPTER OUTLINE23.1 What Are Species?23.2 How Do New Species Arise?23.3 What Happens When Newly Formed SpeciesCome Together?23.4 Why Do Rates of Speciation Vary?Experimental Subjects Fruit flies of the genus Drosophilaare easily reared in the laboratory. Their short generation time(7–10 days from newly laid egg to reproductive adult) makesthem ideal subjects for controlled experiments on speciation.23.1 | WHAT ARE SPECIES? 483The morphological species concept has limitations, however.In some cases, for instance, not all members of a species lookalike. For example, males, females, and young individuals donot always resemble one another closely (Figure 23.1B). Themorphological species concept is of little use in the case of crypticspecies, instances in which two or more morphologically indistinguishablespecies do not interbreed. Biologists thereforecannot always rely on appearance alone in determining whetherindividual organisms are members of the same or differentspecies. Several additional types of information (especially behavioraland genetic data) are used today to help biologists differentiatespecies.Species are reproductively isolated lineageson the tree of lifeEvolutionary biologists often think of species as branches onthe tree of life, which is known as a lineage species concept.Under this concept, each species has a history that starts at aspeciation event (one lineage on the tree splits into two) andends either at extinction or another speciation event, at whichtime the species produces two daughter species. The process oflineage splitting may be gradual, and thus take thousands ofgenerations to complete. On the other hand, one ancestral lineagemay be split into two as a result of a sudden geologicalevent, such as a volcanic eruption that isolates two parts of ancestralspecies range. Either way, the lineage species concepttreats speciation as the process by which one species splits intotwo or more daughter species, which thereafter evolve as distinctlineages. The gradual nature of some splitting eventsmeans that at a single point in time, the final outcome of theprocess may not be clear. In these cases it is often impractical totry to decide whether the partially isolated populations of theincipient species will continue to diverge and become fully isolatedfrom one another, or perhaps merge again in the future.The most important component that determines long-termisolation of sexually reproducing lineages from one another isthe development of reproductive isolation, a state in which twopopulations can no longer exchange genes. If individuals of apopulation mate and reproduce with one another, but not withindividuals of other populations, they constitute a distinct groupwithin which genes recombine. In other words, they comprisean independent evolutionary lineage—a separate branch on thetree of life.It was recognition of the importance of reproductive isolationthat brought Ernst Mayr to propose the biological speciesconcept: “Species are groups of actually or potentially interbreedingnatural populations which are reproductively isolatedfrom other such groups.” The terms “actually” and “potentially”are important elements of the definition. “Actually” saysthat the individuals live in the same area and interbreed withone another. “Potentially” says that although the individualsdo not live in the same area, and therefore cannot interbreed,other information suggests that they would do so if they did gettogether. This widely used concept of species does not apply toorganisms that reproduce asexually, and it is limited to a singlepoint in evolutionary time.These various concepts of species are not entirely incompatible;they simply emphasize different aspects of species. The morphologicalspecies concept emphasizes the practicality of humansrecognizing species, although it underestimates or overestimatesthe actual number of species in some cases. Mayr’s biologicalspecies concept emphasizes that reproductive isolation is whatkeeps sexual lineages on the tree of life separated from one another.The lineage species concept embraces the idea that sexualspecies are maintained by reproductive isolation, while recognizingthe existence of asexual species. The lineage species conceptalso allows biologists to consider species through evolutionarytime, which we will discuss in the next section.Virtually all species exhibit some degree of genetic recombinationamong individuals, even if recombination is relativelyrare (see Section 21.4). Significant reproductive isolation betweenspecies is thus necessary for lineages to remain distinctthrough evolutionary time. Reproductive isolation is also responsiblefor the morphological distinctiveness of most species,because genetic mutations that result in morphological changescannot spread between reproductively isolated species. Therefore,no matter which species concept we emphasize, the evolutionof reproductive isolation is important for understandingthe origin of species.(A) (B)Agelaius phoeniceusMale, New YorkAgelaius phoeniceusMale, British ColumbiaAgelaius phoeniceusFemale23.1 Members of the Same Species LookAlike—or Not (A) Both of these male redwingedblackbirds are members of the samespecies—Agelaius phoeniceus—even thoughone is from the eastern United States and theother is from western Canada. Despite the geographicdistance, the two individuals are morphologicallyvery similar. (B) Red-winged blackbirdsare sexually dimorphic, which means thefemale of the species looks quite differentfrom the male.23.1 RECAPSpecies are distinct lineages on the tree of life. Speciationis usually a gradual process as one lineagedivides into two. Over time, lineages of sexualspecies remain distinct from one another becausethey have become reproductively isolated.• Explain how the various species concepts emphasizedifferent attributes of species. See pp. 482–483• Why is the biological species concept not applicableto asexually reproducing organisms?• Do you understand why reproductive isolation is animportant component of all of the species conceptsdiscussed here? See p. 483Although Charles Darwin titled his groundbreaking book TheOrigin of Species, it did not extensively discuss the processes ofspeciation. He devoted most of his attention to demonstratingthat individual species are altered by natural selection over time.We will next discuss the many things that biologists havelearned about speciation since Darwin’s time.23.2 How Do New Species Arise?Not all evolutionary changes result in new species. Asingle lineagemay change over time without giving rise to a new species.Speciation, in contrast, usually requires the evolution of reproductiveisolation within a species whose members formerly exchangedgenes. But if a genetic change prevents reproductionbetween individuals of a species, how can such a change spreadthrough a species in the first place?Gene incompatibilities can producereproductive isolation in two daughter speciesIf a new allele that causes reproductive incompatibilityarises in a population, it cannot spread throughthe population, because no other individuals are reproductivelycompatible with the individual thatcarries the new allele. So how can one reproductivelycohesive lineage ever split into two reproductivelyisolated species? Several early geneticists, includingTheodosius Dobzhansky and Hermann JosephMuller, developed a genetic model to explain this apparentconundrum (Figure 23.2).The Dobzhansky-Muller model is quite simple. First, assumethat a single ancestral population is divided into two (by theformation of a new mountain range, for instance). In one ofthe descendant populations, a new allele (A) arises and becomesfixed (see Figure 23.2). In the other population, another new allele(B) becomes fixed at a different gene locus. Neither new alleleat either gene results in any loss of reproductive compatibility.However, the two new forms of these two genes have never occurredtogether in the same organism. The products of manygenes must work together, and it is quite likely that the new proteinforms encoded by these two genes are not compatible withone another. If the two populations come back together, theymay still be able to interbreed, or hybridize. However, the hybridoffspring will have a new combination of genes that maybe functionally inferior, or even lethal. Of course, this will nothappen with all new combinations of genes, but over time isolatedpopulations will accumulate many allele differences atmany gene loci. Thus, we expect that genetic incompatibilitywill develop through time in the two isolated populations.Many empirical examples support the Dobzhansky-Mullermodel, which works not only for pairs of individual genes butalso for some kinds of chromosomal rearrangements. For example,bats of the genus Rhogeessa exhibit considerable variationin centric fusions of their chromosomes. The chromosomes ofthe various species contain the same basic chromosomal arms,but in some species two acrocentric (one-armed) chromosomeshave fused to form larger, metacentric (two-armed) chromosomes.A polymorphism in this character causes few, if any,problems in meiosis, because the respective chromosomes canstill align and assort normally. Therefore, a given centric fusioncan become fixed in a population. However, if a different centricfusion becomes fixed in a second population, then hybrids betweenthe two populations can no longer produce normal gametesin meiosis (Figure 23.3). Most of the closely relatedspecies of Rhogeessa display different combinations of these centricfusions, and are thereby reproductively isolated from oneanother.484 CHAPTER 23 | SPECIES AND THEIR FORMATIONA new allele arises atlocus #1 in one lineage.A different allele changetakes place at locus #2in the other lineage.The ancestral populationseparates into twoindependent lineages.Allele A becomes fixedat locus #1.Allele B becomes fixedat locus #2.Allele A is incompatiblewith allele B, so hybridsare inviable.Locus 1aaLocus 2bbAa bbaa BbAA bbaa BBGenotype ofancestral population23.2 The Dobzhansky-Muller Model In this simple two-locus geneticmodel, two populations isolated from the same ancestral population evolve independently.In each descendant lineage, a new allele becomes fixed, but at twodifferent loci. Neither of the new alleles is incompatible with the ancestral alleles,but the two new alleles at the two loci are incompatible with one another. Thusthe two descendant lineages are reproductively incompatible.23.2 | HOW DO NEW SPECIES ARISE? 485Reproductive isolation develops with increasinggenetic divergenceAs pairs of species diverge genetically, they become increasinglyreproductively isolated from one another (Figure 23.4). Both therate at which reproductive isolation develops and the mechanismsthat produce it vary from group to group. Nonetheless,reproductive incompatibility has been shown to develop graduallyin many groups of plants, animals, and fungi, reflectingthe slow pace at which incompatible genes accumulate in eachlineage. In some cases, complete reproductive isolation may takemillions of years to develop. In other cases (as with the chromosomalfusions of Rhogeessa described above), reproductive isolationcan develop over just a few generations.Partial reproductive isolation has evolved in strains of Phloxdrummondii artificially isolated by humans. In 1835, ThomasDrummond, after whom this species of garden plant is named,collected seeds in Texas and distributed them to nurseries in Europe.Over the next 80 years, the European nurseries establishedmore than 200 true-breeding strains of this phlox, which differedin flower size and color and plant growth form. The plantbreeders did not select directly for reproductive incompatibilitybetween strains, but in subsequent experiments in which fertilizationrates were measured and compared, biologists foundthat reproductive compatibility between strains had been reducedby 14 to 50 percent, depending on the strain.Many laboratory experiments have demonstrated the gradualevolution of reproductive incompatibility during isolation.We described one such experiment in the opening of this chapter.These laboratory experiments are also consistent with ourobservations of naturally isolated populations, as described forthe unique species of the Cuatro Ciénegas basin in the chapteropening.Geographic barriers give rise to allopatric speciationSpeciation that results when a population is divided by a physicalbarrier is known as allopatric speciation (Greek allos,“other”; patra, “homeland”), also called geographic speciation (Figure23.5). Allopatric speciation is thought to be the dominantmode of speciation in most groups of organisms. The physicalbarrier that divides the range of a species may be a water body,a mountain range, or other inhospitable habitat for terrestrialorganisms, or dry land for aquatic organisms. Barriers can formwhen continents drift, sea levels rise, glaciers advance and retreat,or climates change. These processes continue to generateThis centromere fusion betweenchromosomes 1 and 2 does not disruptchromosome pairing during meiosis.Fixation of1 + 2 fusion.A different fusion betweenchromosomes 2 and 3 also doesnot disrupt chromosome pairing.Normal pairing ofchromosomes cannotoccur in hybrids.Fixation of2 + 3 fusion.1 2 3Increasing reproductive isolationIncreasing genetic divergenceGenetically distant pairsof species show highreproductive isolation.Genetically similar pairsof species show littlereproductive isolation.23.3 Speciation by Centric Fusion In this chromosomal version ofthe Dobzhansky–Muller model of speciation, two independent centricfusions of one-armed chromosomes occur in two sister lineages. Whenpolymorphic, neither centric fusion event by itself results in major difficultiesat meiosis. However, the independent centric fusions are incompatibleat meiosis, because the three different chromosomes involved inthese fusions cannot pair normally, leading to sterility of the F1 hybrid.Most of the species in the bat genus Rhogeessa differ from one anotherby such centric fusions.23.4 Reproductive Isolation Increases with Time of SeparationThis positive relationship between genetic distance and reproductive isolation,shown here for pairs of Drosophila species, has been observed inmany groups of plants, animals, and fungi (each dot represents a comparisonof one species pair).physical barriers today. The populations separated by such barriersare often, but not always, initially large. They evolve differencesfor a variety of reasons, including genetic drift (see Section21.1), but especially because the environments in whichthey live are, or become, different.Allopatric speciation may also result when some membersof a population cross an existing barrier and found a new, isolatedpopulation. Many of the more than 800 species ofDrosophila found in the Hawaiian archipelago are restricted toa single island. We know that these species are the descendantsof new populations founded by individuals dispersing amongthe islands because the closest relative of a species on one islandis often a species on a neighboring island rather than a specieson the same island. Biologists who have studied the chromosomesof these fruit flies estimate that speciation in this groupof Drosophila has resulted from at least 45 such founder events(Figure 23.6).The 14 species of finches found in the Galápagos, an archipelago1,000 kilometers off the coast of Ecuador, were generatedby allopatric speciation. Darwin’s finches (as they are usuallycalled, because Darwin was the first scientist to study them)arose in the Galápagos from a single South American speciesthat colonized the islands. Today the 14 species differ strikinglyfrom their closest mainland relative and from one another (Figure23.7). The islands of the Galápagos archipelago are sufficientlyfar apart that finches move among them only infrequently.In addition, environmental conditions differ fromisland to island. Some are relatively flat and arid; others haveforested mountain slopes. Finch populations on different islandshave differentiated over millions of years to the point that, whenoccasional immigrants arrive from other islands, they either donot breed with the residents or, if they do, the resulting offspringdo not survive as well as the offspring of established island residents.The genetic distinctness and cohesiveness of the differentfinch species are thus maintained.Sympatric speciation occurs without physical barriersAlthough physical isolation is usually required for speciation,under some circumstances speciation can occur without it. Apartition of a gene pool without physical isolation is called sympatricspeciation (Greek sym, “together with”). Given that speciationis usually a gradual process, how can reproductive isolationdevelop when individuals have frequent opportunities486 CHAPTER 23 | SPECIES AND THEIR FORMATIONA single species is distributedover a broad range.A barrier separates two populations. Populationsadapt to differing environments onopposite sides of the barrier.The barrier is removed. The populationsrecolonize the intervening area and mingle,but do not interbreed.TimeRange of overlap23.5 Allopatric Speciation Allopatric speciation may result when apopulation is divided into two separate populations by a physical barrier,such as rising sea levels.KauaiPicture-wingedDrosophilaOahuMauicomplexHawaiiOldestislandYoungestisland1115271031526402912Number of proposedfounder eventsNumber of speciesfound on an island23.6 Founder Events Lead to Allopatric Speciation The large numberof species of picture-winged Drosophila in the Hawaiian Islands is theresult of founder events: the founding of new populations by individualsdispersing among the islands. The islands, which were formed insequence as Earth’s crust moved over a volcanic “hot spot,” vary in age.GO TO Animated Tutorial 23.1 • Founder Eventsand Allopatric SpeciationyourBioPortal.com23.2 | HOW DO NEW SPECIES ARISE? 487Large-billed finchescan crush large,hard seeds.Small-billed finchescannot crush largeseeds well, but areadept at handlingsmall seeds.The large tree finchuses its heavy bill totwist apart wood toreach larvae inside.The woodpecker finchuses its long beak toprobe dead wood,crevices, and barkfor insects.The warbler finchuses quick motions tocapture insects onplant surfaces.Cactus finches areadapted to openingcactus fruits andextracting the seeds.The small and mediumtree finches andmangrove finch pickinsects from leavesand branches andexplore crevices forhidden prey.Large tree finch(C. psittacula)Medium tree finch(C. pauper)Mangrove finch(C. heliobates)Woodpecker finch(C. pallidus)Warbler finch(Certhidea olivacea)Vegetarian finch(Platyspiza crassirostris)Small tree finch(Camarhynchus parvulus)Bud eater The bud eater’s heavy bill is adaptedfor grasping and wrenching buds from branches.Seed eatersBills of seed eaters areadapted for harvestingand crushing seeds.ANCESTOR FINCHfrom SouthAmericanmainlandLarge ground finch(Geospiza magnirostris)Medium ground finch(G. fortis)Small ground finch(G. fuliginosa)Sharp-billed ground finch(G. difficilis)Large cactus finch(G. conirostris)Cactus finch(G. scandens)GalápagosIslandsCocos IslandInsect eatersThe bills of insect eaters varybecause they eat different typesand sizes of insects and theycapture them in different ways.North AmericaSouthAmericaPacificOcean23.7 Allopatric Speciation amongDarwin’s Finches The descendants ofthe ancestral finch that colonized theGalápagos archipelago several million yearsago evolved into 14 different species whosemembers are variously adapted to feed onseeds, buds, and insects. (The fourteenthspecies, not pictured here, lives in CocosIsland, farther north in the Pacific Ocean.)to mate with one another? Sympatric speciation may occur withsome form of disruptive selection in which certain genotypeshave a preference for distinct microhabitats where mating takesplace. The experiment described in the opening of this chaptershows that this kind of disruptive selection can take place in thelaboratory, but does it also occur in nature?Sympatric speciation via disruptive selection appears to behappening in the apple maggot fly (Rhagoletis pomonella) in easternNorth America. Until the mid-1800s, Rhagoletis flies courted,mated, and deposited their eggs only on hawthorn fruits. About150 years ago, some Rhagoletis flies began to lay their eggs onapples, which European immigrants had introduced into easternNorth America. Apple trees are closely related to hawthorns,but the smell of the fruits differs, and the apple fruits appearearlier than those of hawthorns. Some early-emerging femaleRhagoletis laid their eggs on apples and evolved a genetic preferencefor the smell of apples. Their offspring inherited this geneticpreference for apples for mating and egg deposition. Whenthe offspring sought out apple trees for these purposes, theymated with other flies reared on apples, which shared the samepreferences.Today the two groups of Rhagoletis pomonella in the easternUnited States may be on the way to becoming distinct species.One group mates and lays eggs primarily on hawthorn fruits,the other on apples. The two incipient species are partly reproductivelyisolated because they mate primarily with individualsraised on the same fruit and because they emerge from theirpupae at different times of the year. In addition, the apple-feedingflies have evolved so that they now grow more rapidly onapples than they originally did.Sympatric speciation via ecologicalisolation, as appears to be happening inRhagoletis pomonella, may be widespreadamong insects, many of which feed ononly a single plant species. The mostcommon means of sympatric speciation,however, is polyploidy, or the duplicationof sets of chromosomes within individuals(see Section 11.5). Polyploidy can ariseeither from chromosome duplication in asingle species (autopolyploidy) or from thecombining of the chromosomes of twodifferent species (allopolyploidy).An autopolyploid individual originateswhen (for example) two accidentallyunreduced diploid gametes (withtwo sets of chromosomes) combine to form a tetraploid individual(with four sets of chromosomes). Tetraploid and diploid individualsof the same species are reproductively isolated becausetheir hybrid offspring are triploid and are usually sterile;they cannot produce viable gametes because their chromosomesdo not segregate evenly during meiosis (Figure 23.8). So atetraploid individual cannot produce viable offspring by matingwith a diploid individual—but it can do so if it self-fertilizesor mates with another tetraploid. Thus polyploidy can result incomplete reproductive isolation in two generations—an importantexception to the general rule that speciation is a gradualprocess.Allopolyploids may also be produced when individuals oftwo different (but closely related) species interbreed. Such hybridizationoften disrupts normal meiosis, which can result inchromosomal doubling. Allopolyploids are often fertile becauseeach of the chromosomes has a nearly identical partner withwhich to pair during meiosis.Speciation by polyploidy has been particularly important inthe evolution of plants. Botanists estimate that about 70 percentof flowering plant species and 95 percent of fern species are theresult of recent polyploidization. Some of these arose from hybridizationbetween two species, followed by chromosomal duplicationand self-fertilization. Many other species divergedfrom polyploid ancestors, so the new species also shared the duplicatedsets of chromosomes. New species may arise by meansof polyploidy more easily among plants than among animalsbecause plants of many species can reproduce by self-fertilization.In addition, if polyploidy arises in several offspring of asingle parent, the siblings can fertilize one another.488 CHAPTER 23 | SPECIES AND THEIR FORMATIONThe tetraploidparent has fourcopies of eachchromosome.The F1 offspring istriploid (three copiesof each chromosome).Most gametes producedby the triploid hybridare not viable becausethey have an unbalancedset of chromosomes.The diploidparent has twocopies of eachchromosome.MeiosisMeiosisMeiosisMatingHaploid gametes(one copy of eachchromosome)Diploid gametes(two copies ofeach chromosome)Only viable gamete23.8 Tetraploids Are ReproductivelyIsolated from Their Diploid AncestorsEven if the triploid offspring of a diploid and atetraploid parent survives and reaches sexualmaturity, most of the gametes it produceshave aneuploid (unbalanced) numbers ofchromosomes. Such triploid individuals areeffectively sterile. (For simplicity, the diagramshows only three chromosomes; mostspecies have many more than that.)23.3 | WHAT HAPPENS WHEN NEWLY FORMED SPECIES COME TOGETHER? 48923.2 RECAPAllopatric speciation results from the separation ofpopulations by geographic barriers; it is the dominantmode of speciation among most groups of organisms.Sympatric speciation may result from ecologicalisolation, but among plants and someanimals, polyploidy is the most common cause ofsympatric speciation.• How can speciation via polyploidy happen in twogenerations? See p. 488• Explain why an effective barrier to gene flow for onespecies may not effectively isolate another species.Polyploidy, as we have just seen, can result in a new speciesthat is completely reproductively isolated from its parent speciesin two generations, but most populations separated by a physicalbarrier become reproductively isolated only very slowly.Let’s see how reproductive isolation may become establishedonce two populations have separated from each other.What Happens When Newly Formed 23.3 Species Come Together?As discussed in the previous section, once a barrier to gene flowis established, reproductive isolation can develop through geneticdivergence. Over many generations, genetic differencesaccumulate that reduce the probability that members of the twopopulations can mate and produce viable offspring. In this way,reproductive isolation evolves as a by-product of the geneticchanges in the two populations. What types of mechanisms preventor reduce gene flow between populations, leading to reproductiveisolation? Reproductive isolating mechanisms fallinto two major categories: prezygotic reproductive barriers actbefore fertilization to prevent individuals of different species orpopulations from mating, whereas postzygotic reproductive barriersact after fertilization to prevent the development of viableoffspring, or to reduce the offsprings’ fertility.Prezygotic barriers prevent fertilizationPrezygotic mechanisms come into play before fertilization andcan involve several kinds of reproductive isolation.HABITAT ISOLATION When individuals of different speciesevolve genetic preferences for different habitats in which theylive or mate, they may never come into contact during theirrespective mating periods. The Rhagoletis flies in the easternUnited States (discussed in Section 23.2) experienced such habitatisolation, as did the Drosophila in the experiment describedin the opening of this chapter.TEMPORAL ISOLATION Many organisms have distinct matingseasons. If two closely related species breed at different timesof the year (or different times of day), the two may never havean opportunity to hybridize. For example, in sympatric populationsof three closely related leopard frogs, each species breedsat a different time of year (Figure 23.9). Although there is someoverlap in the breeding seasons, the opportunities for hybridizationare minimized.MECHANICAL ISOLATION Differences in the sizes and shapes ofreproductive organs may prevent the union of gametes fromdifferent species. With animals, this may involve a match in theshape of reproductive organs between males and females, sothat reproduction between species with mismatching structuresis not physically possible. In plants, the mechanical isolation betweenspecies may involve a pollinator. For example, orchids ofthe genus Cryptostylis produce flowers that look and smell likethe females of particular species of wasps (Figure 23.10). Whena male wasp visits and attempts to mate with the flower (thinkingit is a female wasp), the mating action results in transfer ofPeaks show relative frequencyof egg-laying events.These breeding peaks dropout in sympatric populations……so sympatric populations havefew opportunities to hydridize.J F M A M J J A S O N DMonth(A) AllopatryRana berlandeieriRana sphenocephalaRana blairiJ F M A M J J A S O N DMonth(B) SympatryRana berlandeieriRana sphenocephalaRana blairi23.9 Temporal Isolation in the Breeding Seasons of Three Speciesof Frogs (A) The peak breeding seasons of three species of Rana overlapwhen the species are physically separated (allopatry). (B) When two ormore species of Rana occupy the same territory (sympatry), overlapbetween peak breeding seasons of each species is greatly reduced oreliminated. In areas where only one species is found, the breeding seasonsare broader. Selection against hybridization in areas of overlap helpsreinforce the prezygotic isolating mechanism.GO TO Animated Tutorial 23.2 • Speciation MechanismsyourBioPortal.compollen between the flower and wasp as a result of appropriatelyconfigured anthers and stigmas on the flower. Insects that visitthe flower but do not attempt to mate with it do not triggerthe transfer of pollen between the insect and flower.BEHAVIORAL ISOLATION Individuals of a species may reject, orfail to recognize, individuals of other species as potential matingpartners. For example, the breeding calls of male frogsquickly diverge between related species (Figure 23.11). Femalefrogs respond to and approach calls from males of their ownspecies, but ignore the calls of even closely related species.Sometimes the mate choice of one species is mediated by thebehavior of individuals of other species. For example, whethertwo plant species hybridize may depend on the food preferencesof their pollinators. The floral traits of plants, includingtheir color and shape, can enhance reproductive isolation eitherby influencing which pollinators are attracted to the flowersor by altering where pollen is deposited on the bodies of pollinators.Aplant whose flowers are pendant (Figure 23.12A) willbe pollinated by an animal with different physical characteristicsthan a plant in which the flowers grow upright (Figure23.12B). Because each pollinator prefers (and is adapted to) adifferent type of flower, the pollinators rarely transfer pollenfrom one plant species to the other.Such isolation by pollinator behavior is seen in the case oftwo sympatric species of columbines (Aquilegia) in the mountainsof California that have diverged in flower color, structure,and orientation. Aquilegia formosa has pendant flowers withshort spurs (spikelike, nectar-containing structures) and is pollinatedby hummingbirds (Figure 23.12C). A. pubescens has upright,lighter-colored flowers with long spurs and is pollinatedby hawkmoths (Figure 23.12D). The difference in pollinatorsmeans that these two species are effectively reproductively isolatedeven though they populate the same geographic range.GAMETIC ISOLATION Sperm of one species may not attach to theeggs of another species because the eggs do not release the appropriateattractive chemicals, or the sperm may be unable topenetrate the egg because the two gametes are chemically in-490 CHAPTER 23 | SPECIES AND THEIR FORMATION23.10 Mechanical Isolation through Mimicry Many orchid speciesmaintain reproductive isolation because their flowers look and smell like aspecific species of bee or wasp, inducing copulatory actions on the partof that specific pollinator insect. The placement of the anthers and stigmason the flower results in transfer of pollen from the flower to the insectthat “mates” with it, and then from the insect to the next flower withwhich it attempts to mate. Shown here are an Australian orchid(Cryptostylis sp.) and its pollinator, a male wasp of the genus Lissopimpla.Dominant frequency (Hz)AllopatrySympatryAllopatry300025003500400045005000Gastrophyrne carolinensisGastrophryne olivacea23.11 Behavioral Isolation in the Mating Calls of Male Frogs The males of most species of frogsproduce species-specific calls. The calls of the two closely related frog species in this figure differ in theirdominant frequency (a high-frequency sound wave results in a high-pitched sound; a low frequencyresults in a low-pitched sound). Female frogs are attracted to the calls of males of their own species.Note that the calls of the two species are more distinct in areas of sympatry than in areas of allopatry(an example of reinforcement).23.3 | WHAT HAPPENS WHEN NEWLY FORMED SPECIES COME TOGETHER? 491compatible. Thus, even though individuals of the two speciesmay attempt to mate, the gametes never fuse into a zygote.For example, gametic isolation has arisen between species ofsea urchins. A protein known as bindin occurs in sea urchinsperm and functions in attaching (“binding”) the sperm to eggs.All sea urchins produce this egg-recognition protein, but thegene sequence diverges rapidly between species. The spermprotein evolves so that it will only bind to eggs of the samespecies, thus preventing interspecific hybridization.Postzygotic barriers can isolate species after fertilizationIf individuals of two different populations lack complete prezygoticreproductive barriers, postzygotic reproductive barriersmay prevent the species from merging. Genetic differences thataccumulate while the populations are isolated from each othermay reduce the survival and reproduction of hybrid offspringin any of several ways:• Low hybrid zygote viability. Hybrid zygotes may fail to maturenormally, either dying during development or developingsuch severe abnormalities that they cannot mate asadults.• Low hybrid adult viability. Hybrid offspring may simply havelower survivorship than offspring resulting from withinpopulationmatings.• Hybrid infertility. Hybrids may mature normallybut be infertile. For example, the offspring of matingsbetween horses and donkeys—mules—arehealthy but sterile; they produce no descendants.Although natural selection does not directly favorthe evolution of postzygotic reproductive barriers, ifhybrid offspring survive poorly, natural selection mayfavor the evolution of prezygotic barriers. This happensbecause individuals that mate with individuals ofthe other population will leave fewer surviving descendantsthan individuals that mate only within their ownpopulation. In this case, individuals that can avoid matingwith members of the other population have a selectiveadvantage, and any trait that favors such avoidance willbe favored by natural selection. Such strengthening of prezygoticbarriers is known as reinforcement.Donald Levin of the University of Texas noticed that individualsof Phlox drummondii in most of the range of the species inTexas have pink flowers. Where P. drummondii is sympatric withthe pink-flowered P. cuspidata, however, P. drummondii has redflowers. No other Phlox species has red flowers. Levin performedan experiment whose results showed that reinforcementmight explain the evolution of red flowers where the twospecies are sympatric (Figure 23.13).Reinforcement can also be detected by comparing sympatricand allopatric populations of potentially hybridizing species. Ifreinforcement is occurring, then sympatric pairs of closely relatedspecies should evolve more effective prezygotic reproductive barriersthan do allopatric populations of the same species. The examplesof temporal isolation shown in Figure 23.9 and of behavioralisolation shown in Figure 23.11 illustrate reinforcement ofprezygotic barriers. The breeding seasons of the sympatric populationsof frogs (Figure 23.9) overlap much less than do those ofthe corresponding allopatric populations. Similarly, the frequenciesof the frog mating calls illustrated in Figure 23.11 are more divergentin sympatric populations than in allopatric populations.In both cases, there appears to have been selection against hybridsin areas of sympatry, so individuals that do not produce hybridsare more likely to leave more genes to future generations.(A) (B)(C) Aquilegia formosa (D) Aquilegia pubescens23.12 Floral Morphology is Associatedwith Pollinator Morphology (A) Thishummingbird’s morphology and behaviorare adapted to approach plants whoseflowers are pendant (hanging downward).(B) The nectar-extracting proboscis of thishawkmoth is adapted to flowers that growupright. (C) Aquilegia formosa flowers arenormally pendant and are pollinated byhummingbirds. (D) Flowers of A. pubescensare normally upright, which facilitates pollinationby hawkmoths. In addition, the longfloral spurs appear to restrict access bysome other potential pollinators.During the process of reinforcement, closely relatedspecies may form hybrids in areas where their rangesoverlap, and they may continue to do so for manyyears. Let’s examine what happens when reproductivebarriers do not completely prevent individualsfrom different populations from mating and producingoffspring.Hybrid zones may form if reproductiveisolation is incompleteIf contact is reestablished between formerly isolatedpopulations before complete reproductive isolationhas developed, members of the two populations mayinterbreed. Three outcomes of such interbreeding arepossible:• If hybrid offspring are as fit as those resultingfrom matings within each population, hybrids willmate with individuals of both parental species.The gene pools will gradually become completelymixed, resulting in one species.• If hybrid offspring are less fit, complete reproductiveisolation may evolve as reinforcementstrengthens prezygotic reproductive barriers.• Even if hybrid offspring are at some disadvantage,a narrow hybrid zone—a region in which geneticallydistinct populations come together and produceoffspring of mixed ancestry—may developin the absence of reinforcement, or before reinforcementis complete.When a hybrid zone first forms, most hybrids areoffspring of crosses between purebred individuals ofthe two populations. However, subsequent generationsinclude a variety of individuals with differentproportions of their genes derived from the originaltwo populations. Thus hybrid zones contain recombinantindividuals resulting from many generations ofhybridization. Detailed genetic studies can tell usmuch about why hybrid zones may be narrow andstable for long periods of time.The hybrid zone between two species of Europeantoads of the genus Bombina has been studied intensively.The fire-bellied toad (B. bombina) lives in easternEurope; the closely related yellow-bellied toad(B. variegata) lives in western and southern Europe.The ranges of the two species overlap in a long butvery narrow zone stretching 4,800 kilometers fromeastern Germany to the Black Sea (Figure 23.14). Hybridsbetween the two species suffer from a rangeof defects, many of which are lethal. Those hybridsthat survive often have skeletal abnormalities, suchas misshapen mouths, ribs that are fused to vertebrae,and a reduced number of vertebrae. By followingthe fates of thousands of toads from the hybridzone, investigators found that a hybrid toad is on averageonly half as fit as a purebred individual. The492 CHAPTER 23 | SPECIES AND THEIR FORMATIONHYPOTHESIS Red-flowered P. drummondii are less likely to hybridizewith P. cuspidata than are pink-flowered P. drummondii.INVESTIGATING LIFEMETHODRESULTS23.13 Flower Color Reinforces a Reproductive Barrier in PhloxMost Phlox drummondii flowers are pink, but in regions where they aresympatric with P. cuspidata—which is always pink—most P. drummondiiindividuals are red. Most pollinators preferentially visit flowers of one coloror the other. In this experiment, Donald Levin explored whether flowercolor reinforces a prezygotic reproductive barrier, lessening the chancesof interspecific hybridization.CONCLUSION P. drummondii and P. cuspidata are less likely tohybridize if the flowers of the two species differ in color.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: This experiment did not address the probablereproduction advantages for individual Phloxplants of donating and receiving primarilyintraspecific pollen. Can you design an experimentto measure such an advantage?Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.2. After the flowering season ends, measure hybridization byassessing the genetic composition of the seeds produced byP. drummondii plants of both colors.P. cuspidataP. drummondiiOf the seeds produced by pink-flowered P. drummondii,38% were hybrids with P. cuspidata. Only 13% of the seedsproduced by red-flowered individuals were genetic hybrids.Percent of seeds fromhybrid matingsPink flowers Red flowersPhlox drummondii250501. Introduce equal numbers of red- and pink-floweredP. drummondii individuals into an area with manypink-flowered P. cuspidata.23.4 | WHY DO RATES OF SPECIATION VARY? 493hybrid zone thus remains narrow because there is strong selectionagainst hybrids, and because adult toads do not moveover long distances. The zone has persisted for hundreds ofyears, however, because many individuals of both species continueto move short distances into it, constantly replenishingthe hybrid population.23.3 RECAPReproductive isolation may result from prezygotic orpostzygotic reproductive barriers. Lower fitness ofhybrids in contact zones can lead to the reinforcementof prezygotic reproductive barriers.• Describe various kinds of prezygotic and postzygoticreproductive barriers. See pp. 489–491• Why is reinforcement of prezygotic barriers likely ifhybrid offspring survive more poorly than offspringproduced by within-population matings? See p. 491Some groups of organisms have many species, others only a few.Hundreds of species of Drosophila evolved in the small area ofthe Hawaiian Islands over about 20 million years. In contrast,there are only a few species of horseshoe crabs in the world, andonly one species of ginkgo tree, even though these latter groupshave persisted for hundreds of millions of years. Why do differentgroups of organisms have such different rates of speciation?23.4 Why Do Rates of Speciation Vary?Rates of speciation (the proportion of existing species that splitto form new species over a given period of time) vary greatlybecause many factors influence the likelihood that a lineagewill split to form two or more species. What are some of thefactors that influence the probability of a given lineage splittinginto two?Populations of species that have specialized diets may bemore likely to diverge than are populations that have generalizeddiets. To investigate the effects of diet on rates of speciation,Charles Mitter and colleagues compared species richnessin some closely related groups of true bugs (hemipterans). Thecommon ancestor of these groups was a predator that fed onother insects, but a dietary shift to herbivory (eating plants)evolved at least twice in the groups under study. The herbivorousgroups have many more species than those that are predatory(Figure 23.15). Herbivorous bugs typically specialize onone or a few closely related species of plants, whereas predatorybugs tend to feed on many different species of insects. Highdiversity of host plants can thus lead to a correspondingly highdiversity in the herbivorous specialists.Speciation rates in plants are faster in animal-pollinated thanin wind-pollinated plants. Animal-pollinated groups have, onaverage, 2.4 times as many species as related groups pollinatedby wind. Among animal-pollinated plants, speciation rates arecorrelated with pollinator specialization. In columbines (Aquilegia),the rate of evolution of new species has been about threetimes faster in lineages that have long nectar spurs than inlineages that lack spurs. Why do nectar spurs increase the spe-HybridzoneB. variegata(yellow-bellied toad)23.14 Hybrid Zones May Be Long and B. bombina (fire-bellied toad)Narrow The narrow zone in Europewhere fire-bellied toads meet andhybridize with yellow-bellied toadsstretches across Europe. This hybrid zonehas been stable for hundreds of yearsand has never expanded, and no reinforcementhas evolved.Joppeicids (1 species)Tingids (1,800 species)Mirids (10,000 species)HerbivoresPredators on other insectsIsometopids (60 species)Commonancestor23.15 Dietary Shifts Can Promote Speciation Herbivorous groupsof hemipteran insects have speciated several times faster than closelyrelated predatory groups.ciation rate? Apparently it is because having longer spurs restrictsthe number of pollinator species that visit the flowers,thus increasing opportunities for reproductive isolation (seeFigure 23.12).The mechanisms of sexual selection (see Section 21.2) appearto result in increased rates of speciation. Some of the most strikingexamples of sexual selection are found in birds with promiscuousmating systems. Bird-watchers travel thousands of milesto Papua New Guinea to witness the mating displays of malebirds of paradise, some of which have long, brightly colored tailfeathers and look distinctly different than the females (sexual dimorphism).In many of these 33 species, males assemble at displaygrounds, called leks, and females come there to choose amale with whom to copulate. After mating, the females leavethe display grounds, build their nests, lay their eggs, and feedtheir offspring with no help from the males. The males remainto court more females (Figure 23.16A).The closest relatives of the birds of paradise are the manucodes.Male and female manucodes differ only slightly in sizeand plumage (so they are sexually monomorphic). They formmonogamous pair bonds, and both sexes contribute to raisingthe young. There are only 5 species of manucodes (Figure23.16B), compared with 33 species of birds of paradise. Thisis just one comparison, and by itself would not be convincingevidence that sexually dimorphic clades of birds have higherrates of speciation than do monomorphic clades. However,when biologists compare all the examples of birds in which oneclade is sexually dimorphic, and the most closely related cladeis sexually monomorphic, the sexually dimorphic clades aresignificantly more likely to contain more species. But whywould sexual dimorphism be associated with a higher rate ofspeciation?Animals with complex sexually selected behaviors are likelyto form new species at a high rate because they make sophisticateddiscriminations among potential mating partners. Theydistinguish members of their own species from members ofother species, and they make subtle discriminations amongmembers of their own species on the basis of size, shape, appearance,and behavior. Such discriminations can greatly influencewhich individuals are most successful in mating and producingoffspring, and may lead to rapid evolution of prezygoticreproductive barriers among populations.Speciation rates are usually higher in species with poor dispersalabilities than in species with good dispersal abilities,because even narrow barriers can be effective in dividing aspecies whose members are highly sedentary. The Hawaiian Islandshave about 1,000 species of land snails, many of whichare restricted to a single valley. Because snails move only shortdistances, the high ridges that separate the valleys are effectivebarriers to their dispersal.The proliferation of a large number of daughter species froma single ancestor is called an evolutionary radiation. If the rapidproliferation of species results in an array of species that livein a variety of environments and differ in the characteristics theyuse to exploit those environments, the radiation is said to beadaptive. Several remarkable adaptive radiations have occurredin the Hawaiian Islands. In addition to its 1,000 species of landsnails, the native biota of the Hawaiian Islands includes 1,000species of flowering plants, 10,000 species of insects, and morethan 100 bird species. However, there were no amphibians, noterrestrial reptiles, and only one native terrestrial mammal—abat—on the islands until humans introduced additional species.The 10,000 known native species of insects on Hawaii are believedto have evolved from only about 400 immigrant species;only 7 immigrant species are believed to account for all the nativeHawaiian land birds. Similarly, as we saw earlier in thischapter, an adaptive radiation in the Galápagos archipelago resultedin the 14 species of Darwin’s finches, which differ strikinglyin the size and shape of their bills and, accordingly, inthe food resources they use (see Figure 23.7).The 28 species of Hawaiian sunflowers called silverswordsare an impressive example of an adaptive radiation in plants.DNA sequences show that these species share a relatively recentcommon ancestor with a species of tarweed from the Pacificcoast of North America (Figure 23.17). Whereas all mainlandtarweeds are small, upright herbs (nonwoody plants),the silverswords include prostrate and upright herbs, shrubs,trees, and vines. Silversword species occupy nearly all the habitatsof the Hawaiian Islands, from sea level to above timberline494 CHAPTER 23 | SPECIES AND THEIR FORMATION(A) Paradisaea minor(B) Manucodia comrii23.16 Sexual Selection in Birds Can Lead to Higher SpeciationRates (A) Birds of paradise and (B) manucodes are closely related birdgroups of the South Pacific. However, speciation rates are much higheramong the sexually dimorphic, polygynous birds of paradise (33 species)than among manucodes (5 species).23.4 | WHY DO RATES OF SPECIATION VARY? 495in the mountains. Despite their extraordinary morphological diversification,the silverswords are genetically very similar.The Hawaiian silverswords are more diverse in size andshape than the mainland tarweeds because the tarweed ancestorsfirst arrived on islands that harbored very few plant species.In particular, there were few trees and shrubs, because suchlarge-seeded plants rarely disperse to oceanic islands. Trees andshrubs have evolved from nonwoody ancestors on manyoceanic islands. On the mainland, however, tarweeds live inecological communities that contain many tree and shrubspecies in lineages with long evolutionary histories. In those environments,opportunities to exploit the “tree” way of life hadalready been preempted.23.4 RECAPDispersal ability, dietary specialization, and mechanismsof sexual selection affect rates of speciation.Speciation rates in plants can depend on mechanismsof pollination. Open ecological niches presentopportunities for evolutionary radiations.• Explain how pollinator specialization in plants and sexualselection in animals can increase rates of speciation.See pp. 493–494• Why do adaptive radiations often occur when afounder species invades an isolated geographic area?See p. 494The processes described in this chapter, operating over billionsof years, have produced a world in which life is organizedinto millions of species, each adapted to live in a particular environmentand to use environmental resources in a particularway. In the next chapter we consider how species evolve at thelevel of their genes and genomes.Wilkesia hobdyi Madia sativa (tarweed)Dubautia menziesiiArgyroxiphium sandwicense23.17 Rapid Evolution among Hawaiian Silverswords TheHawaiian silverswords, three closely related genera of the sunflower family,are believed to have descended from a single common ancestor (aplant similar to the tarweed; upper right) that colonized Hawaii from thePacific coast of North America. The four plants shown here are moreclosely related than they appear to be based on their morphology.
23.1 What Are Species?• Speciation is the process by which one species splits into twoor more daughter species, which thereafter evolve as distinctlineages.• The biological species concept distinguishes species on thebasis of reproductive isolation.• The morphological species concept distinguishes species onthe basis of physical similarities; it often underestimates or overestimatesthe actual number of reproductively isolated species.• The lineage species concept recognizes evolutionarily independentlineages as species, allowing biologists to considerspecies over evolutionary time.23.2 How Do New Species Arise?• Speciation usually results from the interruption of gene flowwithin a population.• The Dobzhansky-Muller model describes how reproductive isolationcan develop between two descendant species. ReviewFigure 23.2• Allopatric speciation, which results when populations are separatedby a physical barrier, is the dominant mode of speciation.This type of speciation may follow from founder events, inwhich some members of a population cross a barrier and founda new, isolated population. Review Figure 23.5, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 23.1• Sympatric speciation results when the genomes of two groupsdiverge in the absence of physical isolation. It can result fromdisruptive selection for two or more distinct microhabitats.• Sympatric speciation can occur within two generations viapolyploidy, an increase in the number of chromosomes sets.Polyploidy may arise from chromosome duplications within aspecies (autopolyploidy) or from hybridization that results incombining the chromosomes of two species (allopolyploidy).Review Figure 23.8SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 23.223.3 What Happens When Newly Formed SpeciesCome Together?• Prezygotic barriers to reproduction operate before fertilization;postzygotic barriers to reproduction operate after fertilization.Prezygotic barriers may be favored by natural selection ifpostzygotic barriers are incomplete. Review Figures 23.9, 23.11• Hybrid zones may form when previously separated populationscome into contact and reproductive isolation is incomplete.Review Figure 23.1423.4 Why Do Rates of Speciation Vary?• Dispersal ability, dietary specialization, type of pollination, andsexual selection all influence speciation rates. Review Figure23.15SEE WEB ACTIVITY 23.1 for a concept review of thischapter.