Why would a frog swallow its own offspring?That may not sound like a good parentingskill, but female gastric brooding frogs ofAustralia shut down their digestive system to brood theirtadpoles in their stomach. This provides the tadpoles witha safe haven from predators, making it much more likelythat they will survive to metamorphosis. That was thecase, at least, until gastric brooding frogs went extinct inthe early 1980s, after humans introduced pathogenicfungi into their native range.Not all frogs are as involved in raising their young aswere gastric brooding frogs, however. Bullfrogs, for example,lay thousands of eggs each year and provide noparental care for their offspring. The eggs are fertilized bya male bullfrog and are then left to develop on their own.The eggs hatch into tadpoles and transform into tinyfrogs—if they aren’t eaten first; most of these offspringdon’t survive. In the water, the tadpoles are eaten bymany species of fishes, turtles, birds, snakes, aquatic insects,and other predators. As the young tadpoles transforminto frogs, they are likely to be eaten by predatorshunting at the margins of the pond. Out of the tens ofthousands of tadpoles an adult bullfrog produces in itslifetime, an average of only two offspring are expected tosurvive to reproduce themselves.In many species of frogs, complex behaviors associatedwith parental care change these long odds. Rather thanproducing huge numbers of offspring, each with a minimalchance of surviving, some frogs invest more energy ineach offspring and care for the young as they grow. Thisincreases the chances that any one offspring will surviveand reproduce—but it also means far fewer offspring canbe produced, because of the greater parental investmentper offspring.Strategies for parental care include many behaviors inaddition to gastric brooding. The females of many speciesguard a terrestrial egg clutch untilit hatches. Other females carrytheir developing embryos or tadpolesaround with them on theirbacks, or even in special broodpouches (as in the marsupial frogsof South America). Parental careoften involves males as well. Malesof many frog species guard eggmasses or carry young, sometimesin unusual ways. In Darwin’s frogGood parents, or cannibals?33Eating One’s Offspring? Youngfrogs emerge from the digestive tractof a female Rheobatrachus silus, oneof the now-extinct gastric broodingfrogs of Australia. In this unique formof gestation, eggs hatch and tadpolesdevelop within the protected environmentof the mother’s stomach.33.1 What Is a Deuterostome?It may surprise you to learn that both you and a sea urchin aredeuterostomes. Adult sea stars, sea urchins, and sea cucumbers—the most familiar echinoderms—look so different fromadult vertebrates (fishes, frogs, lizards, birds, and mammals)that it may be difficult to believe all these animals are closelyrelated. The evidence that all deuterostomes share a commonancestor that is not shared with the protostomes includes commonearly developmental patterns and phylogenetic analysisof gene sequences, factors that are not apparent in the forms ofthe adult animals.Historically, the deuterostomes were characterized by threeearly developmental patterns:• Radial cleavage• Formation of the mouth at the opposite end of the embryofrom the blastopore (the pattern that gives the deuterostomestheir name); in deuterostomes, the blastoporedevelops into the anus (see Figure 31.2)• Development of a coelom from mesodermal pockets thatbud off from the cavity of the gastrula rather than by splittingof the mesoderm, as occurs among protostomesRadial cleavage is not exclusive to deuterostomes, and as notedin Chapter 31, it is now thought to be the ancestral condition forbilaterians. In fact, some of the groups now known to be protostomeswere once thought to be deuterostomes because theyhave developmental patterns similar to those of echinodermsand chordates. The development of the blastopore into an anusmay also be the ancestral condition for bilaterians, rather thana derived feature of deuterostomes. Today, the strongest supportfor the shared evolutionary relationships of echinoderms,hemichordates, and chordates (the groups that now composethe deuterostomes) comes from phylogenetic analyses of DNAsequences of many different genes.Although there are far fewer species of deuterostomes thanof protostomes (see Table 31.1), we have a special interest indeuterostomes, in part because we are members of that clade.The deuterostomes are also of interest because they includemany large animals that strongly influence the characteristicsof ecosystems. Many deuterostome species have been intensivelystudied in all fields of biology. Complex behaviors,such as the parenting behaviors described in the opening ofthis chapter, are especially well developed among somedeuterostomes.IN THIS CHAPTER we will introduce the deuterostomesand describe the principal animal groups: the echinoderms,hemichordates, and chordates. We will then discussthe evolution of the vertebrates within the chordates,including the features that allowed vertebrates to colonizemost habitats on Earth. We will look especially closely at theprimate lineage, which includes our own species.of southern South America, for example, the tadpolesdevelop within the male’s vocal sacs.Parental care can extend beyond protection to feedingthe young. Some female dart-poison frogs of thetropical Americas carry each individual tadpole to one ofthe tiny pools of water that collect in bromeliad plantsgrowing on the trees. The female then returns to eachbromeliad “pond” and lays unfertilized eggs as food forthe single tadpole developing there.Frogs and other vertebrates constitute one of the majorgroups of deuterostome animals. Although there arefar fewer species of deuterostomes than of protostomes,deuterostomes are of particular interest to biologists becauseof their importance in many ecosystems, their oftencomplex behaviors, and their widespread use asmodels in developmental biology and genetics.CHAPTER OUTLINE33.1 What Is a Deuterostome?33.2 What Are the Major Groups of Echinoderms andHemichordates?33.3 What New Features Evolved in the Chordates?33.4 How Did Vertebrates Colonize the Land?33.5 What Traits Characterize the Primates?Riding Piggyback The young of this female Flectonotuspygmaeus are developing within a pouch on her back. Themarsupial frogs of South America take their name from anothervertebrate group—marsupial mammals such as kangaroos—whose females also protect their developing young in pouches.Living deuterostomes comprise three distinct clades (Figure33.1):• Echinoderms: sea stars, sea urchins, and their relatives• Hemichordates: acorn worms and pterobranchs• Chordates: sea squirts, lancelets, and vertebratesAll deuterostomes are triploblastic, coelomate animals (see Figure31.4C). Skeletal support features, where present, are internalrather than external. Some species have segmented bodies,but the segments are less obvious than those of annelids andarthropods.Scientists are learning much about the ancestors of moderndeuterostomes from fossils recently discovered in 520-millionyear-old rocks in China. Some of these early deuterostomes hada skeleton similar to that of a modern echinoderm, but they hadpharyngeal slits and bilateral symmetry. Another group of earlydeuterostomes, the yunnanozoans, were discovered in China’sYunnan Province. These well-preserved animals had a largemouth, six pairs of external gills, and a segmented posteriorbody section bearing a light cuticle (Figure 33.2).The features of these fossil animals support the findings fromphylogenetic analyses of living species in showing that the earliestdeuterostomes were bilaterally symmetrical, segmentedanimals with a pharynx that had slits through which waterflowed. Echinoderms evolved their adult forms with uniquesymmetry (in which the body parts are arranged along five radialaxes) much later, whereas other deuterostomes retained theancestral bilateral symmetry.33.1 RECAPThe deuterostomes include the echinoderms, hemichordates,and chordates. The common ancestry ofthese groups is supported by developmental similaritiesand by phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequences.• What are three developmental patterns the earliestdeuterostomes had in common? See p. 693• Why is radial cleavage no longer considered to be evidencefor the monophyly of deuterostomes? See p. 693What Are the Major Groups of 33.2 Echinoderms and Hemichordates?About 13,000 species of echinoderms in 23 major groups havebeen described from their fossil remains. They are probably onlya small fraction of those that actually lived. Only 6 of the 23 majorgroups known from fossils are represented by species thatsurvive today; many clades became extinct during the periodicmass extinctions that have occurred throughout Earth’s history.Nearly all of the 7,000 extant species of echinoderms live onlyin marine environments. There are far fewer species of livinghemichordates, with only about 100 known species.694 CHAPTER 33 | DEUTEROSTOME ANIMALSAmbulacrarians ChordatesCommon ancestor(bilaterally symmetrical,pharyngeal slits present)EchinodermsHemichordatesUrochordatesCephalochordatesVertebratesRadial symmetry as adults,calcified internal plates,loss of pharyngeal slitsVertebral column, anterior skull,large brain, ventral heartNotochord,dorsal hollownerve cord,post-anal tailCiliatedlarvae33.1 Phylogeny of the Deuterostomes The threeprincipal groups of deuterostomes are the hemichordates,the echinoderms, and the chordates (cephalochordates,urochordates, and vertebrates). The echinoderms and thevertebrates contain most of the described species.GO TO Web Activity 33.1 • Deuterostome PhylogenyyourBioPortal.comMouth Esophagus External gills SegmentsYunnanozoon lividum33.2 Ancestral Deuterostomes Had External Gills The extinct yunnanozoansmay be ancestral to all deuterostomes. This fossil, whichdates from the Cambrian, shows the six pairs of external gills and segmentedposterior body that characterized these animals.Each arm has a fullcomplement of organs.This arm has been drawnwith the digestive glandsremoved to show theorgans lying below.The sea star larvamoves throughthe water bybeating its cilia.The anus is on the aboral(top-facing) surface.The mouth is on the oralsurface, facing the seafloor.CiliatedarmsMadreporiteGonad DigestiveglandsStomachTube feetRadial canalRing canal(B) Adult sea star(pentaradial symmetry)(A) Sea star larva(bilateral symmetry)CalcareousplateWater canalSkin gill CoelomSuction cupGonadDigestiveglandAmpullaThe echinoderms and hemichordates (together known as ambulacrarians)have a bilaterally symmetrical, ciliated larva (Figure33.3A). Adult hemichordates also are bilaterally symmetrical.Echinoderms, however, undergo a radical change in formas they develop into adults (Figure 33.3B), changing from abilaterally symmetrical larva to an adult with pentaradial symmetry(symmetry in five or multiples of five). As is typical of animalswith radial symmetry, echinoderms have no head, andthey move slowly and equally well in many directions. Ratherthan having an anterior–posterior (head–tail) and dorsal–ventral(back–belly) body organization, echinoderms have an oralside (containing the mouth) and an opposite aboral side (containingthe anus).Echinoderms have unique structural featuresIn addition to having pentaradial symmetry,adult echinoderms have two unique structuralfeatures. One is a system of calcifiedinternal plates covered by thin layers ofskin and some muscles. The calcified plates of mostechinoderms are thick, and they fuse inside the entire body,forming an internal skeleton. The other unique feature is a watervascular system, a network of water-filled canals leadingto extensions called tube feet. This system functions in gas exchange,locomotion, and feeding (see Figure 33.3B). Seawaterenters the system through a perforated structure called amadreporite. Acalcified canal leads from the madreporite to thering canal, which surrounds the esophagus (the tube leading fromthe mouth to the stomach). Radial canals branch off from the ringcanal, extending through the arms (in species that have arms)and connecting with the tube feet. Echinoderms use their tubefeet in many different ways to move and to capture prey. Thesestructural innovations have been modified in many ways, resultingin a striking array of very different animals.Members of one major extant echinoderm clade, the crinoids(sea lilies and feather stars), were more abundant and speciesrich300 to 500 million years ago than they are today. There aresome 80 described living sea lily species, most of which are sessileorganisms attached to the substratum by a stalk. Featherstars (Figure 33.4A) grasp the substratum with flexible appendagesthat allow for limited movement. About 600 livingspecies of feather stars have been described.Unlike the mostly sessile crinoids, most surviving echinodermsare motile. The two main groups of motile echinodermsare the echinozoans (sea urchins and sea cucumbers) and asterozoans(sea stars and brittle stars). Sea urchins are hemisphericalin shape and lack arms (Figure 33.4B). They are covered withspines that are attached to the underlying skeleton with ball-andsocketjoints. These joints enable the spines to be moved so theycan converge toward a point that has been touched. The spinesvary in size and shape and can be used for locomotion; a fewproduce toxic substances. They provide effective protection forthe urchin, as many a scuba diver has found out the hard way.Sand dollars are flattened, disc-shaped relatives of sea urchins.Sea cucumbers also lack arms, and their bodies are orientedin an atypical manner for an echinoderm (Figure 33.4C). Themouth is anterior and the anus is posterior (front and rear),not oral and aboral (top and bottom) as in other echinoderms.33.2 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR GROUPS OF ECHINODERMS AND HEMICHORDATES? 69533.3 Echinoderms Are Bilaterally Symmetrical as Larvae butRadially Symmetrical as Adults (A) The ciliated larva of a sea starhas bilateral symmetry. Hemichordates have a similar larval form. (B) Theradially symmetrical adult sea star displays the canals and tube feet of theechinoderm water vascular system, as well as the calcified internal skeleton.The body’s orientation is oral–aboral rather than anterior–posterior.EchinodermsHemichordatesChordatesSea cucumbers use most of their tube feet primarily for attachingto the substratum rather than for moving.Sea stars, popularly called starfish, are the most familiarechinoderms (Figure 33.4D). Their gonads and digestive organsare located in the arms, as seen in Figure 33.3B. Their tube feetserve as organs of locomotion, gas exchange, and attachment.Each tube foot of a sea star consists of an internal ampulla connectedby a muscular tube to an external suction cup that canstick to the substratum. The tube foot is moved by expansionand contraction of the circular and longitudinal muscles of thetube. Brittle stars are similar in structure to sea stars, but theirflexible arms are composed of jointed, hard plates (Figure 33.4E).Echinoderms use their tube feet in a great variety of waysto capture prey. Sea lilies, for example, feed by orienting theirarms in passing water currents. Food particles then strike andstick to the tube feet, which are covered with mucus-secretingglands. The tube feet transfer these particles to grooves in thearms, where ciliary action carries the food to the mouth. Sea cucumberscapture food with their anterior tube feet, which aremodified into large, feathery, sticky tentacles that can be protrudedfrom the mouth. Periodically, a sea cucumber withdrawsthe tentacles, wipes off the material that has adhered to them,and digests it.Many sea stars use their tube feet to capture large prey suchas polychaetes, gastropod and bivalve mollusks, small crustaceanssuch as crabs, and fishes. With hundreds of tube feetacting simultaneously, a sea star can grasp a bivalve in its arms,anchor the arms with its tube feet, and by steady contraction ofthe muscles in its arms, gradually exhaust the muscles the bivalveuses to keep its shell closed (see Figure 33.4D). To feed ona bivalve, a sea star can push its stomach out through its mouthand then through the narrow space between the two halves ofthe bivalve’s shell. The sea star’s stomach then secretes enzymesthat digest the prey.Most sea urchins eat algae, which they catch with their tubefeet from the plankton or scrape from rocks with a complexrasping structure. Most of the 2,000 species of brittle stars ingestparticles from the upper layers of sediments and assimilatethe organic material from them, although some species filtersuspended food particles from the water and others capturesmall animals.696 CHAPTER 33 | DEUTEROSTOME ANIMALS(A) Oxycomanthus bennetti(B) Sphaerechinus granularis(C) Synaptula sp. (D) Asterias rubens (E) Ophiothrix spiculata33.4 Echinoderm Diversity (A) The flexible arms of this golden featherstar are clearly visible. (B) Sea urchins are important grazers on algae inthe intertidal zones of the world’s oceans. (C) Sea cucumbers are uniqueamong echinderms in having an anterior–posterior rather than anoral–aboral orientation of the mouth and anus. (D) Sea stars are importantpredators on bivalve mollusks such as mussels and clams. Suction tipson its tube feet allow a sea star to grasp both shells of the bivalve andpull them open. (E) The arms of the brittle star are composed of hard butjointed plates.Hemichordates are wormlike marine deuterostomesHemichordates—acorn worms and pterobranchs—have a body organized inthree major parts, consisting of a proboscis,a collar (which bears the mouth), and atrunk (which contains the other body parts). The 70known species of acorn worms range up to 2 meters in length(Figure 33.5A). They live in burrows in muddy and sandy marinesediments. The digestive tract of an acorn worm consistsof a mouth behind which are a muscular pharynx and an intestine.The pharynx opens to the outside through a number of pharyngealslits through which water can exit. Highly vascularizedtissue surrounding the pharyngeal slits serves as agas-exchange apparatus. Acorn worms breathe by pumping waterinto the mouth and out through the pharyngeal slits. Theycapture prey with the large proboscis, which is coated withsticky mucus to which small organisms in the sediment stick.The mucus and its attached prey are conveyed by cilia to themouth. In the esophagus, the food-laden mucus is compactedinto a ropelike mass that is moved through the digestive tractby ciliary action.The 30 living species of pterobranchs are sedentary marineanimals up to 12 millimeters long that live in a tube secretedby the proboscis. Some species are solitary; others form coloniesof individuals joined together (Figure 33.5B). Behind the proboscisis a collar with anywhere from one to nine pairs of arms.The arms bear long tentacles that capture prey and functionin gas exchange.33.2 RECAPEchinoderms have an internal skeleton of calcifiedplates and a unique water vascular system. Hemichordateshave a bilaterally symmetrical body dividedinto three parts: proboscis, collar, and trunk.• What are some of the ways that echinoderms use theirtube feet to obtain food? See p. 696• How do hemichordates obtain food? See p. 697We have described the deuterostome groups that are most distantlyrelated to us. Now we turn our attention to the chordates,the clade to which humans belong.What New Features Evolved 33.3 in the Chordates?It is not obvious from examining adult animals that echinodermsand chordates share a common ancestor. The evolutionary relationshipsamong some chordate groups are not immediatelyapparent, either. The features that reveal the evolutionary relationshipsboth among the chordates and between chordates andechinoderms are seen primarily in the larvae—in other words,it is during the early developmental stages that their evolutionaryrelationships are evident.There are three principal chordate clades: the cephalochordates,the urochordates, and the vertebrates (see Figure 33.1).There are about 3,000 living species of urochordates and 62,000living species of vertebrates, but only about 30 living species ofcephalochordates.Adult chordates vary greatly in form, but all chordates displaythe following derived structures at some stage in theirdevelopment (Figure 33.6):• Adorsal hollow nerve cord• Atail that extends beyond the anus• Adorsal supporting rod called the notochordThe notochord is the most distinctive derived chordate trait. Itis composed of a core of large cells with turgid fluid-filled vacuoles,which make it rigid but flexible. In the urochordates thenotochord is lost during metamorphosis to the adult stage. Inmost vertebrate species, it is replaced during development byskeletal structures that provide support for the body.33.3 | WHAT NEW FEATURES EVOLVED IN THE CHORDATES? 697EchinodermsHemichordatesChordatesArms TentaclesTrunk Collar ProboscisProboscisCollarStalkTissue connectingcolony membersRetractedanimalTube(A)(B)Saccoglossus kowalevskii33.5 Hemichordates (A) The proboscis of an acorn worm is modifiedfor burrowing. (B) The structure of a colonial pterobranch.A sea squirt larva has all thechordate features, some ofwhich are lost in the adult.An adult lancelet retains all thechordate features and also has amuch enlarged pharyngeal basket.Branchiostoma lanceolatumNotochordNotochordPharyngealslitsPharyngealslitsTailAnus Tail(A)(B)Dorsal hollownerve cordDorsal hollownerve cordGutGutCiona sp.The ancestral pharyngeal slits (not a derived feature of thisgroup) are present at some developmental stage of chordatesbut are often lost in adults. The pharynx, which develops aroundthe pharyngeal slits, functioned in chordate ancestors as the sitefor oxygen uptake and the elimination of carbon dioxide andwater (as in acorn worms). The pharynx is much enlarged insome chordate species (as in the pharyngeal basket of the lanceletin Figure 33.6B) but has been lost in others.Adults of most cephalochordates and urochordatesare sessileThe 30 species of cephalochordates, orlancelets, are small animals that rarelyexceed 5 centimeters in length. Thenotochord, which provides body support,extends the entire length of thebody throughout their lives (see Figure33.6B). Lancelets are found in shallow marineand brackish waters worldwide. Most of the time they lie coveredin sand with their head protruding above the sediment,but they can swim. They filter prey from the water with theirpharyngeal basket. During the reproductive season, the gonadsof the males and females greatly enlarge. At spawning, the wallsof the gonads rupture, releasing eggs and sperm into the watercolumn, where fertilization takes place.All members of the three major urochordate groups—the ascidians,thaliaceans, and larvaceans—are marine animals. Morethan 90 percent of the known species of urochordates are ascidians(sea squirts). Individual ascidians range in length fromless than 1 millimeter to 60 centimeters. Some ascidians formcolonies by asexual budding from a single founder. Coloniesmay measure several meters across. The baglike body of anadult ascidian is enclosed in a tough tunic, leading to its alternatename of “tunicate” (Figure 33.7A). The tunic is composedof proteins and a complex polysaccharide secreted by epidermalcells. The ascidian pharynx is enlarged into a pharyngealbasket that filters prey from the water passing through it.In addition to its pharyngeal slits, an ascidian larva has a dorsalhollow nerve cord and a notochord that is restricted mostlyto the tail region (see Figure 33.6A). Bands of muscle that surroundthe notochord provide support for the body. After a short698 CHAPTER 33 | DEUTEROSTOME ANIMALS33.6 The Key Features of Chordates Are Most Apparent in EarlyDevelopmental Stages The pharyngeal slits of both the urochordatesea squirt and the cephalochordate lancelet develop into a pharyngealbasket. (A) The sea squirt larva (but not the adult) has all three chordatefeatures: dorsal hollow nerve cord, postanal tail, and a notochord. (B) Allthree chordate synapomorphies are retained in the adult lancelet.EchinodermsHemichordatesUrochordatesCephalochordatesVertebrates(A) Clavelina dellavallei(B) Pegea socia 1 cm1 cm33.7 Adult Urochordates (A) The transparent tunic and the pharyngealbasket are clearly visible in this ascidian (sea squirt, alsoknown as a tunicate). (B) A chainlike colony of thaliaceans (salps)floats in tropical waters.time swimming in the plankton, the larvae of most species settleon the seafloor and transform into sessile adults. The swimming,tadpolelike larvae suggest a close evolutionary relationshipbetween ascidians and vertebrates (see Figure 22.6).Thaliaceans (salps) can live singly or in chainlike coloniesup to several meters long (Figure 33.7B). They float in tropicaland subtropical oceans at all depths down to 1,500 meters. Larvaceansare solitary planktonic animals that retain their notochordand dorsal hollow nerve cord throughout their lives. Mostlarvaceans are less than 5 millimeters long, but some speciesthat live near the bottom of deep ocean waters build delicatecasings of mucus that may be more than a meter wide. Theysnare sinking organic particles (their primary food source) withelaborate filters built into their mucus “houses.” When the old“house” gets clogged with excess debris, the animals build anew one.A dorsal supporting structure replaces the notochordin vertebratesIn one chordate group, a new dorsal supportingstructure evolved. The vertebratestake their name from thejointed, dorsal vertebral column thatreplaces the notochord during early developmentas their primary supportingstructure (Figure 33.8).All of the non-vertebrate deuterostomes (the hemichordates,echinoderms, cephalochordates, and urochordates) are exclusivelyor primarily marine. The lineage that led to the vertebratesis also thought to have evolved in the oceans, althoughprobably in an estuarine environment (where fresh water meetssalt water). Vertebrates have since radiated into marine, freshwater,terrestrial, and aerial environments worldwide.The hagfishes are thought by many biologists to be the sistergroup to the remaining vertebrates (as shown in Figure 33.8).Hagfishes (Figure 33.9A) have a weak circulatory system, withthree small accessory hearts (rather than a single, large heart),a partial cranium or skull (containing no cerebrum or cerebellum,two main regions of the brain of other vertebrates), and no jawsor stomach. They also lack separate, jointed vertebrae and havea skeleton composed of cartilage. Thus, some biologists do notconsider hagfishes vertebrates, and use instead the term craniatesto refer collectively to the hagfishes and the vertebrates.Some analyses of gene sequences suggest, however, that hagfishesmay be more closely related to the vertebrate lampreys(Figure 33.9B); in this phylogenetic arrangement, the twogroups are collectively called the cyclostomes (“circle mouths”).If in fact the hagfishes and lampreys do form a monophyleticgroup, then hagfishes must have secondarily lost many of themajor vertebrate morphological features during their evolution.The 58 known species of hagfishes are unusual marine animalsthat produce copious quantities of slime as a defense. Theyare virtually blind and rely largely on the four pairs of sensorytentacles around their mouth to detect food. Although they haveno jaws, hagfishes have a tonguelike structure equipped withtoothlike rasps that they can use to tear apart dead organismsand to capture their principal prey, polychaete worms. Hagfisheshave direct development (no larvae), and individuals mayactually change sex from year to year (from male to female andvice versa).The nearly 50 species of lampreys either live in fresh water,or they live in coastal salt water and move into fresh water tobreed. Although the lampreys and hagfishes may look super-33.3 | WHAT NEW FEATURES EVOLVED IN THE CHORDATES? 699EchinodermsHemichordatesUrochordatesCephalochordatesVertebratesMarine and freshwatervertebrates are thoughtto have developed fromestuarine ancestors.Jawless fishesGnathostomesAmniotesTerrestrial limbsand digitsLobe finsAmnioteeggVertebraeJaws, teeth,paired finsHagfishesLampreysLungfishesAmphibiansChondrichthyansRay-finned fishesBony skeleton, swim Coelacanthsbladder/lungInternal nares33.8 Phylogeny of the Living Vertebrates This phylogenetic treeshows the evolution of some of the key innovations among the majorgroups of vertebrates.ficially similar (with elongate eel-like bodies and no paired fins),they differ greatly in their biology.Lampreys have a complete braincase and distinct and separate(although rudimentary) vertebrae, all cartilaginous ratherthan bony. Lampreys undergo a complete metamorphosis fromfilter-feeding larvae known as ammocoetes, which are morphologicallyquite similar in general structure to adult lancelets. Theadults of many species of lampreys are parasitic, although severallineages of lampreys evolved to become nonfeeding asadults. These nonfeeding adult lampreys survive only a fewweeks after metamorphosis—just long enough to breed. In thespecies that are parasitic as adults, the round mouth is a raspingand sucking organ that is used to attach to their prey and raspat the flesh (see Figure 33.9B). Some species of lampreys are criticallyendangered because of recent habitat changes and losses.The vertebrate body plan can support large,active animalsFour key features characterize the vertebrates:• An anterior skull with a large brain• Arigid internal skeleton supported by the vertebral column• Internal organs suspended in a coelom• Awell-developed circulatory system, driven by contractionsof a ventral heartThis organization of the vertebrate body is exemplified by thebony fish diagrammed in Figure 33.10. Many kinds of jawlessfishes were found in the seas, estuaries, and fresh waters ofthe Devonian period, but hagfishes and lampreys are the onlyjawless fishes that survived beyond the Devonian. During thatperiod, the gnathostomes (Greek, “jaw mouths”) evolved jawsvia modifications of the skeletal arches that supported the gills(Figure 33.11A). Jaws greatly improved feeding efficiency, as ananimal with jaws can grasp, subdue, and swallow large prey.700 CHAPTER 33 | DEUTEROSTOME ANIMALS(A)(B)Eptatretus stoutiiPetromyzon marinus33.9 Modern Jawless Fishes (A) Hagfishes burrow in the oceanmud, from which they extract small prey. They also scavenge on dead ordying fish. Hagfishes have degenerate eyes, which has led to their beingmiscalled “blind eels.” (B) Sea lampreys are ectoparasites that attach tothe bodies of living fish and use their large, jawless mouths to suck bloodand flesh. They can survive in both fresh and salt water, as this individualattached to a salmon returning to its spawning ground will do.The anterior skull of vertebratescontains the brain and manysensory organs.Vertebrates also have adorsal nervous system……an internal skeleton,supported by avertebral column……and internal organssuspended in a largecoelom.MusclesSpinal cordVertebraRibKidneyGonadGutCoelomPeritoneumPelvic fin(paired appendage)Gonad Anal finHeartVertebralcolumn KidneyDorsal finsGutDorsalVentralCaudal finLiverCross section33.10 The Vertebrate Body Plan A ray-finned fish is used here to illustratethe structural elements common to all vertebrates. In addition to the pairedpelvic fins, these fishes have paired pectoral fins on the sides of their bodies(not seen in this cutaway view).The earliest jaws were simple, but the evolution of teeth madepredators more effective (Figure 33.11B). In predators, teethfunction crucially both in grasping and in breaking up prey. Inboth predators and herbivores, teeth enable an animal to chewboth soft and hard body parts of their food. Chewing also aidschemical digestion and improves an animal’s ability to extractnutrients from its food, as we describe in Chapter 51. Vertebratesare remarkable in the diversity of their jaws and teeth.Fins and swim bladders improved stabilityand control over locomotionPaired fins stabilize the position ofjawed fishes in water (and in somecases, help propel them). Mostaquatic gnathostomes have a pair ofpectoral fins just behind the gill slits,and a pair of pelvic fins anterior to theanal region (see Figures 33.10 and 33.12). Mediandorsal and anal fins stabilize the fish, or may be used forpropulsion in some species. In many fishes, the caudal fin helpspropel the animal and enables it to turn rapidly.Several groups of gnathostomes became abundant duringthe Devonian. Among them were the chondrichthyans—sharks,skates, and rays (940 living species) and chimaeras (40 livingspecies). Like hagfishes and lampreys, these fishes have a skeletoncomposed entirely of firm but pliable cartilage. Their skinis flexible and leathery, sometimes bearing scales that give it theconsistency of sandpaper. Sharks move forward by means oflateral undulations of their body and caudal (tail) fin (Figure33.12A). Skates and rays propel themselves by means of verticalundulating movements of their greatly enlarged pectoralfins (Figure 33.12B).Most sharks are predators, but some feed by straining planktonfrom the water. Most skates and rays live on the ocean floor,where they feed on mollusks and other animals buried in thesediments. Nearly all cartilaginous fishes live in the oceans,but a few are estuarine or migrate into lakes and rivers. Onegroup of stingrays is found in river systems of South America.The less familiar chimaeras (Figure 33.12C) live in deep-sea orcold waters.In the ancestor of the bony vertebrates, gas-filled sacs supplementedthe gas-exchange function of the gills by giving theanimals access to atmospheric oxygen. These features enabledthose fishes to live where oxygen was periodically in short supply,as it often is in freshwater environments. These lunglikesacs evolved into swim bladders, which are organs of buoyancy,as well as into the lungs of tetrapods. By adjusting the amountof gas in its swim bladder, a fish can control the depth at whichit remains suspended in the water while expending very littleenergy to maintain its position.Ray-finned fishes, and most remaining groups of vertebrates,have internal skeletons of calcified, rigid bone rather than flexiblecartilage. The outer body surface of most species of rayfinnedfishes is covered with flat, thin, lightweight scales thatprovide some protection or enhance movement through the wa-33.3 | WHAT NEW FEATURES EVOLVED IN THE CHORDATES? 701Gill arches made of cartilagesupported the gills.Some anterior gill archesbecame modified to form jaws,which at first had no teeth.Additional gill arches help supportheavier, more efficient jaws, whichin turn, support teeth.Modern jawed fishes(cartilaginous and bony fishes)Jawless fishesEarly jawed fishes(placoderms, now extinct)Gill slitsGill archesSkull (cartilage)(A) (B)33.11 Jaws and Teeth Increased Feeding Efficiency (A) The diagramsillustrate one probable scenario for the evolution of jaws from theanterior gill arches of jawless fishes. (B) Jaws of the extinct giant shark(Carcharodon megalodon) display the teeth that indicate an extremepredatory lifestyle.HagfishesLampreysCartilaginous fishesRay-finned fishesSacopterygians702 CHAPTER 33 | DEUTEROSTOME ANIMALSDorsal finCaudal fin Pelvic fin Pectoral finsPectoral finsPectoral finDorsal finPelvic fin(A) Carcharhinus plumbeus(B) Myliobatis australis(C) Hydrolagus colliei33.12 Chondrichthyans (A) Most sharks, such as this sandbar shark,are active marine predators. (B) Skates and rays, represented here by aneagle ray, feed on the ocean bottom. Their modified pectoral fins areused for propulsion; their other fins are greatly reduced. (C) A chimaera,or ratfish. These deep-sea fishes often possess modified dorsal fins thatcontain toxins.(A) Gymnothorax favagineus(B) Cirrhilabrus jordani(C) Cromileptes altivelis(D) Gigantactis vanhoeffeni luring prey33.13 Diverse Ray-Finned Fishes (A) Eels such as this moray havethe large teeth and powerful jaws typical of predatory fishes. (B) Thewrasses contain more than 500 described species. Many species, suchas the flame fairy wrasse seen here, inhabit coral reefs. (C) Another largeray-fin clade, the serranids, includes the sea basses and groupers.Panther groupers such as this one are endangered by the loss of Pacificcoral reef habitat. (D) A unique structure that resembles a fishing lure hasevolved among the anglerfishes. Deep-sea anglerfishes such as this onelive below the level of light penetration; their lures are bioluminescent.ter. The gills of ray-finned fishes open into a single chamber coveredby a hard flap, called an operculum. Movement of the operculumimproves the flow of water over the gills, where gasexchange takes place.Ray-finned fishes radiated extensively in the Tertiary. Todaythere are about 30,000 known living species, encompassing a remarkablevariety of sizes, shapes, and lifestyles (Figure 33.13).The smallest are less than 1 centimeter long as adults; the largestweigh as much as 900 kilograms. Ray-finned fishes exploitnearly all types of aquatic food sources. In the oceans they filterplankton from the water, rasp algae from rocks, eat coralsand other soft-bodied colonial animals, dig animals from softsediments, and prey on virtually all kinds of other fishes. Infresh water they eat plankton, devour insects, eat fruits that fallinto the water in flooded forests, and prey on other aquatic vertebratesand, occasionally, terrestrial vertebrates. Many rayfinnedfishes are solitary, but in open water others form largeaggregations called schools. Many species perform complicatedbehaviors to maintain schools, build nests, court and choosemates, and care for their young.Although ray-finned fishes can readily control their positionin open water using their fins and swim bladder, their eggs tendto sink. Some species produce small eggs that are buoyantenough to complete their development in the open water, butmany marine fishes move to food-rich shallow waters to laytheir eggs. That is why coastal waters and estuaries are so importantin the life cycles of many marine fishes. Some, such assalmon, are anadromous; these species leave salt water when theybreed, ascending rivers to spawn in freshwater streams andlakes (see Figure 33.9B).33.3 RECAPChordates are characterized by a dorsal hollownerve chord, a post-anal tail, and a dorsal supportingrod called a notochord at some point during thelife cycle. Specialized structures for support (such asvertebrae), locomotion (such as fins), and feeding(such as jaws and teeth) evolved among the vertebrates,which allowed them to colonize and adapt tomost of Earth’s environments.• What synapomorphies respectively characterize thechordates and the vertebrates? See pp. 697–700 andFigures 33.6 and 33.10• How do the hagfishes differ from the lampreys in morphologyand life history? Do you see why some biologistsdo not consider the hagfishes to be vertebrates?See p. 699In some fishes, the lunglike sacs that gave rise to swim bladdersbecame specialized for another purpose: breathing air.That adaptation set the stage for the vertebrates to move ontothe land.How Did Vertebrates Colonize 33.4 the Land?The evolution of lunglike sacs in fishes set the stage for the invasionof the land. Some early ray-finned fishes probably usedthose sacs to supplement their gills when oxygen levels in thewater were low, as lungfishes and many groups of ray-finnedfishes do today. But with their unjointed fins, those fishes couldonly flop around on land. Changes in the structure of the finsfirst allowed some fishes to support themselves better in shallowwater and, later, to move better on land.Jointed fins enhanced support for fishesTwo pairs of muscular, jointed finsevolved in the ancestor of the sarcopterygians,which include coelacanths,lungfishes, and tetrapods. Each ofthe jointed appendages of sarcopterygians isjoined to the body by a single enlarged bone. Thecoelacanths flourished from the Devonian until about 65 millionyears ago, when they were thought to have become extinct.However, in 1938 a commercial fisherman caught a living coelacanthoff South Africa. Since that time, hundreds of individualsof this extraordinary fish, Latimeria chalumnae, have been collected.Asecond species, L. menadoensis, was discovered in 1998 off theIndonesian island of Sulawesi. Latimeria, a predator of otherfishes, reaches a length of about 1.8 meters and weighs up to 82kilograms (Figure 33.14A). Its skeleton is composed mostly of cartilage,not bone. A cartilaginous skeleton is a derived feature inthis clade because it had bony ancestors.Lungfishes, which also have jointed fins that are connected tothe body by a single enlarged bone, were important predatorsin shallow-water habitats in the Devonian, but most lineagesdied out. The six surviving species live in stagnant swamps andmuddy waters in South America, Africa, and Australia (Figure33.14B). Lungfishes have lungs derived from the lunglike sacsof their ancestors as well as gills. When ponds dry up, individualsof most species can burrow deep into the mud and survivefor many months in an inactive state while breathing air.It is believed that some early aquatic sarcopterygians beganto use terrestrial food sources, became more fully adapted to lifeon land, and eventually evolved to become ancestral tetrapods(four-legged vertebrates).How was the transition from an animal that swam in waterto one that walked on land accomplished? Early in 2006,scientists reported the discovery of a Devonian fossil theybelieve represents an intermediate between the finned appendagesof fishes and the limbs of terrestrial tetrapods (Figure33.14C). It appears that limbs able to prop up a large fishwith the front-to-rear movement necessary for walkingevolved while the animals still lived in water. These limbs appearto have functioned in holding the animals upright in shallowwater, perhaps even allowing them to hold their headabove the water’s surface. These same structures were thenco-opted for movement on land, at first probably for foragingon brief trips out of water.33.4 | HOW DID VERTEBRATES COLONIZE THE LAND? 703TetrapodsLungfishesRay-finned fishesCoelacanthsAmphibians adapted to life on landDuring the Devonian, the first tetrapods arosefrom an aquatic ancestor. In this lineage, legscapable of movement on land evolved fromthe short, stubby fins of their aquatic ancestors.The basic elements of those legs have remained throughout theevolution of terrestrial vertebrates, although they have changedconsiderably in their form.Most modern amphibians areconfined to moist environments becausethey lose water rapidlythrough the skin when exposed todry air. In addition, their eggs areenclosed within delicate membranousenvelopes that cannot preventwater loss in dry conditions. In someamphibian species, adults livemostly on land but return to freshwater to lay their eggs, which areusually fertilized outside the body(Figure 33.15). The fertilized eggsgive rise to larvae that live in water until they undergo metamorphosisto become terrestrial adults. However, many amphibians(especially those in tropical and subtropical areas) have evolveda wide diversity of additional reproductive modes and types ofparental care, as described in the opening of this chapter. Internalfertilization evolved many times among the amphibians.704 CHAPTER 33 | DEUTEROSTOME ANIMALS (B) Protopterus annectens(A) Latimeria chalumnae(C) Tiktaalik roseaeTiktaalik’s pectoral finsshow some of the skeletal33.14 The Closest Relatives of Tetrapods (A) The African coela- structures of tetrapod limbs.canth, discovered in deep waters of the Indian Ocean, represents oneof two surviving species of a group that was once thought to beextinct. (B) All surviving lungfish species, such as this African lungfish,live in the Southern Hemisphere. (C) This fossil from the Devonian isbelieved to represent a transitional species intermediate between thefinned fishes and the limbed tetrapods.LungfishesAmphibiansAmniotesAdults spawnin water.The egg hatches. The larva(tadpole) respires withexternal gills.4External gillsbecome enclosed;hind legs appear.21The fertilized eggdevelops in water.3 The embryo developsand a tail bud forms.7 The adult frog breathes withlungs; its tail is resorbed.6 Front legsappear.5AdultSperm67Eggs33.15 In and Out of the WaterMost early stages in the life cycle ofmany amphibians take place in water.The aquatic tadpole transforms into aterrestrial adult through metamorphosis.Some species of amphibians, however,have direct development (with no aquaticlarval stage), and others are aquaticthroughout life.GO TO Animated Tutorial 33.1 •Life Cycle of a FrogyourBioPortal.comMany species develop directly into adultlike forms from fertilizedeggs laid on land or carried by the parents. Other species ofamphibians are entirely aquatic, never leaving the water at anystage of their lives, and many of these species retain a larval-likemorphology.The more than 6,500 known species of amphibians living onEarth today belong to three major groups: the wormlike, limbless,tropical, burrowing or aquatic caecilians (Figure 33.16A),the tail-less frogs and toads (collectively called anurans; Figure33.16B), and the tailed salamanders (Figure 33.16C and D).Anurans are most diverse in wet tropical and warm temperateregions, although a few are found at very high latitudes.There are far more anurans than any other amphibians, withabout 5,800 described species and more being discovered everyyear. Some anurans have tough skins and other adaptations thatenable them to live for long periods in very dry deserts, whereasothers live in moist terrestrial and arboreal environments. Somespecies are completely aquatic as adults. All anurans have a veryshort vertebral column, with a strongly modified pelvic regionthat is modified for leaping, hopping, or propelling the bodythrough water by kicking the hind legs.The approximately 600 described species of salamanders aremost diverse in temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere,but many species are also found in cool, moist environments inthe mountains of Central America, and a few species penetrateinto the South American tropics. Many salamanders livein rotting logs or moist soil. One major group has lost lungs, andthese species exchange gases entirely through the skin andmouth lining—body parts that all amphibians use in additionto their lungs. Through paedomorphosis (retention of the juvenilestate; see Chapter 20), a completely aquatic lifestyle has evolvedseveral times among the salamanders (see Figure 33.16D). Mostspecies of salamanders have internal fertilization, which is usuallyachieved through the transfer of a small jellylike, spermembeddedcapsule called a spermatophore.Many amphibians have complex social behaviors. Most maleanurans utter loud, species-specific calls to attract females oftheir own species (and sometimes to defend breeding territories),and they compete for access to females that arrive at thebreeding sites. Many amphibians lay large numbers of eggs,which they abandon once they are deposited and fertilized. Asdescribed in the opening of this chapter, some amphibians layonly a few eggs, which are fertilized and then guarded in a nest,or carried on the backs, in the vocal pouches, or even in thestomachs of one of the parents. Afew species of frogs, salamanders,and caecilians are viviparous, meaning they give birth towell-developed young that have received nutrition from the femaleduring gestation.33.4 | HOW DID VERTEBRATES COLONIZE THE LAND? 705(C) Ambystoma mavortium(B) Bufo periglenes(A) Siphonops annulatus(D) Eurycea waterlooensis33.16 Diversity among the Amphibians (A) Burrowing caecilianssuperficially look more like worms than amphibians. (B) Male goldentoads in the cloud forest of Monteverde, Costa Rica. This species hasrecently become extinct, one of many amphibian species to do so in thepast few decades. (C) An adult barred tiger salamander. (D) This Austinblind salamander’s life cycle remains aquatic; it has no adult terrestrialstage. The eyes of this cave dweller have become greatly reduced.ShellExtraembryonicmembranes:Chorion(gas exchange)Allantois(gas exchange;encloses wastes)Embryo Amniotic cavityAmnion(protects embryo)YolkYolk sac(encloses nutrients)Amphibians are the focus of much attention today becausepopulations of many species are declining rapidly,especially in mountainous regions of western North America,Central and South America, and northeastern Australia.Worldwide, about one-third of amphibian speciesare now threatened with extinction or have disappearedcompletely in the last few decades (as happened with thegastric brooding frogs described at the beginning of thischapter). Scientists are investigating several hypotheses toaccount for these population declines, including the adverseeffects of habitat alteration by humans, increased solarradiation caused by destruction of Earth’s ozone layer,pollution from urban and industrial areas and airborneagricultural pesticides and herbicides (see Chapter 1), and thespread of a pathogenic chytrid fungus that attacks amphibians.Scientists have documented the spread of the chytrid fungusthrough Central America, where many species of amphibianshave become extinct (including Costa Rica’s golden toad; seeFigure 33.16B).Amniotes colonized dry environmentsSeveral key innovations contributed to the ability of membersof one clade of tetrapods to exploit a wide range of terrestrialhabitats. The animals that evolved these water-conserving traitsare called amniotes.The amniote egg (which gives the group its name) is relativelyimpermeable to water and allows the embryo to developin a contained aqueous environment (Figure 33.17). The leatheryor brittle, calcium-impregnated shell of the amniote eggretards evaporation of the fluids inside but permits passage ofoxygen and carbon dioxide. The egg also stores large quantitiesof food in the form of yolk, allowing the embryo to attain a relativelyadvanced state of developmentbefore it hatches. Within the shell are extraembryonicmembranes that protect theembryo from desiccation and assist itsgas exchange and excretion of waste nitrogen.In several different groups of amniotes,the amniote egg became modified,allowing the embryo to grow inside(and receive nutrition from) the mother.For instance, the mammalian egg lost itsshell while the functions of the extraembryonic membraneswere retained and expanded; we examine the roles of thesemembranes in detail in Section 44.4.Other innovations evolved in the organs of terrestrial adults.A tough, impermeable skin, covered with scales or modificationsof scales such as hair and feathers, greatly reduced waterloss. Adaptations of the vertebrate excretory organs, the kidneys,allowed amniotes to excrete concentrated urine, riddingthe body of waste nitrogen without losing a large amount ofwater in the process (see Chapter 52).During the Carboniferous, amniotes split into two majorgroups, the mammals and reptiles (Figure 33.18). More than706 CHAPTER 33 | DEUTEROSTOME ANIMALS33.17 An Egg for Dry Places The evolution of the amniote egg, withits water-retaining shell, four extraembryonic membranes, and embryonourishingyolk, was a major step in the colonization of the terrestrialenvironment.GO TO Web Activity 33.2 • The Amniote EggyourBioPortal.comAmnioteancestorTuataras LepidosaursSquamatesCrocodiliansPterosaurs (extinct)Therapods,including birdsOrnithischians(extinct)Sauropods(extinct)MammalsREPTILESMAMMALSTurtlesDinosaursArchosaurs33.18 Phylogeny of Amniotes Thistree of amniote relationships shows the primarysplit between mammals and reptiles.The reptile portion of the tree shows a lineagethat led to the turtles, another to the lepidosaurs(snakes, lizards, and tuataras), and athird branch that includes all the archosaurs(crocodiles, several extinct groups, and thebirds). There is some uncertainty in the placementof the turtle lineage; some data support arelationship between turtles and archosaurs.18,700 species of reptiles exist today, over half of which are birds.Birds are the only living members of the otherwise extinct dinosaurs,the dominant terrestrial predators of the Mesozoic.Reptiles adapted to life in many habitatsThe lineage leading to modern reptiles beganto diverge from other amniotes about 250million years ago. One reptilian group thathas changed very little over the intervening millenniais the turtles. The dorsal and ventral bony platesof turtles form a shell into which the head and limbs can be withdrawnin many species (Figure 33.19A). The dorsal shell is an expansionof the ribs, and it is a mystery how the pectoral girdlesevolved to be inside the ribs of turtles, making them unlike anyother vertebrates. Most turtles live in aquatic environments, butseveral groups, such as tortoises and box turtles, are terrestrial.Sea turtles spend their entire lives at sea except when they comeashore to lay eggs. Human exploitation of sea turtles and theireggs has resulted in worldwide declines of these species, all ofwhich are now endangered. Afew species of turtles are strict herbivoresor carnivores, but most species are omnivores that eat avariety of aquatic and terrestrial plants and animals.The lepidosaurs constitute the second-most species-rich cladeof living reptiles. This group is composed of the squamates(lizards, snakes, and amphisbaenians—the last a group of mostlylegless, wormlike, burrowing reptiles with greatly reduced eyes)and the tuataras, which superficially resemble lizards but differfrom them in tooth attachment and several internal anatomicalfeatures. Many species related to the tuataras lived during theMesozoic era, but today only two species, restricted to a few islandsoff New Zealand, survive (Figure 33.19B).The skin of a lepidosaur is covered with horny scales thatgreatly reduce loss of water from the body surface. These scales,however, make the skin unavailable as an organ of gas exchange.Gases are exchanged almost entirely via the lungs,which are proportionally much larger in surface area than thoseof amphibians. Alepidosaur forces air into and out of its lungsby bellowslike movements of its ribs. The three-chambered lepidosaurheart partially separates oxygenated blood from thelungs from deoxygenated blood returning from the body. Withthis type of heart, lepidosaurs can generate high blood pressureand can sustain a relatively high metabolism.Most lizards are insectivores, but some are herbivores; a fewprey on other vertebrates. The largest lizard, which grows as33.4 | HOW DID VERTEBRATES COLONIZE THE LAND? 707AmphibiansReptilesMammals(D) Diadophis punctatus(B) Sphenodon punctatus(C) Eublepharis macularius(A) Chelonia mydas33.19 Reptilian Diversity (A) Green sea turtles are widely distributedin tropical oceans. (B) This tuatara represents one of only two survivingspecies in a lineage that diverged long ago. (C) The leopard gecko, adesert dweller native to Afghanistan, Pakistan, and northwestern India.(D) The ringneck snake of North America is nonvenomous. It coils its tailto reveal a bright orange underbelly, which distracts potential predatorsfrom the vital head region.long as 3 meters and can weigh more than 150 kilograms, is thepredaceous Komodo dragon of the East Indies. Most lizardswalk on four limbs (Figure 33.19C), although limblessness hasevolved repeatedly in the group, especially in burrowing andgrassland species. One major group of limbless squamates isthe snakes (Figure 33.19D). All snakes are carnivores, and manycan swallow objects much larger than themselves. Several snakegroups evolved venom glands and the ability to inject venomrapidly into their prey.Crocodilians and birds share their ancestrywith the dinosaursAnother reptilian group, the archosaurs, includesthe crocodilians, dinosaurs, andbirds. Dinosaurs rose to prominenceabout 215 million years ago and dominatedterrestrial environments forabout 150 million years; only one groupof dinosaurs, the birds, survived the massextinction event at the Cretaceous–Tertiary boundary. Duringthe Mesozoic, most terrestrial animals more than a meter longwere dinosaurs. Many were agile and could run rapidly; theyhad special muscles that enabled the lungs to be filled and emptiedwhile the limbs moved. We can infer the existence of suchmuscles in dinosaurs from the structure of the vertebral columnin fossils. Some of the largest dinosaurs weighed as much as70,000 kilograms.Modern crocodilians—crocodiles, caimans, gharials, and alligators—are confined to tropical and warm temperate environments(Figure 33.20A). Crocodilians spend much of their timein water, but they build nests on land or on floating piles of vegetation.The eggs are warmed by heat generated by decaying organicmatter that the female places in the nest. Typically, the femaleguards the eggs until hatching, and she often facilitateshatching. In some species, the female continues to guard andcommunicate with her offspring after they hatch. All crocodiliansare carnivorous. They eat vertebrates of all kinds, includinglarge mammals.Biologists have long accepted the phylogenetic position ofbirds among the reptiles, although birds clearly have manyunique, derived morphological features. In addition to thestrong morphological evidence for the placement of birdsamong the reptiles, fossil and molecular data emerging over thelast few decades have provided definitive supporting evidence.Birds are thought to have emerged among the theropods, a groupof predatory dinosaurs that share such traits as bipedal stance,hollow bones, a furcula (“wishbone”), elongated metatarsalswith three-fingered feet, elongated forelimbs with three-fingeredhands, and a pelvis that points backward.The living bird species fall into two major groups that divergedduring the late Cretaceous, about 80 to 90 million yearsago, from a flying ancestor. The few modern descendants of onelineage include a group of secondarily flightless and weakly flyingbirds, some of which are very large. This group, called thepalaeognaths, includes the South and Central American tinamousand several large flightless birds of the southern continents—the rheas, emu, kiwis, cassowaries, and the world’s largest bird,the ostrich (Figure 33.20B). The second lineage, the neognaths,has left a much larger number of descendants, most of whichhave retained the ability to fly.The evolution of feathers allowed birds to flyFossil dinosaurs discovered recently in early Cretaceous depositsin Liaoning Province, in northeastern China, show that the scalesof some small predatory dinosaurs were highly modified to formfeathers. The feathers of one of these dinosaurs, Microraptor gui,were structurally similar to those of modern birds (Figure 33.21A).During the Mesozoic era, about 175 million years ago, a lineageof theropods gave rise to the birds. The oldest known avianfossil, Archaeopteryx, which lived about 150 million years ago,had teeth, but it was covered with feathers that are virtually identicalto those of modern birds (Figure 33.21B). It also had welldevelopedwings, a long tail, and a furcula to which some of theflight muscles were probably attached. Archaeopteryx had clawedfingers on its forelimbs, but it also had typical perching birdclaws on its hindlimbs. It probably lived in trees and shrubs andused the fingers to assist it in clambering over branches.The evolution of feathers was a major force for diversification.Feathers are lightweight but are strong and structurallycomplex (Figure 33.22). The large quills of the flight feathers on708 CHAPTER 33 | DEUTEROSTOME ANIMALSBirdsLepidosaursCrocodiliansTurtlesMammals(B) Struthio camelus(A) Crocodylus porosus33.20 Archosaurs (A) Crocodiles, alligators, and their relatives live intropical and warm temperate climates. This crocodile lives in saltwater andestuarine environments along Australia’s coast. (B) Birds are the other livingarchosaur group, represented here by the winged but flightless ostrich.the wings arise from the skin of the forelimbs to create the flyingsurfaces. Other strong feathers sprout like a fan from theshortened tail and serve as stabilizers during flight. The feathersthat cover the body, along with an underlying layer of downfeathers, provide birds with insulation that helps them to survivein virtually all of Earth’s climates.The bones of theropod dinosaurs, including birds, are hollowwith internal struts that increase their strength. Hollowbones would have made early theropods lighter and more mobile;later they facilitated the evolution of flight. The sternum(breastbone) of flying birds forms a large, vertical keel to whichthe flight muscles are attached.Flight is metabolically expensive. Aflying bird consumes energyat a rate about 15 to 20 times faster than a running lizard ofthe same weight. Because birds have such high metabolic rates,they generate large amounts of heat. They control the rate of heatloss using their feathers, which may be held close to the body orelevated to alter the amount of insulation they provide. Thelungs of birds allow air to flow through unidirectionally ratherthan by pumping air in and out (see Section 49.2). This flowthroughstructure of the lungs increases the efficiency of gasexchange and thereby supports an increased metabolic rate.There are about 10,000 species of living birds, which rangein size from the 150-kilogram ostrich to a tiny hummingbirdweighing only 2 grams. The teeth so prominent among otherdinosaurs were secondarily lost in the ancestral birds, but birdsnonetheless eat almost all types of animal and plant material.Insects and fruits are the most important dietary items for terrestrialspecies. Birds also eat seeds, nectar and pollen, leavesand buds, carrion, and other vertebrates. By eating the fruitsand seeds of plants, birds serve as major agents of seed dispersal.Figure 33.23 shows representatives of a few of the majorgroups of birds.Mammals radiated after the extinction of dinosaursSmall and medium-sized mammals coexisted with the dinosaursfor millions of years. After the non-avian dinosaurs disappearedduring the mass extinction at the close of the Mesozoicera, mammals increased dramatically in numbers, diversity,and size. Today mammals range in size from tiny shrews andbats weighing only about 2 grams to the blue whale, the largestanimal on Earth, which measures up to 33 meters long andcan weigh as much as 160,000 kilograms. Mammals have farfewer, but more highly differentiated, teeth than do fishes, amphibians,or reptiles. Differences among mammals in the number,type, and arrangement of teeth reflect their varied diets (seeFigure 51.6).Four key features distinguish the mammals:• Sweat glands, which secrete sweat that evaporates andthereby cools an animal• Mammary glands, which in females secrete a nutritive fluid(milk) on which newborn individuals feed33.4 | HOW DID VERTEBRATES COLONIZE THE LAND? 709Faint impressions of featherscan be seen around thefossilized skeletons.(A)(B)33.22 Feathers Represent a Major Evolutionary Innovation Theflight feathers of birds are attached to the forelimb (wing) bones by a hollowcentral shaft. Fine branches with interlocking hooks and barbs radiatefrom the shaft, creating a strong, lightweight surface that enables flight.33.21 Mesozoic Bird Relatives Fossil remains demonstrate the evolutionof birds from other dinosaurs. (A) Microraptor gui was a feathered dinosaurfrom the early Cretaceous (about 140 mya). (B) Dating from roughlythe same timeframe, Archaeopteryx is the oldest known birdlike fossil.The hollow quill attachesto the bones of theforelimb (i.e., the wing).Quill(central shaft)Branch Barbules with hooks• Hair, which provides a protective andinsulating covering• Afour-chambered heart that completelyseparates the oxygenated blood comingfrom the lungs from the deoxygenatedblood returning from the body(this last characteristic is convergentwith the archosaurs, including modernbirds and crocodiles)Mammalian eggs are fertilized within thefemale’s body, and the embryos undergoa period of development in the female’sbody in an organ called the uterus prior tobeing born. Most mammals have a coveringof hair (fur), which is luxuriant in somespecies but has been greatly reduced inothers, including the cetaceans (whalesand dolphins) and humans. Thick layersof insulating fat (blubber) replace hair as aheat-retention mechanism in the cetaceans; humans learned touse clothing for this purpose when they dispersed from warmtropical areas.The approximately 5,000 species of livingmammals are divided into two primarygroups: the prototherians and thetherians. Only five species of prototheriansare known, and they are found only in Australiaand New Guinea. These mammals, the duckbilledplatypus and four species of echidnas, differ from othermammals in lacking a placenta, laying eggs, and having sprawlinglegs (Figure 33.24). Prototherians supply milk for theiryoung, but they have no nipples on their mammary glands; themilk simply oozes out and is lapped off the fur by the offspring.Most mammals are theriansMembers of the therian clade are further divided into the marsupialsand the eutherians. Females of most marsupial specieshave a ventral pouch in which they carry and feed their offspring(see Figure 33.25A). Gestation (pregnancy) in marsupialsis brief; the young are born tiny but with well-developedforelimbs, with which they climb to the pouch. They attach to710 CHAPTER 33 | DEUTEROSTOME ANIMALS(D) Tyto alba(B) Aix galericulata(C) Frigata minor(A) Bombycilla cedrorum33.23 Diversity among the Birds(A) Perching, or passeriform, birds such as thiscedar waxwing comprise the most species-richof all bird groups. (B) This bright-plumaged maleMandarin duck is a member of the group thatincludes ducks, geese, and swans. (C) Greatfrigatebirds are among the ocean-going birdsthat are often found miles from shore. This maleis in display mode, with an inflated pouch thatadvertises his presence to females. (D) This barnowl is a nighttime predator that can find preyusing its sensitive auditory “sonar” system.ReptilesPrototheriansMarsupialsEutherians(A) Tachyglossus aculeatus(B) Ornithorhynchus anatinus33.24 Prototherians (A) Theshort-beaked echidna is one of thefour surviving species of echidnas.(B) The duck-billed platypus isanother surviving prototherian.a nipple but cannot suck. Themother ejects milk into the tiny offspringuntil it grows large enoughto suckle. Once her offspring haveleft the uterus, a female marsupialmay become sexually receptiveagain. She can then carry fertilizedeggs that are capable of initiatingdevelopment and can replace theoffspring in her pouch shouldsomething happen to them.At one time marsupials werefound on all continents, but the approximately350 living species arenow restricted to Australasia (Figure33.25A and B) and the Americas(especially South America;Figure 33.25C). One species, theVirginia opossum, is widely distributedin North America. Marsupialsradiated to become herbivores, insectivores,and carnivores, but no marsupials live in the oceans.None can fly, although some arboreal (tree-dwelling) marsupialsare gliders. The largest living marsupials are the kangaroos ofAustralia, which can weigh up to 90 kilograms. Much larger marsupialsexisted in Australia until humans exterminated them soonafter reaching that continent about 40,000 years ago.Eutherians include the majority of mammals. Eutherians aresometimes called placental mammals, but this name is inappropriatebecause some marsupials also have placentas. Eutheriansare more developed at birth than are marsupials; no externalpouch houses them after they are born.The approximately 5,000 species of living eutherians are dividedinto 20 major groups (Table 33.1). The largest group isthe rodents, with about 2,300 species. Rodents are traditionallydefined by the unique morphology of their teeth, whichare adapted for gnawing through substances such as wood.The next largest group comprises the approximately 1,100 batspecies—the flying mammals. The bats are followed by themoles and shrews, with about 430 species. The relationshipsof the major groups of eutherians to one another have beendifficult to determine, because most of the major groups divergedin a short period of time during an explosive adaptiveradiation.Eutherians are extremely varied in their form and ecology(Figure 33.26). The extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs at theend of the Cretaceous may have made it possible for them to diversifyand radiate into a large range of ecological niches. Manyeutherian species grew to become quite large in size, and someassumed the role of dominant terrestrial predators previouslyoccupied by the large dinosaurs. Among these predators, socialhunting behavior evolved in several species, including membersof the canid (dog), felid (cat), and primate lineages.Grazing and browsing by members of several eutheriangroups helped transform the terrestrial landscape. Herds ofgrazing herbivores feed on open grasslands, whereas browsersfeed on shrubs and trees. The effects of herbivores on plant lifefavored the evolution of the spines, tough leaves, and difficult-to-eat growth forms found in many plants. In turn, adaptationsto the teeth and digestive systems of many herbivore lineagesallowed these species to consume many plants despitesuch defenses—a striking example of coevolution. Alarge animalcan survive on food of lower quality than a small animalcan, and large size evolved in several groups of grazing andbrowsing mammals (see Figure 33.26C). The evolution of largeherbivores, in turn, favored the evolution of large carnivoresable to attack and overpower them.Several lineages of terrestrial eutherians subsequently returnedto the aquatic environments their ancestors had left behind(see Figure 33.26D). The completely aquatic cetaceans—whales and dolphins—evolved from artiodactyl ancestors(whales are closely related to the hippopotamuses). The seals,sea lions, and walruses also returned to the marine environment,and their limbs became modified into flippers. Weasellikeotters retain their limbs but have also returned to aquaticenvironments, colonizing both fresh and salt water. The manateesand dugongs colonized estuaries and shallow seas.33.4 | HOW DID VERTEBRATES COLONIZE THE LAND? 711(C) Marmosa murina(B) Sarcophilus harrisii(A) Macropus giganteus33.25 Marsupials (A) Australia’s eastern gray kangaroois among the largest living marsupials. This femalecarries her young offspring in the characteristic marsupialpouch. (B) The carnivorous Tasmanian devil is foundonly in Tasmania, an island off southern Australia. (C)This arboreal opossum is a South American marsupial.712 CHAPTER 33 | DEUTEROSTOME ANIMALSTABLE 33.1Major Groups of Living Eutherian MammalsAPPROXIMATE NUMBERGROUP OF LIVING SPECIES EXAMPLESGnawing mammals (Rodentia) 2,300 Rats, mice, squirrels, woodchucks, ground squirrels, beaver, capybaraFlying mammals (Chiroptera) 1,100 BatsSoricomorph insectivores (Soricomorpha) 430 Shrews, molesEven-toed hoofed mammals and cetaceans 320 Deer, sheep, goats, cattle, antelopes, giraffes, camels, swine,(Cetartiodactyla) hippopotamus, whales, dolphinsCarnivores (Carnivora) 290 Wolves, dogs, bears, cats, weasels, pinnipeds (seals, sea lions, walruses)Primates (Primates) 235 Lemurs, monkeys, apes, humansLagomorphs (Lagomorpha) 80 Rabbits, hares, pikasAfrican insectivores (Afrosoricida) 50 Tenrecs, golden molesSpiny insectivores (Erinaceomorpha) 24 HedgehogsArmored mammals (Cingulata) 21 ArmadillosTree shrews (Scandentia) 20 Tree shrewsOdd-toed hoofed mammals (Perissodactyla) 20 Horses, zebras, tapirs, rhinocerosesLong-nosed insectivores (Macroscelidea) 16 Elephant shrewsPilosans (Pilosa) 10 Anteaters, slothsPholidotans (Pholidota) 8 PangolinsSirenians (Sirenia) 5 Manatees, dugongsHyracoids (Hyracoidea) 4 Hyraxes, dassiesElephants (Proboscidea) 3 African and Indian elephantsDermopterans (Dermoptera) 2 Flying lemursAardvark (Tubulidentata) 1 Aardvark(A) Erithizon dorsatum (B) Artibeus lituratus(C) Rangifer tarandus(D) Stenella longirostris33.26 Diversity among the Eutherians(A) The North American porcupine, a large rodentcovered with sharp, protective quills. Almost halfof all eutherians are rodents. (B) Flight evolved inthe ancestor of bats. This fruit-eating bat rangesfrom Central to South America. Virtually all batspecies are nocturnal. (C) Large hoofed mammalsare important herbivores in terrestrial environments.Although this bull is grazing by himself,caribou are usually found in huge herds. (D)Spinner dolphins are cetaceans, a cetartiodactylgroup that returned to the marine environment.33.4 RECAPThe vertebrate colonization of dry land was facilitatedby the evolution of an impermeable body covering,efficient kidneys, and the amniote egg—astructure that resists desiccation and provides anaqueous internal environment in which the embryogrows. Major amniote groups include turtles, lepidosaurs,archosaurs (crocodilians and birds), andmammals.• In the not-too-distant past, the idea that birds werereptiles met with skepticism. Explain how fossils, morphology,and molecular evidence now support the positionof birds among the reptiles. See pp. 708–709• In reviewing the discussion of the various vertebrategroups, identify several reasons why tooth structure issuch an important area of study.The evolutionary history of one eutherian group—the primates—is of special interest to us because it includes the humanlineage. The primates have been the subject of extensive researchin most aspects of their biology, including behavior, ecology,physiology, and molecular biology. Let’s take a closer lookat the characteristics and evolutionary history of the primates.What Traits Characterize 33.5 the Primates?The eutherian primates underwent extensive evolutionary radiationfrom an ancestral small, arboreal, insectivorous mammal.A nearly complete fossil of an early primate, Carpolestes, wasfound in Wyoming and dated at 56 million years ago; it hadgrasping feet with an opposable big toe that had a nail ratherthan a claw. Grasping limbs with opposable digits are one of themajor adaptations to arboreal life that distinguish primates fromother mammals.Early in their evolutionary history, the primates split into twomain clades, the prosimians and the anthropoids (Figure 33.27).Prosimians—lemurs, lorises, and their close relatives—once livedon all continents, but today they are restricted to Africa, Madagascar,and tropical Asia. All mainland prosimian species arearboreal and nocturnal (Figure 33.28). On the island of Madagascar,however, the site of a remarkable radiation oflemurs, there are also diurnal and terrestrial species.A second primate lineage, the anthropoids—tarsiers,New World monkeys, Old World monkeys, andapes—evolved about 65 million years ago in Africaor Asia. New World monkeys diverged from OldWorld monkeys and apes at a slightly later date, butearly enough that they might have reached SouthAmerica from Africa when those two continents werestill close to each other. All New World monkeys arearboreal (Figure 33.29A). Many of themhave a long, prehensile tail with whichthey can grasp branches. Many OldWorld monkeys are arboreal as well, buta number of species are terrestrial (Figure33.29B). No Old World primate hasa prehensile tail.About 35 million years ago, a lineagethat led to the modern apes separatedfrom the Old World monkeys. Between22 and 5.5 million years ago, dozens ofspecies of apes lived in Europe, Asia, andAfrica. The Asian apes—gibbons andorangutans (Figure 33.30A and B)—descendedfrom two of these ape lineages.Another extinct genus, Dryopithecus, isthe sister group of the modern Africanapes—gorillas and chimpanzees (Figure33.30C and D)—and of humans.33.5 | WHAT TRAITS CHARACTERIZE THE PRIMATES? 713PleistocenePlioceneProsimians LemursAnthropoidsLorisesTarsiersNew WorldmonkeysOld WorldmonkeysGibbonsOrangutansAfrican apesand humansTime (mya)Late Paleocene Eocene Oligocene MioceneCretaceous98 65 56 34 23 5.3 2.6 33.27 Phylogeny of the Primates The phylogeny ofprimates is among the best studied of any major group ofmammals. This tree is based on evidence from manygenes, morphology, and fossils.714 CHAPTER 33 | DEUTEROSTOME ANIMALSEulemur coronatus (A) Ateles geoffroyi (B) Mandrillus sphinx33.28 A Prosimian The crowned lemur is oneof many lemur species found in Madagascar,where it is part of a unique assemblage of endemicplants and animals.33.29 Monkeys (A) The spider monkeys of Central America are typical of the New Worldmonkeys, all of which are arboreal. (B) Although many Old World monkey species are arboreal,the mandrills are among the many terrestrial groups.(A) Hylobates lar (B) Pongo pygmaeus (C) Gorilla gorilla(D) Pan troglodytes33.30 Apes (A) The several genera of gibbons are all smaller in sizethan the other apes. Gibbons are found throughout southeastern Asia.(B) Orangutans are also native ot Asia, living in the forests of Sumatraand Borneo. (C) Gorillas—the largest apes—are restricted to humidAfrican forests. This male is a lowland gorilla. (D) Chimpanzees, ourclosest relatives, are found in forested regions of Africa.Human ancestors evolved bipedal locomotionAbout 6 million years ago in Africa, a lineage split occurred thatwould lead to the chimpanzees on the one hand and to the hominidclade that includes modern humans and their extinct closerelatives on the other.The earliest protohominids, known as ardipithecines, had distinctmorphological adaptations for bipedal locomotion (walkingon two legs). Bipedal locomotion frees the forelimbs to manipulateobjects and to carry them while walking. It also elevatesthe eyes, enabling the animal to see over tall vegetation to spotpredators and prey. Bipedal locomotion is also energeticallymore economical than quadrupedal locomotion. All three advantageswere probably important for the ardipithecines andtheir descendants, the australopithecines.The first australopithecine skull was found in South Africa in1924. Since then australopithecine fossils have been found atmany sites in Africa. The most complete fossil skeleton of anaustralopithecine yet found was discovered in Ethiopia in 1974.The skeleton was approximately 3.5 million years old and wasthat of a young female who has since become known to theworld as “Lucy.” Lucy was assigned to the species Australopithecusafarensis, and her discovery captured worldwide interest.Fossil remains of more than 100 A. afarensis individuals havesince been discovered, and there have been recent discoveriesof fossils of other australopithecines who lived in Africa 4 to 5million years ago.Experts disagree over how many species are representedby australopithecine fossils, but it is clear that multiple speciesof hominids lived together over much of eastern Africa severalmillion years ago (Figure 33.31). Alineage of larger species(weighing about 40 kilograms) is represented by Paranthropusrobustus and P. boisei, both of which died out between 1 and 1.5million years ago. Members of a smaller lineage of australopithecinesgave rise to the genus Homo.Early members of the genus Homo lived contemporaneouslywith Paranthropus in Africa for about a million years. Some 2-million-year-old fossils of an extinct species called H. habiliswere discovered in the Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania. Other fossilsof H. habilis have been found in Kenya and Ethiopia. Associatedwith the fossils are tools that these early hominids used to obtainfood.Another extinct hominid species, Homo erectus, evolved inAfrica about 1.6 million years ago. Soon thereafter it had spreadas far as eastern Asia, becoming the first hominid to leave Africa.Members of H. erectus were nearly as large as modern people,but their brains were smaller and they had comparatively thickskulls. The cranium, which had thick, bony walls, may have33.5 | WHAT TRAITS CHARACTERIZE THE PRIMATES? 715The Paranthropus lineagescoexisted with species of Homoand Australopithecus in Africa.Expansion intothe New World12,000–20,000years ago.Expansionfrom Africa60,000–70,000years ago.Several species ofHomo coexisted inAfrica, Asia, andEurope until recently.No fossils are known of thislineage until 95,000 years ago.ArdipithicineancestorsAustralopithecusafarensis (Lucy)Australopithecus africanusParanthropusaethiopicus Paranthropus robustusParanthropus boiseiHomo floresiensis (extinct 17,000 years ago)Homo erectus (extinct 250,000 years ago)Homo ergasterHomo neanderthalensis(extinct 28,000 years ago)Homo sapiens(now worldwide)4.0 3.0 2.0 1.0 PresentTime (mya)Homo habilisAfrica onlyExpansion out of Africa33.31 A Phylogenetic Tree of Hominids At times in the past, morethan one species of hominid lived on Earth at the same time. Originatingin Africa, hominids spread to Europe and Asia multiple times. All theseclosely related species are now extinct, while modern Homo sapienshave colonized nearly every corner of the planet.been an adaptation to protect the brain, ears, and eyes from impactscaused by a fall or a blow from a blunt object. What wouldhave been the source of such blows? Fighting with other H. erectusindividuals is a possible answer.Homo erectus used fire for cooking and for hunting large animals,and made characteristic stone tools that have been foundin many parts of the Old World. Populations of H. erectus surviveduntil at least 250,000 years ago, although more recent fossilsmay also be attributable to this species. In 2004 some 18,000-year-old fossil remains of a small Homo were found on the islandof Flores in Indonesia. Since then, numerous additional fossilsof this diminutive hominid have been found on Flores, datingfrom 95,000 to 17,000 years ago. Many anthropologists thinkthat this small species, named H. floresiensis, was most closelyrelated to H. erectus.Human brains became larger as jaws became smallerIn the hominid lineage leading to Homo sapiens and H. neanderthalensis,the brain increased rapidly in size. At the same time,the powerful jaw muscles of our ancestors dramatically decreasedin size. These two changes were simultaneous, suggestingthey might have been functionally correlated. A mutationin a regulatory gene that is expressed only in the head may haveremoved a barrier that had previously prevented this remodelingof the human cranium.The striking enlargement of the brain relative to body sizein the hominid lineage was probably favored by an increasinglycomplex social life. Any features that allowed groupmembers to communicate more effectively with one anotherwould have been valuable in cooperative hunting and gatheringand for improving one’s status in the complex social interactionsthat must have characterized early human societies,just as they do in ours today.Several Homo species coexisted during the mid-Pleistoceneepoch, from about 1.5 million to about 250,000 years ago. Allwere skilled hunters of large mammals, but plants were importantcomponents of their diets. During this period another distinctlyhuman trait emerged: rituals and a concept of life afterdeath. Deceased individuals were buried with tools and clothing,supplies for their presumed existence in the next world.One species, Homo neanderthalensis, was widespread in Europeand Asia between about 500,000 and 28,000 years ago. Neanderthalswere short, stocky, and powerfully built. Their massiveskull housed a brain somewhat larger than our own. Theymanufactured a variety of tools and hunted large mammals,which they probably ambushed and subdued in close combat.Early modern humans (H. sapiens) expanded out of Africa between70,000 and 60,000 years ago. Then about 35,000 years ago,H. sapiens moved into the range of H. neanderthalensis in Europeand western Asia, so the two species must have interacted withone another. Neanderthals abruptly disappeared about 28,000years ago. Many anthropologists believe it is likely that the Neanderthalswere exterminated by these early modern humans.Scientists have been able to isolate large parts of the genomeof H. neanderthalensis from recent fossils and to compare it withour own. These studies suggest little or no interbreeding betweenthe two species while they occupied the same range inEurope and western Asia.Early modern humans made and used a variety of sophisticatedtools. They created the remarkable paintings of largemammals, many of them showing scenes of hunting, found inEuropean caves. The animals depicted were characteristic of thecold steppes and grasslands that occupied much of Europe duringperiods of glacial expansion. Early modern humans alsospread across Asia, reaching North America perhaps as early as20,000 years ago, although the date of their arrival in the NewWorld is still uncertain. Within a few thousand years, they hadspread southward through North America to the southern tipof South America.Humans developed complex language and cultureAs our ancestors evolved larger brains, their behavioral capabilitiesincreased, especially the capacity for language. Most animalcommunication consists of a limited number of signals,which refer mostly to immediate circumstances and are associatedwith charged emotional states induced by those circumstances.Human language is far richer in its symbolic characterthan other animal vocalizations. Our words can refer to pastand future times and to distant places. We are capable of learningthousands of words, many of them referring to abstract concepts.We can rearrange words to form sentences with complexmeanings.The expanded mental abilities of humans enabled the developmentof a complex culture, in which knowledge and traditionsare passed along from one generation to the next by teaching andobservation. Cultures can change rapidly because genetic changesare not necessary for a cultural trait to spread through a population.Cultural norms, however, are not transferred automaticallyand must be deliberately taught to each generation.Cultural transmission greatly facilitated the development anduse of domestic plants and animals and the resultant conversionof most human societies from ones in which food was obtainedby hunting and gathering to ones in which pastoralism (herdinglarge animals) and agriculture provided most of the food. The developmentof agriculture led to an increasingly sedentary life, thegrowth of cities, greatly expanded food supplies, rapid increasesin the human population, and the appearance of occupational specializations,such as artisans, shamans, and teachers.33.5 RECAPGrasping limbs with opposable digits distinguishprimates from other mammals. Human ancestorsdeveloped bipedal locomotion and large brains.• What are some major trends in primate evolution?• Describe the differences between Old World andNew World monkeys. See p. 713• Do you understand how cultural evolution differs fromgenetic evolution? See p. 716716 CHAPTER 33 | DEUTEROSTOME ANIMALS
33.1 What Is a Deuterostome?• Deuterostomes vary greatly in adult form, but based on the distinctivepatterns of early development they share and on phylogeneticanalyses of gene sequences, they are judged to bemonophyletic. There are far fewer species of deuterostomesthan of protostomes, but many deuterostomes are large andecologically important. Review Figure 33.1, WEB ACTIVITY33.133.2 What Are the Major Groups of Echinoderms andHemichordates?• Echinoderms and hemichordates both have bilaterally symmetrical,ciliated larvae.• Adult echinoderms have pentaradial symmetry. Echinodermshave an internal skeleton of calcified plates and a unique watervascular system connected to extensions called tube feet.Review Figure 33.3• Hemichordate adults are bilaterally symmetrical and have athree-part body that is divided into a proboscis, collar, andtrunk. They include the acorn worms and the pterobranchs.Review Figure 33.533.3 What New Features Evolved In the Chordates?• Chordates fall into three principal subgroups: cephalochordates,urochordates, and vertebrates.• At some stage in their development, all chordates have a dorsalhollow nerve cord, a post-anal tail, and a notochord. ReviewFigure 33.6• Urochordates include the ascidians (sea squirts), the larvaceans,and the thaliaceans (salps). Cephalochordates are the lancelets,which live buried in the sand of shallow marine and brackishwaters.• The vertebrate body is characterized by a rigid internal skeleton,which is supported by a vertebral column that replaces thenotochord, internal organs suspended in a coelom, a ventralheart, and an anterior skull with a large brain. Review Figure33.10• The evolution of jaws from gill arches enabled individuals tograsp large prey and, together with teeth, cut them into smallpieces. Review Figure 33.11• Chondrichthyans have skeletons of cartilage; almost all speciesare marine. The skeletons of ray-finned fishes are made ofbone; these fishes have colonized all aquatic environments.33.4 How Did Vertebrates Colonize the Land?• Lungs and jointed appendages enabled vertebrates to colonizethe land. The earliest split in the tetrapod tree is between theamphibians and the amniotes (reptiles and mammals).• Most modern amphibians are confined to moist environmentsbecause they and their eggs lose water rapidly. Review Figure33.16, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 33.1• An impermeable skin, efficient kidneys, and an egg that couldresist desiccation evolved in the amniotes. Review Figure33.17, WEB ACTIVITY 33.2• The major living reptile groups are the turtles, the lepidosaurs(tuataras, lizards, snakes, and amphisbaenians), and thearchosaurs (crocodilians and birds). Review Figure 33.18• Mammals are unique among animals in supplying their youngwith a nutritive fluid (milk) secreted by mammary glands. Thereare two primary mammalian clades: the prototherians (of whichthere are only five species) and the species-rich therians. Thetherian clade is further subdivided into the marsupials and theeutherians. Review Table 33.133.5 What Traits Characterize the Primates?• Grasping limbs with opposable digits distinguish primates fromother mammals. The prosimian clade includes the lemurs andlorises; the anthropoid clade includes monkeys, apes, andhumans. Review Figure 33.27• Hominid ancestors were terrestrial primates that developed efficientbipedal locomotion. In the lineage leading to Homo,brains became larger as jaws became smaller; the two eventsmay have been developmentally linked. Review Figure 33.31SEE WEB ACTIVITY 33.3 for a concept review of this chapter.