Place your hand over your heart. Now place it overyour liver. Next over your appendix. Surely you putyour hand first on the left side of your chest, then onyour right side just under your ribs, and finally on theright side of your lower abdomen. But in Chapter 31 youlearned that vertebrates (including you) are bilaterallysymmetrical (left arm/right arm, left kidney/right kidney,and so on). Clearly, however, our bilateral symmetry isnot absolute.Some of our internal organs—including the heart, liver,appendix, stomach, and the lobes of the lungs—are orienteddifferently with respect to the left and right sides ofthe body. How does a developing embryo know whichside is left and which is right?Clues to answering this question came from the factthat in about 1 out of every 7,000 people, the arrangementof the internal organs is reversed, a conditionknown as situs inversus, Latin for “location inverted.” Thisdevelopmental difference arises when the very earlyembryo goes from being a single layer of cells to multiplelayers of cells.As you will learn in this chapter, to get from a singlelayer of cells to the next stage with two layers of cells, apore or slit forms as cells in one area of the embryo migrateinward from the surface. Other cells from the surfacemigrate toward and through this opening to take uppositions underneath. The place where the inward movementof cells starts is called the node. Cells of the nodehave motile cilia that sweep extracellular fluidthrough the opening.Cells bordering the node also have one nonmotilecilium each—a primary cilium. When the primarycilia are bent by the flow of extracellular fluid, theyinitiate signaling cascades that determine the patternof internal organ development. Since the fluiddriven by the motile cilia tends to flow from right toleft, the signaling cascades are not expressed symmetrically,and this initiates the left–right organizationof organ development.Among individuals carrying a mutation that eliminatesmotility of the nodal cilia, half have the normalorientation of the internal organs and half have situsinversus. Most people with this condition lead normal,healthy lives. They may not even know about itGo with the flow44Go with the Flow The internal organs of humans arenot all symmetrical, and some individuals are born withthe mirror-image pattern of what is seen in most people—a condition called situs inversus. The left–right asymmetryof the internal organs is initiated by asymmetrical stimulationof primary cilia at a very early stage in development.How Does Fertilization Activate 44.1 Development?Fertilization is the joining of sperm and egg. You might thereforethink of it as the event that begins development. Keep twothings in mind, however. First, in animals that reproduce asexually,development proceeds without fertilization. And second,in animals where fertilization does occur, it is preceded by criticalevents in the maturing egg that will influence subsequentdevelopment. Thus, in studying fertilization we are really askinghow it activates or restarts multicellular development in sexuallyreproducing animals.Fertilization does far more than just restore a full diploidcomplement of maternal and paternal genes. The fusion ofsperm and egg plasma membranes accomplishes several things:• It sets up blocks to the entry of additional sperm.• It stimulates ion fluxes across the egg membrane.• It changes the egg’s pH.• It increases egg metabolism and stimulates protein synthesis.• It initiates the rapid series of cell divisions that produce amulticellular embryo.Section 43.2 described the mechanisms of fertilization. Here wetake a closer look at the cellular and molecular interactions ofsperm and egg that initiate the first steps of development.The sperm and the egg make different contributionsto the zygoteIn most species, eggs are much larger than sperm. Egg cytoplasmis well stocked with organelles, nutrients, and a varietyof molecules, including transcription factors and mRNAs. Thesperm is little more than a DNA delivery vehicle. Nearly everythingthe embryo needs during its early stages of developmentcomes from the mother. In addition to providing its haploid nucleus,the sperm makes another important contribution to thezygote in most species—a centriole.The centriole becomes the centrosome of the zygote, whichorganizes the mitotic spindles for subsequent cell divisions (seeFigure 11.10). The centriole is also the origin of the primary ciliaof cells, which are important in cell signaling, as we saw in theopening story about situs inversus.Cytoplasmic factors in the egg play important roles in settingup the signaling cascades that orchestrate the major eventsof development: determination, differentiation, and morphogenesis.IN THIS CHAPTER we will see how a single cell becomesa multicellular animal through orderly cell movementsthat create multiple layers and set up cell–cell interactions.The regional and temporal differences in geneexpression that control cell differentiation, described inChapters 19 and 20, lead to the emergence of the body planof the animal. We will discuss these early developmentalsteps in four organisms that have been studied extensively:sea urchins, frogs, chickens, and humans.unless a routine physical exam reveals that the organsare not where they should be.As frequently happens in biology, we just pushed thequestion back one more step. Why do the nodal ciliabeat in such a way that the extracellular fluid flows fromright to left? The root cause of this asymmetry likely originatesin some of the early cell divisions of the fertilizedegg. The fertilized egg goes through an initial series ofcell divisions that subdivide the egg cytoplasm into amass of undifferentiated cells. Although this mass ofcells shows no hints of the eventual body plan, an unevendistribution of molecules from the cytoplasm of thefertilized egg can provide information that directs thefates of cells and sets up the body plan.CHAPTER OUTLINE44.1 How Does Fertilization Activate Development?44.2 How Does Gastrulation Generate Multiple TissueLayers?44.3 How Do Organs and Organ Systems Develop?44.4 How is the Growing Embryo Sustained?44.5 What Are the Stages of Human Development?When Sperm Meet Egg Development begins with the fertilizationof an egg by a sperm. Once one sperm fuses with theegg, all other sperm are blocked. An animal egg typically ismuch larger than the sperm; the egg cytoplasm is loaded withinformational molecules and nutrients that will direct developmentand nourish the growing embryo.Rearrangements of egg cytoplasm set the stage fordeterminationThe unique attributes of amphibian eggs make them ideal modelsfor illustrating how rearrangements of egg cytoplasm set thestage for determination. The molecules in the cytoplasm of theamphibian egg are not homogeneously distributed. The entryof the sperm into the egg stimulates rearrangements of the eggcytoplasm that introduce additional organization to the egg cytoplasm.This rearrangement establishes the polarity of the zygote,and when cell divisions begin, the informational moleculesthat will guide development are not divided equallyamong daughter cells.Rearrangement of egg cytoplasm following fertilization iseasily observed in some frog species because of pigments in thecytoplasm. The nutrients in an unfertilized frog egg are denseyolk granules that are concentrated by gravity in the lower halfof the egg, called the vegetal hemisphere. The haploid nucleusof the egg is located at the opposite end, in the animal hemisphere.The outermost (cortical) cytoplasm of the animal hemisphereis heavily pigmented, and the underlying cytoplasm hasmore diffuse pigmentation. The vegetal hemisphere is not pigmented.Because of these differences, it is easy to observe howthe cytoplasm is rearranged when a frog egg is fertilized.The frog egg is radially symmetrical. You can turn it on itsvegetal–animal pole axis, and all sides are the same. Spermbindingsites are localized on the surface of the animal hemisphere,so that is where the sperm enters the egg. When a spermenters the egg, bilateral symmetry is imposed by creating an anterior–posterior axis. Cortical cytoplasm rotates toward the siteof sperm entry. This rotation brings different regions of cytoplasminto contact with each other on opposite sides of the egg,producing a band of diffusely pigmented cytoplasm on the sideopposite the site of sperm entry. This band, called the gray crescent,marks the location of important developmental events insome species of amphibians (Figure 44.1).The one non-nuclear organelle that the sperm contributes tothe egg—the centriole—initiates the cytoplasmic reorganizationrevealed by the appearance of the gray crescent. The centrioleorganizes the microtubules in the vegetal hemisphere cytoplasminto a parallel array that guides the movement of the corticalcytoplasm. These microtubules also appear to be directly responsiblefor movement of specific organelles and proteins, becausethese organelles and proteins move from the vegetal924 CHAPTER 44 | ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTThe cortical cytoplasmrotates relative to theinner cytoplasm.The gray crescentis created by therotation.SpermentrypointVegetalcorticalcytoplasm(unpigmented)Vegetalpole (V)Animalcorticalcytoplasm(pigmented)Animalpole (A)AVInnercytoplasm44.1 The Gray Crescent Rearrangement of the cytoplasm of frog eggsafter fertilization creates the gray crescent.…but does degradeit on the ventral side.Thus there is a higherb-catenin concentrationin the dorsal cells of theearly embryo.The vesicles releaseGSK-inhibiting protein……so GSK-3 does notdegrade b-cateninon the dorsal side…b-catenin (orange)is distributedthroughout cytoplasm.A protein that inhibitsGSK-3 is contained invegetal pole vesicles.Vesicles in the vegetalpole move on microtubuletracks to the sideopposite sperm entry.GSK-3 (blue), which targetsb-catenin for degradation,is also found throughoutcytoplasm.Ventral(V)Dorsal(D)V DV DV D(A) Fertilization(B) Cortical rotation(D) Dorsal inhibitionof GSK-3(E) Dorsal enrichmentof β-catenin(C) Dorsal enrichmentinhibitorVegetal poleAnimal pole EggSperm44.2 Cytoplasmic Factors Set Up Signaling CascadesCytoplasmic movement changes the distributions of criticaldevelopmental signals. In the frog zygote, the interaction of theprotein kinase GSK-3, its inhibitor, and the protein β-catenin arecrucial in specifying the dorsal–ventral axis of the embryo.hemisphere to the gray crescent region even faster than the corticalcytoplasm rotates.The movement of cytoplasm, proteins, and organelleschanges the distribution of critical developmental signals. Akeytranscription factor in early development is β-catenin, whichis produced from maternal mRNA(mRNAproduced and storedin the egg while it was maturing in the ovary). Beta-catenin isfound throughout the egg cytoplasm. Also present throughoutthe egg cytoplasm is a protein kinase called glycogen synthasekinase-3 (GSK-3), which phosphorylates and thereby targetsβ-catenin for degradation. An inhibitor of GSK-3 is segregatedin the vegetal cortex of the egg. After sperm entry, this inhibitoris moved along microtubules to the gray crescent, where it preventsthe degradation of β-catenin. As a result, the concentrationof β-catenin is higher on the dorsal than on the ventral sideof the developing embryo (Figure 44.2).Beta-catenin plays a major role in the cell–cell signaling cascadethat begins the process of cell determination and the formationof the embryo. But before cell–cell signaling can occur,multiple cells must be in place. Let’s turn to the early series ofcell divisions that transform the zygote into a multicellularembryo.Cleavage repackages the cytoplasmTransformation of the diploid zygote into a mass of cells occursthrough a rapid series of cell divisions called cleavage. Becausethe cytoplasm of the zygote is not homogeneous, these first celldivisions result in the differential distribution of nutrients andcytoplasmic determinants in the early embryo.In most animals, cleavage proceeds with rapid DNA replicationand mitosis but with no cell growth and little gene expression.The embryo becomes a solid ball of smaller and smallercells. Eventually, this ball forms a central fluid-filled cavity calleda blastocoel, at which point the embryo is called a blastula. Itsindividual cells are called blastomeres. The pattern of cleavagein different species influences the form of their blastulas.• Complete cleavage occurs in most eggs that have little yolk(stored nutrients). In this pattern, early cleavage furrows dividethe egg completely and the blastomeres are of similarsize. The frog egg undergoes complete cleavage, but becauseits vegetal pole contains more yolk, the division ofthe cytoplasm is unequal and the blastomeres in the animalhemisphere are smaller than those in the vegetal hemisphere(Figure 44.3A).44.1 | HOW DOES FERTILIZATION ACTIVATE DEVELOPMENT? 925(B) Incomplete cleavage (zebrafish)(C) Superficial cleavage (Drosophila)(A) Complete cleavage (frog) Animal poleThe planes of the second cleavageare displaced only slightly byyolk in the cytoplasm.Vegetal cells have incorporatedyolk and are thus larger thanthe animal cells in the 16-cellembryo.In birds and fishes, cleavagefurrows do not penetrate thelarge yolk mass.The embryo forms as a blastodiscthat sits on top of the yolk mass.1 Mitosis (nuclear division)occurs without cell division.2 A syncitium—a single cellwith many nuclei—is produced.3 The nuclei migrate to the inneredge of the plasma membrane.4 Cellularization occurs,creating a blastodermNucleus44.3 Some Patterns of Cleavage Differences in patternsof early embryonic development reflect differences in the waythe egg cytoplasm is organized. (A) The frog is a model organismrepresenting complete cleavage in these scanning electronmicrographs. (B) SEMs of zebrafish embryos illustrate incompletecleavage, in which the large yolk mass limits the planes ofcleavage. (C) Nuclear staining reveals the syncitial nuclei characteristicof the early embryo of a fruit fly. These nuclei migrateto the periphery. Cleavage furrows then move inward to separatethe nuclei into individual cells, forming the blastoderm.• Incomplete cleavage occurs in many species in which theegg contains a lot of yolk and the cleavage furrows do notpenetrate it all. Discoidal cleavage is a type of incompletecleavage common in fishes, reptiles, and birds, the eggs ofwhich contain a dense yolk mass. The embryo forms as adisc of cells, called a blastodisc, that sits on top of the yolkmass (Figure 44.3B).• Superficial cleavage is a variation of incomplete cleavagethat occurs in insects such as the fruit fly (Drosophila). Earlyin development, cycles of mitosis occur without cell division,producing a syncytium—a single cell with many nuclei(Figure 44.3C). The nuclei eventually migrate to the peripheryof the egg, after which the plasma membrane of the egggrows inward, partitioning the nuclei into individual cellssurrounding a core of yolk.The positions of the mitotic spindles during cleavage are notrandom but are defined by cytoplasmic factors produced fromthe maternal genome and stored in the egg (see Section 19.4).The orientation of the mitotic spindles can determine the planesof cleavage and the arrangement of the blastomeres.In complete cleavage, if the mitotic spindles of successive celldivisions form parallel or perpendicular to the animal–vegetalaxis of the zygote, a pattern of radial cleavage occurs as seenin the frog: the first two cell divisions are parallel to the animal–vegetal axis and the third is perpendicular to it (see Figure44.3A). Spiral cleavage results when the mitotic spindles are atoblique angles to the animal–vegetal axis. In spiral cleavage,each new cell layer is shifted to the left or right, depending onthe orientation of the mitotic spindles. Most mollusks have spiralcleavage, reflected in some species by a coiling shell pattern(as seen in snails).Early cell divisions in mammals are uniqueSeveral features of early cell divisions in placental mammals(eutherians) are so different from those seen in other animalgroups that some biologists think it is inappropriate to call itcleavage. But whether you call it cleavage or not, it is still thesequence of early cell divisions that produces a body of undifferentiatedcells that will become the embryo. This process inmammals is very slow. Cell divisions are 12 to 24 hours apart,compared with tens of minutes to a few hours in non-mammalianspecies. Also, the cell divisions of mammalian blastomeresare not in synchrony with each other. Because the blastomeresdo not undergo mitosis at the same time, the numberof cells in the embryo does not increase in the regular (2, 4, 8,16, 32, etc.) progression typical of other species.The pattern of mammalian cleavage is rotational: the first celldivision is parallel to the animal–vegetal axis, yielding two blastomeres.In the second cell division, those two blastomeres divideat right angles to one other: one divides parallel to the animal–vegetal axis, while the other divides perpendicular to it(Figure 44.4A).Another unique feature of the slow, rotational mammaliancleavage is that gene products expressed during cleavage playroles in cleavage. In animals such as sea urchins and frogs, genetranscription does not occur in the blastomeres, and cleavage istherefore directed exclusively by molecules that were presentin the egg before fertilization.As in other animals that have complete cleavage, the early celldivisions in a mammalian zygote produce a loosely associatedball of cells. After the 8-cell stage, however, the behavior of themammalian blastomeres changes. They change shape to maximizetheir surface contact with one another, form tight junctions,and become a compact mass of cells (Figure 44.4B).At the transition from the 16- to the 32-cell stage (the fourthdivision), the cells separate into two groups. The inner cell masswill become the embryo, while the surrounding outer cells becomean encompassing sac called the trophoblast. Trophoblastcells secrete fluid, creating a cavity—the blastocoel—with the in-926 CHAPTER 44 | ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTThe inner cell mass willform the embryo.(A) ParallelplanePlane of firstcell divisionPerpendicularplane(B)8-cell stage 16-cell stage 32-cell stageBlastocyst(cross section)BlastocoelTrophoblast(outer cells)AV(C)44.4 Becoming a Blastocyst (A) Mammals have rotational cleavage, in which the plane of the firstcleavage is parallel to the animal–vegetal (A–V) axis, but the second cell division involves two planes (beige)at right angles to each other. (B) Scanning electron micrographs show that asynchronous cell divisionresults in an asymmetrical blastocyst at about the 32-cell stage. (C) Seen in cross section under a lightmicroscope, the mammalian blastocyst consists of an inner cell mass adjacent to a fluid-filled blastocoeland surrounded by trophoblast cells.ner cell mass at one end (Figure 44.4C). At this stage, the mammalianembryo is called a blastocyst, distinguishing it from theblastulas of other animal groups.Why is mammalian cleavage so different? Akey factor is thatmammalian eggs contain no yolk and must derive all nutrientsfrom the mother. Mammals are viviparous: the embryo developswithin the uterus of the mother. To support the developing embryo,a connection develops between the circulatory systems ofthe embryo and the mother. As we will see later in this chapter,the structures that provide this connection are the placentaand the umbilical cord. Thus, the mammalian blastocyst mustproduce both the embryo (from the inner cell mass) and its supportstructures (from the trophoblast).Fertilization in mammals occurs in the upper reaches of themother’s oviduct, and cleavage occurs as the zygote travelsdown the oviduct to the uterus. When the blastocyst arrives inthe uterus, the trophoblast adheres to the lining of the uterus(the endometrium), beginning the process of implantation. In humans,implantation begins about 6 days after fertilization andis aided by adhesion molecules and enzymes secreted by thetrophoblast (Figure 44.5).As the blastocyst moves down the oviduct to the uterus, itmust not embed itself in the oviduct (Fallopian tube) wall, orthe result will be an ectopic, or tubal, pregnancy—a very dangerouscondition. Early implantation is prevented by the zona pellucida,which surrounded the egg and remains around thecleaving ball of cells (see Section 43.2). At about the time theblastocyst reaches the uterus, it hatches from the zona pellucida,and implantation can occur.Specific blastomeres generate specific tissuesand organsCleavage results in a repackaging of the egg cytoplasm into alarge number of small cells surrounding the fluid-filled blastocoel.Except in mammals, little cell differentiation and little ifany gene expression occur during cleavage. Nevertheless, cellsin different regions of the blastula possess different complementsof the nutrients and cytoplasmic determinants that werepresent in the egg.The blastocoel prevents cells from different regions of theblastula from coming into contact and interacting, but that willsoon change. During the next stage of development, the cells ofthe blastula will move around and come into new associationswith one another, communicate instructions to one another, andbegin to differentiate. In many animals, these movements of theblastomeres are so regular and well orchestrated that it is possibleto label a specific blastomere with a dye and identify thetissues and organs that form from its progeny. Such labeling experimentsproduce fate maps of the blastula (Figure 44.6).Blastomeres become determined—committed to specificfates—at different times in different species. In some species,44.1 | HOW DOES FERTILIZATION ACTIVATE DEVELOPMENT? 927Human embryo at 9 days16–32 cells (3–4 dayspostfertilization)Implantation of blastocyst(6–7 days postfertilization)2–4 cells (2 dayspostfertilization)Site offertilizationDeveloping placentaWall of uterusBlastocoelEndometriumAmnionBloodvesselTrophoblastHypoblastEpiblastInner cellmass(embryo)UterusCervixVaginaOvaryEmergingchorionicvillus44.5 A Human Blastocyst at Implantation Adhesion molecules andproteolytic enzymes secreted by trophoblast cells allow the blastocyst toburrow into the endometrium. Once the blastocyst is implanted in the wallof the uterus, the trophoblast cells send out numerous projections—thechorionic villi—which increase the embryo’s area of contact with themother’s bloodstream.The neural ectoderm(midline) will form thenervous system.Ectoderm willform epidermallayer of skin.Mesoderm will form muscle,bone, kidneys, blood, gonads,and connective tissues.Endoderm will form thelining of the gut, the liver,and the lungs.The gray crescent isthe site where majorcell movement willbegin. (See Figure44.1.)Vegetal poleAnimal pole44.6 Fate Map of a Frog Blastula Colors indicate the portions of theblastula that will form the three germ layers and subsequently the frog’stissues and organs.such as roundworms, the fates of blastomeres are restricted asearly as the two-cell stage. If one of these blastomeres is experimentallyremoved, a particular portion of the embryo will notform. This type of development has been called mosaic developmentbecause each blastomere seems to contribute a specificset of “tiles” to the final “mosaic” that is the adult animal.In contrast to mosaic development, the loss of some cells duringcleavage in regulative development does not affect the developingembryo, because the remaining cells compensate forthe loss. Regulative development is typical of many vertebratespecies, including humans. The pluripotent cells of the mammalianblastocyst (the inner cell mass) are known as embryonicstem cells and are the subject of much research, particularly becauseof their therapeutic potential (see Section 19.2).If some blastomeres can change their fate to compensate forthe loss of other cells during cleavage and blastula formation,can those cells form an entire embryo? To a certain extent, yes.During cleavage or early blastula formation in mammals, forexample, if the blastomeres are physically separated into twogroups, both groups can produce complete embryos. Since thetwo embryos come from the same zygote, they will be monozygotictwins—genetically identical.Non-identical twins occur when two separate eggs are fertilizedby two separate sperm. Thus, while identical twins arealways of the same sex, non-identical twins have a 50 percentchance of being the same sex. In about 1 out of 50,000 humanpregnancies, genetic or environmental factors cause the innercell mass to split partially. The result is twins that are conjoinedat some point on their bodies, usually sharing some of theirorgans and limbs.44.1 RECAPThe egg is stocked with nutrients and informationalmolecules that power and direct the early stages ofdevelopment. Fertilization activates the egg andstimulates rearrangement of the cytoplasm, settingup the body axes and positional information thatinitiate signaling cascades, which control determinationand differentiation.• Explain how β-catenin becomes concentrated in onlycertain blastomeres. See p. 925 and Figure 44.2• In general terms, describe the difference betweencomplete and incomplete cleavage. See pp. 925–926and Figure 44.3• What does a fate map tell us? How are fate mapsconstructed? See pp. 927–928 and Figure 44.6Of the next stage of development—gastrulation—the developmentalbiologist Louis Wolpert once said, “It is not birth, marriage,or death, but gastrulation which is the most importanttime in your life.” During gastrulation, cell movements createnew cell-to-cell contacts, which in turn sets up signaling cascades.Signaling cascades initiate the differentiation of cells andtissues and set the stage for the emergence of the body plan.How Does Gastrulation Generate 44.2 Multiple Tissue Layers?The blastula is typically a fluid-filled ball of cells. How does thissimple ball of cells become an embryo made up of multipletissue layers with head and tail ends and dorsal and ventralsides? Gastrulation is the process whereby the blastula is transformedby massive movements of cells into an embryo withmultiple tissue layers and distinct body axes. The resulting spatialrelationships between tissues make possible the inductiveinteractions between cells that trigger differentiation and organformation (see Figure 19.10).During gastrulation, three germ layers (also called cell layersor tissue layers) form (see Figure 44.6):• The endoderm is the innermost germ layer, created as someblastomeres move to the inside of the embryo. The endodermgives rise to the lining of the digestive tract, respiratorytract, pancreas, and liver.• The ectoderm is the outer germ layer, formed from thosecells remaining on the outside of the embryo. The ectodermgives rise to the nervous system, including the eyes andears; and to the epidermal layer of the skin and structuresderived from skin, such as hair, feathers, nails or claws,sweat glands, oil glands, and even teeth and other tissuesof the mouth.• The mesoderm is the middle layer and is made up of cellsthat migrate between the endoderm and the ectoderm. Themesoderm contributes tissues to many organs, includingthe heart, blood vessels, muscles, and bones.Some of the most interesting and important challenges in animaldevelopment have dealt with two related questions: whatdirects the cell movements of gastrulation, and what is responsiblefor the resulting patterns of cell differentiation and organformation? Scientists have made significant progress in answeringboth these questions at the molecular level. In the followingdiscussion, we will begin with sea urchin gastrulation becauseit is the simplest to conceptualize in spatial terms. We will thendescribe the more complex pattern of gastrulation in frogs,which in turn will help elucidate the still more complex patternsin reptiles, birds, and mammals.Invagination of the vegetal pole characterizesgastrulation in the sea urchinThe sea urchin blastula is a hollow ball of cells only one cellthick. The end of the blastula stage is marked by slowing of therate of mitosis; the beginning of gastrulation is marked by a flatteningof the vegetal hemisphere (Figure 44.7). Some cells at thevegetal pole bulge into the blastocoel, break away from neighboringcells, and migrate into the cavity. These cells becomemesenchyme —cells of the middle germ layer, the mesoderm.Mesenchymal cells are not organized in tightly packed sheetsor tubes like epithelial cells are; they act as independent units,migrating into and among the other tissue layers.The flattening at the vegetal pole results from changes in theshape of individual blastomeres. These cells, which are origi-928 CHAPTER 44 | ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTnally rather cuboidal, become wedge-shaped, with smallerouter edges and larger inner edges. As a result, the vegetal polebulges inward, or invaginates, as if someone were poking a fingerinto a hollow ball (see Figure 44.7). The invaginating cellsbecome endoderm and form the primitive gut, called thearchenteron. At the tip of the archenteron, more cells enter theblastocoel to form more mesoderm.Changes in cell shapes cause the initial invagination of thearchenteron, but eventually it is pulled by the mesenchyme cells.These cells, attached to the tip of the archenteron, send out extensionscalled filopodia that adhere to the overlying ectoderm.When the filopodia contract, they pull the archenteron towardthe ectoderm at the opposite end of the embryo from where theinvagination began. The mouth of the animal forms where thearchenteron makes contact with this overlying ectoderm. Theopening created by the invagination of the vegetal pole is calledthe blastopore; it will become the anus of the animal.What mechanisms control the various cell movements of seaurchin gastrulation? The immediate answer is that specific propertiesof particular blastomeres change. For example, some vegetalcells change shape and bulge into the blastocoel, and thesecells become mesenchyme. Once they lose contact with theirneighboring cells on the surface of the blastula, they send outfilopodia that then move along an extracellular matrix of proteinslaid down by the cells lining the blastocoel.Adeeper understanding of gastrulation requires that we discoverthe molecular mechanisms whereby different blastomeresdevelop different properties. Cleavage systematically dividesup the cytoplasm of the egg. The sea urchin blastula at the 64-cell stage is radially symmetrical, but it has polarity, as describedin Section 19.4. It consists of tiers of cells. As in the frog blastula,the top is the animal pole and the bottom the vegetal pole.If different tiers of blastula cells are separated, they show differentdevelopmental potentials; only cells from the vegetal poleare capable of initiating the development of a complete larva(see Figure 19.8). It has been proposed that these differences aredue to uneven distribution of various transcriptional regulatoryproteins in the egg cytoplasm. As cleavage progresses, theseproteins end up in different groups of cells. Therefore, specificsets of genes are activated in different cells, determining theirdifferent developmental capacities.Let’s turn now to gastrulation in the frog, in which severalkey signaling molecules have been identified.Gastrulation in the frog begins at the gray crescentAmphibian blastulas have considerable yolk and are more thanone cell thick; therefore, gastrulation is more complex in amphibiansthan in sea urchins. Variation is considerable amongdifferent species of amphibians, but in this brief account we willuse results from studies done on different species to produce ageneralized picture of amphibian development.Amphibian gastrulation begins when certain cells in the graycrescent region change their shapes and cell adhesion properties.These cells bulge inward toward the blastocoel while theyremain attached to the outer surface of the blastula by slendernecks. Because of their shape, these cells are called bottle cells.Bottle cells mark the spot where the dorsal lip of the blastoporewill form (Figure 44.8). As the bottle cells move inward,the dorsal lip is created, and a sheet of cells moves over it intothe blastocoel. This process is called involution. One group of involutingcells is the prospective endoderm; these cells form theprimitive gut, or archenteron. Another group will move betweenthe endoderm and the outermost cells to form the mesoderm.These rearrangements are due to changes in cell propertiescalled convergent extension. The cells elongate in thedirection of movement, but they also intercalate (move in betweeneach other). If they just elongated, the migrating groupof cells would become much narrower; by intercalating, theymaintain the width of the migrating cell group.As gastrulation proceeds, cells from the animal hemisphereflatten and move toward the site of involution in a process calledepiboly. The blastopore lip widens and eventually forms a com-44.2 | HOW DOES GASTRULATION GENERATE MULTIPLE TISSUE LAYERS? 9291 The vegetalpole of theblastulaflattens.2 Some cells changeshape and moveinward to form thearchenteron.3 Other cells breakfree, becomingprimarymesenchyme.5 The archenteron iselongated by contractionof mesenchymal filopodiaand cell rearrangement.6 The mouth willform where thearchenteronmeets ectoderm.7 The blastopore will form theanus of the mature animal.4 More cells break free,forming secondarymesenchyme. Thinextensions of thesecells (filopodia) attach toAnimal the overlying ectoderm.hemisphereBlastoporeSecondarymesenchymeEctodermEndodermArchenteronPrimaryVegetal mesenchymehemisphere44.7 Gastrulation in Sea Urchins During gastrulation, cells move to new positionsand form the three germ layers from which differentiated tissues develop.GO TO Animated Tutorial 44.1 • GastrulationyourBioPortal.complete circle surrounding a “plug” of yolk-rich cells. As cells continueto move inward through the blastopore, the archenterongrows, gradually displacing the blastocoel.As gastrulation comes to an end, the amphibian embryo consistsof three germ layers: ectoderm on the outside, endodermon the inside, and mesoderm in between. The embryo also hasa dorsal–ventral and anterior–posterior organization. Most importantly,the fates of specific regions of the endoderm, mesoderm,and ectoderm have been determined. The beautiful experimentsrevealing how determination takes place in theamphibian embryo are an old but exciting story.The dorsal lip of the blastopore organizesembryo formationIn the early 1900s, the German biologist Hans Spemann wasstudying the development of salamander eggs. He was interestedin finding out whether the nuclei of blastomeres remaincapable of directing the development of complete embryos.With great patience and dexterity, he formed loops from singlehairs taken from a baby (in fact, his daughter) and tied themaround fertilized eggs along the plane of the first cell division,effectively dividing the eggs in half, with the nucleus restrictedto one side. That side went through cell divisions and developedinto a salamander; the other half simply degenerated.Up until the 16-cell stage, if one nucleus escaped to the otherside of the constriction, twin salamanders could develop. Thus,each of the nuclei of the blastula (at least up to the 16-cell stage)was capable of directing and supporting development of thewhole organism.But, as often happens in science, Spemann’s bisection experimentsrevealed a new phenomenon. Sometimes the half ofthe blastula receiving an escaped nucleus did not develop.When his loops bisected the gray crescent, both halves of thezygote developed into a complete embryo. When he tied theloops so the gray crescent was on only one side of the constriction,however, only that half of the zygote developed into a completeembryo (Figure 44.9). The half lacking gray crescent materialunderwent cell division, but even if it contained a nucleus,it became a clump of undifferentiated cells that Spemann calleda “belly piece.” Spemann hypothesized that cytoplasmic factorsunequally distributed in the fertilized egg were necessary forgastrulation and the development of a normal salamander.To further test the hypothesis that cells receiving differentcomplements of cytoplasmic factors had different developmentalfates, Spemann transplanted pieces of early gastrulas to variouslocations on other gastrulas. Guided by fate maps (see Figure44.6), he was able to take a piece of ectoderm he knewwould develop into skin and transplant it to a region that normallybecomes part of the nervous system, and vice versa.When he performed these transplants in early gastrulas—when the blastopore was just beginning to form—the transplantedpieces always developed into tissues that were appropriatefor the location where they were placed. Transplantedcells destined to become epidermis in their original location developedinto nervous system tissue, and transplanted cells destinedto become nervous system tissue in their original locationdeveloped into host epidermis. Thus, Spemann learned that thefates of the transplanted cells had not been determined beforethe transplantation (see Figure 19.2).In late gastrulas, however, the same experiment yielded oppositeresults. Transplanted cells destined to become epidermisin their original location produced patches of skin cells in the host930 CHAPTER 44 | ANIMAL DEVELOPMENT21 Gastrulation beginswhen cells in the regionof the gray crescentmove inward, formingthe dorsal lip of thefuture blastopore.Cells of the animalpole spread out,pushing surface cellsbelow them towardand across thedorsal lip. These cellsinvolute into theinterior of theembryo, where theyform the endodermand mesoderm.3 Involution creates thearchenteron anddestroys theblastocoel. Theblastopore lip formsa circle, with cellsmoving to the interiorall around theblastopore; the yolkplug is visible throughthe blastopore.Blastocoeldisplaced bymesodermEndodermYolk plugArchenteronMesodermAnimal poleVentral lip ofblastoporeVegetal poleDorsal lipMesoderm(notochord)EctodermArchenteron(future digestivetract)Dorsal lipBlastocoelBottle cellsDorsal lip ofblastoporeBlastocoelDorsal lipBottle cellsArchenteronbegins toform44.8 Gastrulation in the Frog Embryo The colors in this diagram arematched to those in Figure 44.6, the frog fate map.nervous system, and the transplanted cells from regionsthat would develop into nervous system tissue producedneural tissue in the skin of the recipient. At somepoint during gastrulation, the fates of the embryoniccells had become determined.Spemann’s next experiment, done with his studentHilde Mangold, produced momentous results: theytransplanted the dorsal lip of the blastopore (Figure44.10). When this small piece of tissue was transplantedinto the presumptive belly area of another gastrula, itstimulated a second site of gastrulation—and a secondcomplete embryo formed belly-to-belly with theoriginal embryo. Because the dorsal lip of the blastoporewas apparently capable of inducing the host tissueto form an entire embryo, Spemann and Mangolddubbed the dorsal lip tissue the primary embryonic organizer,or simply the organizer. For more than 80 years,the organizer has been an active area of research.Transcription factors underlie theorganizer’s actionsWith the advent of modern molecular methods, theprimary embryonic organizer has been studied intensivelyto discover the molecular mechanisms involved44.2 | HOW DOES GASTRULATION GENERATE MULTIPLE TISSUE LAYERS? 93144.9 Gastrulation and the Gray Crescent Spemann’sresearch revealed that gastrulation and subsequent normaldevelopment in salamanders depends on cytoplasmic determinantslocalized in the gray crescent.Using a baby’s hair,Spemann constricteda salamander zygotealong the plane of firstcleavage.This constriction bisectsthe gray crescent.This constrictionrestricts the graycrescent to one halfof the zygote.Only those halveswith gray crescentdevelop normally.Gray crescentbisectedGray crescentisolatedGray crescentNormal Normal Normal“Bellypiece”12a32bHYPOTHESIS Cytoplasmic factors in the early dorsal blastopore liporganize cell differentiation in amphibian embryos.INVESTIGATING LIFEMETHODC44.10 The Dorsal Lip Induces Embryonic OrganizationIn a classic experiment, Hans Spemann and Hilde Mangold transplantedthe dorsal blastopore lip mesoderm of an early gastrula stage salamanderembryo. The results showed that the cells of this embryonic region, whichthey dubbed “the organizer,” could direct the formation of an entire embryo.CONCLUSION The cells of the dorsal blastopore lip can induce othercells to change their developmental fates.1. Excise a patch of mesoderm tissue from above the dorsalblastopore lip of an early gastrula stage salamander embryo(the donor).2. Transplant the donor tissue onto a recipient embryo at the samestage. The donor tissue is transplanted onto a region ofectoderm that should become epidermis (skin).RESULTSGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.The donor tissue induces asecondary involution……and a second set of dorsalneural structures forms in therecipient embryo.Eventually a completesecondary embryo forms,attached to the originalembryo at the belly.Primary involution(recipient ofdorsal lip)PresumptivemesodermPresumptiveDorsal epidermisblastoporelipBlastocoelEndodermMesodermInducednervoussystemNervoussystem213GO TO Animated Tutorial 44.2 • Tissue TransplantsReveal the Process of DeterminationyourBioPortal.comin its action. The distribution of the transcription factor β-cateninin the late blastula corresponds to the location of the organizerin the early gastrula, so β-catenin is a candidate for the initiatorof organizer activity. To prove that a protein is an inductive signal,it has to be shown that it is both necessary and sufficient forthe proposed effect. In other words, the effect should not occurif the candidate protein is not present (necessity), and thecandidate protein should be capable of inducing the effectwhere it would otherwise not occur (sufficiency).The criteria of necessity and sufficiency have been satisfiedfor β-catenin. If β-catenin mRNA transcripts are depleted by injectionsof antisense RNA into the egg (see Section 18.4), gastrulationdoes not occur. If β-catenin is experimentally overexpressedin another region of the blastula, it can induce a secondaxis of embryo formation, as the transplanted dorsal lip did inthe Spemann–Mangold experiments. Thus, β-catenin appearsto be both necessary and sufficient for the formation of the primaryembryonic organizer—but it is only one component of acomplex signaling process.How the presence of β-catenin creates the organizer, and howthe organizer then induces the beginnings of the body plan,involves a complex series of interactions between transcriptionfactors and growth factors that control gene expression. Whatfollows is only a portion of this complex and still emerging story.What you should take from this description is not the names ofthe genes and gene products involved. Rather, we hope you willgain a basic appreciation for how signaling molecules interactto produce different combinations of signals that convey positionaland temporal information. This information guides cellsinto different paths of determination and differentiation.Studies of early gastrulas revealed that primary embryonic organizeractivity is generated by the interaction of β-catenin withsignals coming from the vegetal cells. Together, they activatethe expression of the transcription factor Goosecoid. Expressionof the goosecoid gene depends on two signaling pathways.The first of these pathways involves a goosecoid-promotingtranscription factor called Siamois. The siamois gene is normallyrepressed by a ubiquitous transcription factor called Tcf-3, butin cells in which β-catenin is present, an interaction between Tcf-3 and β-catenin induces siamois expression (Figure 44.11). ButSiamois protein alone is not sufficient for goosecoid expression.The second pathway involves mRNAs from the original eggcytoplasm for a family of proteins called transforming growthfactor-β (TGF-β). TGF-β interacts with the Siamois protein tocontrol goosecoid transcription. Thus, you can see that it is a complexcombination of factors that determines which cells becomethe primary organizer.The organizer changes its activity as it migratesfrom the dorsal lipOrganizer cells begin the process of formation of the dorsal lipof the blastopore. Specifically, these cells are at the center ofthe dorsal lip and involute, moving forward on the midline (i.e.,the middle of the anterior–posterior axis). The first organizercells to enter the embryo migrate anteriorly to become the headendoderm and head mesoderm. Here, they induce neighboringcells to participate in making structures of the head. Later organizercells that involute into the embryo will induce structuresof the trunk, and the last of the organizer cells to move inwardfrom the dorsal lip will induce structures of the tail. Howdoes the nature of the organizer cells change to enable them toinduce head, trunk, or tail structures?Inductive tissue interactions can suppress as well as activate.As we learned above, the early organizer cells express the transcriptionfactor Goosecoid, which activates genes encoding solublesignals. As these cells move forward in the blastocoel, theycome into contact with new populations of cells that producea number of different growth factors. For head structures toform, certain of these growth factors have to be suppressed. Theanteriormost organizer cells, under the influence of Goosecoid,produce and release antagonists to those growth factors.The induction of trunk structures requires suppression of adifferent set of growth factors. In organizer cells that involutelater than the head organizers, Goosecoid is no longer the dominanttranscription factor, and these cells express differentgrowth factor antagonists. The induction of tail structures requiresstill different activities of the organizer cells that involutelast. Thus, the organizer cells express appropriate sets of growthfactor antagonists at the right times to achieve different patternsof differentiation on the anterior–posterior axis.The initiation of the development of the nervous system alsoinvolves a suppressive tissue interaction. For a long time it wasthought that the involuting organizer cells actively induced the932 CHAPTER 44 | ANIMAL DEVELOPMENT2 b-Catenin in vegetalcells below the graycrescent blocks Tcf-3repression of siamoisgene expression.1 Repression of siamoisby Tcf-3 proteinsprevents expressionof organizer-specificgenes.3 TGF-b-related signalingpathway acts synergisticallywith Siamois to activate thegoosecoid gene.4 Goosecoid proteinactivates numerousgenes in the organizer.Gray crescentDNATcf-3 proteins siamois generepressedb-catenin proteins siamois geneactivatedNo transcription TranscriptionSiamois proteingoosecoidTranscriptionNo b-catenin44.11 Molecular Mechanisms of the Organizer In amphibians, theorganizing potential of the gray crescent depends on the activity of thegoosecoid gene, which in turn is activated by signaling pathways set upin the vegetal cells below the gray crescent.overlying ectoderm to form neural tissue ratherthan becoming epidermis. We now know, however,that epidermis is not the default state ofthe dorsal ectoderm. Rather, the underlyingmesoderm secretes factors called BMP proteinsthat induce the ectoderm to become epidermis.The role of the involuting organizer cells is toblock that induction, allowing the overlying ectodermalcells to follow what is really their defaultpathway—differentiation into neural tissue(Figure 44.12).Reptilian and avian gastrulation is anadaptation to yolky eggsThe eggs of reptiles and birds contain a mass ofyolk, and the blastulas of these groups developas a disc of cells on top of the yolk (see Figure44.3B). We will use the chicken egg to showhow gastrulation proceeds in a flat disc of cellsrather than in a ball of cells.Cleavage in the chick results in a flat, circularlayer of cells called a blastodisc (Figure44.13). Between the blastodisc and the yolkmass is a fluid-filled space. Some cells from theblastodisc break free and move into this space.These cells come together to form a continuouslayer called the hypoblast, which will later contributeto extraembryonic membranes that willsupport and nourish the developing embryo.The overlying cells make up the epiblast, fromwhich the embryo proper will form. Thus, theavian blastula is a flattened structure consistingof an upper epiblast and a lower hypoblast,which are joined at the margins of the blastodisc.The blastocoel is the fluid-filled spacebetween the epiblast and hypoblast.Gastrulation begins with a thickening in theposterior region of the epiblast, caused by themovement of cells toward the midline and thenforward along the midline (see Figure 44.13).The result is a midline ridge called the primitivestreak. A depression called the primitive grooveforms along the length of the primitive streak.The primitive groove functions as the blastopore,and cells migrate through it into the blastocoelto become endoderm and mesoderm.In the chick embryo, no archenteron forms,but the endoderm and mesoderm migrate forwardto form the gut and other structures. Atthe anterior end of the primitive groove is athickening called Hensen’s node, which inbirds, reptiles, and mammals is the equivalentof the dorsal lip of the amphibian blastopore.Many signaling molecules that have been identifiedin the frog organizer are also expressedin Hensen’s node. Some cells that pass over44.2 | HOW DOES GASTRULATION GENERATE MULTIPLE TISSUE LAYERS? 933CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE44.12 Differentiation Can Be Due to Inhibition of Transcription FactorsWhen organizer cells involute to underlie dorsal ectoderm along the embryomidline, that overlying ectoderm becomes neural tissue rather than skin(epidermis). But do the organizer cells cause dorsal ectoderm to becomeneural tissue, or do they prevent this ectoderm from becoming skin?HYPOTHESIS The default state of amphibian dorsal ectoderm is neural; it isinduced by underlying mesoderm to become epidermis.The default state of amphibian dorsal ectoderm is neural.BMP4 protein from mesoderm can induce ecotoderm cells todifferentiate into epidermis. Thus the organizer cells mustsecrete an inhibitor of BMP4.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTS1. Excise the animal caps of late-stage frog blastulas and dispersethe cells in culture medium so there is no cell-to-cell contact. Fromthe culture, extract molecules of BMP4 (secreted by mesodermcells) and molecules of an inhibitor of BMP4.2. Prepare four separate cultures of embryonic ectodermal cells. Incubate withno additions (control); with BMP4 from step 1; with BMP4 inhibitor fromstep 1; and with both molecules.3. After incubation, extract mRNAs from the ectodermal cells and analyze for thepresence of mRNAs for marker proteins NCAM (neural cell adhesion molecule,a neural protein) and/or keratin (an epidermal protein).BlastulaAnimalcapGray crescentControlIncubateAdd BMP4Add inhibitorof BMP4Add BMP4+ inhibitorDispersedanimal cap cellsin cultureControl BMP4BMP4inhibitorBMP4 +inhibitorNCAMMarker proteinsKeratin“Loading control”The control ectoderm (no inductive factors added) expresses theneural marker. In the presence of mesodermal BMP4, ectodermexpresses the epidermal marker. If BMP4 is inhibited, ectodermexpresses the neural marker.This control message isfrom a gene expressedin all cells and verifiesthat each sample containssimilar amounts of mRNA.Hensen’s node become the notochord andorganize the chick embryo in a manner similarto that of the frog embryo. And, as welearned at the start of this chapter, the asymmetricalflow of extracellular fluid over thisnode stimulates the primary cilia of nodalcells, creating asymmetrical signaling cascadesthat determine the left–right asymmetryof the internal organs.Placental mammals retain the avian–reptilian gastrulation pattern but lack yolkMammalian embryos (with the exception of monotremes) derivetheir nourishment from the maternal circulation, and thereforemammalian eggs do not have large amounts of yolk to constraintheir patterns of cleavage and early development.Nevertheless, mammals and birds evolved from reptilian ancestors,so it is not surprising that they share certain patterns ofearly development. Earlier we described the development ofthe mammalian inner cell mass (the equivalent of the avian epiblast)and the outer trophoblast.As in avian development, in placental mammals the innercell mass splits into an upper layer called the epiblast and alower layer called the hypoblast. The embryo forms from theepiblast, while the hypoblast contributes to the extraembryonicmembranes that will encase the developing embryo and helpform the placenta (see Figure 44.5). The epiblast also contributesto the extraembryonic membranes; specifically, it splits off anupper layer of cells that will form the amnion. The amnion willgrow to surround the developing embryo as a membranous sacfilled with amniotic fluid. Gastrulation occurs in the mammalianepiblast just as it does in the avian epiblast. Aprimitive grooveforms, and epiblast cells migrate through the groove to becomelayers of endoderm and mesoderm.44.2 RECAPThe cell movements of gastrulation convert the blastulainto an embryo with three tissue layers. Newcontacts between cells set up inductive signaling interactionsthat determine cell fates. Dorsal lip tissueis the source of organizer cells that induce developmentof preliminary head, trunk, and tail structures.• Describe and compare the cell movements that occurduring gastrulation in a sea urchin, a frog, and a bird.See Figures 44.7, 44.8, and 44.13• Explain the molecular basis for the inductive capabilitiesof the organizer. See pp. 931–932 and Figures44.11 and 44.12We have described how the fertilized egg develops into an embryowith three germ layers and how cellular signals trigger differentpatterns of differentiation. In the next section we will describehow organs and organ systems develop.934 CHAPTER 44 | ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTCells generated in Hensen’snode and passing into thegastrula migrate anteriorlyand form head structuresand notochord.The primitivestreak narrowsand lengthens……forming the primitive groove—the chick blastopore. Cells ingressto the embryo interior throughHensen’s node at the anterior endof the groove.Cells migrate, convergingat the primitive streak andcausing it to elongate.Cells moving overthe sides of theprimitive grooveform mesodermand endoderm.The hypoblast isdisplaced by spreadingendoderm.Posterior epiblast cellschange shape and thicken,forming the primitive streak.1 2 34 5Surface cells movetoward the groove andinto the gastrula.EpiblastHensen’snodeHensen’snodeHensen’snodeAnteriorMidlineYolk PosteriorEmbryoEndodermYolkBlastocoelHypoblastPrimitivestreakCross section through chick embryoYolkPrimitivegroovePrimitivegrooveChick embryo viewedfrom aboveFlattened blastodisc44.13 Gastrulation in Birds Because their eggs contain a large yolk mass, bird and reptileembryos have a flattened blastodisc and display a pattern of gastrulation very different from that ofamphibians.How Do Organs and Organ 44.3 Systems Develop?Gastrulation produces an embryo with three germ layers thatare positioned to influence one another through inductive tissueinteractions. During the next phase of development, calledorganogenesis, many organs and organ systems develop simultaneouslyand in coordination with one another. An earlyprocess of organogenesis in chordates that is directly relatedto gastrulation is neurulation. Neurulation is the initiation of thenervous system. We will examine neurulation in the amphibianembryo, but it occurs in a similar fashion in reptiles, birds,and mammals.The stage is set by the dorsal lip of the blastoporeAs we learned in the previous section, one group of cells thatpasses over the dorsal lip of the blastopore moves anteriorlyand becomes the endodermal lining of the digestive tract. Theother group of cells that involutes over the dorsal lip becomeschordamesoderm, so named because it forms a rod of mesoderm—the notochord—that extends down the center of the embryo.These cells also have important organizer functions (seeFigure 44.8). The notochord gives structural support to the developingembryo and is eventually replaced by the vertebralcolumn. The organizing capacity of the chordamesoderm enablesthe overlying ectoderm to become neural ectoderm (seeFigure 44.12). It does this by expressing signaling molecules (oneappropriately called Noggin and another one called Chordin)that initiate differentiation of the different divisions of the nervoussystem.Neurulation involves the formation of an internal neural tubefrom an external sheet of cells. The first signs of neurulation areflattening and thickening of the ectoderm overlying the notochord;this thickened area forms the neural plate (Figure 44.14A).The edges of the neural plate that run in an anterior–posteriordirection continue to thicken to form ridges or folds. Betweenthese neural folds, a groove forms and deepens as the folds rollover it to converge on the midline. The folds fuse, forming acylinder, the neural tube, and a continuous overlying layer ofepidermal ectoderm (Figure 44.14B–D).Cells from the most lateral portions of the neural plate do notbecome part of the neural tube, but disassociate from it andcome to lie between the neural tube and the overlying epidermis.These neural crest cells migrate outward to lead the developmentof the connections between the central nervous system(brain and spinal cord) and the rest of the body.The neural tube develops bulges at the anterior end, whichbecome the major divisions of the brain; the rest of the tubebecomes the spinal cord. In humans, failure of the neural foldsto fuse in this posterior region results in a birth defect knownas spina bifida. If the folds fail to fuse at the anterior end, an infantcan develop without a forebrain—a condition called anencephaly.Although several genetic factors can cause these defects,other factors are environmental, including maternal diet. Theincidence of neural tube defects in the United States in the early1900s was as high as 1 in 300 live births; today it is less than 1in 1,000. Amajor factor in this improvement has been the inclusionof folic acid (a B vitamin, also known as folate) in themother’s diet. It is essential for pregnant women to ingest sufficientfolic acid.Body segmentation develops during neurulationThe vertebrate body plan, like that of arthropods, consists of repeatingsegments that are modified during development. Thesesegments are most evident as the repeating patterns of vertebrae,ribs, nerves, and muscles along the anterior–posterior axis.As the neural tube forms, mesodermal tissues gather alongthe sides of the notochord to form separate, segmented blocks44.3 | HOW DO ORGANS AND ORGAN SYSTEMS DEVELOP? 935Neural foldNeural plateNeural grooveNeural tubeMesodermEndodermEctodermNotochordNotochordGutGutNeuralcrest cellsNeural tube(A)(D)(B)(C)MesodermCoelomEpidermisNeural tube EpidermisSomite Notochord Coelom44.14 Neurulation in a Vertebrate (A) At the start of neurulation, theectoderm of the neural plate (green) is flat. (B) The neural plate invaginatesand folds, forming a tube. (C,D) The completely formed neural tubeseen in (C) diagrammatic form and (D) in a scanning electron micrographof a chick embryo.of cells called somites (Figure 44.15). The somites produce cellsthat will become the vertebrae, ribs, muscles of the trunk andlimbs, and the lower layer of the skin.Nerves that connect the brain and spinal cord with tissuesand organs throughout the body are also arranged segmentally.The somites help guide the organization of these peripheralnerves, but the nerves are not of mesodermal origin. As we sawabove, when the neural tube fuses, the neural crest cells breakloose and migrate inward between the epidermis and thesomites and through the somites. These neural crest cells havediverse fates, including the development of peripheral nerves.As development progresses, the different segments of thebody change. Regions of the spinal cord differ, regions of thevertebral column differ in that some vertebrae grow ribs of varioussizes and others do not, forelegs arise in the anterior partof the embryo, and hind legs arise in the posterior region.Hox genes control development along theanterior–posterior axisHow is mesoderm in the anterior part of a mouse embryo programmedto produce forelegs rather than hind legs? In Section19.5, we saw how homeotic genes control body segmentationin Drosophila. We also learned that all homeotic genes containa DNA sequence called the homeobox. Some of the genes directinggastrulation in the frog are homeobox genes—for example,goosecoid and siamois. In vertebrates, the homeotic genesthat control differentiation along the anterior–posterior bodyaxis are called Hox genes.In mammals, four Hox gene complexes reside on differentchromosomes in clusters of about 10 genes each. Remarkably,the temporal and spatial expression of these genes follows thesame pattern as their linear order on their chromosome. That is,the Hox genes closest to the 3′ end of each gene complex are expressedfirst and in the anterior of the embryo. The Hox genesat the 5′ end of the gene complex are expressed later and in amore posterior part of the embryo. As a result, different segmentsof the embryo receive different combinations of Hox geneproducts, which serve as transcription factors (Figure 44.16; seealso Figure 20.2).Whereas Hox genes give cells information about their positionon the anterior–posterior body axis, other genes provideinformation about their dorsal–ventral position. Tissues in eachsegment of the body differentiate according to their dorsal–ventrallocation. The notochord provides many of these signals. Oneexample of a dorsal–ventral difference is seen in the spinal cord;sensory nerve connections develop in the dorsal region, andmotor nerve connections in the ventral region. The protein Sonichedgehog (named for a video-game character), which is expressedin the mammalian notochord, induces cells in the overlyingneural tube (i.e., the ventralmost cells of the neural tube)to become motor neurons.After the development of body segmentation, the formationof organs and organ systems progresses rapidly. The developmentof an organ involves extensive inductive interactions ofthe kind we saw in the example of the vertebrate eye (see Figure19.10). These inductive interactions are a current focus ofstudy for developmental biologists.936 CHAPTER 44 | ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTEach somite dividesinto three layers ofcells. The upper willcontribute to skin…2…the middle tomuscles…3…and the lowermesenchyme willform cartilage of thevertebrae and ribs.4Repeating segmentsof tissue–somites–form from mesodermon either side of theneural tube.1Neural crest cellsmigrate between thelayers and willproduce nerves andother tissue.54-Day chick embryo7-Day chick embryoNeural crest cellsMigratingmesenchymecells2-Day chick embryoNeural crestNeural tubeEpidermisSomitesNotochordNeural tube(A) (B) Neural tube SomitesMesodermaltissue (willbecome somites)Somiteforming44.15 Developing Body Segmentation (A) Repeating blocks of tissuecalled somites form on either side of the neural tube. Muscle, cartilage,bone, and the lower layer of the skin form from the somites. (B) Inthis SEM of somite formation in a chick embryo, the overlying ectodermhas been removed and the neural tube and somites are seen from above.44.3 RECAPGastrulation sets up tissue interactions that initiateorganogenesis. Neurulation is initiated by organizermesoderm that forms the notochord.• Describe the formation of the neural tube in vertebrates.See p. 935 and Figure 44.14• How do somites relate to segmentation of the bodyaxis? See pp. 935–936 and Figure 44.15• Using information from this chapter and from Chapters19 and 20, explain what Hox genes are and howthey instruct patterns of differentiation along the bodyaxis. See Figures 19.19, 20.1, and 44.16You may be aware that in mammals the circulatory systems ofthe fetus and mother are separate and that nourishment reachesthe fetus through the placenta and the umbilical cord. In thenext section we will examine the developmental events that resultin the creation of the placenta.How is the Growing Embryo 44.4 Sustained?There is more to a developing reptile, bird, or mammal than theembryo itself. As mentioned earlier, the embryos of these vertebratesare surrounded by several extraembryonic membranes,which originate from the embryo but are not part of it. Extraembryonicmembranes function in nutrition, gas exchange, andwaste removal. In mammals, they interact with tissues of themother to form the placenta.Extraembryonic membranes form with contributionsfrom all germ layersThe chicken provides a good example of how extraembryonicmembranes form from the germ layers created during gastrulation.In the chick, four membranes form—the yolk sac, the allantoicmembrane, the amnion, and the chorion. The yolk sac is thefirst to form, and it does so by extension of the hypoblast layeralong with some adjacent mesoderm. The yolk sac grows to enclosethe entire body of yolk in the egg (Figure 44.17). It constrictsat the top to create a tube that is continuous with thegut of the embryo. However, yolk does not pass through thistube. Yolk is digested by the cells of the yolk sac, and the nu-The genes closest to the 3′ 44.4 | HOW IS THE GROWING EMBRYO SUSTAINED? 937end are expressed in theanteriormost positions…For example, Hoxb1is expressed in thehindbrain……and Hoxb9in the spinalcord.…and those closest to the 5′end are expressed moreposteriorly.Mouse embryoCervical ThoracicLumbarSpinal cord HindbrainMidbrainForebrainHoxbb1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6 b7Expressiongradients fromanterior toposterior ofembryob8 b93′ 5′44.16 Hox Genes Control Body Segmentation Hox genes areexpressed along the anterior–posterior axis of the embryo in the sameorder as their arrangement between the 3′ and 5′ ends of the gene complex.As a result of gene duplication during evolution, vertebrates havefour copies of the Hox gene complex shown.The first extraembryonicmembrane is the yolk sac, whichis forming in the 5-day embryo.The mesoderm and ectodermextend beyond the embryo to formthe chorion and the amnion.The mesodermal and ectodermallayers fuse below the yolk so thatthe chorion lines the shell.Mesodermal and endodermaltissues form the allantois, asac for metabolic wastes.9-Day chick embryoAllantoicmembrane5-Day chick embryoEmbryo(head end)Gut AmnionAmnioticcavity ChorionYolkEmbryoGutAmnionAmnioticcavityYolk sacYolkChorion Allantois44.17 The Extraembryonic Membranes In birds, reptiles, and mammals,the embryo constructs four extraembryonic membranes. The yolksac encloses the yolk, and the amnion and chorion enclose the embryo.Fluids secreted by the amnion fill the amniotic cavity, providing an aqueousenvironment for the embryo. The chorion, along with the allantoicmembrane, mediates gas exchange between the embryo and its environment.The allantois stores the embryo’s waste products.GO TO Web Activity 44.1 • Extraembryonic MembranesyourBioPortal.comtrients are transported to the embryo through blood vessels thatform from mesoderm and line the outer surface of the yolk sac.The allantoic membrane is also an outgrowth of the extraembryonicendoderm plus adjacent mesoderm. It forms the allantois,a sac for storage of metabolic wastes.Ectoderm and mesoderm combine and extend beyond thelimits of the embryo to form the other extraembryonic membranes.Two layers of cells extend all along the inside of theeggshell, both over the embryo and below the yolk sac. Wherethey meet, they fuse, forming two membranes, the inner amnionand the outer chorion. The amnion surrounds the embryo,forming the amniotic cavity. The amnion secretes fluid intothe cavity, providing a protective environment for the embryo.The outer membrane, the chorion, forms a continuous membranejust under the eggshell (see Figure 44.17). It limits waterloss from the egg and also works with the enlarged allantoicmembrane to exchange respiratory gases between the embryoand the outside world.Extraembryonic membranes in mammals formthe placentaIn placental mammals, the first extraembryonic membrane toform is the trophoblast, which is already apparent by the fifthcell division (see Figure 44.4). When the blastocyst reaches theuterus and hatches from its encapsulating zona pellucida, thetrophoblast cells interact directly with the endometrium. Adhesionmolecules expressed on the surfaces of these cells attachthem to the uterine wall. By secreting proteolytic enzymes, thetrophoblast burrows into the endometrium, beginning theprocess of implantation (see Figure 44.5). Eventually, the entiretrophoblast is within the wall of the uterus. The trophoblastcells then send out numerous projections, or villi, to increase thesurface area of contact with maternal blood.Meanwhile, the hypoblast cells proliferate to form what inthe bird would be the yolk sac. But there is no yolk in eggs ofplacental mammals, so the yolk sac contributes mesodermal tissuesthat interact with trophoblast tissues to form the chorion.The chorion, along with tissues of the uterine wall, producesthe placenta, the organ that exchanges nutrients, respiratorygases, and metabolic wastes between the mother and the embryo(Figure 44.18).At the same time the yolk sac is forming from the hypoblast,the epiblast produces the amnion, which grows to enclose the entireembryo in a fluid-filled amniotic cavity. The rupturing of theamnion and chorion and the loss of the amniotic fluid (a processcalled “water breaking”) herald the onset of labor in humans.An allantois also develops in mammals, but its importancedepends on how well nitrogenous wastes can be transferredacross the placenta. In humans the allantois is minor; in pigs itis important. In humans and other mammals, allantoic tissuescontribute to the formation of the umbilical cord, by which theembryo is attached to the chorionic placenta. It is through theblood vessels of the umbilical cord that nutrients and oxygenfrom the mother reach the developing fetus, and wastes, includingcarbon dioxide and urea, are removed (see Figure 44.18).44.4 RECAPThe extraembryonic membranes of reptiles, birds,and mammals sustain the growing embryo. In reptilesand birds, these membranes surround the embryowithin the shelled egg. In mammals the extraembryonicmembranes form the placenta, an organ that exchangesnutrients, respiratory gases, and metabolicwastes between the mother and the embryo.• Describe each of the four extraembryonic membranesand their functions in the developing chick egg. Seepp. 937–938 and Figure 44.17• Explain the role of the trophoblast in the early developmentof a mammalian embryo. See p. 938938 CHAPTER 44 | ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTTo fetusFrom fetusFrom fetusUmbilical arteries(from fetus)Umbilical vein(to fetus)AmnionMaternal vein(to mother)Maternal artery(from mother)Chorion (fetalportion of placenta)ChorionicvillusMaternal portionof placentaFetus Placenta2 monthsUterusAmnionUmbilical cord44.18 The Mammalian Placenta In humansand most other mammals, nutrients and wastesare exchanged between maternal and fetalblood in the placenta, which forms from thechorion and tissues of the uterine wall. Theembryo is attached to the placenta by theumbilical cord. Embryonic blood vessels invadethe placental tissue to form fingerlike chorionicvilli. Maternal blood flows into the spaces surroundingthe villi, and placental blood flowsthrough the villi so nutrients and respiratorygases can be exchanged between the maternaland fetal blood.What Are the Stages of 44.5 Human Development?In humans, gestation, or pregnancy, lasts about 266 days, or 9months. In smaller mammals gestation is shorter—for example,21 days in mice—and in larger mammals it is longer—for example,330 days in horses and 600 days in elephants. The eventsof human gestation can be divided into three periods of roughly3 months each, called trimesters.Organ development begins in the first trimesterImplantation of the human blastocyst begins about 6 days afterfertilization. After implantation, gastrulation occurs, tissues differentiate,the placenta forms, and organs begin to develop. Theheart begins to beat during week 4, and limbs are formed byweek 8 (Figure 44.19 A,B). By the end of the first trimester, mostorgans have started to form. The embryo is about 8 centimeterslong and weighs about 40 grams (less than 2 ounces); it wouldfit neatly in a teaspoon. At about this point in time, the humanembryo is medically and legally referred to as a fetus. (This distinctionis not made for other mammals; developing mice, forexample, remain embryos until they are born.)The first trimester is a time of rapid cell division and tissuedifferentiation. Signal transduction cascades and the resultingbranching sequences of developmental processes are intheir early stages. Therefore, the first trimester is the periodduring which the embryo is most sensitive to damage from radiation,drugs, chemicals, and pathogens that can cause birthdefects. An embryo can be damaged before the mother evenknows she is pregnant. A classic and tragic case is that ofthalidomide, a drug widely prescribed in Europe in the late1950s to treat nausea. Women who took this drug in the fourthand fifth weeks of pregnancy, when the embryo’s limbs are beginningto form, gave birth to children with missing or severelymalformed arms and legs.Organ systems grow and mature during the second andthird trimestersDuring the second trimester the fetus grows rapidly to a weightof about 600 grams. The limbs of the fetus elongate, and the fingers,toes, and facial features become well formed (Figure44.19C). Eyebrows and fingernails grow and the fetus’s nervoussystem develops rapidly. Fetal movements are first felt bythe mother early in the second trimester, and they become progressivelystronger and more coordinated.The fetus grows rapidly during the third trimester (Figure44.19D). As the trimester approaches its end, internal organsmature. The digestive system begins to function, the liver storesglycogen, the kidneys produce urine, and the brain undergoescycles of sleep and waking. A human infant is born as soon asthe last of its critical organs—the lungs—mature.Although the first-trimester embryo is the most susceptibleto adverse effects of drugs, chemicals, and diseases, the potentialfor serious effects from exposure to environmental factors44.5 | WHAT ARE THE STAGES OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT? 939(A) 4 weeks(B) 8 weeks(C) 4 months(D) 9 monthsActual length ~0.4 cm (4 mm) Actual length ~10 cmActual length ~3 cm Actual length ~40 cm44.19 Stages of HumanDevelopment (A) At 4 weeks ofgestation, most of the embryo’s organsystems have been formed and theheart is beating. (B) The body structuresof this 8-week-old embryo areforming rapidly, and it is visibly a male.The umbilical cord attaches theembryo to the placenta (upper left).(C) At 4 months, the fetus has fullyformed limbs with fingers and toes,and moves freely within the amnioticcavity. (D) This fetus is well along in itsninth month. Soon its lungs will bemature enough to trigger the onset ofcontractions and birth.exists throughout pregnancy and continues after birth. Severeprotein malnutrition, alcohol, and cigarette smoke are examplesof factors that can cause low birth weight, mental retardation,and other developmental complications.Developmental changes continue throughout lifeDevelopment does not end with birth. Obviously, growth continuesuntil adult size is reached, and even when growth stops,organs of the body continue to repair and renew themselvesthrough cycles of cell replacement by the progeny of undifferentiatedstem cells. In humans especially, enormous developmentalchanges occur in the brain in the years between birthand adolescence. Especially in the early years, there is a greatdeal of plasticity in the organization of the nervous system asthe connections between neurons develop.For example, a child born with misaligned eyes (a conditionknown as strabismus) will use mostly one eye. The connectionsto the brain from that eye will become strong whileconnections from the other eye remain weak, and the child willdevelop with reduced visual acuity and depth perception. If eyealignment is corrected in the first 3 years of life, the connectionsbetween the eyes and the brain can improve and the child islikely to develop normal vision. After the age of 3, correctingthe connections between the eyes and the brain is less likely toresult in improvement, and visual impairments may persist.Thus plasticity in human visual system development declinesduring early childhood. However, recent data indicate that it isnot lost entirely and may be reactivated even in adulthood.44.5 RECAPHuman gestation lasts 9 months and can be dividedinto 3 trimesters. At the end of the first trimester, thefetus is very small but most of its organs have begunto form. In the second trimester, limbs elongate andthe fetus moves. By the end of the third trimester,most organs have begun to function.• Why is a first-trimester embryo particular sensitive toenvironmental risks? See p. 939940 CHAPTER 44 | ANIMAL DEVELOPMENT44.1 How Does Fertilization Activate Development?• The sperm and the egg contribute differentially to the zygote.The sperm contributes a haploid nucleus and, in most species, acentriole. The egg contributes a haploid nucleus, nutrients, ribosomes,mitochondria, mRNAs, and proteins.• In amphibians, the cytoplasmic contents of the egg are not distributedhomogeneously, and they are rearranged after fertilizationto set up the major axes of the future embryo. The nutrientmolecules are generally found in the vegetal hemisphere,whereas the nucleus is found in the animal hemisphere.Review Figures 44.1 and 44.2• Cleavage is a period of rapid cell division. Except in mammals,little if any gene expression occurs during cleavage. Cleavagecan be complete or incomplete, and the pattern of cell divisionsdepends on the orientation of the mitotic spindles. The result ofcleavage is a ball or mass of cells called a blastula. ReviewFigure 44.3• Early cell divisions in mammals are unique in being slow andallowing for gene expression early in the process. These celldivisions produce a blastocyst composed of an inner cell massthat becomes the embryo and an outer cell mass that becomesthe trophoblast. At the time of implantation, the trophoblastsecretes molecules that help the blastocyst implant in the uterinewall. Review Figures 44.4 and 44.5• A fate map can be created by labeling specific blastomeres andobserving what tissues and organs are formed by their progeny.Review Figure 44.6• Some species undergo mosaic development, in which the fate ofeach cell is determined during early divisions. Other species,including vertebrates, undergo regulative development, in whichremaining cells can compensate for cells lost in early cleavages.44.2 How Does Gastrulation Generate Multiple TissueLayers?• Gastrulation involves massive cell movements that producethree germ layers and place cells from various regions of theblastula into new associations with one another. Review Figure44.7, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 44.1• The initial step of sea urchin and amphibian gastrulation isinward movement of certain blastomeres. The site of inwardmovement becomes the blastopore. Cells that move into theblastula become the endoderm and mesoderm; cells remainingon the outside become the ectoderm. Cytoplasmic factors inthe vegetal pole cells are essential to initiate development.Review Figures 44.7 and 44.8• The dorsal lip of the amphibian blastopore is a critical site forcell determination. It has been called the primary embryonicorganizer because it induces determination in cells that passover it during gastrulation. Review Figures 44.8, 44.9, and44.10, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 44.2• The protein β-catenin activates a signaling cascade that inducesthe primary embryonic organizer and sets up the anterior–posteriorbody axis. Review Figures 44.2, and 44.11• Gastrulation in reptiles and birds differs from that in sea urchinsand frogs because the large amount of yolk in reptile and birdeggs causes the blastula to form a flattened disc of cells.Review Figure 44.13• Although their eggs have no yolk, placental mammals have apattern of gastrulation similar to that of reptiles and birds.44.3 How Do Organs and Organ Systems Develop?• Gastrulation is followed by organogenesis, the process wherebytissues interact to form organs and organ systems.CHAPTER SUMMARY
44.1 How Does Fertilization Activate Development?• The sperm and the egg contribute differentially to the zygote.The sperm contributes a haploid nucleus and, in most species, acentriole. The egg contributes a haploid nucleus, nutrients, ribosomes,mitochondria, mRNAs, and proteins.• In amphibians, the cytoplasmic contents of the egg are not distributedhomogeneously, and they are rearranged after fertilizationto set up the major axes of the future embryo. The nutrientmolecules are generally found in the vegetal hemisphere,whereas the nucleus is found in the animal hemisphere.Review Figures 44.1 and 44.2• Cleavage is a period of rapid cell division. Except in mammals,little if any gene expression occurs during cleavage. Cleavagecan be complete or incomplete, and the pattern of cell divisionsdepends on the orientation of the mitotic spindles. The result ofcleavage is a ball or mass of cells called a blastula. ReviewFigure 44.3• Early cell divisions in mammals are unique in being slow andallowing for gene expression early in the process. These celldivisions produce a blastocyst composed of an inner cell massthat becomes the embryo and an outer cell mass that becomesthe trophoblast. At the time of implantation, the trophoblastsecretes molecules that help the blastocyst implant in the uterinewall. Review Figures 44.4 and 44.5• A fate map can be created by labeling specific blastomeres andobserving what tissues and organs are formed by their progeny.Review Figure 44.6• Some species undergo mosaic development, in which the fate ofeach cell is determined during early divisions. Other species,including vertebrates, undergo regulative development, in whichremaining cells can compensate for cells lost in early cleavages.44.2 How Does Gastrulation Generate Multiple TissueLayers?• Gastrulation involves massive cell movements that producethree germ layers and place cells from various regions of theblastula into new associations with one another. Review Figure44.7, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 44.1• The initial step of sea urchin and amphibian gastrulation isinward movement of certain blastomeres. The site of inwardmovement becomes the blastopore. Cells that move into theblastula become the endoderm and mesoderm; cells remainingon the outside become the ectoderm. Cytoplasmic factors inthe vegetal pole cells are essential to initiate development.Review Figures 44.7 and 44.8• The dorsal lip of the amphibian blastopore is a critical site forcell determination. It has been called the primary embryonicorganizer because it induces determination in cells that passover it during gastrulation. Review Figures 44.8, 44.9, and44.10, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 44.2• The protein β-catenin activates a signaling cascade that inducesthe primary embryonic organizer and sets up the anterior–posteriorbody axis. Review Figures 44.2, and 44.11• Gastrulation in reptiles and birds differs from that in sea urchinsand frogs because the large amount of yolk in reptile and birdeggs causes the blastula to form a flattened disc of cells.Review Figure 44.13• Although their eggs have no yolk, placental mammals have apattern of gastrulation similar to that of reptiles and birds.44.3 How Do Organs and Organ Systems Develop?• Gastrulation is followed by organogenesis, the process wherebytissues interact to form organs and organ systems.
• In the formation of the vertebrate nervous system, one group ofcells that migrates over the blastopore lip is determined tobecome the notochord. The notochord organizes the overlyingectoderm to thicken, form parallel ridges, and fold in on itself toform a neural tube below the epidermal ectoderm. The nervoussystem develops from this neural tube. Review Figure 44.14• The notochord and neural crest cells participate in the segmentalorganization of mesoderm into structures called somitesalong the body axis. Rudimentary organs and organ systemsform during these stages. Review Figure 44.15• In vertebrates, Hox genes determine the pattern ofanterior–posterior differentiation along the body axis in mammals.Other genes, such as sonic hedgehog, contribute to dorsal–ventral differentiation. Review Figure 44.1644.4 How is the Growing Embryo Sustained?• The embryos of reptiles, birds, and mammals are protected andnurtured by four extraembryonic membranes. In birds and reptiles,the yolk sac surrounds the yolk and provides nutrients tothe embryo, the chorion lines the eggshell and participates ingas exchange, the amnion surrounds the embryo and enclosesit in an aqueous environment, and the allantois stores metabolicwastes. Review Figure 44.17, WEB ACTIVITY 44.1• In mammals, the chorion and the trophoblast cells interact withthe maternal uterus to form a placenta, which provides theembryo with nutrients and gas exchange. The amnion enclosesthe embryo in an aqueous environment. Review Figure 44.1844.5 What Are the Stages of Human Development?• Human pregnancy, or gestation, can be divided into threetrimesters. The embryo forms in the first trimester; during thistime, it is most vulnerable to environmental factors that canlead to birth defects. During the second and third trimesters thefetus grows, the limbs elongate, and the organ systems mature.• Development continues throughout childhood and throughoutlife.