In the summer of 1990, soldiers from Iraq invaded neighboringKuwait. The reason was oil: the Iraqis were angrybecause Kuwait was pumping too much of it, keepingprices low. Six months later, a United Nations–sponsoredcoalition army from more than 30 countries drove theIraqis out of Kuwait and back to their homeland. ForKuwait, the Gulf War was a success, but it left an environmentaldisaster. As they fled, the Iraqi soldiers set fire tomore than 700 oil wells. It took over six months to put thefires out, and in the meantime an astounding 250 milliongallons of crude oil were released into the desert. Twentyyears later, much of the oil remains as a gooey coating,severely affecting the organisms that live there.The government of Kuwait is using a variety ofprocesses to get rid of the contaminating oil. Amongthem is the addition of bacteria that break down and consumethe oil, utilizing the hydrocarbons in it as an energysource for growth. This process—using an organism to removea pollutant—is called bioremediation. The Kuwaitepisode is not the first major use of bacteria for bioremediation.In 1989, the oil tanker Exxon Valdez ran agroundnear the Alaskan shore, releasing 11 million gallons ofcrude oil along 500 miles of shoreline. Physical methodssuch as skimming the water were used to remove morethan half of the oil. Nitrogen and phosphorus salts werethen sprayed on the oily rocks to stimulate the growth ofoil-consuming bacteria already there, and other bacteriawere added as part of the recovery effort. The oil graduallydisappeared.Some species of bacteria, because of their genetic capacityto produce unusual enzymes and biochemical pathways,thrive on all sorts of nutrients besides the usual glucose,including pollutants. Scientists have discovered theseorganisms simply by mixing polluted soil with water andseeing what grows. Many of the genescoding for enzymes involved in breakingdown crude oil are carried onsmall chromosomes called plasmids.In 1971, Ananda Chakrabarty at theGeneral Electric Research Center inNew York used genetic crosses to developa single strain of the bacteriumPseudomonas with multiple plasmidscarrying genes for the breakdown ofvarious hydrocarbons in oil. He and hiscompany applied for a patent tolegally protect their discovery andprofit from it. In a landmark case, theU.S. Supreme Court ruled in 1980 that“a live, human-made microorganism isPollution fighters18The Spoils of War Massive oil spillsoccurred in Kuwait during the 1991Gulf War.18.1 What Is Recombinant DNA?You are familiar with restriction endonucleases (restriction enzymes),which occur naturally in bacteria and are used in thelaboratory to cut DNA into fragments (see Chapter 15). Our focusin Chapter 15 was on the use of these enzymes for detectingmutations. In this chapter we examine how they are used,along with other enzymes, to construct recombinant DNA.During the late 1960s, scientists discovered other enzymesthat act on DNA. One of these is DNA ligase, which catalyzesthe joining of DNA fragments. This is the enzyme that joinsOkazaki fragments during DNA replication (see Section 13.3).Once they had isolated restriction enzymes and DNA ligase, scientistscould use these enzymes to cut DNA into fragments andthen splice them together in new combinations. Stanley Cohenand Herbert Boyer did just that in 1973. They used restrictionenzymes to cut sequences from two E. coli plasmids (small chromosomalDNAs—see Figure 12.27) containing different antibioticresistance genes. Then they used DNA ligase to jointhe fragments together. The resulting plasmid, when insertedinto new E. coli cells, gave those cells resistance to both antibiotics(Figure 18.1). The era of recombinant DNA—a DNA moleculemade in the laboratory that is derived from at least twogenetic sources—was born.Hundreds of different restriction enzymes are now available.They recognize palindromic DNA sequences—sequences thatread the same way in both directions. For example, you can readthe DNA recognition sequence for the restriction enzyme EcoR1from 5′ to 3′ as GAATTC on both strands:5′…….GAATTC……3′3′…….CTTAAG……5′Some restriction enzymes cut the DNA straight through the middleof the palindrome, generating “blunt-ended” fragments. Others,such as EcoRI, make staggered cuts—they cut one strand ofthe double helix several bases away from where they cut theother (Figure 18.2). After EcoRI makes its two cuts in the complementarystrands, the ends of the strands are held togetheronly by the hydrogen bonds between four base pairs. Thesehydrogen bonds are too weak to persist at warm temperatures(above room temperature), so the DNA separates into fragmentswhen it is warmed. As a result, each fragment carries a singlestranded“overhang” at the location of each cut. These overhangsare called sticky ends because they have specific base sequencesthat can bind by base pairing with complementary sticky ends.IN THIS CHAPTER we will describe some of the techniquesthat are used to manipulate DNA. First, we will describehow DNA molecules are cut into smaller fragmentsand how these fragments are spliced together to createrecombinant DNA. This will lead to a discussion of how recombinantDNA is introduced into suitable host cells. Afterdescribing some other ways to manipulate DNA, we willshow how scientists have applied these methods to createa new biotechnology industry.patentable” under the U.S. Constitution. Since then otherbacteria have been patented that remove toxic metalssuch as mercury and copper from soils. In these cases, thebacteria use metabolic pathways to convert the metals tobiologically inert forms.The Supreme Court ruling came at a time when newlaboratory methods were being developed to insert specificDNA sequences into organisms by recombinant DNAtechnology. Since then, an entirely new biotechnologyindustry has sprung up, its activities legally protected.The resulting flood of patents for DNA sequences andgenetically modified organisms continues to this day.CHAPTER OUTLINE18.1 What Is Recombinant DNA?18.2 How Are New Genes Inserted into Cells?18.3 What Sources of DNA Are Used in Cloning?18.4 What Other Tools Are Used to Study DNAFunction?18.5 What Is Biotechnology?18.6 How Is Biotechnology Changing Medicine,Agriculture, and the Environment?Using Biotechnology to Clean Up the EnvironmentAnanda Chakrabarty received the first patent for a geneticallymodified organism, a bacterium that breaks down crude oil.After a DNA molecule has been cut with a restriction enzyme,complementary sticky ends can form hydrogen bondswith one another. The original ends may rejoin, or two differentfragments with complementary sticky ends may join. Indeed,a fragment from one source, such as a human, can bejoined to a fragment from another source, such as a bacterium.Initially the fragments are held together by weak hydrogenbonds, but then the enzyme ligase catalyzes the formation ofcovalent bonds between adjacent nucleotides at the ends of thefragments, joining them to form a single, larger molecule.With these tools—restriction enzymes and DNA ligase—scientistscan cut and rejoin different DNAmolecules from any andall sources, including artificially synthesized DNA sequences.18.1 RECAPDNA fragments from different sources can be linkedtogether to make recombinant DNA.• How did Cohen and Boyer make the first recombinantDNA? See Figure 18.1• How does a staggered cut in DNA create a “stickyend”? See p. 387 and Figure 18.2Recombinant DNA has no biological significance until it is insertedinside a living cell, which can replicate and transcribethe transplanted genetic information. How can recombinantDNAmade in the laboratory be inserted and expressed in livingcells?CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE18.1 Recombinant DNAWith the discovery of restriction enzymes and DNA ligase, itbecame possible to combine DNA fragments from differentsources in the laboratory. But would such “recombinant DNA”be functional when inserted into a living cell? The results of thisexperiment completely changed the scope of genetic research,increasing our knowledge of gene structure and function, andushered in the new field of biotechnology.HYPOTHESIS Biologically functional recombinantchromosomes can be made in the laboratory.Two DNA fragments with different genes canbe joined to make a recombinant DNAmolecule, and the resulting DNA is functional.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSFURTHER INVESTIGATION: Only one cell in 10,000 took up theplasmid in the experiment. Thespontaneous mutation rate to Tr or Kris one cell in 106. How would youdistinguish between genetic transformationand spontaneous mutationin this experiment?The cutplasmids aremixed withDNA ligase toformrecombinantDNA.The plasmidsare insertedinto E. coli.Plasmids are cut Plasmids are not cutKrKrTrTrKr TrE. coli plasmidSome E. coli are resistantto both antibiotics.No E. coli are doublyresistant.E. coli plasmids carrying a gene for resistance toeither the antibiotic kanamycin (K) or tetracycline(T) are cut with a restriction enzyme.1 EcoRI cuts the two DNAstrands at two differentpoints in a palindromicrecognition sequence.32The sticky ends can hydrogen-bondto complementary sticky ends fromother DNAs, and the resultingrecombinant DNA can be sealedwith DNA ligase.The separated strandshave “sticky ends” withunpaired bases.CGGCEcoRI cuts atred arrowsGCTAGGTCCTTAAGTAGGTCGG TCCGAGATCTTAAGAAGATCGACGATCCAGGAATTCATCCAGCC AGGCTCTAGAATTCTTCTAGCTGCTAGGTCCTTAAGAAGATCGACGATCCAGGAATTCTTCTAGCTGCTAGGTCCTTAACGATCCAGGTCCGAGATCTTAAAGGCTCTAGDNAAATTCATCCAGCCGTAGGTCGG GAAGATCGAAATTCTTCTAGCT18.2 Cutting, Splicing, and Joining DNA Some restriction enzymes(EcoRI is shown here) make staggered cuts in DNA. EcoRI can be usedto cut two different DNA molecules (blue and orange). The exposedbases can hydrogen bond with complementary exposed bases on otherDNA fragments, forming recombinant DNA. DNA ligase stabilizes therecombinant molecule by forming covalent bonds in the DNA backbone.388 CHAPTER 18 | RECOMBINANT DNA AND BIOTECHNOLOGY18.2 | HOW ARE NEW GENES INSERTED INTO CELLS? 389How Are New Genes Inserted 18.2 into Cells?One goal of recombinant DNA technology is to clone—that is,to produce many identical copies of—a particular gene. Cloningmight be done for analysis, to produce a protein product inquantity, or as a step toward creating an organism with a newphenotype. Recombinant DNA is cloned by inserting it into hostcells in a process known as transformation (or transfection if thehost cells are derived from an animal). A host cell or organismthat contains recombinant DNA is referred to as a transgeniccell or organism. Later in this chapter we will encounter manyexamples of transgenic cells and organisms, including yeast,mice, wheat plants, and even cows.Various methods are used to create transgenic cells. Generally,these methods are inefficient in that only a few of the cellsthat are exposed to the recombinant DNA actually becometransformed with it. In order to grow only the transgenic cells,selectable marker genes, such as genes that confer resistance toantibiotics, are often included as part of the recombinant DNAmolecule. Antibiotic resistance genes were the markers usedin Cohen and Boyer’s experiment (see Figure 18.1).Genes can be inserted into prokaryoticor eukaryotic cellsThe initial successes with recombinant DNA technology wereachieved using bacteria as hosts. As we have seen in precedingchapters, bacterial cells are easily grown and manipulatedin the laboratory. Much of their molecular biology is known, especiallyfor certain well-studied bacteria such as E. coli. Furthermore,bacteria contain plasmids, which are easily manipulatedto carry recombinant DNA into the cell.In some important ways, however, bacteria are not ideal organismsfor studying and expressing eukaryotic genes. Considerhow differently the processes of transcription and translationproceed in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and recall thatDNAoften contains the signals for these specific functions (seeChapter 14). Furthermore, scientists often want to study howgenes function in multicellular eukaryotic organisms rather thanin cells grown in cultures. Or they might want to create a cropplant or farm animal with a new phenotype for use in agriculture.For these reasons, scientists have developed methods totransform or transfect eukaryotic cells.Yeasts such as Saccharomyces are commonly used as eukaryotichosts for recombinant DNA studies. The advantages of usingyeasts include rapid cell division (a life cycle completed in 2–8hours), ease of growth in the laboratory, and a relatively smallgenome size (about 12 million base pairs and 6,000 genes). In addition,yeasts have most of the characteristics of other eukaryotes,except for those characteristics involved in multicellularity.Plant cells can also be used as hosts. One property that makesplant cells good hosts is the ability to make stem cells (unspecialized,totipotent cells; see Chapter 5 opener) from mature planttissues. When these unspecialized plant cells are isolated andgrown in culture, they can be transformed with recombinantDNA. These transgenic cells can be studied in culture, or manipulatedto form entire new plants. There are also methods formaking whole transgenic plants without going through the cellculture step. These methods result in plants that carry the recombinantDNA in all their cells, including the germ line cells.If biologists want to study expression of human or animalgenes, for example for medical purposes, they use cultured animalcells as hosts. Whole transgenic animals can also be created.Recombinant DNA enters host cells in a variety of waysMethods for inserting DNA into host cells vary. The cells maybe chemically treated to make their outer membranes more permeable,and then mixed with the DNA so that it can diffuse intothe cells. Another approach is called electroporation; a short electricshock is used to create temporary pores in the membranes,through which the DNA can enter. Viruses can be altered so thatthey carry recombinant DNA into cells. Plants are often transformedusing a bacterium that has evolved mechanisms totransfer its DNA into cells and then insert the DNA into a plantchromosome. Transgenic animals can be produced by injectingrecombinant DNA into the nuclei of fertilized eggs. There areeven “gene guns,” which “shoot” the host cells with tiny particlescarrying the DNA.The challenge of inserting new DNA into a cell lies not justin getting it into the host cell, but in getting it to replicate asthe host cell divides. DNA polymerase does not bind to just anysequence. If the new DNA is to be replicated, it must becomepart of a segment of DNA that contains an origin of replication.Such a DNA molecule is called a replicon, or replication unit.There are two general ways in which the newly introducedDNAcan become part of a replicon:• It may be inserted into a host chromosome. Although thesite of insertion is usually random, this is nevertheless acommon method of integrating new genes into host cells.• It can enter the host cell as part of a carrier DNA sequence,called a vector, that already has an origin of replication.Several types of vectors are used to get DNA into cells. Once insidethe cells, some vectors replicate independently, while othersincorporate all or part of their DNA into the host chromosomes.PLASMIDS AS VECTORS As you learned in Chapter 12, plasmidsare small chromosomes that exist in prokaryotic cells in additionto the main chromosomes. Yeast cells can also harbor plasmids.A number of characteristics make plasmids useful astransformation vectors:• They are relatively small (an E. coli plasmid has 2,000–6,000 base pairs) and therefore easy to manipulate in thelaboratory.• Aplasmid will usually have one or more restriction enzymerecognition sequences that each occur only once inthe plasmid sequence. These sites make it easy to insertadditional DNA into the plasmid before it is used to transformhost cells.• Many plasmids contain genes that confer resistance to antibiotics,which can serve as selectable markers.• Plasmids have a bacterial origin of replication (ori) and canreplicate independently of the host chromosome. It is not uncommonfor a bacterial cell to contain hundreds of copies of arecombinant plasmid. For this reason, the power of bacterialtransformation to amplify a gene is extraordinary. Aone-literculture of bacteria harboring the human β-globin gene in atypical plasmid has as many copies of that gene as the sumtotal of all the cells in a typical adult human being (1014). Atypical bacterial plasmid is shown in Figure 18.3A.The plasmids used as vectors in the laboratory have been extensivelyaltered by recombinant DNA technology to includeconvenient features: multiple cloning sites with 20 or moreunique restriction enzyme sites for cloning purposes; origins ofreplication for a variety of host cells; and various kinds of reportergenes and selectable marker genes.VIRUSES AS VECTORS Constraints on plasmid replication limitthe size of the new DNA that can be inserted into a plasmid toabout 10,000 base pairs. Although many prokaryotic genes maybe smaller than this, most eukaryotic genes—with their intronsand extensive flanking sequences—are bigger. Avector that accommodateslarger DNA inserts is needed for these genes.Both prokaryotic and eukaryotic viruses are often used asvectors for eukaryotic DNA. Bacteriophage λ, which infects E.coli, has a DNA genome of about 45,000 base pairs. If the genesthat cause the host cell to die and lyse—about 20,000 basepairs—are eliminated, the virus can still attach to a host cell andinject its DNA. The deleted 20,000 base pairs can be replacedwith DNA from another organism. Because viruses infect cellsnaturally, they offer a great advantage over plasmids, which oftenrequire artificial means to coax them to enter host cells. Aswe saw in Section 15.6, viruses are important vectors in humangene therapy.PLASMID VECTORS FOR PLANTS An important vector for carryingnew DNA into many types of plants is a plasmid found inAgrobacterium tumefaciens. This bacterium lives in the soil, infectsplants, and causes a disease called crown gall, which ischaracterized by the presence of growths, or tumors, in theplant. A. tumefaciens contains a plasmid called Ti (for tumorinducing)(Figure 18.3B). The Ti plasmid carries genes that allowthe bacterium to infect plant cells and then insert a regionof its DNA called the T DNA into the chromosomes of infectedcells. The T DNA contains genes that cause the growth of tumorsand the production of specific sugars that the bacteriumuses as sources of energy. Scientists have exploited this remarkablenatural “genetic engineer” to insert foreign DNA into thegenomes of plants.When used as a vector for plant transformation, the tumorinducingand sugar-producing genes on the T DNA are removedand replaced with foreign DNA. The altered Ti plasmidsare first used to transform Agrobacterium cells from which theoriginal Ti plasmids have been removed. Then the Agrobacteriumcells are used to infect plant cells. Whole plants can be regeneratedfrom transgenic cells or, in the case of the model plantArabidopsis (see Section 17.3), the Agrobacterium can be used todirectly infect germ line cells of whole plants.Reporter genes identify host cells containingrecombinant DNAEven when a population of host cells interacts with an appropriatevector, only a small proportion of the cells actually takeup the vector. Furthermore, the process of making recombinantDNAis far from perfect. After a ligation reaction, not all the vectorcopies contain the foreign DNA. How can we identify or selectthe host cells that contain that sequence?Selectable markers such as antibiotic resistance genes can beused to select cells containing those genes. Only cells carryingthe antibiotic resistance gene can grow in the presence of thatantibiotic. If a vector carrying genes for resistance to two differentantibiotics is used, one antibiotic can be used to selectivelygrow cells carrying the vector. If the other antibiotic resistancegene is inactivated by the insertion of foreign DNA, then cellscarrying copies of the vector with the inserted DNA can be identifiedby their sensitivity to that antibiotic (Figure 18.4). Sincethe uptake of recombinant DNA is a rare event (only about 1cell in 10,000 takes up a plasmid in such experiments), it is vitalto be able to select the small number of cells harboring therecombinant DNA.390 CHAPTER 18 | RECOMBINANT DNA AND BIOTECHNOLOGYPstIHindIIIBamHISalIOrigin ofreplication (ori)oriT DNASites for severalrestriction enzymes(A) Plasmid pBR322Host: E. coli(B) Ti plasmidHosts: Agrobacterium tumefaciens (plasmid)and infected plants (T DNA)Ampicillin resistancereporter gene (ampr )Tetracycline resistancereporter gene (Tr )Recognition sites for restriction enzymes18.3 Vectors for Carrying RecombinantDNA into Cells (A) A plasmidwith reporter genes for antibioticresistance can be incorporated intoan E. coli cell. (B) The Ti plasmid, isolatedfrom the bacterium Agrobacteriumtumefaciens, is used to insertDNA into many types of plants.18.2 | HOW ARE NEW GENES INSERTED INTO CELLS? 391Selectable markers are one type of reporter gene, which is anygene whose expression is easily observed. Other reporter genescode for proteins that can be detected visually. For example:• The β-galactosidase (lacZ) gene in the E. coli lac operon (seeFigure 16.10) codes for an enzyme that can convert the substrateX-Gal into a bright blue product. Many plasmids containthe lacZ gene with a multiple cloning site within its sequence.Bacterial colonies containing the plasmid (whichalso includes an antibiotic resistance gene) are selected on asolid medium containing the antibiotic. X-Gal is also includedin the medium, so that bacterial colonies containingthe recombinant DNA inserted into the lacZ gene producewhite, rather than blue, colonies.• Green fluorescent protein, which normally occurs in the jellyfishAequopora victoriana, emits visible light when exposedto ultraviolet light. The gene for this protein has been isolatedand incorporated into vectors. It is now widely usedas a reporter gene (Figure 18.5).Such reporters are not just used to select and identify cells carryingrecombinant DNA. They can be attached to promoters in orderto study how the promoters function under different conditionsor in different tissues of a transgenic multicellular organism.They can also be attached to other proteins, to study how andwhere those proteins become localized within eukaryotic cells.18.2 RECAPRecombinant DNA can be cloned by using a vectorto insert it into a suitable host cell. The vector oftenhas a selectable marker or other reporter gene thatgives the host cell a phenotype by which transgeniccells can be identified.• List the characteristics of a plasmid that make it suitablefor introducing new DNA into a host cell. See pp.389–390• How are cells harboring a vector that carries recombinantDNA selected? See p. 390 and Figure 18.4TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE18.4 Marking Recombinant DNA by Inactivating a GeneSelectable marker (reporter) genes are used by scientists to select for bacteria that have taken up a plasmid. A second reporter geneallows for the identification of bacteria harboring the recombinant plasmid. The host bacteria in this experiment could display anyof the three phenotypes indicated in the table.A plasmid has genes forresistance to both ampicillin(ampr ) and tetracycline (tetr ).The resulting recombinant DNAhas an intact functional gene forampicillin resistance but not fortetracycline resistance.Foreign DNA is inserted at theBamHI recognition site, which iswithin the tetr gene.123Host E. coli are screened to detectthe presence of recombinant DNA.4BamHIoriampr tetrBamHIBamHIForeignDNABamHIoriamprtetrDNA taken up byamps and tets E. coli genotypeNoneForeign DNA onlypBR322 plasmidpBR322 recombinantplasmidSensitiveSensitiveResistantResistantSensitiveSensitiveResistantSensitivePhenotype forampicillinPhenotype fortetracyclinePlasmid vector has the gene forgreen fluorescent protein (GFP).Host bacteria with the plasmidglow in ultraviolet light.oriampr gfparaCpGLO5400 bp18.5 Green Fluorescent Protein as a Reporter The presence of aplasmid with the gene for green fluorescent protein is readily apparent intransgenic cells because they glow under ultraviolet light. This allows theidentification of cells carrying a plasmid without the use of selection onantibiotics. That is, no cells are killed during the selection process.We have described how DNA can be cut or amplified,inserted into a vector, and introduced intohost cells. We have also seen how host cells carryingrecombinant DNA can be identified. Now let’sconsider where the genes or DNA fragments usedin these procedures come from.What Sources of DNA Are 18.3 Used in Cloning?Amajor goal of cloning experiments is to elucidatethe functions of DNA sequences and the proteinsthey encode. The DNA fragments used in cloningprocedures are obtained from a number of sources.They include random fragments of chromosomesthat are maintained as gene libraries, complementaryDNA obtained by reverse transcription frommRNA, products of the polymerase chain reaction(PCR), and artificially synthesized or mutated DNA.Often a scientist will want to express a gene derivedfrom one kind of organism in another, verydifferent organism—for example, a human gene ina bacterium, or a bacterial gene in a plant. To dothis it is necessary to use a promoter and other regulatorysequences from the host organism: a bacterialpromoter will not function in a plant cell, forexample. The coding region of the gene of interestis inserted between a promoter and a transcriptiontermination sequence derived from the host organism,or from one that uses similar mechanisms forgene regulation.Libraries provide collections ofDNA fragmentsIn Chapter 17 we introduced the concept of a genomiclibrary: a collection of DNA fragments thattogether comprise the genome of an organism.Now we provide details on how a genomic or othergene library is generated and used.Restriction enzymes or other means, such as mechanicalshearing, can be used to break chromosomes into smaller pieces.These smaller DNA fragments still constitute a genome (Figure18.6A), but the information is now in many smaller “volumes.”Each fragment is inserted into a vector, which is then taken upby a host cell. Proliferation of a single transformed cell producesa colony of recombinant cells, each of which harbors manycopies of the same fragment of DNA.When plasmids are used as vectors, about 700,000 separatefragments are required to make a library of the human genome.By using bacteriophage λ, which can carry four times as muchDNAas a plasmid, the number of “volumes” in the library canbe reduced to about 160,000. Although this seems like a largenumber, a single petri plate can hold thousands of phagecolonies, or plaques, and is easily screened for the presence ofa particular DNA sequence by hybridization to an appropriateDNAprobe.cDNA libraries are constructed from mRNA transcriptsAmuch smaller DNA library—one that includes only the genestranscribed in a particular tissue—can be made from complementaryDNA, or cDNA (Figure 18.6B). This involves isolatingmRNA from cells, then making cDNA copies of that mRNAby complementary base pairing. An enzyme, reverse transcriptase,catalyzes this reaction.A collection of cDNAs from a particular tissue at a particulartime in the life cycle of an organism is called a cDNA library.Messenger RNAs do not last long in the cytoplasm and are oftenpresent in small amounts, so a cDNA library is a “snapshot”that preserves the transcription pattern of the cell. ComplementaryDNA libraries have been invaluable for comparing geneexpression in different tissues at different stages of development.For example, their use has shown that up to one-third ofall the genes of an animal are expressed only during development.Complementary DNA is also a good starting point forcloning eukaryotic genes (because the clones contain only the392 CHAPTER 18 | RECOMBINANT DNA AND BIOTECHNOLOGYTOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE18.6 Constructing LibrariesIntact genomic DNA is too large to be introduced into host cells. A genomiclibrary can be made by breaking the DNA into small fragments, incorporatingthe fragments into a vector, and then transforming host cells with therecombinant vectors. Each colony of cells contains many copies of a smallpart of the genome. Similarly, there are many mRNAs in a cell. These canbe copied into cDNAs and a library made from them. The DNA in thesecolonies can then be isolated for analysis.1a Genomic DNA is cutinto small fragments.1b Messenger RNAs arecopied into cDNAs.2 A plasmid vector isadded to createrecombinant DNA.3 E. coli host cells aretransformed with therecombinant plasmids.4 Each colony in the library has aDNA fragment from the genome,or a cDNA made from mRNA.Genomic DNAGenomic library cDNA librarymRNAscDNAsPlasmidsBacteria (E. coli)(A) (B)18.3 | WHAT SOURCES OF DNA ARE USED IN CLONING? 393coding sequences of the genes) and genes that are expressedin only a few cell types.Synthetic DNA can be made by PCRor by organic chemistryIn Chapter 13 we describe the polymerase chain reaction (PCR),a method of amplifying DNA in a test tube. PCR can begin withas little as 10–12 g of DNA (a picogram). Any fragment of DNAcan be amplified by PCR as long as appropriate primers areavailable. You will recall that DNA replication (by PCR or anyother system) requires not just a template on which DNA polymeraseadds complementary nucleotides, but also a shortoligonucleotide primer where replication begins (see Figure13.22). If the appropriate primers (two are needed—one for eachstrand of DNA) are added to denatured DNA, more than twobillion copies of the DNA region between the primers can beproduced in just a few hours. This amplified DNA can then beinserted into plasmids to create recombinant DNA and clonedin host cells.The artificial synthesis of DNA by organic chemistry is nowfully automated, and a special service laboratory can makeshort- to medium-length sequences overnight for any numberof investigators. Synthetic oligonucleotides (single-strandedDNAfragments of up to 40 bp) are used as primers in PCR reactions.These primers can be designed to create short new sequencesat the ends of the PCR products. This might be done tocreate a mutation in a recombinant gene, or to add restrictionenzyme sites at the ends of the PCR product to aid in cloning.Longer synthetic sequences can be pieced together to constructan artificial gene. If we know the amino acid sequenceof the desired protein product, we can use the genetic code tofigure out the corresponding DNA sequence. As mentionedabove, other sequences must be added, such as the promoterand transcription termination sequences. Appropriate selectionof the codon for a given amino acid is another important consideration:many amino acids are encoded by more than onecodon (see Figure 14.6), and host organisms vary in their use ofsynonymous codons.DNA mutations can be created in the laboratoryMutations that occur in nature have been important in demonstratingcause-and-effect relationships in biology. However, mutationsin nature are rare events. Recombinant DNA technologyallows us to ask “what if” questions by creating mutations artificially.Because synthetic DNA can be made with any desiredsequence, it can be manipulated to create specific mutations, theconsequences of which can be observed when the mutant DNAis expressed in host cells. These mutagenesis techniques haverevealed many cause-and-effect relationships.For example, consider the experiment illustrated in Figure14.20. Researchers hypothesized that a nuclear localization signal(NLS) sequence of amino acids is necessary for targeting aprotein to the nucleus after it is made at the ribosome. The researchersused recombinant DNA technology to synthesizegenes encoding proteins with and without the sequence, whichwere then used to transform cells. Without the NLS, newly synthesizedproteins did not enter the nucleus. Knowing this, theresearchers then asked, “Are certain amino acids more functionallyimportant to the NLS than others?” In follow-up experiments,they made a series of mutated genes to test whethercertain amino acids were needed at certain locations in the NLS.They found that changing the amino acids at the very beginningor very end of the NLS, but not the middle, abolishedits function. This led to a fuller description of the binding ofthe NLS to its nuclear receptor. Without the ability to generatespecific mutations, these experiments would not have beenpossible.18.3 RECAPDNA for cloning can be obtained from genomic libraries,cDNA made from mRNA, or artificially synthesizedDNA fragments. Gene function can be investigatedby intentionally introducing mutationsinto natural or synthetic genes and organisms.• How are genomic DNA and cDNA libraries made andused? See p. 392 and Figure 18.6• Explain how recombinant DNA and mutagenesis areused to test “what if” questions in biology. See p. 393We’ve explored the various sources of DNA that can be used tomake recombinant DNA molecules and the ways the resultingmolecules can be used to study the functions of genes and proteins.We now turn to some additional tools that are availablefor studying DNA.What Other Tools Are Used to Study 18.4 DNA Function?Sections 13.5 and 17.1 describe PCR and DNA sequencing, twoimportant techniques arising from our understanding of DNAreplication. In this section we will examine three additional techniquesfor studying DNA, including homologous recombinationto inactivate genes, antisense and RNAi to block gene expression,and DNA microarrays to analyze large numbers ofnucleotide sequences.Genes can be inactivated by homologous recombinationOne way to study a gene or protein in order to understand itsfunction is to inactivate the gene so that it is not transcribed andtranslated into a functional protein. Such a manipulation iscalled a knockout experiment. In plants, transposons or T DNAinsertions can be used to create thousands of knockout mutants,and then the mutants are screened to identify those with alteredphenotypes. For example, the mutants can be screened for thosethat are susceptible to a particular disease. This is an importantway to identify genes that are involved in processes such asresistance to disease or other environmental stresses, such asdrought and temperature extremes.Atechnique called homologous recombination isa much more targeted way to produce knockoutmutants. In this case, the gene of interest has alreadybeen identified, and recombinant DNA technologyis used to specifically inactivate that gene. Mice arefrequently used in such knockout experiments (Figure18.7). The normal allele of the mouse gene to betested is inserted into a plasmid. Restriction enzymesare then used to insert a fragment containinga reporter gene into the middle of the normalgene. This addition of extra DNA plays havoc withthe targeted gene’s transcription and translation; afunctional mRNA is seldom made from a genewhose sequence has been thus interrupted.Once the recombinant plasmid has been made,it is used to transfect mouse embryonic stem cells.(A stem cell is an unspecialized cell that divides anddifferentiates into specialized cells.) Much of the targetedgene is still present in the plasmid (althoughin two separated regions), and these sequences tendto line up with their homologous sequences in thenormal allele on the mouse chromosome. Sometimesrecombination occurs, and the plasmid’s inactiveallele is “swapped” with the functional allelein the host cell. The inactive allele is inserted permanentlyinto the host cell’s genome and the normalallele is lost (because the plasmid cannot replicatein mouse cells). The active reporter gene in theinsert is used to select those stem cells carrying theinactivated gene.Atransfected stem cell is now transplanted intoan early mouse embryo. If the mouse that developsfrom this embryo has the mutant gene in its germline cells, its progeny will have the knockout genein every cell in their bodies. Such mice are inbred tocreate knockout mice carrying the inactivated gene inhomozygous form. The mutant mouse can then beobserved for phenotypic changes, to find cluesabout the function of the targeted gene in the normal(wild-type) animal. The knockout techniquehas been important in assessing the roles of manygenes, and has been especially valuable in studyinghuman genetic diseases. Many of these diseases,such as phenylketonuria, have knockout mousemodels—mouse strains that suffer from an analogousdisease—produced by homologous recombination.These models can be used to study a disease and totest potential treatments. Mario Capecchi, Martin Evans, andOliver Smithies shared the Nobel Prize for developing theknockout mouse technique.Complementary RNA can prevent the expressionof specific genesAnother way to study the expression of a specific gene is toblock the translation of its mRNA. This is an example of scientistsimitating nature. As described in Section 16.5, gene expressionis sometimes controlled by the production of doublestrandedRNA molecules, which are cut up and unwound toproduce short, single-stranded RNA molecules (microRNAs)that are complementary to specific mRNA sequences (see Figure16.23). Such a complementary molecule is called antisenseRNA because it binds by base pairing to the “sense” bases onthe mRNA. The resulting partially double-stranded RNA hybridinhibits translation of the mRNA, and the hybrid tends tobe broken down rapidly in the cytoplasm. Although the genecontinues to be transcribed, translation does not take place. Afterdetermining the sequence of a gene and its mRNA in the lab-394 CHAPTER 18 | RECOMBINANT DNA AND BIOTECHNOLOGYTOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE18.7 Making a Knockout MouseAnimals carrying mutations are rare. Homologous recombination is used toreplace a normal mouse gene with an inactivated copy of that gene, thus“knocking out” the gene. Discovering what happens to a mouse with aninactive gene tells us much about the normal role of that gene.The targeted gene is inactivated byinsertion of the marker gene.321…where the targeted genes on thevector and mouse genome line upvia homologous sequence recognition.4 Recombination occurs. The inactivatedgene is now in the mouse genome, andthe vector is lost during cell division.5 The stem cell is transplanted into an earlymouse embryo, where it replaces most ofthe embryo's cells during development.6 The resulting mouse is examinedfor consequences of carrying aninactivated gene.The vector is inserted into amouse stem cell…Inactivatedmouse geneBlastocystDevelopmentof embryoand birthMouseembryonicstem cellVectorTarget gene (plasmid)Reporter geneMousechromosome18.4 | WHAT OTHER TOOLS ARE USED TO STUDY DNA FUNCTION? 395oratory, scientists can make a specific, single-stranded antisenseRNA and add it to a cell to prevent translation of that gene’smRNA(Figure 18.8, left).Several antisense drugs are being developed to reduce the expressionof genes involved with cancer. For example, the genebcl2 codes for a protein that blocks apoptosis, and in some formsof cancer bcl2 is activated inappropriately through mutation.These cells fail to undergo apoptosis, continue to divide, andform a tumor. Treatment with oblimersen, an antisense RNA thatbinds to bcl2 mRNA, prevents production of the protein, andleads to apoptosis of tumor cells and shrinkage of the tumor.A related technique to antisense RNA takes advantage ofRNA interference (RNAi), a rare, natural mechanism for inhibitingmRNA translation. In a process similar to that involved inprocessing microRNAs, a short (about 20 nucleotides) doublestrandedRNA is unwound to single strands by a protein complexthat guides this RNA to a complementary region onmRNA. The protein complex catalyzes the breakdown of thetargeted mRNA. RNAi was not discovered until the late 1990s,but since then scientists have synthesized double-strandedsiRNAs to inhibit the expression of known genes (Figure 18.8,right). Because these double-stranded siRNAs are more stablethan antisense RNAs, the use of siRNAs is the preferred approachfor blocking translation. Macular degeneration is an eyedisease that results in near-blindness when blood vessels proliferatein the eye. The signaling molecule that stimulates vesselproliferation is a growth factor. An RNAi-based therapy isbeing developed to target this growth factor’s mRNA andshows promise in stopping and even reversing the progress ofthe disease.Although medical applications for RNAi are still at the experimentalstage, antisense RNA and RNAi have been widelyused to test cause-and-effect relationships in biological research.Another powerful research tool with great potential for medicineis the gene chip, or DNA microarray.DNA microarrays can reveal RNA expression patternsThe emerging science of genomics has to face two major quantitativerealities. First, there are very large numbers of genes ineukaryotic genomes. Second, the pattern of gene expression indifferent tissues at different times is quite distinctive. For example,a cell from a skin cancer at its early stage may have a uniquemRNA“fingerprint” that differs from that of both normal skincells and the cells of a more advanced skin cancer.To find such patterns, scientists could isolate mRNA from acell and test it by hybridization with each gene in the genome,one gene at a time. But that would involve many steps and takea very long time. It is far simpler to do these hybridizations all inone step. This is possible with DNA microarray technology, whichprovides large arrays of sequences for hybridization experiments.The development of DNA arrays (“gene chips”) was inspiredby methods used for decades by the semiconductor industry. Asilicon microchip consists of an array of microscopic electric circuitsetched onto a tiny silicon base, called a chip. In the sameway, a series of DNA sequences can be attached to a glass slidein a precise order (Figure 18.9). The slide is divided into a gridof microscopic spots, or “wells.” Each spot contains thousandsof copies of a particular oligonucleotide of 20 or more bases. Acomputer controls the addition of these oligonucleotide sequencesin a predetermined pattern. Each oligonucleotide canhybridize with only one DNA or RNA sequence, and thus is aunique identifier of a gene. Many thousands of different oligonucleotidescan be placed on a single microarray.As we mention in Section 17.4, DNA microarrays can be usedto identify specific single nucleotide polymorphisms or othermutations in genomic DNA samples. Or they can be used to analyzeRNA from different tissues or cells to identify which genesare expressed in those cell types. If mRNA is to be analyzed, itis usually incubated with reverse transcriptase to make cDNA(see Figure 18.6B). Fluorescent dyes are used to tag the cDNAsfrom different samples with different colors (usually red andgreen; see Figure 18.9). The cDNAs are used to probe the DNAon the microarray. Complementary sequences that form hybridswith the DNA on the microarray can be located using a sensitivescanner that detects the fluorescent light.A clinical use of DNA chips was developed by Laura van ‘tVeer and her colleagues at the Netherlands Cancer Institute(Figure 18.10). Most women with breast cancer are treated withsurgery to remove the tumor, and then treated with radiationsoon afterward to kill cancer cells that the surgery may havemissed. But a few cancer cells may still survive in some patients,and these eventually form tumors in the breast or elsewhere inthe body. The challenge for physicians is to develop criteria toidentify patients with surviving cancer cells so that they canbe treated aggressively with tumor-killing chemotherapy. Thescientists in van ‘t Veer’s group followed the medical historiesof breast cancer patients to identify those patients whose cancerrecurred. They then used a DNA microarray to examine theexpression of about 1,000 genes in these patients’ original tu-A protein complexunwinds siRNA andguides it to thetarget mRNA, whichis broken down.Antisense RNA iscomplementary tomRNA and blocksits translation.mRNAAntisense RNANo translationmRNA degradedmRNAmRNA fragmentation18.8 Using Antisense RNA and siRNA to siRNABlock Translation of mRNA Once a gene’ssequence is known, the synthesis of its proteincan be prevented by making either an antisenseRNA (left) or a small interfering RNA (siRNA,right) that is complementary to its mRNA.mors (which had been stored after their surgical removal) relativeto normal tissue. They found 70 genes whose expressiondiffered dramatically between tumors from patients whose cancersrecurred and tumors from patients whose cancers did notrecur. From this information, the Dutch group was able to identifywhat is called a gene expression signature. This expressionpattern is useful in clinical decision-making: patients with agood prognosis can avoid unnecessary chemotherapy, whilethose with a poor prognosis can receive aggressive treatment.396 CHAPTER 18 | RECOMBINANT DNA AND BIOTECHNOLOGYTOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE18.9 DNA on a ChipLarge arrays of DNA sequences can be used to identify specific sequences in a sample of DNA or RNA byhybridization. For example, thousands of known, synthetic DNA sequences can be attached to a glass slide inan organized grid pattern. This can be hybridized with cDNA samples derived from two different tissues to findout what genes are being expressed in the tissues.421 mRNA is isolatedfrom the tissues.cDNA is made from the mRNAs.The two cDNA mixtures arelabeled with different fluorescentdyes.3 The cDNAs hybridize withtarget DNA sequenceson the chip.The chip is read underfluorescent light.Green spots indicate geneexpression in normal tissue.Yellow spots indicate equalexpression in both tissues.Red spots indicateexpression in tumor tissue.Each well on the chip is filledwith thousands of copies of adifferent, known singlestrandedDNA sequence.Tumor tissueReversetranscriptionDNAmicroarrayNormal tissuecDNAmRNAcDNAs are hybridized to anarray containing DNA sequencesfrom diagnostic genes.The pattern ofspots providesinformation aboutthe tumor.Tumor cDNAGood prognosis Poor prognosisGO TO Animated Tutorial 18.1 • DNA Chip Technology Normal cDNAyourBioPortal.com18.10 Using DNA Arrays for Medical Diagnosis The pattern ofexpression of 70 genes in tumor tissues indicates whether breast canceris likely to recur. Actual arrays have more dots than shown here.18.5 | WHAT IS BIOTECHNOLOGY? 39718.4 RECAPResearchers can study the function of a gene byknocking out that gene in a living organism. AntisenseRNAs and siRNAs silence genes by selectivelyblocking mRNA translation. DNA microarrays allowthe simultaneous analysis of many different mRNAtranscripts.• How is a gene “knocked out” in a living organism? Seep. 393 and Figure 18.7• How do antisense RNA and siRNA molecules affectgene expression? See pp. 394–395 and Figure 18.9Now that you’ve seen how DNA can be fragmented, recombined,manipulated, and put back into living organisms, let’ssee some examples of how these techniques are used to makeuseful products.18.5 What Is Biotechnology?Biotechnology is the use of cells or whole living organisms toproduce materials useful to people, such as foods, medicines,and chemicals. People have been doing this for a very long time.For example, the use of yeasts to brew beer and wine dates backat least 8,000 years, and the use of bacterial cultures to makecheese and yogurt is a technique many centuries old. For a longtime people were not aware of the molecular basis of each ofthese biochemical transformations.About 100 years ago, thanks largely to Louis Pasteur’s work,it became clear that specific bacteria, yeasts, and other microbescould be used as biological converters to make certain products.Alexander Fleming’s discovery that the mold Penicillium makesthe antibiotic penicillin led to the large-scale commercial cultureof microbes to produce antibiotics as well as other usefulchemicals. Today, microbes are grown in vast quantities to makemuch of the industrial-grade alcohol, glycerol, butyric acid, andcitric acid that are used by themselves or as starting materialsin the manufacture of other products.Nevertheless the commercial harvesting of proteins, includinghormones and enzymes, was limited by the (often) minusculeamounts that could be extracted from organisms that producethem naturally. Yields were low, and purification wasdifficult and costly. Gene cloning has changed all this. The abilityto insert almost any gene into bacteria or yeasts, along withmethods to induce the gene to make its product in largeamounts and export it from the cells, has turned these microbesinto versatile factories for important products. Today there isinterest in producing nutritional supplements and pharmaceuticalsin whole transgenic animals and harvesting them in largequantities, for example from the milk of cows or the eggs ofchickens. Key to this boom in biotechnology has been the developmentof specialized vectors that not only carry genes intocells, but also make those cells express them at high levels.Expression vectors can turn cells into protein factoriesIf a eukaryotic gene is inserted into a typical plasmid and usedto transform E. coli, little if any of the gene product will be made.Other key prokaryotic DNA sequences must be included withthe gene. Abacterial promoter, a signal for transcription termination,and a special sequence that is necessary for ribosomebinding on the mRNA must all be included in the transformationvector if the gene is to be expressed in the bacterial cell.To solve this kind of problem, scientists make expression vectorsthat have all the characteristics of typical vectors, as wellas the extra sequences needed for the foreign gene (also calleda transgene) to be expressed in the host cell. For bacterial hosts,these additional sequences include the elements named above(Figure 18.11); for eukaryotes, they include the poly A–additionsequence, transcription factor binding sites, and enhancers.An expression vector can be designed to deliver transgenes to4321 An expressionvector includes theappropriate sequencesfor transcription andtranslation within thehost cell.The foreign gene isexpressed in E. colibecause the expressionvector is present.A foreign gene is insertedat a restriction site.E. coli is transformed withthe expression vector.BamHIBamHIBamHIPromoterRibosome-bindingsequenceTerminator oftranscriptionForeign geneForeigngeneDNA mRNA ProteinExpressionvector18.11 Expression of a Transgene in a Host Cell Produces LargeAmounts of its Protein Product To be expressed in E. coli, a genederived from a eukaryote requires bacterial sequences for transcriptioninitiation (promoter), transcription termination, and ribosome binding.Expression vectors contain these additional sequences, enabling theeukaryotic protein to be synthesized in the prokaryotic cell.GO TO Web Activity 18.1 • Expression VectorsyourBioPortal.comany class of prokaryotic or eukaryotic host and may include additionalfeatures:• An inducible promoter, which responds to a specific signal,can be included. For example, a promoter that responds tohormonal stimulation can be used so that the transgene willbe expressed at high levels when the hormone is added.• Atissue-specific promoter, which is expressed only in a certaintissue at a certain time, can be used if localized expression isdesired. For example, many seed proteins are expressedonly in the plant embryo. Coupling a transgene to a seedspecificpromoter will allow it to be expressed only in seeds.• Signal sequences can be added so that the gene product is directedto an appropriate destination. For example, when aprotein is made by yeast or bacterial cells in a liquidmedium, it is economical to include a signal directing theprotein to be secreted into the extracellular medium for easierrecovery.18.5 RECAPExpression vectors maximize the expression oftransgenes inserted into host cells.• How do expression vectors work? See pp. 397–398and Figure 18.11This chapter has introduced many of the methods that are usedin biotechnology. Let’s turn now to the ways biotechnology isbeing applied to meet some specific human needs.How Is Biotechnology Changing 18.6 Medicine, Agriculture, and theEnvironment?Huge potential for improvements in health, agriculture, and theenvironment derive from recent developments in biotechnology.We now have the ability to make virtually any protein byrecombinant DNA technology and to insert transgenes intomany kinds of host cells. With these revolutionary developmentsin biological capability, concerns have been raised aboutethics and safety. We now turn to the promises and problems ofbiotechnology that uses DNA manipulation.Medically useful proteins can be made by biotechnologyMany medically useful products are being made by biotechnology(Table 18.1), and hundreds more are in various stages ofdevelopment. The manufacture of tissue plasminogen activator(TPA) provides a good illustration of a medical application ofbiotechnology.When a wound begins bleeding, a blood clot soon forms tostop the flow. Later, as the wound heals, the clot dissolves. Howdoes the blood perform these conflicting functions at the righttimes? Mammalian blood contains an enzyme called plasminogen.When activated, it becomes plasmin and catalyzes the dissolutionof the clotting proteins. The conversion of plasminogento plasmin is catalyzed by the enzyme TPA, which isproduced by cells lining the blood vessels:TPAplasminogen ⎯⎯⎯→ plasmin(inactive) (active)Heart attacks and strokes can be caused by blood clots thatform in major blood vessels leading to the heart or the brain, respectively.During the 1970s, a bacterial enzyme called streptokinasewas found to stimulate the dissolution of clots in somepatients. Treatment with this enzyme saved lives, but being aforeign protein, it triggered the body’s immune system to reactagainst it. More important, the drug sometimes preventedclotting throughout the entire circulatory system, sometimesleading to a dangerous situation in which blood could not clotwhere needed.When TPA was discovered, it had many advantages: itbound specifically to clots, and it did not provoke an immunereaction. But the amounts of TPAthat could be harvested fromhuman tissues were tiny, certainly not enough to inject at thesite of a clot in the emergency room.Recombinant DNA technology solved this problem. TPAmRNAwas isolated and used to make cDNA, which was then398 CHAPTER 18 | RECOMBINANT DNA AND BIOTECHNOLOGYTABLE 18.1Some Medically Useful Products of BiotechnologyPRODUCT USEColony-stimulating factor Stimulates production of white blood cells in patients with cancer and AIDSErythropoietin Prevents anemia in patients undergoing kidney dialysis and cancer therapyFactor VIII Replaces clotting factor missing in patients with hemophilia AGrowth hormone Replaces missing hormone in people of short statureInsulin Stimulates glucose uptake from blood in people with insulin-dependent (Type I) diabetesPlatelet-derived growth factor Stimulates wound healingTissue plasminogen activator Dissolves blood clots after heart attacks and strokesVaccine proteins: Hepatitis B, herpes, influenza, Prevent and treat infectious diseasesLyme disease, meningitis, pertussis, etc.18.6 | HOW IS BIOTECHNOLOGY CHANGING MEDICINE, AGRICULTURE, AND THE ENVIRONMENT? 399inserted into an expression vector and used to transform E.coli (Figure 18.12). The transgenic bacteria made the protein inquantity, and it soon became available commercially. This drughas had considerable success in dissolving blood clots in peopleexperiencing strokes and heart attacks.Another way of making medically useful products in largeamounts is pharming: the production of pharmaceuticals in farmanimals or plants. For example, a gene encoding a useful proteinmight be placed next to the promoter of the gene that encodeslactoglobulin, an abundant milk protein. Transgenic animals carryingthis recombinant DNAwill secrete large amounts of the foreignprotein into their milk. These natural “bioreactors” can produceabundant supplies of the protein, which can be separatedeasily from the other components of the milk (Figure 18.13).Human growth hormone is a protein made in the pituitarygland in the brain and has many effects, especially in growingchildren (see Chapter 41). Children with growth hormone deficiencyhave short stature as well as other abnormalities. In thepast they were treated with protein isolated from the pituitaryglands of dead people, but the supply was too limited to meetdemand. Recombinant DNA technology was used to coax bacteriato make the protein, but the cost of treatment was high($30,000 a year). In 2004, a team led by Daniel Salamone at the4321 TPA DNA is insertedinto the expressionvector.TPA protein ismade byE. coli in largeamounts.TPA is harvested, purified,and injected into astroke patient todissolve the blood clot.E. coli is transformedwith the vector.BamHIExpression vectorfor E. coliTPAgeneReverse transcriptionmRNA for TPAcDNA for TPAE. coliDNATPA18.12 Tissue Plasminogen Activator: From Protein to Gene to DrugTPA is a naturally occurring human protein that dissolves blood clots. It isused to treat patients suffering from blood clotting in heart attacks orstrokes, and is manufactured using recombinant DNA technology.18.13 Pharming An expression vector carrying a desired gene can beput into an animal egg, which is implanted into a surrogate mother. Thetransgenic offspring produce the new protein in their milk. The milk is easilyharvested and the protein isolated, purified, and made clinically availableto patients.21 Donor ewes are treatedwith hormones toachieve superovulation.After insemination,fertilized eggs arecollected.The human transgeneis injected into thefertilized eggs.3 Eggs are transferredto recipient ewes.4 The offspring areraised, and matureoffspring are selectedfor presence of thehuman protein in themilk.5 The humanprotein isextractedfrom the milk.6 The therapeuticprotein isadministered tohuman patients.University of Buenos Aires made a transgenic cow that secreteshuman growth hormone in her milk. The yield is prodigious:only 15 such cows are needed to meet the needs worldwide ofchildren suffering from this type of dwarfism.DNA manipulation is changing agricultureThe cultivation of plants and the husbanding of animals providethe world’s oldest examples of biotechnology, dating backmore than 10,000 years. Over the centuries, people haveadapted crops and farm animals to their needs. Through selectivebreeding of these organisms, desirable characteristicssuch as large seeds, high fat content in milk, or resistance to diseasehave been imparted and improved.Until recently, the most common way to improve crop plantsand farm animals was to identify individuals with desirablephenotypes that existed as a result of natural variation. Throughmany deliberate crosses, the genes responsible for the desirabletrait could be introduced into a widely used variety or breed ofthat organism.Despite some spectacular successes, such as the breedingof high-yielding varieties of wheat, rice, and hybrid corn, suchdeliberate crossing can be a hit-or-miss affair. Many desirabletraits are controlled by multiple genes, and it is hard to predictthe results of a cross or to maintain a prized combinationas a pure-breeding variety year after year. In sexual reproduction,combinations of desirable genes are quickly separated bymeiosis. Furthermore, traditional breeding takes a long time:many plants and animals take years to reach maturity and thencan reproduce only once or twice a year—a far cry from therapid reproduction of bacteria.Modern recombinant DNA technology has several advantagesover traditional methods of breeding (Figure 18.14):• The ability to identify specific genes. The development of geneticmarkers allows breeders to select for specific desirablegenes, making the breeding process more precise and rapid.• The ability to introduce any gene from any organism into a plantor animal species. This ability, combined with mutagenesistechniques, vastly expands the range of possible new traits.• The ability to generate new organismsquickly. Manipulating cellsin the laboratory and regeneratinga whole plant by cloning ismuch faster than traditionalbreeding.Consequently, recombinant DNAtechnology has found many applicationsin agriculture (Table 18.2).We will describe a few examples todemonstrate the approaches thatplant scientists have used to improvecrop plants.PLANTS THAT MAKE THEIR OWN INSECTICIDESPlants are subject to infectionsby viruses, bacteria, and fungi,but probably the most importantcrop pests are herbivorous insects.From the locusts of biblical (andmodern) times to the cotton boll weevil,insects have continually eaten thecrops people grow.The development of insecticideshas improved the situation somewhat,but insecticides have theirown problems. Many, including theorganophosphates, are relativelynonspecific and kill beneficial insectsin the broader ecosystem aswell as crop pests. Some even have400 CHAPTER 18 | RECOMBINANT DNA AND BIOTECHNOLOGYConventional breedingMust usesamespeciesof plantsAny organismcan be usedMany yearsof crosses tooriginal parentOne crossto originalparentMany genescombinedFew genescombinedSelect plantswith bestgenotypesSelect plantswith bestgenotypesRecombinant DNA technologyX XX X18.14 Genetically Modified Plantsversus Conventional Plant BreedingPlant biotechnology offers many potentialadvantages over conventional breeding.18.6 | HOW IS BIOTECHNOLOGY CHANGING MEDICINE, AGRICULTURE, AND THE ENVIRONMENT? 401toxic effects on other groups of organisms, including people.What’s more, many insecticides persist in the environment fora long time.Some bacteria protect themselves by producing proteins thatcan kill insects. For example, the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensisproduces a protein that is toxic to the insect larvae that preyon it. The toxicity of this protein is 80,000 times greater than thatof a typical commercial insecticide. When a hapless larva eatsthe bacteria, the toxin becomes activated and binds specificallyto the insect’s gut, producing holes and killing the insect.Dried preparations of B. thuringiensis have been sold for decadesas safe insecticides that break down rapidly in the environment.But the biodegradation of these preparations is their limitation,because it means that the dried bacteria must be applied repeatedlyduring the growing season.Amore permanent approach is to have the crop plants themselvesmake the toxin, and this is exactly what plant scientistshave done. The toxin gene from B. thuringiensis has been isolated,cloned, and extensively modified by the addition of aplant promoter and other regulatory sequences. Transgeniccorn, cotton, soybeans, tomatoes, and other crops are now beinggrown successfully with this added gene. Pesticide usageby farmers growing these transgenic crops is greatly reduced.CROPS THAT ARE RESISTANT TO HERBICIDES Herbivorous insectsare not the only threat to agriculture. Weeds may grow in fieldsand compete with crop plants for water and soil nutrients.Glyphosate is a widely used and effective herbicide, or weedkiller, that works only on plants. It inhibits an enzyme systemin the chloroplast that is involved in the synthesis of aminoacids. Glyphosate is a broad-spectrum herbicide that kills mostweeds, but unfortunately it also kills crop plants. One solutionto this problem is to use it to rid a field of weeds before the cropplants start to grow. But, as any gardener knows, when the cropbegins to grow, the weeds reappear. If the crop were not affectedby the herbicide, the herbicide could be applied to thefield at any time.Scientists have used expression vectors to make plants thatsynthesize a different form of the target enzyme for glyphosatethat is unaffected by the herbicide. The gene for this enzymehas been inserted into corn, cotton, and soybean plants, makingthem resistant to glyphosate. This technology has expandedrapidly and a large proportion of cotton and soybean plantsnow carry this gene.GRAINS WITH IMPROVED NUTRITIONALCHARACTERISTICS To remain healthy,humans must consume adequateamounts of β-carotene, which thebody converts into vitamin A(see Figure3.21). About 400 million peopleworldwide suffer from vitamin Adeficiency,which makes them susceptibleto infections and blindness. Onereason is that rice grains, which do notcontain β-carotene, make up a largepart of their diets. Other parts of therice plant, and indeed many plantsand other organisms, contain enzymes for the biochemical pathwaythat leads to β-carotene production.Plant biologists Ingo Potrykus and Peter Beyer isolated oneof the genes for the β-carotene pathway from the bacteriumErwinia uredovora and another from daffodil plants. They addeda promoter and other signals for expression in the developingrice grain, and then transformed rice plants with the two genes.The resulting rice plants produce grains that look yellow becauseof their high β-carotene content. A newer variety with acorn gene replacing the one from daffodils makes even more β-carotene and is golden in color (Figure 18.15). A daily intakeof about 150 grams of this cooked rice can supply all the β-carotene a person needs. This new transgenic strain has beencrossed with strains adapted for various local environments, inthe hope of improving the diets of millions of people.CROPS THAT ADAPT TO THE ENVIRONMENT Agriculture dependson ecological management—tailoring the environment to theneeds of crop plants and animals. A farm field is an unnatural,human-designed system that must be carefully managedto maintain optimal conditions for crop growth. For example,excessive irrigation can cause increases in soil salinity. TheFertile Crescent, the region between the Tigris and Euphratesrivers in the Middle East where agriculture probably originated10,000 years ago, is no longer fertile. It is now a desert,largely because the soil has a high salt concentration. Fewplants can grow on salty soils, partly because of osmotic ef-TABLE 18.2Agricultural Applications of Biotechnology under DevelopmentPROBLEM TECHNOLOGY/GENESImproving the environmental adaptations Genes for drought tolerance, salt toleranceof plantsImproving nutritional traits High-lysine seeds; β-carotene in riceImproving crops after harvest Delay of fruit ripening; sweeter vegetablesUsing plants as bioreactors Plastics, oils, and drugs produced in plantsWild type Golden rice 1 Golden rice 218.15 Transgenic Rice Rich in b-Carotene Right and middle: Thegrains from these transgenic rice strains are colored because they makethe pigment β-carotene, which is converted to vitamin A in the humanbody. Left: Normal rice grains do not contain β-carotene.fects that result in wilting, and partly because excess salt ionsare toxic to plant cells.Some plants can tolerate salty soils because they have a proteinthat transports Na+ ions out of the cytoplasm and into the vacuole,where the ions can accumulate without harming plantgrowth (see Section 5.3 for a description of the plant vacuole). Inmany salt-intolerant plants, including Arabidopsis thaliana, the genefor this protein exists but is inactive. Recombinant DNA technologyhas allowed scientists to create active versions of this gene,and to use it to transform crop plants such as rapeseed, wheat,and tomatoes. When this gene was added to tomato plants, theygrew in water that was four times as salty as the typical lethal level(Figure 18.16). This finding raises the prospect of growing usefulcrops on what were previously unproductive soils.This example illustrates what could become a fundamentalshift in the relationship between crop plants and the environment.Instead of manipulating the environment to suit the plant,biotechnology may allow us to adapt the plant to the environment. Asa result, some of the negative effects of agriculture, such aswater pollution, could be lessened.Biotechnology can be used for environmental cleanupThe thousands of species of bacteria have many unique enzymesand biochemical pathways. Bacteria are nature’s recyclers,thriving on many types of nutrients—including what humansrefer to as wastes. Bioremediation is the use by humans ofother organisms to remove contaminants from the environment.Two well-known uses of bacteria for bioremediation are compostingand wastewater treatment.Composting involves the use of bacteria to break down largemolecules, including carbon-rich polymers and proteins inwaste products such as wood chips, paper, straw, and kitchenscraps. For example, some species of bacteria make cellulase,an enzyme that hydrolyzes cellulose. Bacteria are used in wastewatertreatment to break down human wastes, paper products,and household chemicals.Transgenic organisms can also be used to clean up environmentalcontaminants. As we saw at the opening of this chapter,bacteria are being used to help clean up oil spills. As anotherexample, plants that have been modified to take up heavy metalsare being explored as a way to remediate contaminated soils,such as mine tailings (see Section 39.4).There is public concern about biotechnologyConcerns have been raised about the safety and wisdom of geneticallymodifying crops and other organisms. These concernsare centered on three claims:• Genetic manipulation is an unnatural interference withnature.• Genetically altered foods are unsafe to eat.• Genetically altered crop plants are dangerous to theenvironment.Advocates of biotechnology tend to agree with the firstclaim. However, they point out that all crops are unnatural inthe sense that they come from artificially bred plants growingin a manipulated environment (a farmer’s field). RecombinantDNA technology just adds another level of sophistication tothese technologies.To counter the concern about whether genetically engineeredcrops are safe for human consumption, biotechnology advocatespoint out that only single genes are added and that these genesare specific for plant function. For example, the B. thuringiensistoxin produced by transgenic plants has no effect on people.However, as plant biotechnology moves from adding genes thatimprove plant growth to adding genes that affect human nutrition,such concerns will become more pressing.Various negative environmental impacts have been envisaged.There is concern about the possible “escape” of transgenesfrom crops to other species. If the gene for herbicide resistance,for example, were inadvertently transferred from a cropplant to a closely related weed, that weed could thrive in her-402 CHAPTER 18 | RECOMBINANT DNA AND BIOTECHNOLOGY(A)(B)18.16 Salt-Tolerant Tomato PlantsTransgenic plants containing a genefor salt tolerance thrive in salty water(A), while plants without the transgenedie (B). This technology may allowcrops to be grown on salty soils.18.6 | HOW IS BIOTECHNOLOGY CHANGING MEDICINE, AGRICULTURE, AND THE ENVIRONMENT? 403bicide-treated areas. Another negative impact would be the developmentof new super-weeds from transgenic crops. For example,a drought tolerant crop plant might spread into, and upsetthe ecology of, a desert. Or beneficial insects could eat plantmaterials containing B. thuringiensis toxin and die. Transgenicplants undergo extensive field-testing before they are approvedfor use, but the complexity of the biological world makes itimpossible to predict all potential environmental effects of transgenicorganisms. In fact, some spreading of transgenes has beendetected. Because of the potential benefits of agriculturalbiotechnology (see Table 18.2), scientists believe that it is wiseto proceed with caution.18.6 RECAPBiotechnology has been used to produce medicinesand to develop transgenic plants with improved agriculturaland nutritional characteristics.• What are the advantages of using biotechnology forplant breeding compared with traditional methods?See Figure 18.14• What are some of the concerns that people might haveabout agricultural biotechnology? See pp. 402–40318.1 What Is Recombinant DNA?• Recombinant DNA is formed by the combination of two DNAsequences from different sources. Review Figure 18.1• Many restriction enzymes make staggered cuts in the twostrands of DNA, creating fragments that have sticky ends withunpaired bases.• DNA fragments with sticky ends can be used to create recombinantDNA. DNA molecules from different sources can be cutwith the same restriction enzyme and spliced together usingDNA ligase. Review Figure 18.218.2 How Are New Genes Inserted into Cells?• One goal of recombinant DNA technology is to clone a particulargene, either for analysis or to produce its protein product inquantity.• Bacteria, yeasts, and cultured plant and animal cells are commonlyused as hosts for recombinant DNA. The insertion of foreignDNA into host cells is called transformation or transfection(for animal cells). Transformed or transfected cells arecalled transgenic cells.• Various methods are used to get recombinant DNA into cells.These include chemical or electrical treatment of the cells, theuse of viral vectors, and injection. Agrobacterium tumefaciens isoften used to insert DNA into plant cells.• To identify host cells that have taken up a foreign gene, theinserted sequence can be tagged with one or more reportergenes, which are genetic markers with easily identifiable phenotypes.Selectable markers allow for the selective growth oftransgenic cells.• Replication of the foreign gene in the host cell requires that itbecome part of a segment of DNA that contains a replicon (originand terminus of replication).• Vectors are DNA sequences that can carry new DNA into hostcells. Plasmids and viruses are commonly used as vectors.Review Figure 18.318.3 What Sources of DNA Are Used in Cloning?• DNA fragments from a genome can be inserted into host cellsto create a genomic library. Review Figure 18.6A• The mRNAs produced in a certain tissue at a certain time can beextracted and used to create complementary DNA (cDNA) byreverse transcription. Review Figure 18.6B• PCR products can be used for cloning.• Synthetic DNA containing any desired sequence can be madeand mutated in the laboratory.18.4 What Other Tools Are Used to Study DNAFunction?• Homologous recombination can be used to knock out a genein a living organism. Review Figure 18.7• Gene silencing techniques can be used to inactivate the mRNAtranscript of a gene, which may provide clues to the gene’sfunction. Artificially created antisense RNA or siRNA can beadded to a cell to prevent translation of a specific mRNA.Review Figure 18.8• DNA microarray technology permits the screening of thousandsof cDNA sequences at the same time. Review Figure18.9, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 18.118.5 What Is Biotechnology?• Biotechnology is the use of living cells to produce materialsuseful to people. Recombinant DNA technology has resulted ina boom in biotechnology.• Expression vectors allow a transgene to be expressed in a hostcell. Review Figure 18.11, WEB ACTIVITY 18.118.6 How Is Biotechnology Changing Medicine,Agriculture, and the Environment?• Recombinant DNA techniques have been used to make medicallyuseful proteins. Review Figure 18.12• Pharming is the use of transgenic plants or animals to producepharmaceuticals. Review Figure 18.13• Because recombinant DNA technology has several advantagesover traditional agricultural biotechnology, it is being extensivelyapplied to agriculture. Review Figure 18.14• Transgenic crop plants can be adapted to their environments,rather than vice versa.• Bioremediation is the use of organisms, which are often geneticallymodified, to improve the environment by breaking downpollutants.• There is public concern about the application of recombinantDNA technology to food production.CHAPTER SUMMARY
18.1 What Is Recombinant DNA?• Recombinant DNA is formed by the combination of two DNAsequences from different sources. Review Figure 18.1• Many restriction enzymes make staggered cuts in the twostrands of DNA, creating fragments that have sticky ends withunpaired bases.• DNA fragments with sticky ends can be used to create recombinantDNA. DNA molecules from different sources can be cutwith the same restriction enzyme and spliced together usingDNA ligase. Review Figure 18.218.2 How Are New Genes Inserted into Cells?• One goal of recombinant DNA technology is to clone a particulargene, either for analysis or to produce its protein product inquantity.• Bacteria, yeasts, and cultured plant and animal cells are commonlyused as hosts for recombinant DNA. The insertion of foreignDNA into host cells is called transformation or transfection(for animal cells). Transformed or transfected cells arecalled transgenic cells.• Various methods are used to get recombinant DNA into cells.These include chemical or electrical treatment of the cells, theuse of viral vectors, and injection. Agrobacterium tumefaciens isoften used to insert DNA into plant cells.• To identify host cells that have taken up a foreign gene, theinserted sequence can be tagged with one or more reportergenes, which are genetic markers with easily identifiable phenotypes.Selectable markers allow for the selective growth oftransgenic cells.• Replication of the foreign gene in the host cell requires that itbecome part of a segment of DNA that contains a replicon (originand terminus of replication).• Vectors are DNA sequences that can carry new DNA into hostcells. Plasmids and viruses are commonly used as vectors.Review Figure 18.318.3 What Sources of DNA Are Used in Cloning?• DNA fragments from a genome can be inserted into host cellsto create a genomic library. Review Figure 18.6A• The mRNAs produced in a certain tissue at a certain time can beextracted and used to create complementary DNA (cDNA) byreverse transcription. Review Figure 18.6B• PCR products can be used for cloning.• Synthetic DNA containing any desired sequence can be madeand mutated in the laboratory.18.4 What Other Tools Are Used to Study DNAFunction?• Homologous recombination can be used to knock out a genein a living organism. Review Figure 18.7• Gene silencing techniques can be used to inactivate the mRNAtranscript of a gene, which may provide clues to the gene’sfunction. Artificially created antisense RNA or siRNA can beadded to a cell to prevent translation of a specific mRNA.Review Figure 18.8• DNA microarray technology permits the screening of thousandsof cDNA sequences at the same time. Review Figure18.9, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 18.118.5 What Is Biotechnology?• Biotechnology is the use of living cells to produce materialsuseful to people. Recombinant DNA technology has resulted ina boom in biotechnology.• Expression vectors allow a transgene to be expressed in a hostcell. Review Figure 18.11, WEB ACTIVITY 18.118.6 How Is Biotechnology Changing Medicine,Agriculture, and the Environment?• Recombinant DNA techniques have been used to make medicallyuseful proteins. Review Figure 18.12• Pharming is the use of transgenic plants or animals to producepharmaceuticals. Review Figure 18.13• Because recombinant DNA technology has several advantagesover traditional agricultural biotechnology, it is being extensivelyapplied to agriculture. Review Figure 18.14• Transgenic crop plants can be adapted to their environments,rather than vice versa.• Bioremediation is the use of organisms, which are often geneticallymodified, to improve the environment by breaking downpollutants.• There is public concern about the application of recombinantDNA technology to food production.