14The wedding and honeymoon began spectacularly.Andrew Speaker, an Atlanta lawyer, and law studentSarah Cooksey began their honeymoon in Rome.Days later, they got shocking news from the U.S. Centersfor Disease Control and Prevention: Andrew had drugresistanttuberculosis (TB) and would have to be quarantinedto prevent him from spreading the disease to others.Several months before, Speaker had gone to see hisphysician, complaining of a sore rib. The doctor orderedan X-ray and saw some fluid in Speaker’s lungs. Suspicious,the physician sent samples of the fluid to a lab,which confirmed the diagnosis of TB. Moreover, the TBappeared to be resistant to several drugs.Before the nineteenth-century German microbiologistRobert Koch identified the bacterium Mycobacteriumtuberculosis as its causative agent, TB was known as consumption.What started as a bloody cough with fever,chills, and night sweats would usually progress to otherorgans, including the nervous system. Death was almostinevitable. Today tuberculosis cases are fairly rare in theUnited States and Europe. Worldwide, however, there aremore than 8 million cases and 1.6 million deaths annually,and TB remains the scourge it was in the nineteenth century.Speaker probably picked up the bacterium on histravels and it hid in his tissues (possibly for years) beforeflaring up at the time of his wedding.Two drugs are used as the first approach to treating TB.One of them, isoniazid, is activated inside the bacterial cell,and the activated form blocks an enzyme essential for theassembly of the bacterial cell walls. Without functional cellwalls, new bacterial cells cannot survive. The second drug,rifampin, binds to a part of the enzyme RNA polymerasethat is necessary for gene expression. Without the appropriateexpression of its genes, the bacterium soon dies.In both cases, the targets of the antibiotics are proteins,each encoded by a gene (a sequence of DNA). Mutations inthese genes can lead to altered amino acid sequences inthe proteins, so that they no longer have three-dimensionalstructures that bind to the antibiotics. Unfortunately, thesealtered genes can be transferred from one bacterium to another,so a single M. tuberculosis strain can evolve to haveboth mutations and be resistant to both antibiotics. Thatis what happened in the case of Andrew Speaker.He made his way to Denver for treatment, this timewith a third antibiotic, kanamycin, which binds to the bacterialribosome. The ribosome is the cell’s protein synthesisfactory, and is also essential for gene expression.Finally, the treatment was successful.An unexpected wedding giftMycobacterium tuberculosis The causative agent ofTB can be killed with antibiotics, but resistance sometimesoccurs.What Is the Evidence that Genes 14.1 Code for Proteins?In Chapter 12, we defined genes as sequences of DNA andlearned that genes are expressed as physical characteristicsknown as the phenotype. Here, we show that in most cases,genes code for proteins, and it is the proteins that determine thephenotype. What is the evidence for this?The molecular basis of phenotypes was actually discoveredbefore it was known that DNA was the genetic material. Scientistshad studied the chemical differences between individualscarrying wild-type and mutant alleles in organisms asdiverse as humans and bread molds. They found that the majorphenotypic differences resulted from differences in specificproteins.Observations in humans led to the proposal thatgenes determine enzymesThe identification of a gene product as a protein began with amutation. In the early twentieth century, the English physicianArchibald Garrod saw a number of children with a rare disease.One symptom of the disease was that the urine turned darkbrown in air. This was especially noticeable on the infants’ diapers.The disease was given the descriptive name alkaptonuria(“black urine”).Garrod noticed that the disease was most common in childrenwhose parents were first cousins. Mendelian genetics hadjust been “rediscovered,” and Garrod realized that because firstcousins share alleles (can you calculate what fraction?), the childrenof first cousins might inherit a rare mutant allele from bothparents. He proposed that alkaptonuria was a phenotypecaused by a recessive, mutant allele.Garrod took the analysis one step further. He identified thebiochemical abnormality in the affected children. He isolatedfrom them an unusual substance, homogentisic acid, whichaccumulated in blood, joints (where it crystallized and causedsevere pain), and urine (where it turned black). The chemicalIN THIS CHAPTER we will describe how genes areexpressed as proteins, first discussing the evidence for therelationship between genes and proteins. We will then describehow the DNA sequence of a gene is copied (transcribed)into a sequence of RNA, and how the RNA sequenceis translated to make a polypeptide with a definedsequence of amino acids. We will discuss some of themodifications to proteins that occur after they are madeby the ribosomes. Following Mendel’s definition of thegene as a physical entity, scientists characterized the geneas DNA (see Chapter 13). In this chapter we see how thegene gets expressed as a phenotype at the molecular level.Proteins are the major products of gene expression.Some proteins play vital structural roles in cells, and othersact as enzymes, which are essential for most aspectsof phenotypic expression. So, when protein synthesis isinhibited, cells cannot survive. This is what happened tothe TB-causing bacteria when Speaker was treated withkanamycin. But genes can mutate, and the alleles thatresult may encode proteins that have altered surfaces.The mutant alleles in resistant TB encoded proteins thatwould no longer bind antibiotics.CHAPTER OUTLINE14.1 What Is the Evidence that Genes Code forProteins?14.2 How Does Information Flow from Genes toProteins?14.3 How Is the Information Content in DNATranscribed to Produce RNA?14.4 How Is Eukaryotic DNA Transcribed and theRNA Processed?14.5 How Is RNA Translated into Proteins?14.6 What Happens to Polypeptides after Translation?Tuberculosis Is a World Health Issue Drug-resistant TBhas become a major medical problem throughout the world.Here a doctor examines a patient in Ethiopia, which ranks highamong the world’s nations in number of TB cases.structure of homogentisic acid is similar to that of the amino acidtyrosine:Enzymes as biological catalysts had just been discovered.Garrod proposed that homogentisic acid was a breakdownproduct of tyrosine. Normally, homogentisic acid is convertedto a harmless product. According to Garrod, there is a normal(wild-type) human allele that determines the synthesis of an enzymethat catalyzes this conversion:normal allele↓active enzyme↓tyrosine →homogentisic acid →harmless productWhen the allele has been mutated, the enzyme is inactive andhomogentisic acid accumulates instead:mutant allele↓inactive enzyme↓tyrosine →homogentisic acid (HA accumulates)Therefore, Garrod correlated one gene to one enzyme and coinedthe term “inborn error of metabolism” to describe this geneticallydetermined biochemical disease. But his hypothesisneeded direct confirmation by the identification of the specificenzyme and specific gene mutation involved. This did not occuruntil the enzyme, homogentisic acid oxidase, was describedas active in healthy people and inactive in alkaptonuria patientsin 1958, and the specific DNA mutation was described in 1996.To directly relate genes and enzymes, biologists first turned tosimpler organisms that could be manipulated in the laboratory.Experiments on bread mold established that genesdetermine enzymesAs they work to explain the principles that underlie life, biologistsoften turn to organisms that they can manipulate experimentally.It wasn’t possible to follow up on Garrod’s hypothesisrelating genes to enzymes in humans, because it is unethicalto perform genetics experiments on people. Instead, biologistsuse model organisms that are easy to grow in the laboratory orgreenhouse, and use them to develop principles of genetics thatcan then be applied more generally to other organisms. Youhave seen some of these model organisms in previous chapters:• Pea plants (Pisum sativum) were used by Mendel in hisgenetics experiments.• Fruit flies (Drosophila) were used by Morgan in his geneticsexperiments.• E. coli was used by Meselson and Stahl to study DNAreplication.To this list we now add the common bread mold, Neurosporacrassa. Neurospora is a type of fungus known as an ascomycete(see Chapter 30). This mold is haploid for most of its life, so thatthere are no dominant or recessive alleles: all alleles are expressedphenotypically and are not masked by a heterozygouscondition. Neurospora is simple to culture and grows well in thelaboratory. In the 1940s, George W. Beadle and Edward L. Tatumat Stanford University undertook studies to chemically definethe phenotypes in Neurospora.Beadle and Tatum knew about the roles of enzymes in biochemistrywhen they began their work, and like Garrod, theyhypothesized that the expression of a specific gene results inthe activity of a specific enzyme. Now, they set out to test thishypothesis directly. They grew Neurospora on a minimal nutritionalmedium containing sucrose, minerals, and a vitamin. Usingthis medium, the enzymes of wild-type Neurospora couldcatalyze all the metabolic reactions needed to make all thechemical constituents of their cells, including amino acids andproteins. These wild-type strains are called prototrophs (“originaleaters”). From these wild type strains, they were able toproduce and isolate distinct mutant strains that showed specificbiochemical deficiencies.Mutations provide a powerful way to determine cause andeffect in biology. Nowhere has this been so evident as in the elucidationof biochemical pathways. Such pathways consist of sequentialevents (chemical reactions) in which each event is dependenton the occurrence of the preceding event. The generalreasoning is as follows:• Observation. Condition (1) occurs and condition (2) occurs;that is, (1) and (2) are correlated.• Hypothesis. Condition (1) results in condition (2); that is, (1)causes (2).In biochemical genetics, this can be stated as follows:• Observation. Aparticular gene (a) is present and a particularreaction catalyzed by a particular enzyme (A) occurs; thetwo are correlated.• Hypothesis. The gene (a) encodes (causes the synthesis of)the specific enzyme (A).• Test of hypothesis. Amutant gene (a′ ) encodes a nonfunctionalenzyme (A′ ) and the reaction does not occur.Beadle and Tatum treated wild-type Neurospora with X rays,which act as a mutagen (something known to cause mutations—inherited genotypic changes). When they tested the treatedmolds, they found that some mutant strains could no longergrow on the minimal medium, but grew only if they were suppliedwith additional nutrients, such as amino acids. The scientistshypothesized that these auxotrophs (“increased eaters”)must have suffered mutations in genes that encoded the enzymesused to synthesize the nutrients that they now neededto obtain from their environment.H3N+CH2OHCOHOOHHOHCOO–Homogentisic acid Tyrosine292 CHAPTER 14 | FROM DNA TO PROTEIN: GENE EXPRESSIONFor each auxotrophic mutant strain, Beadleand Tatum were able to find a single compoundthat, when added to the minimalmedium, supported the growth of that strain.These results suggested that mutations havesimple effects, and that each mutation causesa defect in only one enzyme in a metabolicpathway. These conclusions confirmed Garrod’sone-gene, one-enzyme hypothesis (Figure14.1).One group of auxotrophs, for example,could grow only if the minimal medium wassupplemented with the amino acid arginine.These strains were designated arg mutants.Beadle and Tatum found several different argmutant strains. They proposed two alternativehypotheses to explain why these differentgenetic strains had the same phenotype:• The different arg mutants could have mutationsin the same gene, as is the case forsome eye color mutations in fruit flies. Inthis case, the gene might code for an enzymeinvolved in arginine synthesis.• The different arg mutants could have mutationsin different genes, each coding fora separate function that leads to arginineproduction. These independent functionsmight be different enzymes along thesame biochemical pathway.Some of the arg mutant strains fell into oneof these two categories, and some into theother. Genetic crosses showed that some ofthe mutations were at the same chromosomallocus, and were different alleles of the samegene. Other mutations were at different loci,or on different chromosomes, and so werenot alleles of the same gene. Beadle andTatum concluded that these different genesparticipated in governing a single biosyntheticpathway—in this case, the pathwayleading to arginine synthesis. Next, they setout to elucidate each step in this pathway(see the Interpretation in Figure 14.1).By growing different arg mutants in thepresence of various compounds suspected tobe intermediates in the biosynthetic pathwayfor arginine, Beadle and Tatum were able toclassify each mutation as affecting one enzymeor another, and to order the compounds alongthe pathway. Then they broke open the wildtypeand mutant cells and examined them forenzyme activities. The results confirmed theirhypothesis: each mutant strain was indeedmissing a single enzyme activity in the pathway.In general, gene expression controlsmetabolism.14.1 | WHAT IS THE EVIDENCE THAT GENES CODE FOR PROTEINS? 293HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODINTERPRETATIONEach gene specifies a particular enzyme.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: If a diploid Neurospora spore were made from two haploidcells, one with mutant 3 and the other with mutant 2, whatwould be its phenotype?14.1 One Gene, One EnzymeBeadle and Tatum had several mutant strains of Neurospora that could not makearginine (arg). Several compounds are needed for arginine synthesis. By testingthese compounds in the growth media for the mutant strains, the researchersdeduced that each mutant strain was deficient in one enzyme along a biochemicalpathway.Each gene determines an enzyme in a biochemical pathway.RESULTSGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevantlinks for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.INVESTIGATING LIFESupplement added to minimal mediumPlace spores (single cells that divide to produce mold colonies) ofeach arg mutant strain on a minimal nutritional medium with andwithout supplements.The wild type grows on allmedia; it can synthesize itsown arginine.Mutant strain 1 growsonly on arginine. It cannotconvert either citrulline orornithine to arginine.Mutant strain 2 grows oneither arginine or citrulline.It can convert citrulline toarginine, but cannot convertornithine to citrulline.Mutant strain 3 growswhen any one of the threesupplements are added.It can convert ornithine tocitrulline and citrulline toarginine.WildtypeMutantstrain 1Mutantstrain 2Mutantstrain 3Strain 3 isblocked here.Strain 1 isblocked here.Strain 2 isblocked here.None Ornithine Citrulline ArginineIf an organism cannot convert one particular compund to another, itpresumably lacks an enzyme required for conversion, and the mutationis in the gene that codes for that enzyme.Gene AEnzyme AGene BEnzyme BGene CEnzyme CPrecursor Ornithine Citrulline ArginineOne gene determines one polypeptideThe gene–enzyme relationship has undergone several modificationsin light of our current knowledge of molecular biology.Many proteins, including many enzymes, are composed of morethan one polypeptide chain, or subunit (that is, they have a quaternarystructure; see Section 3.2). Look at the illustration ofhemoglobin in Figure 3.10. This protein has four polypeptides—two α and two β subunits, and the different subunits are encodedby separate genes. Thus it is more correct to speak of aone-gene, one-polypeptide relationship.So far we have seen that in terms of protein synthesis, the functionof a gene is to inform the production of a single, specific polypeptide.But not all genes code for polypeptides. As we will see belowand in Chapter 16, there are many DNAsequences that codefor RNA molecules that are not translated into polypeptides butinstead have other functions.14.1 RECAPBeadle and Tatum’s studies of mutations in breadmolds led to our understanding of the one-gene, onepolypeptiderelationship. In most cases, the functionof a gene is to code for a specific polypeptide.• What is a model organism, and why is Neurospora agood model for studying biochemical genetics?See p. 292• How were Beadle and Tatum’s experiments on Neurosporaset up to determine the order of steps in a biochemicalpathway? See pp. 292–293 and Figure 14.1• Explain the distinction between the phrases “onegene,one-enzyme” and “one-gene, one-polypeptide.”See pp. 293–294Now that we have established the one-gene, one-polypeptiderelationship, how does it work? That is, how is the informationencoded in DNA used to produce a particular polypeptide?How Does Information Flow from 14.2 Genes to Proteins?Much of the biochemical genetics in the middle of the twentiethcentury was directed at revealing the relationship betweengenes and protein synthesis. As we discussed in Section 14.1,the expression of a specific gene usually results in the synthesisof a specific polypeptide. The process of gene expression wasoutlined in Section 4.1. To review, this process occurs in two majorsteps:• During transcription, the information in a DNA sequence (agene) is copied into a complementary RNA sequence.• During translation, this RNA sequence is used to create theamino acid sequence of a polypeptide.In 1958, Francis Crick described this process as “the centraldogma of molecular biology.”RNA differs from DNA and plays a vital rolein gene expressionRNA (ribonucleic acid) is a key intermediary between a DNAsequence and a polypeptide. RNA is an informational polynucleotidesimilar to DNA (see Figure 4.2), but it differs from DNAin three ways:• RNA generally consists of only one polynucleotide strand.• The sugar molecule found in RNA is ribose, rather than thedeoxyribose found in DNA.• Although three of the nitrogenous bases (adenine, guanine,and cytosine) in RNA are identical to those in DNA, thefourth base in RNA is uracil (U), which is similar to thyminebut lacks the methyl (—CH3) group.The bases in RNA can pair with those in a single strand of DNA.This pairing obeys the same complementary base-pairing rulesas in DNA, except that adenine pairs with uracil instead ofthymine. Single-stranded RNA can fold into complex shapes byinternal base pairing, as seen below.Three types of RNA participate in protein synthesis:• Messenger RNA (mRNA) carries a copy of a gene sequencein DNA to the site of protein synthesis at the ribosome.• Transfer RNA (tRNA) carries amino acids to the ribosome forassembly into polypeptides.• Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) catalyzes peptide bond formationand provides a structural framework for the ribosome.tRNAmRNA rRNA(ribosome)Thymine UracilNCH3OOHHNNHOOHHN H HTranscription TranslationDNA RNA Polypeptide294 CHAPTER 14 | FROM DNA TO PROTEIN: GENE EXPRESSIONTwo hypotheses were proposed to explaininformation flow from DNA to proteinThe central dogma suggested that information flows from DNAto RNA to protein, and not in the reverse direction. It raised twoquestions:• How does genetic information get from the nucleus of aeukaryotic cell to the cytoplasm? (As Section 5.3 explains,most of the DNA of a eukaryotic cell is confined to the nucleus,but proteins are synthesized in the cytoplasm.)• What is the relationship between a specific nucleotide sequencein DNA and a specific amino acid sequence in aprotein?To answer these questions, Crick proposed two hypotheses, themessenger hypothesis and the adapter hypothesis.THE MESSENGER HYPOTHESIS AND TRANSCRIPTION Crick and hiscolleagues proposed that an RNA molecule forms as a complementarycopy of one DNA strand in a gene. This messengerRNA, or mRNA, then travels from the nucleus to the cytoplasm,where it serves as an informational sequence of codons.Each codon consists of three consecutive nucleotides, and differentcodons encode particular amino acids. Thus the mRNAsequence determines the ordered sequence of amino acids in apolypeptide chain, which is built by the ribosome. The processby which RNA forms is called transcription (Figure 14.2).This hypothesis has been tested repeatedly, and the result isalways the same: each DNA sequence that encodes a protein istranscribed as a sequence of mRNA. Today it is routine in thousandsof laboratories around the world to test for gene expressionby examining the mRNA copy of the gene, which is oftencalled the transcript. There is no longer any question that Crick’smodel was correct.THE ADAPTER HYPOTHESIS AND TRANSLATION To answer the questionof how a DNA sequence gets transformed into the specificamino acid sequence of a polypeptide, Crick proposed theadapter hypothesis: that there must be an adapter molecule thatcan both bind a specific amino acid and recognize a specific sequenceof nucleotides. He proposed that this recognition functionoccurs because the adapter molecule contains an anticodoncomplementary to the codon in the mRNA. He envisioned suchadapters as molecules with two regions, one serving the bindingfunction and the other serving the recognition function.In due course, such adapter molecules were found: they areknown as transfer RNA, or tRNA. Each tRNA recognizes a specificcodon in the mRNA and simultaneously carries the specificamino acid corresponding to that codon. Thus, the tRNAstogether can translate the language of DNA into the languageof proteins. The tRNA adapters, carrying bound amino acids,line up on the mRNA sequence so that the amino acids are inthe proper sequence for a growing polypeptide chain—in theprocess of translation (see Figure 14.2). Once again, actual observationsof the expression of thousands of genes in all types oforganisms have confirmed the hypothesis that tRNA acts as theintermediary between the nucleotide sequence information inmRNAand the amino acid sequence in a protein.We can summarize the main features of the central dogma,the messenger hypothesis, and the adapter hypothesis asfollows: a given gene is transcribed to produce an mRNA moleculethat is complementary to one of the DNA strands, andthen the tRNA molecules translate the sequence of codons inthe mRNA into a sequence of linked amino acids, to form apolypeptide.RNA viruses are exceptions to the central dogmaCertain viruses present exceptions to the central dogma. As wesaw in Section 13.1, a virus is a non-cellular infectious particlethat reproduces inside cells. Many viruses, such as the tobaccomosaic virus, influenza viruses, and poliovirus, have RNArather than DNA as their genetic material. With its nucleotidesequence, RNA could potentially act as an information carrierand be expressed as a protein. But if RNA is usually singlestranded,how do these viruses replicate? They generally solvethis problem by transcribing from RNA to RNA, making anRNAstrand that is complementary to their genomes. This “opposite”strand is then used to make multiple copies of the viralgenome by transcription:RNA RNA PolypeptideSee Figures14.4 and 14.7.See Figures14.7, 14.10,and 14.11.See Figures14.15, 14.16,and 14.17.See Figures14.12 and14.13.Transcription(RNA synthesis)ProcessingTranslation(protein synthesis)RibosometRNADNAPre-mRNAmRNAInside nucleusInside of cellPolypeptideNuclear envelope14.2 From Gene to Protein This diagram summarizes the processesof gene expression in eukaryotes.GO TO Web Activity 14.1 • Eukaryotic Gene ExpressionyourBioPortal.com14.2 | HOW DOES INFORMATION FLOW FROM GENES TO PROTEINS? 295Human immunodeficiency viruses (HIV) and certain rare tumorviruses also have RNA as their genomes, but do not replicateby transcribing from RNA to RNA. Instead, after infectinga host cell, such a virus makes a DNA copy of its genome, whichbecomes incorporated into the host’s genome. The virus relieson the host cell’s transcription machinery to make more RNA.This RNA can be either translated to produce viral proteins, orincorporated as the viral genome into new viral particles. Synthesisof DNA from RNAis called reverse transcription, and notsurprisingly, such viruses are called retroviruses.14.2 RECAPThe central dogma of molecular biology states thatthe DNA code is used to produce RNA and the RNAsequence determines the sequence of amino acidsin a polypeptide. Transcription is the process bywhich a DNA sequence is copied into mRNA. Translationis the process by which this information isconverted into polypeptide chain. Transfer RNAsrecognize the genetic information in messenger RNAand bring the appropriate amino acids into positionin a growing polypeptide chain.• What is the central dogma of molecular biology?See p. 294• What are the roles of mRNA and tRNA in gene expression?See p. 294 and Figure 14.2The central dogma is indeed central to gene expression in all organisms.Understanding its details is essential for understandinghow organisms function at the molecular level, and this understandingis key to the application of biology to humanwelfare, in areas such as agriculture and medicine. Much of theremainder of this book will in one way or another involve DNAand proteins. Let’s begin by describing how the information inDNAis transcribed to produce RNA.How Is the Information Content in 14.3 DNA Transcribed to Produce RNA?In normal prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, RNA synthesis isdirected by DNA. Transcription—the formation of a specificRNAsequence from a specific DNA sequence—requires severalcomponents:• ADNAtemplate for complementary base pairing; one ofthe two strands of DNA• The appropriate nucleoside triphosphates (ATP, GTP, CTP,and UTP) to act as substrates• An RNA polymerase enzymeNot only mRNA is produced by transcription. The sameprocess is responsible for the synthesis of tRNA and ribosomalRNA (rRNA), whose important roles in protein synthesis willbe described below. Like polypeptides, these RNAs are encodedby specific genes. In addition, as we will see in Chapter 16,many small RNAs, called microRNAs, are transcribed. Thesemolecules stay in the nucleus, where they play roles in stimulatingor inhibiting gene expression.RNA polymerases share common featuresRNA polymerases from both prokaryotes and eukaryotes catalyzethe synthesis of RNA from the DNA template. There isonly one kind of RNA polymerase in bacteria, while there areseveral kinds in eukaryotes; however, they all share a commonstructure (Figure 14.3). Like DNA polymerases, RNA polymerasesare processive; that is, a single enzyme–template bindingevent results in the polymerization of hundreds of RNAbases. But unlike DNA polymerases, RNA polymerases do notrequire a primer and do not have a proofreading function.Transcription occurs in three stepsTranscription can be divided into three distinct processes: initiation,elongation, and termination. You can follow theseprocesses in Figure 14.4.INITIATION Transcription begins with initiation, which requiresa promoter, a special sequence of DNA to which the RNA polymerasebinds very tightly (see Figure 14.4A). Eukaryotic genesgenerally have one promoter each, while in prokaryotes andviruses, several genes often share one promoter. Promoters areimportant control sequences that “tell” the RNA polymerase twothings:• Where to start transcription• Which strand of DNA to transcribeApromoter, which is a specific sequence in the DNA that readsin a particular direction, orients the RNA polymerase and thus“aims” it at the correct strand to use as a template. Promoters296 CHAPTER 14 | FROM DNA TO PROTEIN: GENE EXPRESSIONDirection of transcriptionRNA exitPath of DNA14.3 RNA Polymerase This enzyme from yeast is similar to mostother RNA polymerases. Note the size relationship between enzyme andDNA. See Figure 14.4 for details.14.3 | HOW IS THE INFORMATION CONTENT IN DNA TRANSCRIBED TO PRODUCE RNA? 297TranscriptionProcessingTranslationDNAPre-mRNAmRNAPolypeptide123RNA polymerase binds tothe promoter and starts tounwind the DNA strands.RNA polymerase moves along the DNA templatestrand from 3′ to 5′ and produces the RNAtranscript by adding nucleotides to the 3′ endof the growing RNA.When RNA polymerase reaches thetermination site, the RNA transcriptis set free from the template.Complementarystrand5′5′5′5′3′3′3′5′5′3′3′ PromoterInitiation siteTermination siteTemplatestrandRNApolymeraseExiting RNAtranscriptDirection oftranscriptionRNAExiting DNANucleotides (A, U, C, G)Rewindingof DNAUnwindingof DNA(A) INITIATION(B) ELONGATION(C) TERMINATIONTemplatestrand14.4 DNA Is Transcribed to Form RNA DNA is partially unwoundby RNA polymerase to serve as a template for RNA synthesis. The RNAtranscript is formed and then peels away, allowing the DNA that hasalready been transcribed to rewind into a double helix. Three distinctprocesses—initiation, elongation, and termination—constitute DNA transcription.RNA polymerase is much larger in reality than indicated here,covering about 50 base pairs.GO TO Animated Tutorial 14.1 • TranscriptionyourBioPortal.comfunction somewhat like the capital letter at the beginning of asentence, indicating how the sequence of words should be read.Part of each promoter is the initiation site, where transcriptionbegins. Groups of nucleotides lying “upstream” from the initiationsite (5′ on the non-template strand, and 3′ on the templatestrand) help the RNA polymerase bind.Although every gene has a promoter, not all promoters areidentical. Some promoters are more effective at transcriptioninitiation than others. Furthermore, there are differences betweentranscription initiation in prokaryotes and in eukaryotes.But despite these variations, the basic mechanisms of initiationare the same throughout the living world.ELONGATION Once RNA polymerase has bound to the promoter,it begins the process of elongation (see Figure 14.4B).RNA polymerase unwinds the DNA about 10 base pairs at atime and reads the template strand in the 3′-to-5′ direction. LikeDNA polymerase, RNA polymerase adds new nucleotides tothe 3′ end of the growing strand, but does not require a primerto get this process started. The new RNA elongates from the firstbase, which forms its 5′ end, to its 3′ end. The RNA transcriptis thus antiparallel to the DNA template strand.Because RNA polymerases do not proofread, transcriptionerrors occur at a rate of one for every 104 to 105 bases. Becausemany copies of RNA are made, however, and becausethey often have only a relatively short lifespan, these errors are not as potentially harmfulas mutations in DNA.TERMINATION Just as initiation sites in the DNAtemplate strand specify the starting point for transcription,particular base sequences specify its termination(see Figure 14.4C). The mechanisms of terminationare complex and of more than one kind.For some genes, the newly formed transcript fallsaway from the DNA template and the RNA polymerase.For others, a helper protein pulls the transcriptaway.The information for protein synthesislies in the genetic codeThe genetic code relates genes (DNA) to mRNAand mRNA to the amino acids that make up proteins.The genetic code specifies which amino acidswill be used to build a protein. You can think of thegenetic information in an mRNA molecule as a seriesof sequential, nonoverlapping three-letter“words.” Each sequence of three nucleotide bases(the three “letters”) along the mRNA polynucleotidechain specifies a particular amino acid.Each three-letter “word” is called a codon. Eachcodon is complementary to the corresponding triplet of basesin the DNA molecule from which it was transcribed. The geneticcode relates codons to their specific amino acids.CHARACTERISTICS OF THE CODE Molecular biologists “broke”the genetic code in the early 1960s. The problem they addressedwas perplexing: how could more than 20 “code words” be writtenwith an “alphabet” consisting of only four “letters”? In otherwords, how could four bases (A, U, G, and C) code for 20 differentamino acids?Atriplet code, based on three-letter codons, was consideredlikely. Since there are only four letters (A, G, C, and U), a onelettercode clearly could not unambiguously encode 20 aminoacids; it could encode only four of them. Atwo-letter code couldhave only 4 × 4 = 16 unambiguous codons—still not enough.But a triplet code could have 4 × 4 × 4 = 64 codons, more thanenough to encode the 20 amino acids.Marshall W. Nirenberg and J. H. Matthaei, at the U.S. NationalInstitutes of Health, made the first decoding breakthroughin 1961 when they realized that they could use a simpleartificial polynucleotide instead of a complex natural mRNAas a messenger. They could then identify the polypeptide thatthe artificial messenger encoded. This led to the identificationof the first three codons (Figure 14.5).298 CHAPTER 14 | FROM DNA TO PROTEIN: GENE EXPRESSIONHYPOTHESIS A triplet codon based on three-base codons specifies amino acids.INVESTIGATING LIFEMETHOD Prepare a bacterialextract containingall the componentsneeded to makeproteins except mRNA.Add an artificial mRNAcontaining only onerepeating base.The polypeptideproduced containsa single amino acid.+++Codon Codon CodonU U U U U U U U U Phe Phe PheA A A A A A A A A Lys Lys LysC C C C C C C C C Pro Pro Pro14.5 Deciphering the Genetic CodeNirenberg and Matthaei used a test-tube protein synthesis system to determine theamino acids specified by synthetic mRNAs of known codon compositions.RESULTSCONCLUSION UUU is an mRNA codon for phenylalanine.AAA is an mRNA codon for lysine.CCC is an mRNA codon for proline.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: What would be the result if the artificial mRNA were poly-G?Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevantlinks for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.GO TO Animated Tutorial 14.2 • Deciphering theGenetic CodeyourBioPortal.comOther scientists later found that simple artificial mRNAs onlythree nucleotides long—each amounting to one codon—couldbind to a ribosome, and that the resulting complex could then bindto the corresponding tRNAwith its specific amino acid. Thus, forexample, a simple UUU mRNAcaused the tRNAcarrying phenylalanineto bind to the ribosome. After this discovery, the completedeciphering of the genetic code was relatively simple. To discoverwhich amino acid a codon represented, the scientists simply repeatedthe experiment using a sample of artificial mRNA for thatcodon, and observed which amino acid became bound to it.The complete genetic code is shown in Figure 14.6. Noticethat there are many more codons than there are different aminoacids in proteins. All possible combinations of the four available“letters” (the bases) give 64 (43) different three-lettercodons, yet these codons determine only 20 amino acids. AUG,which codes for methionine, is also the start codon, the initiationsignal for translation. Three of the codons (UAA, UAG,UGA) are stop codons, or termination signals for translation.When the translation machinery reaches one of these codons,translation stops, and the polypeptide is released from the translationcomplex.What happens if a stop codon isn’t there? In humans a severeanemic condition, α-thalassemia, results from various mutationsin either of the two genes that encode the α-polypeptidechain of hemoglobin. In one of these mutant alleles, the stopcodon UAAhas been converted to GAA, a codon for glutamine.The next stop codon doesn’t occur until much further along themRNA, resulting in a protein molecule with larger, defective αsubunits.THE GENETIC CODE IS REDUNDANT BUT NOT AMBIGUOUS The 60codons that are not start or stop codons are far more thanenough to code for the other 19 amino acids—and indeed, foralmost all amino acids, there is more than one codon. Thus wesay that the genetic code is redundant (or degenerate). For example,leucine is represented by six different codons (see Figure14.6). Only methionine and tryptophan are represented byjust one codon each.Aredundant code should not be confused with an ambiguouscode. If the code were ambiguous, a single codon could specifyeither of two (or more) different amino acids, and there wouldbe doubt about which amino acid should be incorporated intoa growing polypeptide chain. Redundancy in the code simplymeans that there is more than one clear way to say, “Put leucinehere.” The genetic code is not ambiguous: a given amino acidmay be encoded by more than one codon, but a codon can codefor only one amino acid.THE GENETIC CODE IS (NEARLY) UNIVERSAL The same genetic codeis used by all the species on our planet. Thus the code must bean ancient one that has been maintained intact throughout theevolution of living organisms. Exceptions are known: within mitochondriaand chloroplasts, the code differs slightly from thatin prokaryotes and in the nuclei of eukaryotic cells; and in onegroup of protists, UAA and UAG code for glutamine rather thanfunctioning as stop codons. The significance of these differencesis not yet clear. What is clear is that the exceptions are few.The common genetic code means that there is also a commonlanguage for evolution. Natural selection acts on phenotypicvariations that result from genetic variation. The genetic codeprobably originated early in the evolution of life. As we saw inChapter 4, simulation experiments indicate the plausibility ofindividual nucleotides and nucleotide polymers arising spontaneouslyon the primeval Earth. The common code also hasprofound implications for genetic engineering, as we will seein Chapter 18, since it means that the code for a human gene isthe same as that for a bacterial gene. It is therefore impressive,but not surprising, that a human gene can be expressed in E. colivia laboratory manipulations, since these cells speak the same“molecular language.”The codons in Figure 14.6 are mRNA codons.The base sequence of the DNA strand that is transcribedto produce the mRNA is complementaryand antiparallel to these codons. Thus, for example,• 3′-AAA-5′ in the template DNA strand correspondsto phenylalanine (which is encoded bythe mRNA codon 5′-UUU-3′ )14.3 | HOW IS THE INFORMATION CONTENT IN DNA TRANSCRIBED TO PRODUCE RNA? 299UAGUAA UGAAUGSecond letterU C A GUUCCUCUUCGUCAPhenylalanineLeucineUUCUUUUUGUUASerineUACUAU TyrosineStop codonStop codonUGCUGUUGGCysteineStop codonTryptophanC LeucineCUCCUUCUGCUACCCCCUCCGCCAProlineCACCAUCAGCAAGlutamineHistidineCGCCGUCGGCGA ArginineAAUC IsoleucineAUUAUAMethionine;start codonACCACUACGACAThreonineAACAAUAAGAAALysineAsparagine AGCAGUAGGAGASerineArginineG ValineGUCGUUGUGGUAGCCGCUGCGGCAAlanineGACGAUGAGGAA GlutamicacidAsparticacid GGCGGUGGGGGAGlycineFirst letterUCAGUCAGUCAGUCAGThird letter14.6 The Genetic Code Genetic information is encodedin mRNA in three-letter units—codons—made up ofnucleoside monophosphates with the bases uracil (U),cytosine (C), adenine (A), and guanine (G) and is read in a5′ to 3′ direction on mRNA. To decode a codon, find itsfirst letter in the left column, then read across the top toits second letter, then read down the right column to itsthird letter. The amino acid the codon specifies is given inthe corresponding row. For example, AUG codes formethionine, and GUA codes for valine.GO TO Web Activity 14.2 • The Genetic CodeyourBioPortal.com• 3′-ACC-5′ in the template DNA corresponds to tryptophan(which is encoded by the mRNA codon 5′-UGG-3′ )The non-template strand has the same sequence as the mRNA(but with T’s instead of U’s), and is often referred to as the “codingstrand.” By convention, DNA sequences are usually shownbeginning with the 5′ end of the coding sequence.14.3 RECAPTranscription, which is catalyzed by an RNA polymerase,proceeds in three steps: initiation, elongation,and termination. The genetic code relates the informationin mRNA (as a linear sequence of codons)to protein (a linear sequence of amino acids).• What are the steps of gene transcription that producemRNA? See pp. 296–298 and Figure 14.4• How do RNA polymerases work? See pp. 296–298• How was the genetic code elucidated? See pp.298–299 and Figure 14.5The features of transcription that we have described were firstelucidated in model prokaryotes, such as E. coli. Biologists thenused the same methods to analyze this process in eukaryotes,and, although the basics are the same, there are some notable(and important) differences. We now turn to eukaryotic geneexpression.How Is Eukaryotic DNA Transcribed 14.4 and the RNA Processed?Since the genetic code is the same, you might expect the processof gene expression to be the same in eukaryotes as it is inprokaryotes. And basically it is. However, there are significantdifferences in gene structure between prokaryotes and eukaryotes,that is, there are differences in the organization of the nucleotidesequences in the genes. In addition, in eukaryotes butnot prokaryotes, a nucleus separates transcription and translation(Table 14.1). Let’s look at the distinctive eukaryotic processof transcription.Eukaryotic genes have noncoding sequencesAdiagram of the structure and transcription of a typical eukaryoticgene is shown in Figure 14.7. In prokaryotes, several adjacentgenes sometimes share one promoter; however, in eukaryotes,each gene has its own promoter, which usually precedesthe coding region. Unlike the prokaryotic RNA polymerase, aeukaryotic RNA polymerase does not recognize the promotersequence by itself, but requires help from other molecules, aswe’ll see in more detail in Chapter 16. At the other end of thegene, downstream from the coding region, is a DNA sequenceappropriately called the terminator, which signals the end oftranscription.Eukaryotic genes may also contain noncoding base sequences,called introns (intervening regions). One or more intronsmay be interspersed with the coding sequences, which arecalled exons (expressed regions). Both introns and exons appearin the primary mRNA transcript, called pre-mRNA, but the intronsare removed by the time the mature mRNA—the mRNAthat will be translated—leaves the nucleus. Pre-mRNAprocessinginvolves cutting introns out of the pre-mRNAtranscript andsplicing together the remaining exon transcripts (see Figure14.7). If this seems surprising, you are in good company. For scientistswho were familiar with prokaryotic genes and gene expression,the discovery of introns in eukaryotic genes was entirelyunexpected.300 CHAPTER 14 | FROM DNA TO PROTEIN: GENE EXPRESSIONTranscriptionProcessingTranslationDNAPre-mRNAmRNAPolypeptideThe exons andintrons of the codingregion are transcribed.21The spliced exons areready for translationafter processing.The intronsare removed.3Promoter Stop codon TerminatorStartcodonSplice sitesDNAmRNAExon 1 Intron 1 Exon 2 Intron 2 Exon 3Pre-mRNA5′3′5′5′3′3′5′ 3′14.7 Transcription of a Eukaryotic Gene The β-globin genediagrammed here is about 1,600 base pairs (bp) long. The threeexons—the protein-coding sequences—contain codons for 146amino acids plus a stop codon. The two introns—noncodingsequences of DNA containing almost 1,000 bp between them—areinitially transcribed, but are spliced out of the pre-mRNA transcript.How can we locate introns within a eukaryotic gene? Oneway is by nucleic acid hybridization, the method that originallyrevealed the existence of introns. This method, outlined in Figure14.8, has been crucial for studying the relationship betweeneukaryotic genes and their transcripts. It involves two steps:• The target DNA is denatured by heat to break the hydrogenbonds between the base pairs and separate the two strands.• A single-stranded nucleic acid from another source (calleda probe) is incubated with the denatured DNA. If theprobe has a base sequence complementary to the targetDNA, a probe–target double helix forms by hydrogenbonding between the bases. Because the two strands arefrom different sources, the resulting double-stranded moleculeis called a hybrid.Biologists used nucleic acid hybridization to examine the β-globin gene, which encodes one of the globin polypeptides thatmake up hemoglobin. Follow the experiment in Figure 14.9carefully as we describe what they did and what happened.The researchers first denatured DNA containing the β-globingene by heating it slowly, then added previously isolated,mature β-globin mRNA. They were able to view the hybridizedmolecules using electron microscopy. As expected, the mRNAbound to the DNA by complementary base pairing. The researchersexpected to obtain a linear (1:1) matchup of the mRNAto the coding DNA. That expectation was only partly met: therewere indeed stretches of RNA–DNA hybrid, but some loopedstructures were also visible. These loops were not expected, andinitially the scientists thought that something must be wrongwith the experimental procedure. However, when they repeatedthe experiment, they got the same results, and whenthey did it with other genes and mRNAs, loopsagain appeared. The loops turned out to be the introns,stretches of DNA that did not have complementarybase sequences on the mature mRNA.When pre-mRNA was used instead of maturemRNAto hybridize to the DNA, there was completehybridization, revealing that the introns were indeedpart of the pre-mRNAtranscript. Somewhere on thepath from primary transcript (pre-mRNA) to maturemRNA, the introns had been removed, and the exonshad been spliced together. We will examine thissplicing process in the next section.Introns interrupt, but do not scramble, the DNAsequence of a gene. The base sequences of the exonsin the template strand, if joined and taken in order,form a continuous sequence that is complementaryto that of the mature mRNA. In some cases, the separatedexons encode different functional regions,or domains, of the protein. For example, the globinpolypeptides that make up hemoglobin each havetwo domains: one for binding to a nonprotein pigmentcalled heme, and another for binding to theother globin subunits. These two domains are encodedby different exons in the globin genes. Most(but not all) eukaryotic genes contain introns, and inrare cases, introns are also found in prokaryotes. Thelargest human gene encodes a muscle protein calledtitin; it has 363 exons, which together code for 38,138amino acids.14.4 | HOW IS EUKARYOTIC DNA TRANSCRIBED AND THE RNA PROCESSED? 301TABLE 14.1Differences between Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Gene ExpressionCHARACTERISTIC PROKARYOTES EUKARYOTESTranscription and translation occurrence At the same time in the cytoplasm Transcription in the nucleus, then translation in the cytoplasmGene structure DNA sequence is read in the same Noncoding introns within coding sequenceorder as the amino acid sequenceModification of mRNA after initial None Introns spliced out; 5′ cap and 3′ poly A addedtranscription but before translationTOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE14.8 Nucleic Acid HybridizationBase pairing permits the detection of a sequence that is complementaryto the probe.1 Upon being slowlyheated, the two strandsof a DNA moleculedenature (separate).2 If a probe with acomplementary basesequence is added tothe denatured DNA…3 …it binds the targetDNA strand, forminga double-strandedhybrid molecule.DenaturationProbeHybridizationTargetDNA3′ 5′ 3′ 5′ 3′ 5′ 3′ 5′5′ 3′5′ 3′ 5′3′3′5′Eukaryotic gene transcripts areprocessed before translationThe primary transcript of a eukaryotic gene is modified in severalways before it leaves the nucleus: both ends of the premRNAaremodified, and the introns are removed.MODIFICATION AT BOTH ENDS Two steps in the processing of premRNAtake place in the nucleus, one at each end of the molecule(Figure 14.10):• AG cap is added to the 5′ end of the pre-mRNA as it istranscribed. The G cap is a chemically modified molecule ofguanosine triphosphate (GTP). It facilitates the binding ofmRNAto the ribosome for translation, and it protects themRNAfrom being digested by ribonucleases that breakdown RNAs.A poly a tail is added to the 3′ end of the pre-mRNA at theend of transcription. In both prokaryotic and eukaryoticgenes, transcription begins at a DNA sequence that is upstream(to the “left” on the DNA) of the first codon (i.e., atthe promoter), and ends downstream (to the “right” on theDNA) of the termination codon. In eukaryotes, there isusually a “polyadenylation” sequence (AAUAAA) nearthe 3′ end of the pre-mRNA, after the last codon. This sequenceacts as a signal for an enzyme to cut the premRNA.Immediately after this cleavage, another enzyme302 CHAPTER 14 | FROM DNA TO PROTEIN: GENE EXPRESSIONGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODINVESTIGATING LIFEThe DNA contains noncoding regions within the genes that are not present in the mature mRNA.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: Draw the result assuming that there were three exons and two introns.14.9 Demonstrating the Existence of IntronsWhen an mRNA transcript of the ß-globin gene was hybridized with the double-stranded DNA of that gene, the introns in the DNA“looped out.” This demonstrated that the coding region of a eukaryotic gene can contain noncoding DNA that is not present in themature mRNA transcript.Some regions within the coding sequence of a gene do not end up in its mRNA.RESULTS1 Mouse DNA is partially denaturedand hybridized with mRNAtranscribed from a mouse gene.2 If there is no intron, theDNA hybridizes withthe mRNA in acontinuous strand.3 If there is an intron, it is forced into a loopby the mRNA, bringing the two exons together.Non-template strandmRNANon-template strand TemplatestrandNon-templatestrandExon 2Exon 2Exon 1Exon 1mRNAExon 1 Exon 2b-globin mRNA from maturemRNA transcript of exons 1 and 2DoublestrandedDNAExon 1 Intron Exon 2IntronElectron micrographof mRNA–DNA hybridGene without intron: Gene with intron:4 An electron micrograph of the hybrid shows athick, double-stranded loop formed by an intron.Thin loops are formed by the non-template strandof DNA that was displaced by the mRNA.adds 100 to 300 adenine nucleotides (a “poly A” sequence)to the 3′ end of the pre-mRNA. This “tail” may assist in theexport of the mRNA from the nucleus and is important formRNA stability.SPLICING TO REMOVE INTRONS The next step in the processingof eukaryotic pre-mRNA within the nucleus is removal of theintrons. If these RNA sequences were not removed, a very differentamino acid sequence, and possibly a nonfunctional protein,would result. A process called RNA splicing removes theintrons and splices the exons together.As soon as the pre-mRNAis transcribed, several small nuclearribonucleoprotein particles (snRNPs) bind at each end. Thereare several types of these RNA–protein particles in the nucleus.At the boundaries between introns and exons are consensussequences—short stretches of DNA that appear, with littlevariation (“consensus”), in many different genes. The RNA inone of the snRNPs has a stretch of bases complementary to theconsensus sequence at the 5′ exon–intron boundary, and it bindsto the pre-mRNA by complementary base pairing. AnothersnRNP binds to the pre-mRNA near the 3′intron–exon boundary (Figure 14.11).Next, using energy from adenosine triphosphate(ATP), proteins are added to form a largeRNA–protein complex called a spliceosome.This complex cuts the pre-mRNA, releases theintrons, and joins the ends of the exons togetherto produce mature mRNA.Molecular studies of human genetic diseaseshave provided insights into intronconsensus sequences and splicing machinery.For example, people with the geneticdisease β-thalassemia, like those with α-thalassemiadiscussed earlier in the chapter,have a defect in the production of one of thehemoglobin subunits. These people suffer from severe anemiabecause they have an inadequate supply of red blood cells. Insome cases, the genetic mutation that causes the disease occursat an intron consensus sequence in the β-globin gene. Consequently,β-globin pre-mRNA cannot be spliced correctly, andnonfunctional β-globin mRNA is made. This finding offers anotherexample of how biologists can use mutations to elucidatecause-and-effect relationships.After processing is completed in the nucleus, the maturemRNAmoves out into the cytoplasm through the nuclear pores.In the nucleus, a protein called TAP binds to the 5′ end ofprocessed mRNA. This protein in turn binds to others, whichare recognized by a receptor at the nuclear pore. Together, theseproteins lead the mRNA through the pore. Unprocessed or incompletelyprocessed pre-mRNAs remain in the nucleus.14.4 | HOW IS EUKARYOTIC DNA TRANSCRIBED AND THE RNA PROCESSED? 303A “cap” of modifiedGTP is added here.A poly A “tail” is added.This sequence is recognizedand cut by an enzyme.Pre-mRNACoding region ofprimary transcriptMature mRNAG cap — AAAAA . . . A5′5′AAUAAAAAUAAA3′3′14.10 Processing the Ends of EukaryoticPre-mRNA Modifications at each end of thepre-mRNA transcript—the G cap and the poly Atail—are important for mRNA function.Small nuclear ribonucleoprotein(snRNP) particles bindto consensus sequences nearthe 5′ and 3′ splice sites.Interactions between the twosnRNPs and other proteinsform a spliceosome.A cut is made between the5′ exon and the intron.After the first cut at the 5′ end,the intron forms a closed loop,like a lariat.The free 3′ OH group at the endof the cut exon reacts with the5′ phosphate of the other exon.The 3′ exon is cleaved and splicedto the 5′ exon and the maturemRNA is exported for translation.43The excised intron isdegraded in the nucleus.721655′ SplicesitePrimary mRNA transcriptMature mRNAsnRNPsnRNPSpliceosome5′ Exon5′ Exon3′ Exon3′ ExonIntron3′ SplicesiteOH5′5′5′5′5′3′3′3′3′14.11 The Spliceosome: An RNA SplicingMachine The binding of snRNPs to consensussequences bordering the introns on the pre-mRNAresults in a series of proteins binding and forming alarge complex called a spliceosome. This structuredetermines the exact position of each cut in thepre-mRNA with great precision.GO TO Animated Tutorial 14.3 • RNA SplicingyourBioPortal.com14.4 RECAPMost eukaryotic genes contain noncoding sequencescalled introns, which are removed from thepre-mRNA transcript.• Describe the method of nucleic acid hybridization.See p. 301 and Figure 14.8• Describe the experiment that showed that the β-globingene contains introns. See p. 301 and Figure 14.9• How is the pre-mRNA transcript modified at the 5′ and3′ ends? See p. 302 and Figure 14.10• How does RNA splicing happen? What are the consequencesif it does not happen correctly? See p. 303and Figure 14.11Transcription and post-transcriptional events produce an mRNAthat is ready to be translated into a sequence of amino acids ina polypeptide. We turn now to the events of translation.14.5 How Is RNA Translated into Proteins?As Crick’s adapter hypothesis proposed, the translation ofmRNAinto proteins requires a molecule that links the informationcontained in mRNA codons with specific amino acids inproteins. That function is performed by transfer RNA (tRNA).Two key events must take place to ensure that the protein madeis the one specified by the mRNA:• The tRNAs must read mRNA codons correctly.• The tRNAs must deliver the amino acids that correspond toeach mRNA codon.Once the tRNAs “decode” the mRNA and deliver the appropriateamino acids, components of the ribosome catalyze the formationof peptide bonds between amino acids. We now turn tothese two steps.Transfer RNAs carry specific amino acids andbind to specific codonsA codon in mRNA and an amino acid in a protein are relatedby way of an adapter—a specific tRNA with an attached aminoacid. For each of the 20 amino acids, there is at least one specifictype (“species”) of tRNA molecule. The tRNA molecule hasthree functions:• It binds to a particular amino acid. When it is carrying anamino acid, the tRNA is said to be “charged.”• It associates with mRNA.• It interacts with ribosomes.The tRNA molecular structure relates clearly to all of these functions.The molecule has about 75 to 80 nucleotides. It has a conformation(a three-dimensional shape) that is maintained bycomplementary base pairing (hydrogen bonding) betweenbases within its own sequence (Figure 14.12).The conformation of a tRNA molecule is exquisitely suitedfor its interaction with specific binding sites on ribosomes. Inaddition, at the 3′ end of every tRNA molecule is its amino acidattachment site: a site to which its specific amino acid binds co-304 CHAPTER 14 | FROM DNA TO PROTEIN: GENE EXPRESSIONGO TO Animated Tutorial 14.4 • Protein SynthesisyourBioPortal.comThis flattened “cloverleaf” modelemphasizes base pairing betweencomplementary nucleotides.This three-dimensional representationemphasizes the internal regionsof base pairing.This icon for tRNA willbe used in the figuresthat follow.The anticodon, composed of thethree bases that interact with mRNA,is far from the amino acid attachment site.This computer-generated, space-fillingrepresentation shows the threedimensionalstructure of tRNA.Amino acidattachment site(always CCA)Amino acidattachment site(always CCA)Hydrogen bondsbetween pairedbases result inthree-dimensionalstructure.ACCACC C CC CCCCCCC DCT YYGGGGGGGGGG GDDG GG GG GG GGCUUUUUUUUUUUGCCGAAAAA AA AAAAAAA5′5′OH3′3′CC G14.12 Transfer RNA The stem and loop structure of a tRNA moleculeis well suited to its functions: binding to amino acids, associating withmRNA molecules, and interacting with ribosomes.valently. At about the midpoint of the tRNA sequence is a groupof three bases, called the anticodon, which is the site of complementarybase pairing (via hydrogen bonding) with the codonon the mRNA. Thus, each tRNA species has a unique anticodonthat corresponds to the amino acid it carries. When the tRNAand the mRNA come into contact on the surface of the ribosome,the codon and anticodon are antiparallel, permitting hydrogenbonding to occur between the complementary bases. As anexample of this process, consider the amino acid arginine:• The template strand DNA sequence that codes for arginineis 3′-GCC-5′, which is transcribed, by complementary basepairing, to produce the mRNA codon 5′-CGG-3′• That mRNA codon binds by complementary base pairing toa tRNA with the anticodon 3′-GCC-5′, which is chargedwith arginine.Recall that 61 different codons encode the 20 amino acids in proteins(see Figure 14.6). Does this mean that the cell must produce61 different tRNA species, each with a different anticodon?No. The cell gets by with about two-thirds of that number oftRNA species because the specificity for the base at the 3′ endof the codon (and the 5′ end of the anticodon) is not alwaysstrictly observed. This phenomenon, called wobble, allows thealanine codons GCA, GCC, and GCU, for example, all to be recognizedby the same tRNA. Wobble is allowed in some matchesbut not in others; of most importance, it does not allow the geneticcode to be ambiguous. That is, each mRNA codon bindsto just one tRNA species, carrying a specific amino acid.Activating enzymes link the right tRNAs andamino acidsThe charging of each tRNA with its correct amino acid isachieved by a family of activating enzymes, known more formallyas aminoacyl-tRNA synthases (Figure 14.13). Each activatingenzyme is specific for one amino acid and for its correspondingtRNA. The enzyme has a three-part active site thatrecognizes three molecules: a specific amino acid, ATP, and aspecific tRNA. Since tRNA has a complex three-dimensionalstructure, the activating enzyme recognizes a specific tRNA witha very low error rate. Remarkably, the error rate for amino acidrecognition is also low, on the order of one in 1,000. Because theactivating enzymes are so highly specific, the process of tRNAcharging is sometimes called the second genetic code. Follow theevents of activation in Figure 14.13.Aclever experiment by Seymour Benzer and his colleaguesat Purdue University demonstrated the importance of specificityin the attachment of tRNA to its amino acid. In their laboratory,the amino acid cysteine, already properly attached toits tRNA, was chemically modified to become a different aminoacid, alanine. Which component—the amino acid or the tRNA—would be recognized when this hybrid charged tRNA was put14.5 | HOW IS RNA TRANSLATED INTO PROTEINS? 305The charged tRNA will deliver theappropriate amino acid to join theelongating polypeptide productof translation.1 The enzyme activates the amino acid, catalyzinga reaction with ATP to form high energyAMP–amino acid and a pyrophosphate ion.2 The enzyme then catalyzes areaction of the activated aminoacid with the correct tRNA.The specificity of the enzyme ensuresthat the correct amino acid and tRNAhave been brought together.43AlanineActivating enzyme(aminoacyl-tRNAsynthase) for aspecific amino acidSpecificamino acid(e.g., alanine)Pyrophosphate (PPi)AlaninespecifictRNAActivatedalanineCharged tRNAtRNA sitePiATPATPtRNA bondedto alanineAMPAMPAMPSTART14.13 Charging a tRNA Molecule The aminoacyltRNAsynthase activates a specific amino acid andcharges a specific tRNA with that amino acid.into a protein-synthesizing system? The answer was the tRNA.Everywhere in the synthesized protein where cysteine was supposedto be, alanine appeared instead. The cysteine-specifictRNA had delivered its cargo (alanine) to every mRNA codonfor cysteine. This experiment showed that the protein synthesismachinery recognizes the anticodon of the charged tRNA,not the amino acid attached to it. If activating enzymes in naturedid what Benzer did in the laboratory and charged tRNAswith the wrong amino acids, those amino acids would be insertedinto proteins at inappropriate places, leading to alterationsin protein shape and function and endangering cell life.The ribosome is the workbench for translationThe ribosome is the molecular workbench where the task oftranslation is accomplished. Its structure enables it to holdmRNA and charged tRNAs in the right positions, thus allowinga polypeptide chain to be assembled efficiently. Agiven ribosomedoes not specifically produce just one kind of protein.Aribosome can use any mRNAand all species of charged tRNAs,and thus can be used to make many different polypeptide products.Ribosomes can be used over and over again, and there arethousands of them in a typical cell.Although ribosomes are small in contrast to other cellular organelles,their mass of several million daltons makes them largein comparison with charged tRNAs. Each ribosome consists oftwo subunits, a large one and a small one (Figure 14.14). Ineukaryotes, the large subunit consists of three different moleculesof ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and 49 different protein molecules,arranged in a precise pattern. The small subunit consistsof one rRNA molecule and 33 different protein molecules.These two subunits and several dozen other molecules interactnon-covalently, like a jigsaw puzzle. In fact, when hydrophobicinteractions between the proteins and RNAs are disrupted,the ribosome falls apart. If the disrupting agent isremoved, the complex structure self-assembles perfectly! Whennot active in the translation of mRNA, the ribosomes exist astwo separate subunits.The ribosomes of prokaryotes are somewhat smaller thanthose of eukaryotes, and their ribosomal proteins and RNAsare different. Mitochondria and chloroplasts also contain ribosomes,some of which are similar to those of prokaryotes (seeChapter 5).On the large subunit of the ribosome there are three sites towhich a tRNA can bind, and these are designated A, P, and E(see Figure 14.14). The mRNA and ribosome move in relationto one another, and as they do so, a charged tRNA traversesthese three sites in order:• The A (amino acid) site is where the charged tRNA anticodonbinds to the mRNA codon, thus lining up the correct aminoacid to be added to the growing polypeptide chain.• The P (polypeptide) site is where the tRNA adds its aminoacid to the polypeptide chain.• The E (exit) site is where the tRNA, having given up itsamino acid, resides before being released from the ribosomeand going back to the cytosol to pick up anotheramino acid and begin the process again.The ribosome has a fidelity function that ensures that themRNA–tRNA interactions are accurate; that is, that a chargedtRNA with the correct anticodon (e.g., 3′-UAC-5′ ) binds to theappropriate codon in mRNA (e.g., 5′-AUG-3′ ). When properbinding occurs, hydrogen bonds form between the base pairs.The rRNA of the small ribosomal subunit plays a role in validatingthe three-base-pair match. If hydrogen bonds have notformed between all three base pairs, the tRNA must be thewrong one for that mRNA codon, and that tRNA is ejected fromthe ribosome.Translation takes place in three stepsTranslation is the process by which the information in mRNA(derived from DNA) is used to specify and link a specific sequenceof amino acids, producing a polypeptide. Like transcription,translation occurs in three steps: initiation, elongation, andtermination.306 CHAPTER 14 | FROM DNA TO PROTEIN: GENE EXPRESSIONRibosomes are irregularly shapedand composed of two subunits.Each subunit contains rRNA andnumerous proteins.There are 3 sites for tRNA binding.Codon–anticodon interactionsbetween tRNA and mRNA occuronly at the P and A sites.Large subunitSmall subunitE P A5′mRNA 3′mRNA binding siteA U G C U C U U U A AC C G U U A A U G C C G UE P A14.14 Ribosome Structure Eachribosome consists of a large and asmall subunit. The subunits remain separatewhen they are not in use for proteinsynthesis.INITIATION The translation of mRNA begins with the formationof an initiation complex, which consists of a charged tRNA and asmall ribosomal subunit, both bound to the mRNA (Figure 14.15).In prokaryotes, the rRNA of the small ribosomal subunit firstbinds to a complementary ribosome binding site (known as theShine–Dalgarno sequence) on the mRNA. This sequence is upstreamof the actual start codon, but lines up the start codon sothat it is will be adjacent to the P site of the large subunit.Eukaryotes do this somewhat differently: the small ribosomalsubunit binds to the 5′cap on the mRNA. After binding, the smallsubunit moves along the mRNA until it reaches the start codon.Recall that the mRNA start codon in the genetic code is AUG(see Figure 14.6). The anticodon of a methionine-charged tRNAbinds to this start codon by complementary basepairing to complete the initiation complex. Thusthe first amino acid in a polypeptide chain is alwaysmethionine. However, not all mature proteinshave methionine as their N-terminal aminoacid. In many cases, the initiator methionine is removedby an enzyme after translation.After the methionine-charged tRNAhas boundto the mRNA, the large subunit of the ribosomejoins the complex. The methionine-charged tRNAnow lies in the P site of the ribosome, and the Asite is aligned with the second mRNA codon.These ingredients—mRNA, two ribosomal subunits,and methionine-charged tRNA—are put togetherproperly by a group of proteins called initiationfactors.ELONGATION A charged tRNA whose anticodonis complementary to the second codon of themRNAnow enters the open Asite of the large ribosomalsubunit. The large subunit then catalyzestwo reactions:• It breaks the bond between the tRNA and itsamino acid in the P site.• It catalyzes the formation of a peptide bondbetween that amino acid and the one attachedto the tRNA in the Asite.Because the large ribosomal subunit performsthese two actions, it is said to have peptidyl transferaseactivity. In this way, methionine (the aminoacid in the P site) becomes the N terminus of thenew protein. The second amino acid is now boundto methionine, but remains attached to its tRNAat the Asite.How does the large ribosomal subunit catalyzethis binding? Harry Noller and his colleagues atthe University of California at Santa Cruz did aseries of experiments and found that:• If they removed almost all of the proteinsfrom the large subunit, it still catalyzed peptidebond formation.• If the rRNA was destroyed, so was peptidyltransferase activity.Thus rRNA is the catalyst. The purification and crystallization ofribosomes has allowed scientists to examine their structure indetail, and the catalytic role of rRNA in peptidyl transferase activityhas been confirmed. This supports the hypothesis thatRNA, and catalytic RNA in particular, evolved before DNA(seeSection 4.3).After the first tRNA releases its methionine, it moves to theE site and is then dissociated from the ribosome, returning tothe cytosol to become charged with another methionine. Thesecond tRNA, now bearing a dipeptide (a two-amino-acidchain), is shifted to the P site as the ribosome moves one codonalong the mRNA in the 5′-to-3′ direction.14.5 | HOW IS RNA TRANSLATED INTO PROTEINS? 307MetE P AU A CU A CTranscriptionProcessingTranslationDNAPre-mRNAmRNAPolypeptideMet1 The small ribosomalsubunit binds to itsrecognition sequenceon mRNA.Methionine-chargedtRNA binds to theAUG “start” codon,completing theinitiation complex.2The large ribosomalsubunit joins theinitiation complex,with methioninechargedtRNA nowoccupying the P site.35′3′mRNAA U G C U C U U U A AC C G U U A A U G C C G U5′3′A U G C U C U U U A AC C G U U A A U G C C G UStart codonAnticodonSmall subunitLarge subunitINITIATION5′3′A U G C U C U U U A AC C G U U A A U G C C G U14.15 The Initiation of TranslationTranslation begins with the formation of aninitiation complex. In prokaryotes, the smallribosomal subunit binds to the Shine-Delgarnosequence to begin the process, while ineukaryotes, it binds to the 5′ cap.The elongation process continues, andthe polypeptide chain grows, as thesesteps are repeated. Follow the process inFigure 14.16. All these steps are assistedby ribosomal proteins called elongationfactors.TERMINATION The elongation cycle ends,and translation is terminated, when a stopcodon—UAA, UAG, or UGA—enters theAsite (Figure 14.17). These codons do notcorrespond with any amino acids, nor dothey bind any tRNAs. Rather, they binda protein release factor, which allows hydrolysisof the bond between the polypeptidechain and the tRNA in the P site.The newly completed polypeptidethereupon separates from the ribosome.Its C terminus is the last amino acid to jointhe chain. Its N terminus, at least initially,is methionine, as a consequence of theAUG start codon. In its amino acid sequence,it contains information specifyingits conformation, as well as its ultimatecellular destination.Table 14.2 summarizes the nucleic acidsignals for initiation and termination oftranscription and translation.Polysome formation increases therate of protein synthesisSeveral ribosomes can work simultaneouslyat translating a single mRNA molecule,producing multiple polypeptides atthe same time. As soon as the first ribosomehas moved far enough from the siteof translation initiation, a second initiationcomplex can form, then a third, and so on.An assemblage consisting of a strandof mRNA with its beadlike ribosomesand their growing polypeptide chains iscalled a polyribosome, or polysome (Figure14.18). Cells that are actively synthesizingproteins contain large numbers of polysomesand few free ribosomes or ribosomalsubunits.A polysome is like a cafeteria line inwhich patrons follow one another, addingitems to their trays. At any moment, theperson at the start has a little food (anewly initiated protein); the person at theend has a complete meal (a completedprotein). However, in the polysome cafeteria,everyone gets the same meal: manycopies of the same protein are made froma single mRNA.308 CHAPTER 14 | FROM DNA TO PROTEIN: GENE EXPRESSIONE P AG G CE P AU A C G G CE P AU A CG G CE P AMetG G CProE AG G CA U ATyrA U AMetMetU A CProMetProPMetProTyr1 Codon recognition: Theanticodon of an incomingtRNA binds to the codonat the A site.Peptide bond formation:Pro is linked to Met bypeptidyl transferaseactivity of the largesubunit.2The process repeats.Elongation: Free tRNA ismoved to the E site, andthen released, as theribosome shifts by onecodon, so that thegrowing polypeptidechain moves to the P site.34N terminusAnticodonIncomingtRNA5′3′A U G C U C U U U A AC C G U U A A U G C C G UELONGATIONU A A5′3′A U G C U C U U U A AC C G U U A A U G C C G U5′3′A U G C U C U U U A AC C G U U A A U G C C G U5′3′A U G C U C U U U A AC C G U U A A U G C C G U5′3′A U G C U C U UC C G U U A A U G C C G U14.16 The Elongation of Translation The polypeptidechain elongates as the mRNA is translated.14.5 | HOW IS RNA TRANSLATED INTO PROTEINS? 309E ATyrProMetAlaLeuG A AE PLeu Ala Tyr Pro MetG AAP A E1 A release factor binds tothe complex when a stopcodon enters the A site.The release factordisconnects the polypeptidefrom the tRNA in the P site.2The remaining components(mRNA and ribosomalsubunits) separate.3TERMINATION5′3′A UCUUUAA U A G U G C C U A G U C C C G UReleasefactorN terminus5′3′A UCUUUAA U A G U G C C U A G U C C C G U5′3′A UCUUUAA U A G U G C C U A G U C C C G UStop codonINITIATIONELONGATIONTERMINATIONLargesubunit(A)SmallsubunitmRNARibosomePolypeptidechainDirectionof translation5′3′RibosomemRNA Growingpolypeptides(B)5′3′Polypeptidesgrow longer aseach ribosomemoves toward the3′ end of mRNA.14.17 The Termination of Translation Translation terminates whenthe A site of the ribosome encounters a stop codon on the mRNA.14.18 A Polysome (A) A polysome consists of multiple ribosomesand their growing polypeptide chains moving along an mRNA moleTABLE14.2 cule. (B) An electron micrograph of a polysome.Signals that Start and Stop Transcriptionand TranslationTRANSCRIPTION TRANSLATIONInitiation Promoter DNA AUG start codon in the mRNATermination Terminator DNA UAA, UAG, or UGA in the mRNA14.5 RECAPA key step in protein synthesis is the attachment ofan amino acid to its proper tRNA. This attachment iscarried out by an activating enzyme. Translation ofthe genetic information from mRNA into protein occursat the ribosome. Multiple ribosomes may act ona single mRNA to make multiple copies of the proteinthat it encodes.• How is an amino acid attached to a specific tRNA, andwhy is the term “second genetic code” associated withthis process? See pp. 304–305 and Figure 14.13• Describe the events of initiation, elongation, and terminationof translation. See pp. 306–308 and Figures14.15–14.17The polypeptide chain that is released from the ribosome is notnecessarily a functional protein. Let’s look at some of the posttranslationalchanges that can affect the fate and function of apolypeptide.What Happens to Polypeptides 14.6 after Translation?The site of a polypeptide’s function may be far away from itspoint of synthesis in the cytoplasm. This is especially true foreukaryotes. The polypeptide may be moved into an organelle,or even out of the cell. In addition, polypeptides are often modifiedby the addition of new chemical groups that have functionalsignificance. In this section we examine these posttranslationalaspects of protein synthesis.Signal sequences in proteins direct themto their cellular destinationsAs a polypeptide chain emerges from the ribosome, it folds intoits three-dimensional shape. As we described in Section 3.2, thepolypeptide’s conformation is determined by the sequence ofamino acids that make it up. Properties such as the polarity andcharge of the R groups in the amino acids determine how theyinteract with each other in the folded molecule. Ultimately, apolypeptide’s conformation allows it to interact with other moleculesin the cell, such as a substrate or another polypeptide. Inaddition to this structural information, the newly formedpolypeptide can contain a signal sequence—an “address label”indicating where in the cell the polypeptide belongs.Protein synthesis always begins on free ribosomes in thecytoplasm. But as a polypeptide chain is made, the informationcontained in its amino acid sequence gives it one of two sets offurther instructions (Figure 14.19):• “Complete translation and be released to an organelle, or remainin the cytosol.” Some proteins contain signal sequences thatdirect them to the nucleus, mitochondria, plastids, or per-310 CHAPTER 14 | FROM DNA TO PROTEIN: GENE EXPRESSIONRoughendoplasmicreticulumGolgiapparatusPlasmamembraneInside of cell(cytoplasm)Outsideof cellLysosomeProteinProteinmRNARibosomeExocytosisProtein synthesis in cytosolNucleusNuclearporePeroxisomesMitochondria PlastidsTo organellesor cytosolTo rough endoplasmic reticulum14.19 Destinations for Newly Translated Polypeptides in aEukaryotic Cell Signal sequences on newly synthesized polypeptidesbind to specific receptor proteins on the outer membranes of theorganelles to which they are “addressed.” Once the protein has bound toit, the receptor forms a channel in the membrane, and the protein entersthe organelle.oxisomes. If they lack a signal sequence, they remain in thecytosol by default.• “Stop translation, go to the endoplasmic reticulum, and finishsynthesis there.” Other proteins contain a signal sequencethat directs them to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) beforetranslation is complete. Such proteins may be retained inthe lumen (the inside) of the ER, or be sent to the Golgi apparatus.From there, they may be sent to the lysosomes orthe plasma membrane. Alternatively if they lack such specificinstructions, they may be secreted from the cell viavesicles that fuse with the plasma membrane.DESTINATION: NUCLEUS, MITOCHONDRION, OR CHLOROPLAST Aftertranslation, some folded polypeptides have a short exposedsequence of amino acids that acts like a postal “zip code,” directingthem to an organelle. These signal (or localization) sequencesare either at the N terminus or in the interior of theamino acid chain. For example, the following sequence directsa protein to the nucleus:—Pro—Pro—Lys—Lys—Lys—Arg—Lys—Val—Anuclear localization sequence would occur in histone proteinsassociated with nuclear DNA, but not in citric acid cycle enzymes,which are addressed to the mitochondria. Signal sequencesfor a particular organelle vary, so not all the polypeptidesdestined for the nucleus have the same signal sequence.How do we know that the amino acid sequence shown aboveis the signal? To investigate this question, Stephen Dilworth andcolleagues at the University of Cambridge injected cells withnuclear and cytoplasmic proteins (Figure 14.20). The experimentsinvolved the nuclear protein nucleoplasmin, the cytoplasmicprotein pyruvate kinase, the nuclear localization signal(see above) and a “mix-and-match” procedure. For example,the putative nuclear signal was removed from nucleoplasmin,which normally carries it, or attached to pyruvate kinase, whichdoes not normally carry it. The result was that it did not matterwhere in the cell the protein normally resided. If it had the signal,it went to the nucleus and if it did not have the signal, itstayed in the cytoplasm.Asignal sequence binds to a specific receptor protein, appropriatelycalled a docking protein, on the outer membrane ofthe appropriate organelle. Once the signal sequence has boundto it, the docking protein forms a channel in the membrane, allowingthe signal-bearing protein to pass through the membraneand enter the organelle. In this process, the protein is usuallyunfolded by a chaperonin protein (see Figure 3.12) so thatit can pass through the channel; then it refolds into its normalconformation.DESTINATION: ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM If a specific hydrophobicsequence of 15–30 amino acids occurs at the N terminus ofan elongated polypeptide chain, the polypeptide is sent initiallyto the ER. Some proteins are retained in the ER, but most moveon to the Golgi, where they can be modified for eventual transportto the lysosomes, the plasma membrane, or out of the cell.In the cytoplasm, before translation is finished and while thepolypeptide is still attached to a ribosome, this signal sequencebinds to a signal recognition particle composed of protein andRNA (Figure 14.21). This binding blocks further protein synthesisuntil the ribosome becomes attached to a specific receptorprotein in the membrane of the rough ER. Once again, thereceptor protein is converted into a channel, through which thegrowing polypeptide passes. After the formation of the channel,protein synthesis resumes, and the chain grows longer untilits sequence is completed. The elongating polypeptide maybe retained in the ER membrane itself, or it may enter the14.6 | WHAT HAPPENS TO POLYPEPTIDES AFTER TRANSLATION? 311CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE14.20 Testing the SignalA series of experiments were used to test whether the nuclearlocalization signal (NLS) sequence is all that is needed todirect a protein to the nucleus.HYPOTHESIS A nuclear localization signal (NLS) is necessaryfor import of a protein into the nucleus.The NLS is essential for nuclear proteinimport and will direct a normally cytoplasmicprotein to the nucleus.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTS1 A protein labeled witha fluorescent dye isinjected into the cytoplasm.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: How would you test for a chloroplastsignal sequence?Injected protein:2 The distribution of the protein in the cellis observed with a fluorescence microscope.Nucleoplasmin,a nuclearprotein, withthe NLSNucleoplasminwith the NLSremovedPyruvatekinase,attachedNLSPyruvatekinase, acytoplasmicproteinwithout theNLSNLSinterior space—the lumen—of the ER. In either case, an enzymein the lumen of the ER removes the signal sequence from thepolypeptide chain.If the finished protein enters the ER lumen, it can be transportedto its appropriate location—to other cellular compartmentsor to the outside of the cell—via the ER and the Golgi apparatus,without mixing with other molecules in the cytoplasm.After removal of the terminal signal sequence in the lumenof the ER, additional signals are needed to direct the protein toits destination. These signals are of two kinds:• Some are sequences of amino acids that allow the protein’sretention within the ER.• Others are sugars, which are added in the Golgi apparatus.The resulting glycoproteins end up either at the plasmamembrane or in a lysosome (or plant vacuole), or are secreted,depending on which sugars are added.Proteins with no additional signals pass from the ER throughthe Golgi apparatus and are secreted from the cell.The importance of signals is shown by Inclusion-cell (I-cell)disease, an inherited disease that causes death in early childhood.People with this disease have a mutation in the gene encodinga Golgi enzyme that adds targeting sugars to proteinsdestined for the lysosomes. As a result, enzymes that are essentialfor the hydrolysis of various macromolecules cannot reachthe lysosomes, where they are normally active. The macromoleculesaccumulate in the lysosomes, and this lack of cellular recyclinghas drastic effects, resulting in early death.Many proteins are modified after translationMost mature proteins are not identical to the polypeptide chainsthat are translated from mRNAon the ribosomes. Instead, mostpolypeptides are modified in any of a number of ways aftertranslation (Figure 14.22). These modifications are essential tothe final functioning of the protein.• Proteolysis is the cutting of a polypeptide chain. Cleavageof the signal sequence from the growing polypeptide chainin the ER is an example of proteolysis; the protein mightmove back out of the ER through the membrane channel ifthe signal sequence were not cut off. Some proteins are actuallymade from polyproteins (long polypeptides) that arecut into final products by enzymes called proteases. Theseprotease enzymes are essential to some viruses, includinghuman immunodeficiency virus (HIV), because the largeviral polyprotein cannot fold properly unless it is cut.Certain drugs used to treat acquired immune deficiencysyndrome (AIDS) work by inhibiting the HIV protease,thereby preventing the formation of proteins needed forviral reproduction.• Glycosylation is the addition of sugars to proteins to formglycoproteins. In both the ER and the Golgi apparatus, residentenzymes catalyze the addition of various sugars orshort sugar chains to certain amino acid R groups on pro-312 CHAPTER 14 | FROM DNA TO PROTEIN: GENE EXPRESSIONProtein synthesisbegins on freeribosomes in thecytosol. The signalsequence is at theN-terminal end ofthe polypeptidechain.1 The signalsequence isremoved byan enzyme inthe lumen ofthe ER.The signal 4recognitionparticle isreleased. Thesignal sequencepasses througha channel in thereceptor.The polypeptide 3binds to a signalrecognition particle,and then both bindto a receptorprotein in themembrane ofthe ER.2 The ribosomeis released. Theprotein foldsinside the ER.Translation 7terminates.The polypeptide 6continues toelongate.5Signal recognitionparticleRibosomemRNAInside of cellReceptorproteinLumen of RERERmembraneSignalsequence5′3′Roughendoplasmicreticulum (RER)14.21 A Signal Sequence Moves a Polypeptide into the ER Whena certain signal sequence of amino acids is present at the beginning of apolypeptide chain, the polypeptide will be taken into the endoplasmicreticulum (ER). The finished protein is thus segregated from the cytosol.teins. One such type of “sugar coating” is essential for directingproteins to lysosomes, as mentioned above. Othertypes are important in the conformation of proteins andtheir recognition functions at the cell surface. Other attachedsugars help to stabilize extracellular proteins, orproteins stored in vacuoles in plant seeds.• Phosphorylation is the addition of phosphate groups to proteins,and is catalyzed by protein kinases. The charged phosphategroups change the conformation of a protein, oftenexposing the active site of an enzyme or the binding site foranother protein. We have seen the role of phosphorylationin cell signaling (see Chapter 7).14.6 RECAPSignal sequences in polypeptides direct them to theirappropriate destinations inside or outside the cell.Many polypeptides are modified after translation.• How do signal sequences determine where a proteinwill go after it is made? See pp. 310–312 and Figure14.21• What are some ways in which posttranslational modificationsalter protein structure and function? Seepp. 312–313 and Figure 14.22All of the processes we have just described result in a functionalprotein, but only if the amino acid sequence of that protein is correct.If the sequence is not correct, cellular dysfunction may result.Changes in the DNA—mutations—are a major source of errorsin amino acid sequences. This is the subject of the next chapter.14.6 | WHAT HAPPENS TO POLYPEPTIDES AFTER TRANSLATION? 313PPProteolysisCleaving the polypeptide allows thefragments to fold into different shapes.GlycosylationAdding sugars is important fortargeting and recognition.PhosphorylationAdded phosphate groupsalter the shape of the protein.Translation Posttranslational processing14.22 Posttranslational Modifications of Proteins Most polypeptidesmust be modified after translation in order to become functionalproteins.14.1 What Is the Evidence that Genes Code for Proteins?• Beadle and Tatum’s experiments on metabolic enzymes in thebread mold Neurospora led to the one-gene, one-enzymehypothesis. We now know that there is a one-gene, onepolypeptiderelationship. Review Figure 14.114.2 How Does Information Flow from Genes to Proteins?• The central dogma of molecular biology states that DNAencodes RNA, and RNA encodes proteins. Proteins do notencode proteins, RNA, or DNA.• The process by which the information in DNA is copied to RNAis called transcription. The process by which a protein is builtfrom the information in RNA is called translation. ReviewFigure 14.2, WEB ACTIVITY 14.1• Certain RNA viruses are exceptions to the central dogma. Theseretroviruses synthesize DNA from RNA in a process calledreverse transcription.• The product of transcription is messenger RNA (mRNA).Transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules are adapters that translate thegenetic information in the mRNA into a correspondingsequence of amino acids to produce a polypeptide.14.3 How Is the Information Content in DNATranscribed to Produce RNA?• In a given gene, only one of the two strands of DNA (the templatestrand) acts as a template for transcription. RNA polymeraseis the catalyst for transcription.• RNA transcription from DNA proceeds in three steps: initiation,elongation, and termination. Review Figure 14.4, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 14.1• Initiation requires a promoter, to which RNA polymerase binds.Part of each promoter is the initiation site, where transcriptionbegins.• Elongation of the RNA molecule proceeds from the 5′ to 3′ end.• Particular base sequences specify termination, at which pointtranscription ends and the RNA transcript separates from theDNA template.CHAPTER SUMMARY14.1 What Is the Evidence that Genes Code for Proteins?• Beadle and Tatum’s experiments on metabolic enzymes in thebread mold Neurospora led to the one-gene, one-enzymehypothesis. We now know that there is a one-gene, onepolypeptiderelationship. Review Figure 14.114.2 How Does Information Flow from Genes to Proteins?• The central dogma of molecular biology states that DNAencodes RNA, and RNA encodes proteins. Proteins do notencode proteins, RNA, or DNA.• The process by which the information in DNA is copied to RNAis called transcription. The process by which a protein is builtfrom the information in RNA is called translation. ReviewFigure 14.2, WEB ACTIVITY 14.1• Certain RNA viruses are exceptions to the central dogma. Theseretroviruses synthesize DNA from RNA in a process calledreverse transcription.• The product of transcription is messenger RNA (mRNA).Transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules are adapters that translate thegenetic information in the mRNA into a correspondingsequence of amino acids to produce a polypeptide.14.3 How Is the Information Content in DNATranscribed to Produce RNA?• In a given gene, only one of the two strands of DNA (the templatestrand) acts as a template for transcription. RNA polymeraseis the catalyst for transcription.• RNA transcription from DNA proceeds in three steps: initiation,elongation, and termination. Review Figure 14.4, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 14.1• Initiation requires a promoter, to which RNA polymerase binds.Part of each promoter is the initiation site, where transcriptionbegins.• Elongation of the RNA molecule proceeds from the 5′ to 3′ end.• Particular base sequences specify termination, at which pointtranscription ends and the RNA transcript separates from theDNA template.• The genetic code is a “language” of triplets of mRNA nucleotidebases (codons) corresponding to 20 specific amino acids; thereare start and stop codons as well. The code is redundant (anamino acid may be represented by more than one codon), butnot ambiguous (no single codon represents more than oneamino acid). Review Figures 14.5 and 14.6, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 14.2 AND WEB ACTIVITY 14.214.4 How Is Eukaryotic DNA Transcribed and the RNAProcessed?• Unlike prokaryotes, where transcription and translation occurin the cytoplasm and are coupled, in eukaryotes transcriptionoccurs in the nucleus and translation occurs later in thecytoplasm.• The initial transcript of a eukaryotic protein-coding gene ismodified with a 5′ cap and a 3′ poly A sequence. ReviewFigure 14.10• Eukaryotic genes contain introns, which are noncodingsequences within the transcribed regions of genes.• Pre-mRNA contains the introns. They are removed in the nucleusvia mRNA splicing by the small nuclear ribonucleoproteinparticles. Then the mRNA passes through the nuclear pore intothe cytoplasm, where it is translated on the surfaces of ribosomes.Review Figure 14.11, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 14.314.5 How Is RNA Translated into Proteins?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 14.4• During translation, amino acids are linked together in the orderspecified by the codons in the mRNA. This task is achieved bytRNAs, which bind to (are charged with) specific amino acids.• Each tRNA species has an amino acid attachment site as well asan anticodon complementary to a specific mRNA codon. A specificactivating enzyme charges each tRNA with its specificamino acid. Review Figures 14.12 and 14.13• The ribosome is the molecular workbench where translationtakes place. It has one large and one small subunit, both madeof ribosomal RNA and proteins.• Three sites on the large subunit of the ribosome interact withtRNA anticodons. The A site is where the charged tRNA anticodonbinds to the mRNA codon; the P site is where the tRNAadds its amino acid to the growing polypeptide chain; and theE site is where the tRNA is released.• Translation occurs in three steps: initiation, elongation, andtermination.• The initiation complex consists of tRNA bearing the first aminoacid, the small ribosomal subunit, and mRNA. A specific complementarysequence on the small subunit rRNA binds to the transcriptioninitiation site on the mRNA. Review Figure 14.15• The growing polypeptide chain is elongated by the formationof peptide bonds between amino acids, catalyzed by the rRNA.Review Figure 14.16• When a stop codon reaches the A site, it terminates translationby binding a release factor. Review Figure 14.17• In a polysome, more than one ribosome moves along a strandof mRNA at one time. Review Figure 14.1814.6 What Happens to Polypeptides after Translation?• Signal sequences of amino acids direct polypeptides to theircellular destinations. Review Figure 14.19• Destinations in the cytoplasm include organelles, which proteinsenter after being recognized and bound by surface receptorscalled docking proteins.• Proteins “addressed” to the ER bind to a signal recognition particle.Review Figure 14.21• Posttranslational modifications of polypeptides include proteolysis,in which a polypeptide is cut into smaller fragments; glycosylation,in which sugars are added; and phosphorylation, inwhich phosphate groups are added. Review Figure 14.22