Everyone knows that plants need water to grow.However, it may come as a surprise that the cultivationof crop plants consumes far more water than allother human activities combined. Worldwide demand forwater is increasing at the same time that supplies aredeclining. This situation makes it imperative that weunderstand how plants use water so that we can breedplants that use it more efficiently.The question of just how much water plants use whilethey grow was addressed in 1690 by John Woodward, aprofessor at Cambridge University. He reported that aplant that gained just 1 g in weight used 76,000 g of waterover 77 days. He proposed that most of the water takenup by plants was “drawn off and conveyed through thepores of the leaves and exhaled into the atmosphere.”We know now, of course, that much of the mass plantsacquire as they grow is due to net fixation of atmosphericCO2 into carbohydrates through photosynthesis. ButWoodward nevertheless articulated a crucial insight:plants need to take up a lot of water to grow. Plant biologistshave a name for the ratio of net photosynthetic carbonfixation to water uptake: water-use efficiency.Droughts and a dwindling water supply are challengingfarmers all over the world. One of the least water-efficientof all crop plants is, unfortunately, one of our mostimportant: rice. Rice plants use up to 3 times more waterper unit of growth than other crops such as wheat andmaize (corn). The precariousness of heavily water-dependentrice farming was dramatically demonstrated ineastern India between 1997 and 2003, when drought reducedrice production by over 5million tons—some farmers lost upto 50 percent of their crop.Clearly, a strain of rice thatneeds less water would not onlymake the world supply of rice lessvulnerable to drought but alsohelp conserve water for other uses.A team of molecular biologists,plant physiologists, and crop scientistsled by Andrew Pereira at VirginiaPolytechnic began theirquest for such a strain of rice bystudying an entirely differentplant—the model organism Arabidopsisthaliana (thale cress). Theysearched for genetic variants ofArabidopsis that had improvedEngineering water-conserving crops35Thirsty Rice Cultivation of rice, themost important food crop in Asia,requires large quantities of water.How Do Plants Take Up Water 35.1 and Solutes?Terrestrial plants must obtain both water and mineral nutrientsfrom the soil, usually through their roots. The roots, in turn, obtaincarbohydrates and other important materials from theleaves (Figure 35.1). Water is required for carbohydrate productionby photosynthesis in leaves (see Section 10.1), for transportingsolutes between plant organs, for cooling the plant, andfor developing the internal pressure that supports the plantbody.As our opening story conveys, plants lose large quantities ofwater to evaporation. To balance this loss, an equally largeamount of water must be absorbed through the roots, continueup the stem, and be transported into the leaves. The mineralsthat a plant needs are transported along with the water. Severalsteps in water and mineral transport will be considered in thischapter. In this section we will focus on the first part of the journey—the uptake of water and minerals into the roots and theirtransport into the xylem.Water potential differences govern the directionof water movementThe process of water uptake by plants requires water to movethrough at least one, and usually many cell membranes. Accordingly,we will begin our discussion of water transport by examiningthe rules that govern the movement of water across membranes.As described in Section 6.3, the movement of waterthrough a membrane in accordance with the laws of diffusionis called osmosis.The overall tendency of a solution to take up water from purewater, across a membrane, is called its water potential and is representedas ψ, the Greek letter psi (pronounced “sigh”). The waterpotential of a solution is measured as the sum of its (negative)solute potential (ψs) and its (usually positive) pressurepotential (ψp):ψ = ψs + ψpWhenever water moves by osmosis, the following importantrule applies: water always moves across a selectively permeablemembrane toward the region of lower (more negative) waterpotential.We can measure solute potential, pressure potential, and waterpotential in megapascals (MPa), a unit of pressure. Atmosphericpressure, “one atmosphere,” is about 0.1 MPa, or 14.7pounds per square inch; a typical pressure in an automobile tireis about 0.2 MPa.IN THIS CHAPTER we will consider the uptake of waterand minerals from the soil and the transport of these materialsup the plant in the xylem. We will also look at thecontrol of evaporative water loss from leaves, and thetranslocation (movement from one location to another) ofdissolved substances in the phloem.water-use efficiency. One variant they chose to studywas particularly hard to pull out of the ground becauseof its extensive root system (indicating more capacity forwater uptake) and had thick leaves with abundant photosynthetictissue (indicating prolific photosynthesis).Molecular and physiological characterization of this Arabidopsisstrain showed that its improved water usagewas linked to a mutation in a single gene that codes for atranscription factor. When this gene (called HARDY) wasisolated and put into rice plants using recombinant DNAtechnology, the rice plants also were more efficient, andindeed tolerated dry soil much better than their normalcounterparts. While the HARDY gene may or may notlead to crops with higher water-use efficiency, many laboratoriesaround the world are using Arabidopsis to isolategenes that can be used to improve water usage andother important characteristics of crop plants.CHAPTER OUTLINE35.1 How Do Plants Take Up Water and Solutes?35.2 How Are Water and Minerals Transported in theXylem?35.3 How Do Stomata Control the Loss of Water andthe Uptake of CO2?35.4 How Are Substances Translocated in the Phloem?A Need for Improved Water-Use Efficiency in PlantsRice that could use water more efficiently would be less vulnerableto drought and might help maintain or even increasecrop yields.We explore the meaning of the water potential equation inFigure 35.2, which assigns values to ψs and ψp and illustrateshow changes in the values of these parameters alter the waterpotential (ψ) and determine the direction of water movementbetween two compartments (for example, the inside and outsideof a plant cell) separated by a semipermeable membrane.The solute potential (ψs, also called the osmotic potential) of asolution is a measure of the effect of dissolved solutes on the osmoticbehavior of the solution. The addition of solutes removesfree water from the solution because the solute molecules bindwater molecules to their surfaces. This is reflected in a more negativevalue for ψs (–0.4 MPa in our example; see Figure 35.2A),which lowers the water potential (ψ = –0.4 MPa) and leads tothe movement of water through the membrane to the regionof lower ψ. Equilibrium is reached when there is no differencein ψ on either side of the membrane (see Figure 35.2B). Nowlet’s see how these same forces determine the direction of waterflow through plant cells.Mature plant cells usually contain a large central vacuolefilled with solutes, which are often pumped into the vacuole bytransporter proteins. The active accumulation of solutes providesthe osmotic force for water uptake into the vacuole. Plantcells are surrounded by a relatively rigid cell wall that resiststhe expansion of the underlying protoplast. The pressureexerted by the cell wall is equivalent to the positive pressure exertedby the piston on the water column in the idealizedexample shown in Figure 35.2C. When the pressure potentialequals the solute potential, there is no net movement of waterthrough the membrane.35.1 | HOW DO PLANTS TAKE UP WATER AND SOLUTES? 741CO2 enters and O2and H2O exit theleaves via the stomata.H2O and dissolvedmineralsH2O,carbohydrates,etc.H2O (transpiration)CO2O2The solution on the right has anegative water potential due tothe presence of solutes. Waterwill move toward the lowerwater potential.Water moves to the right, and itdilutes the solution, making ys lessnegative. As the solution rises in thetube, pressure potential (yp) buildsup until y is equal on both sides.The addition of physical pressureincreases water potential. Osmosiscontinues until solute potentialexactly balances pressure potential.yp = 0ys = 0y = 0 MPa(A)SemipermeablemembranePurewater0.1 M solutionyp = 0ys = –0.4y = –0.4 MPayp = 0ys = 0y = 0 MPayp = 0.15ys = –0.15y = 0 MPaH2OH2Oyp = 0ys = 0y = 0 MPa(C)yp = 0.4ys = –0.4y = 0 MPaPositivepressureH2O(B)35.2 Water Potential, Solute Potential, and Pressure PotentialAs can be seen in these idealized examples, water flows towards regionsof lower water potential (ψ), which is the sum of the solute potential (ψs)and the pressure potential (ψp). For pure water under no applied pressure,all three of these parameters are equal to zero.35.1 The Pathways of Water and Solutes in a PlantWater travels from the soil to the atmosphere, with only asmall fraction used within the plant.When the wall of a plant cell is exerting no pressure on theunderlying protoplast, the cell is said to be flaccid (Figure 35.3,left). In this situation,ψs = –0.7 MPa and ψp = 0 MPaSo, ψ = ψs + ψp = –0.7 MPaWhen a flaccid cell is placed in pure water, water initially movesinto the cell due to its negative solute potential (Figure 35.3,right). However, the cell can’t expand because it is contained bythe cell wall; thus, as water enters, the cell’s internal pressureincreases and resists the further entry of water.ψs = –0.7 MPa and ψp = 0.7 MPaSo, ψ = 0This opposing pressure is called turgor pressurein plants and is equivalent to the pressure potential(ψp) exerted by the piston in Figure 35.2C.Water will enter plant cells by osmosis until thepressure potential exactly balances the solute potential.At this point, the cell is turgid; that is, ithas a significant positive pressure potential. Thephysical structure of many plants is maintainedby the (positive) pressure potential of their cells;if the pressure potential drops (for example, if theplant does not have enough water), the plant wilts(Figure 35.4).Within living plant tissues, the movement of water from cellto cell follows a gradient of water potential. Over long distances,in unobstructed tubes such as xylem vessels and phloem sievetubes, the flow of water and dissolved solutes is driven by a gradientof pressure potential, not a gradient of water potential. Themovement of a solution from a region of higher pressure potentialto a region of lower pressure potential is called bulk flow.We’ll see that bulk flow in the xylem is between regions of differingnegative pressure potential (tension), while bulk flow inthe phloem is between regions of differing positive (turgor) pressurepotential.Aquaporins facilitate the movement of wateracross membranesThe large quantities of water lost to evaporation from the leavesmust be balanced by water taken up by the roots. Yet only atrickle of water can pass through the hydrophobic environmentcreated by the phospholipid bilayers of cell membranes. Howdo plants turn this trickle into a gusher? The answer is that waterdiffuses through cell membranes mainly through channelscalled aquaporins (see Figure 6.13), which are located in boththe plasma membrane and the tonoplast (vacuolar membrane)of plant cells. Aquaporins allow water to move rapidly from environmentto cell and from cell to cell. The abundance of aquaporinsin a plant cell varies with environmental conditions,depending on a cell’s need to obtain and retain water. The permeabilityof some aquaporins also can be regulated. Alterationsin aquaporin abundance and permeability change the rate of osmosisacross the membrane. Note, however, that water movementthrough aquaporins is always passive, so the direction ofwater movement is unchanged.Uptake of mineral ions requires membranetransport proteinsAlthough water molecules can cross membranes through aquaporins,mineral ions generally cannot. The ions, which carryelectric charges, are blocked by the hydrophobic interior of the742 CHAPTER 35 | TRANSPORT IN PLANTSWater will enter a plant cell that has negative water potential.Turgor pressure builds up inside the plant cell until the waterpotential inside the cell is the same as that outside the cell.yp = 0ys = –0.7y = –0.7 MPayp = 0ys = 0y = 0 MPaInitial flaccid cellyp = 0.7ys = –0.7y = 0 MPaTurgid cellPure waterH2O H2O35.3 Turgor Turgor pressure builds up inside the cell as the cell wallresists further expansion of the cell.The cells of this plant have anegative water potential dueto negative solute potentialand no pressure potential.The water potential of cellsof this plant is zero becausethe negative solute potentialis balanced by an equallypositive pressure potential.35.4 A Wilted Plant A plant wilts when the pressurepotential of its cells is zero.membrane, and they are too large to pass through aquaporins.Instead, mineral ions generally cross membranes through transportproteins, including ion channels and carrier proteins (seeSections 6.3 and 6.4).We have just seen that water moves through a water-permeablemembrane in response to a water potential gradient. Othermolecules and ions also follow their own concentration gradients,as permitted by the characteristics of the membrane. Whenthe concentration of charged ions in the soil is greater thanthat in the plant, transport proteins can move them into theplant by facilitated diffusion, which is a passive process. Theconcentrations of most ions in the soil solution, however, arelower than those required inside the plant. In these cases, theplant must actively take up ions against their concentration gradients—a process that requires energy.Electric charge differences also play a role in the uptake ofmineral ions. For example, a negatively charged ion that movesinto a negatively charged compartment is moving against anelectrical gradient, and this requires energy. Concentration andelectrical gradients combine to form an electrochemical gradient.Uptake against an electrochemical gradient involves active transport,which requires specific transport proteins and is fueled byATP generated by cellular respiration.Unlike animals, plants do not have a sodium–potassiumpump (see Section 6.4) for active transport. Rather, plants havea proton pump, which uses energy obtained from ATP to moveprotons out of the cell against a proton concentration gradient(Figure 35.5, step 1). Because protons (H+) are positively charged,their accumulation outside the cell has two results:• An electrical gradient is created such that the region outsidethe cell becomes more positively charged relative tothe region inside.• Aproton concentration gradient develops, with more protonsoutside the cell than inside.Each of these results has consequences for the movement ofother ions. Because the inside of the cell is now more negativethan the outside, cations (positively charged ions) such as potassium(K+) move into the cell by facilitated diffusion throughtheir specific membrane channels (Figure 35.5, step 2). In addition,the proton concentration gradient can be harnessed todrive secondary active transport, in which anions (negativelycharged ions) such as chloride (Cl–) are moved into the cellagainst an electrochemical gradient by a symport protein thatcouples their movement with that of H+ (Figure 35.5, step 3).In sum, there is vigorous traffic of water molecules and mineralions across plant cell membranes. This traffic involves specificmembrane channels and transport proteins, and both activeand passive processes. Now we will step back and see howthese membrane transport processes participate in the journeyof water and nutrients from the soil to the xylem.Water and ions pass to the xylem by wayof the apoplast and symplastThe journey from the soil through the roots to the xylem occursprimarily by one of two pathways, the fast lane (called theapoplast) and the slow(er) lane (called the symplast) (Figure 35.6):• The apoplast (Greek apo, “away from”; plast, “living material”)consists of the cell walls, which lie outside the plasmamembranes, and the intercellular spaces (spaces betweencells) that are common in many plant tissues. The apoplastis a continuous meshwork through which water and dissolvedsubstances can flow without ever having to cross amembrane. Movement of materialsthrough the apoplast is thus unregulatedand rapid—until it reaches the Casparianstrips of the endodermis.• The symplast (Greek sym, “together with”)passes through the continuous cytoplasmof the living cells connected by plasmodesmata.The selectively permeable plasmamembranes of the root cells control accessto the symplast, so movement of water anddissolved substances into the symplast istightly regulated.35.1 | HOW DO PLANTS TAKE UP WATER AND SOLUTES? 743H+H+H+H+ H+H+H+H+H+K+K+K+K+K+K+Cl–H+H+ H+Cl–Cl– Cl–A proton pump generatesdifferences in H+ concentrationand electric charge across themembrane.The difference inelectric charge causescations such as K+ toenter the cell.Symport couples the diffusion ofH+ to the transport (against anelectrochemical gradient) ofanions such as Cl– into the cell.1 2 3Outsideof cellPlasmamembraneInsideof cellPotassiumchannelProtonpump+SymportproteinPiATPADP35.5 The Proton Pump in Transport of K+ and Cl–The active transport of hydrogen ions (H+) out of the cell bythe proton pump (1) drives the movement of both cations (2)and anions (3) into the cell.Water and minerals that pass from the soil solution through theapoplast can travel as far as the endodermis, the innermost layerof the root cortex. The endodermis is distinguished from the restof the ground tissue by the presence of the Casparian strip. Thiswaxy, suberin-impregnated region of the endodermal cell wallforms a water-repelling (hydrophobic) belt around each endodermalcell where it is in contact with other endodermal cells.The Casparian strip acts as a seal that prevents water and ionsfrom moving between the cells (see Figure 35.6).The Casparian strip of the endodermis completely separatesthe apoplast of the cortex from the apoplast of the stele. Accordingly,the only way water and ions can enter the stele is by wayof the symplast—that is, by entering and passing through thecytoplasm of the endodermal cells. Water and ions already inthe symplast can enter the endodermal cells through plasmadesmata,but those in the apoplast must cross the plasma membranesof the endodermal cells (this is possible because the Casparianstrip does not obstruct the inner or outer faces ofendodermal cells). Thus transport proteins in the plasma membranesof the epidermal and cortical cells (for mineral ions travelingthrough the symplast) and endodermal cells (for thosetraveling through the apoplast) determine which mineral ionspass into the stele, and at what rates.Once they have passed the endodermal barrier, water andminerals remain in the symplast until they reach parenchymacells in the pericycle or xylem. These cells then actively exportmineral ions into the apoplast of the stele. As mineral ions aretransported into the solution in the cell walls of the stele, thewater potential in the apoplast becomes more negative; consequently,water moves out of the cells and into the apoplast byosmosis. In other words, ions are transported actively, and waterfollows passively. The end result is that water and mineralsend up in the xylem, where they constitute the xylem sap.744 CHAPTER 35 | TRANSPORT IN PLANTSTo bypass the Casparianstrip, water must enterthe living cells and accessthe stele via the symplast.Water and ions travelinto and through cellwalls and intercellularspaces in the apoplast.The Casparian strip prevents water andions in the apoplast from passing betweenthe endodermal cells into the stele.Water and ions cross aplasma membrane toenter the symplast.PlasmodesmataEpidermisRoot hairCortexEndodermisSteleRoot hairEpidermisCortexSteleEndodermisEndodermisCasparianstripPericyclePericycleXylem PhloemCell wallRoot hairRootRoot crosssection35.6 Apoplast and Symplast Plant cell walls and intercellular spacesconstitute the apoplast. The symplast comprises the living cells, which areconnected by plasmodesmata. To enter the symplast, water and solutesmust pass through a plasma membrane. No such selective barrier limitsmovement through the apoplast. The Casparian strip in the endodermis ofthe cortex is impregnated with the water-repelling substance suberin andseparates apoplast in the cortex from apoplast in the stele.GO TO Web Activity 35.1 • Apoplast and Symplast of the RootyourBioPortal.com35.1 RECAPDifferences in water potential govern the osmoticflow of water from the soil into the plant stele; this isa passive process. Uptake of minerals from the soiloccurs along an electrochemical gradient and istherefore an active process requiring energy andmembrane transport proteins. Water and mineralscan move into the root through either the apoplast orthe symplast, but must enter and leave the symplastto reach the xylem.• What distinguishes water potential, solute potential,and pressure potential? See pp. 740–741 andFigure 35.2• Explain why the cell wall is so important in determiningthe direction of water movement. See pp. 741–742• What are aquaporins? Why are they needed?See p. 742• Describe the differences between the apoplast andthe symplast. See p. 743 and Figure 35.6So far we’ve described the movement of water and mineralsinto plant roots and their entry into the root xylem. How doesthe xylem sap move once it is in the xylem?How Are Water and Minerals 35.2 Transported in the Xylem?Water has arrived in the xylem—it is all uphill from there! Beforewe consider the ascent to the leaves, let’s revisit the cellsthat make up the xylem, the xylem vessels (see Figure 34.9E andF). In this section you will learn that the properties of xylem vesselsmake it possible for water and solutes to be transported efficientlyover long distances. Recall that xylem vessels are deadand lack all cell contents. When fused end to end, the xylem vesselsform a long tubular “straw” of lignified cell walls that provideboth structural support and the rigidity needed to maintaina gradient of pressure.Consider the magnitude of what xylem accomplishes intransporting a large amount of water over a great distance withinthe plant. Asingle maple tree 15 meters tall has been estimatedto have some 177,000 leaves, with a total leaf surface area of 675square meters—half again the area of a basketball court. Duringa summer day, that tree loses 220 liters of water per hour tothe atmosphere by evaporation from the leaves. So to preventwilting, the xylem needs to transport 220 liters of water fromthe roots to the leaves every hour. (By comparison, a 50-gallondrum holds 189 liters.) The tallest leaves can be quite far fromthe root. The tallest gymnosperm, the coast redwood Sequoiasempervirens, and the tallest angiosperm, the Australian Eucalyptusregnans, are more than 110 meters tall. Any successful explanationof water transport in the xylem must account for thetransport of water to these great heights.Scientists have proposed various models to explain the ascentof xylem sap. We begin by reviewing some illuminating experimentsthat ruled out early models, and then turn to evidencein support of the current model.Xylem sap is not pumped by living cellsSome of the earliest attempts to explain the rise of sap in thexylem were based on the hypothesis that a pumping action byliving cells in the stem might push the sap upward. However,in 1893 the German botanist Eduard Strasburger conducted andpublished experiments that definitively ruled out such models.Strasburger worked with trees about 20 meters tall. Hesawed through the trunk of each tree at its base and plungedthe cut end into a solution of a poison, such as copper sulfate.The solution rose through the trunk, as was evident from theprogressive death of the bark higher and higher up. When thesolution reached the leaves, the leaves died too, at which pointthe movement of the solution stopped (as shown by the liquidlevel in the bucket, which stopped dropping).This simple experiment established three important points:• Living, “pumping” cells were not responsible for the upwardmovement of the solution, because the solution itselfkilled all living cells with which it came in contact.• The leaves played a crucial role in transport. As long asthey were alive, the solution continued to move upward;when the leaves died, movement ceased.• The roots did not cause the movement, because the trunkhad been completely separated from the roots.Root pressure alone does not account forxylem transportAsecond hypothesis about xylem transport involved root pressure—pressure exerted by the root tissues that would forceliquid up the xylem. The basis for root pressure is a higher soluteconcentration, and accordingly a more negative water potential,in the xylem sap than in the soil solution. This water potentialdraws water into the stele; once there, the water hasnowhere to go but up, so it rises in the xylem vessels.Root pressure certainly exists—for example, it is responsiblefor the phenomenon of guttation, in which liquid water is forcedout through special openings at the margins of leaves. Guttationoccurs only when atmospheric humidity is high and soilwater is plentiful, conditions that occur most commonly atnight. Root pressure is also the source of the sap that oozes fromthe cut stumps of some plants when their tops are cut off.Root pressure, however, cannot account for the ascent of sapin trees. Root pressure seldom exceeds 0.1–0.2 MPa (1–2 atmospheres).If root pressure were driving sap up the xylem, wewould observe a positive pressure potential in the xylem at alltimes. In fact, as we are about to see, the xylem sap in most treesis under tension—has a negative pressure potential—when it isascending. Furthermore, as Strasburger had already shown, materialscan be transported upward in the xylem even when the35.2 | HOW ARE WATER AND MINERALS TRANSPORTED IN THE XYLEM? 745roots have been removed. If the roots are not pushing the xylemsap upward, what causes it to rise?The transpiration–cohesion–tension mechanismaccounts for xylem transportThe current model of xylem transport relies on an alternative topushing: pulling. The evaporative loss of water from the leavesindirectly generates a pulling force—tension—on the water inthe apoplast of the leaves, which pulls the xylem sap upward.Hydrogen bonding between water molecules makes the sap inthe xylem cohesive enough to withstand the tension and rise bybulk flow. Let’s see how this process works (Figure 35.7).The concentration of water vapor in the atmosphere is lowerthan that in the leaf. Because of this difference, water vapor diffusesfrom the intercellular spaces of the leaf, through the stomata(which we will consider in more detail later) to the outside air,in a process called transpiration. Within the leaf blade, waterevaporates from the moist walls of the mesophyll cells and entersthe intercellular spaces. As water evaporates from the aqueousfilm coating each cell, the film shrinks back into tiny spacesin the cell walls, increasing the curvature of the water surface andthus increasing its surface tension. This increased tension (negativepressure potential) in the surface film draws more water intothe cell walls, replacing that which was lost. The resulting tensionin the mesophyll draws water from the xylem of the nearestvein into the apoplast surrounding the mesophyll cells. The removalof water from the veins, in turn, establishes tension on theentire column of water contained within the xylem, so that thecolumn is drawn upward all the way from the roots.Water can be pulled upward through tiny tubes because ofthe remarkable cohesion of water—the tendency of water moleculesto stick to one another by hydrogen bonding (see Section2.4 and Figure 35.7, step 6). The narrower the tube, the greaterthe tension the water column can withstand without breaking.The integrity of the column is also maintained by the adhesionof water to the xylem walls.In summary, the key elements of water transportin the xylem are:• Transpiration of water molecules from the leaves byevaporation• Tension in the xylem sap resulting from transpirationfrom the leaves• Cohesion of water molecules in the xylem sap, fromthe leaves to the roots746 CHAPTER 35 | TRANSPORT IN PLANTSH2O...then pulls the watercolumn upward andoutward in the xylemof veins in the leaves...Tension pulls waterfrom the veins into theapoplast of themesophyll cells...2 Water evaporatesfrom mesophyllcell walls.During transpirationwater vapor diffusesout of the stomata.134LeafVeinMesophyllcell...and then upward inthe xylem of the rootand stem.Water moleculesform a cohesivewater columnfrom the roots tothe leaves.Water movesinto the xylemby osmosis.7Water enters root fromthe soil by osmosis.865H2ORootStemXylemXylemOOOOHHHH HHHHH2O35.7 The Transpiration–Cohesion–Tension Mechanism Transpirationcauses evaporation from mesophyllcell walls, generating tension on thexylem. Cohesion among water moleculesin the xylem transmits the tensionfrom the leaf to the root, causingwater to flow in the xylem from theroots to the atmosphere.GO TO Animated Tutorial 35.1 • Xylem TransportyourBioPortal.comThe water transport process we have described,called the transpiration–cohesion–tension mechanism,requires no work (that is, no expenditure of energy)on the part of the plant. At each step betweensoil and atmosphere, water moves passively; firsttoward a region with lower water potential, andthen to a region of lower pressure potential. Dry airhas the most negative water potential (–95 MPa at50% relative humidity), and the soil solution has theleast negative water potential (between –0.01 and–3 MPa). Xylem sap has a water potential more negativethan that of cells in the cortex of the root, butless negative than that of mesophyll cells in the leaf.In the tallest trees, such as a 110-meter Sequoia,the difference in pressure potential between thetop and the bottom of the column may be as greatas 3 MPa. Compare this to root pressure and thepressure in a typical automobile tire, which seldomexceed 0.2 MPa. The cohesion of water in thexylem is great enough to withstand the huge tensionsthat develop in the tallest trees.Mineral ions contained in the xylem sap risepassively with water as it ascends from root to leaf.In this way the nutritional needs of the shoot aremet. Some of the mineral elements brought to theleaves are subsequently redistributed to other partsof the plant by way of the phloem, but the initialdelivery from the roots is through the xylem.In addition to promoting the transport of minerals,transpiration has an added benefit of coolinga plant’s leaves. The evaporation of waterfrom mesophyll cells consumes heat, thereby decreasingthe leaf temperature. A farmer can holda leaf between thumb and forefinger to estimate its temperature;if the leaf doesn’t feel cool, that means that transpirationis not occurring and it must be time to water.The cooling effect of evaporation (also evident in the coolingof our skin when we sweat) may also be important in enablingplants to live in hot environments. However, while transpirationmay lead to the cooling of the leaf, this effect is a consequenceof the need to transpire, not a reason for it.A pressure chamber measures tension in the xylem sapThe transpiration–cohesion–tension model holds true only ifthe column of sap in the xylem is under tension (has a negativepressure potential). The most elegant demonstrations of thistension, and of its adequacy to account for the ascent of xylemsap in tall trees, were performed by the biologist Per Scholander,who measured tension in stems with an instrument calleda pressure chamber (Figure 35.8).Scholander used the pressure chamber to study dozens ofplant species from diverse habitats, growing under a variety ofconditions. The rate at which xylem sap ascends is not the sameat all times. No flow of xylem sap takes place at night, whenthere is little or no transpiration. By day, when the sap is ascending,the rate of ascent depends on several factors. These includetemperature, light intensity, and wind velocity, all of which affectthe transpiration rate, and hence the rate of sap flow. In addition,Scholander found that the xylem sap in developing vineswas not under tension until leaves formed. Once leaves developed,the tension increased and transport in the xylem began.35.2 RECAPThe transpiration–cohesion–tension mechanism explainsthe ascent of xylem sap. Transpiration drawswater out of leaves, resulting in tension that pullswater from the xylem. Because of cohesion betweenwater molecules, water is pulled passively throughthe xylem vessels in continuous columns, always towarda region with lower pressure potential.• What are the roles of transpiration, cohesion, and tensionin xylem transport? See p. 746 and Figure 35.7• What properties of the water molecule contribute tocohesion and tension? See p. 746• Describe how mineral ions get from the roots to theleaves. See p. 74735.2 | HOW ARE WATER AND MINERALS TRANSPORTED IN THE XYLEM? 747TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE35.8 Measuring the Pressure of Xylem Sap with a Pressure ChamberXylem sap pulls away from a cut stem because the pressure in the intact xylemis lower than that of the atmosphere. The negative pressure potential originallypresent in the plant can be measured in a pressure chamber in which thepressure can be raised. The cut surface remains outside the chamber. As gaspressure increases, the xylem sap is pushed back to the cut surface. When thesap first becomes visible again at the cut surface, the pressure in the chamberis recorded. This pressure is equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to thetension (negative pressure potential) originally present in the xylem.21 By applying justenough pressure……so that xylem sap ispushed back to the cutsurface of a plant sample,…3 …a scientist can determinethe tension on the sap inthe living plant.PressuregaugePressure release valveGas pressureWithout pressure With pressureAlthough transpiration provides the driving force for the transportof water and minerals in the xylem, it also results in theloss of tremendous quantities of water from the plant. Howplants control this loss is the subject of the next section.How Do Stomata Control the Loss 35.3 of Water and the Uptake of CO2?The epidermis of leaves and stems minimizes transpirationalwater loss by secreting a waxy cuticle, which is impermeable towater. However, the cuticle is also impermeable to carbon dioxide.This poses a problem: how can the plant balance its needto retain water with its need to obtain CO2 for photosynthesis?An elegant compromise has evolved in plants in the form ofpores called stomata (singular stoma) in the epidermis of theirleaves. A pair of specialized epidermal cells, called guard cells,controls the opening and closing of each stoma (Figure 35.9A).When the stomata are open, CO2 can enter the leaf by diffusion—but water vapor diffuses out of the leaf at the same time. Closedstomata prevent water loss, but also exclude CO2 from the leaf.Most plants open their stomata only when the light intensityis sufficient to maintain a moderate rate of photosynthesis. Atnight, when darkness precludes photosynthesis, their stomataare closed; no CO2 is needed at this time, and water is conserved.Even during the day, the stomata close if water is beinglost at too great a rate.Stomata are ancient structures that are found in plant fossilsthat are over 400 million years old. For this reason, theyare thought to predate the evolution of leaves. Stomata arefound in all vascular plants and in many nonvascular plants,including mosses (but not liverworts; see Chapter 28).The stoma and guard cells seen in Figure 35.9A are typicalof eudicots. Monocots typically have specialized epidermal cellsassociated with their guard cells. However, the principle ofoperation, which we will now describe in more detail, is thesame for both monocot and eudicot stomata.The guard cells control the size of the stomatal openingLight causes the stomata of most plants to open, admitting CO2for photosynthesis. Another cue for stomatal opening is thelevel of CO2 in the intercellular spaces inside the leaf. A lowlevel favors opening of the stomata, thus allowing the uptakeof more CO2.Stomata can respond to changes in light and CO2 in a matterof minutes. How can such an important biological processhappen so rapidly? The answer is that the opening and closingof stomata is controlled by turgor pressure changes in theguard cells. Changes in turgor pressure are in turn driven bychanges in K+ concentration in the guard cells. Blue light, absorbedby a pigment in the guard cell plasma membrane, activatesa proton pump, which actively transports H+ out of theguard cells and into the apoplast of the surrounding epidermis.The resulting electrochemical gradient drives K+ into the guardcells, where it accumulates (Figure 35.9B). The increased internalconcentration of K+ makes the water potential of theguard cells more negative. Negatively charged chloride ionsand organic ions also move into and out of the guard cells alongwith the potassium ions, maintaining electrical balance and contributingto the change in the solute potential of the guard cells.Water enters by osmosis (guard cell membranes are particularly748 CHAPTER 35 | TRANSPORT IN PLANTS1 In the light, guard cellsactively pump protonsout, thus facilitating theentry of K+ and Cl–.2 Higher internal K+ andCl– concentrations giveguard cells a morenegative water potential,causing them to take upwater, increase inpressure, and stretch,opening the stoma.3 In the absence of light,K+ and Cl– diffusepassively out of theguard cells, and waterfollows by osmosis. Theguard cells shrink andthe stoma closes.10 μmGuardcellsGuardcellsStomaStomaCellulosemicrofibrilsK+(B)(A)Cl–H2OK+Cl–H2O35.9 Stomata (A) Scanning electron micrograph of an open stomaformed by two sausage-shaped guard cells. (B) Potassium ion concentrationsaffect the water potential of the guard cells, controlling the openingand closing of stomata. Negatively charged ions (e.g., Cl–) that accompanyK+ maintain electrical balance and contribute to the changes in waterpotential that open and close the stomata.rich in aquaporin protein channels), increasing the pressure potentialof the guard cells. The arrangement of the cellulose microfibrilsin their cell walls (see Figure 34.5) is such that theguard cells change shape in response to the increase in pressurepotential, so that a gap—the stoma—appears between them.The stoma closes in the absence of blue light. The proton pumpbecomes less active, potassium ions diffuse passively out of theguard cells, water follows by osmosis, the pressure potential decreases,and the guard cells sag together and seal off the stoma.Showing how much potassium moves into the guard cells toopen a stoma was a difficult feat. A typical guard cell is verysmall, with a total volume of less than 0.03 nanoliters whenthe stoma is closed and almost 0.05 nanoliters when it is open.The scientists who solved the problem used an electron probemicroanalyzer, an instrument normally used by metallurgists tostudy the fine structure of alloys (Figure 35.10).Individual stomata are tiny and plants lose large amounts ofwater (a single corn plant can lose 2 quarts per day); even so,you may find it surprising that there can be up to 250,000 stomataper square inch of leaf surface! To survive, plants limit waterloss by controlling stomata in two very different ways:• By regulating stomatal opening and closing• By controlling the total number of stomataThe opening and closing of stomata is regulated by severalenvironmental and endogenous factors. For example, waterstress is a common problem for plants, especially on hot, windydays. In response to these conditions, plants will close theirstomata, even when the sun is shining. The water potential ofthe mesophyll cells is the cue for this protective response. If themesophyll is too dehydrated—that is, if its water potential istoo negative—its cells release a plant hormone called abscisicacid. Abscisic acid causes the guard cells to close the stomataand prevent further drying of the leaf. This response reducesthe rate of photosynthesis, but it protects the plant. Stomata alsoclose in most plants when CO2 levels in the mesophyll spacesare high. Can you think of a reason why this makes good biologicalsense?A plant can also reduce its total number of stomata whenwater is in short supply. Trees can do this by losing some oftheir leaves. Other plants reduce the number of stomata on thenew leaves they produce. For example, if the model plant Arabidopsisis exposed to high CO2 levels, the new leaves that formon the plant have fewer stomata than they would have hadunder normal conditions. Why do you think this might be advantageous?35.3 RECAPLeaf pores called stomata admit the CO2 needed forphotosynthesis and also permit the exit of water bytranspiration. Stomata can be opened or closed byguard cells to regulate water loss.• What is the role of K+ ions in the functioning of guardcells? See p. 748 and Figure 35.9• Describe how the external environment (includingCO2 level and light intensity) can affect stomatal functionand number during the life of a plant. See p. 749Stomata are normally open during daylight hours, allowingCO2 to be fixed and converted to the products of photosynthesis.In the next section we’ll see how these products are deliveredto other parts of the plant, supporting plant growth.35.3 | HOW DO STOMATA CONTROL THE LOSS OF WATER AND THE UPTAKE OF CO2? 749CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE35.10 Measuring Potassium Ion Concentration inGuard CellsG. D. Humble and Klaus Raschke used the electron probemicroanalyzer to examine individual stomata of the broadbean. In electron probe microanalysis, electron bombardmentof the sample causes it to emit X rays. The wavelength andintensity of the lines in the X-ray spectrum can be analyzed toidentify the elements present in the specimen and estimatetheir concentrations.HYPOTHESIS Guard cells of open stomata contain morepotassium ions than do those of closedstomata.K+ concentration within the guard cellssurrounding an open stoma was muchgreater than that in the guard cellssurrounding a closed stoma.METHODRESULTSGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: What other ion or ions would youstudy in order to further explore themechanism of stomatal opening?1. Peel strips of epidermis from leaves of broad beansin the dark (closed stomata) and in the light (openstomata).2. Examine the strips to locate stomata.3. Scan across guard cells with the electron probemicroanalyzer set to measure K+ concentration.Potassium X-raycounts per second0200400600GuardcellsK+concentrationStomaStoma closed Stoma openHow Are Substances Translocated 35.4 in the Phloem?Photosynthesis occurs primarily in the leaf (see Figure 10.1). Thecarbohydrate products of photosynthesis (mainly sucrose) diffuseto the nearest small vein (composed of xylem and phloem),where they are actively transported into sieve tube elements. Themovement of carbohydrates and other solutes through the plantin the phloem is called translocation. Phloem content has severalnames, including phloem sap, photosynthate, and assimilates.Substances in the phloem are translocated from sources to sinks.• Asource is an organ (such as a mature leaf or a storageroot) that produces (by photosynthesis or by digestion ofstored reserves) more sugars than it requires.• Asink is an organ (such as a root, flower, developing fruitor tuber, or immature leaf) that consumes sugars for its owngrowth and storage needs.Sugars (primarily sucrose), amino acids, some minerals, and avariety of other solutes are translocated between sources andsinks in the phloem. However, an organ that is a sink can turninto a source. For example, storage roots (such as sweet potatoes)are sinks when they accumulate carbohydrates but aresources when the stored reserves are needed to nourish otherorgans in the plant.How do we know that such organic solutes are translocatedin the phloem, rather than in the xylem? Over 300 years ago, theItalian scientist Marcello Malpighi performed a classic experimentin which he removed a ring of bark (containing thephloem) from the trunk of a tree—that is, he girdled the tree (Figure35.11). Over time, the bark in the region above the girdleswelled. We now know that the swelling resulted from the accumulationof organic solutes that came from higher up the treeand could no longer continue downward because of the disruptionof the phloem. Later, the bark below the girdle died becauseit no longer received sugars from the leaves. Eventually theroots, and then the entire tree, died.Any explanation of the translocation of organic solutes mustaccount for a few important observations:• Translocation stops if the phloem tissue is killed by heatingor other methods; thus the mechanism must be differentfrom that of transport in the xylem. Recall that xylem iscomposed of dead cells.• Translocation often proceeds in both directions—with somephloem transporting up the stem and parallel phloemtransporting down the stem. The direction depends on thelocation of sources and sinks.• Translocation is inhibited by compounds that inhibit respirationand thus limit the ATP supply in the source. Thustransport in the phloem, unlike the xylem, depends on theinput of energy.Let’s first revisit the structure of the phloem to find clues tohow it functions. Recall from Chapter 34 that the characteristiccells of the phloem are sieve tube elements (see Figure 34.9G).Like vessel elements, these cells meet end-to-end. However, unlikevessel elements, which break down their end walls as theymature, sieve tube elements contain plasmodesmata in the endwalls. During sieve tube development, the diameter of theseplasmodesmata increases 10- to 100-fold to form pores, enhancingthe connection between neighboring cells. The result is endwalls that look like sieves, called sieve plates (Figure 35.12).750 CHAPTER 35 | TRANSPORT IN PLANTSRemove a ring ofbark to girdle the tree.Organic solutes accumulatein the phloem above thegirdle, causing swelling.BarkWoodTime35.11 Girdling Blocks Translocation in the Phloem By girdling—removing a ring of bark containing the phloem—Malpighi blocked thetranslocation of organic solutes in a tree. Bark below the girdle diedbecause it no longer received nutrients; eventually the entire tree died.Mature sieve tube elements do not havenuclei and have lost most of their organelles.The companion cell is a fullyfunctional cell with a nucleus.Pores of sieve plateSieve plateSieve tube elementCompanion cellPhloem sapPoresSieve plateDr. R. Kessel & Dr. G. Shih/Visuals Unlimited.35.12 Sieve Tubes Individual sieve tube elements join together to formlong tubes that transport carbohydrates and other nutrient moleculesthroughout the plant body in the phloem. Sieve plates form at the ends ofeach sieve tube element, and phloem sap passes through the pores inthe sieve plate.What happens next is truly remarkable andmakes sieve tube elements among the most unusualcell types in nature. As the holes in the sieveplates expand, most of the cell contents are lost, includingthe nucleus, Golgi apparatus, and most ofthe ribosomes and cytoskeleton. Despite this, sievetube elements live for an entire growing season intrees and for decades in some cases. How can theylive for so long with no nucleus? The answer is thateach sieve tube element has one or more companioncells (see Figure 35.12), produced as daughtercells along with the sieve tube element when a parentcell divides. Numerous plasmodesmata link acompanion cell with its sieve tube element. Companioncells retain all their organelles and, throughthe activities of their nuclei, provide all the functionsneeded to maintain the sieve tube elements—they may be thought of as the “life support systems”of the sieve tube elements.A mature sieve tube element is filled withphloem sap consisting of water, dissolved sugars,and other solutes. This solution moves through the sieve tubewithin the symplast, moving from cell to cell through enlargedplasmodesmata. However, because of the unique structural featuresof the living sieve tubes, phloem sap is able to move rapidlyby bulk flow (like xylem sap).Now that we have a better picture of the structure of thephloem, let’s consider the experiments that led to our currentunderstanding of phloem function.To investigate translocation, plant physiologists needed toobtain samples of pure sieve tube sap from individual sieve tubeelements. This difficult task was simplified when it was discoveredthat a common garden pest, the aphid, feeds on plants bydrilling into a sieve tube with its specialized feeding organ,the stylet. The pressure within the sieve tube is higher than outsidethe plant, so the nutritious sieve tube sap is forced throughthe stylet and into the aphid’s digestive tract. So great is thepressure that sugary liquid is forced through the insect’s bodyand out the anus (Figure 35.13). This works because the phloemsap is under strongly positive pressure, unlike the negative pressurepotential in the xylem. (We will discuss the forces underlyingphloem movement a bit later in this section.)Plant physiologists use aphids to collect phloem sap. Whenliquid appears on the aphid’s abdomen, indicating that the insecthas connected with a sieve tube, the physiologist quicklyfreezes the aphid and cuts its body away from the stylet, whichremains in the sieve tube element and can exude phloem sapfor hours. Chemical analysis of phloem sap collected from sucha stylet reveals the contents of a single sieve tube element overtime. Physiologists can also infer the rates at which differentsubstances are translocated by measuring how long it takesfor radioactive tracers administered to a leaf to appear at styletsat different distances from the leaf.Recall that different substances can move in opposite directionsin the phloem of a stem. Experiments with aphid styletshave shown that all the contents of any given sieve tube elementmove in the same direction. Thus, to account for bidirectionaltranslocation in the phloem, different sieve tubes must be conductingsap in opposite directions. These and other experimentsled to the general adoption of the pressure flow model as an explanationfor translocation in the phloem.The pressure flow model appears to account fortranslocation in the phloemAs briefly noted above, phloem sap flows under positive pressurethrough the sieve tubes, moving from one sieve tube elementto the next by bulk flow through the sieve plates, withoutcrossing a membrane. We need to understand how this pressureis generated in order to understand translocation in the phloem.Two steps in translocation require metabolic energy:• Transport of sucrose and other solutes from sources into thesieve tubes; called loading• Removal of the solutes from the sieve tubes into sinks;called unloadingAccording to the pressure flow model of translocation in thephloem, sucrose is actively transported into sieve tube elementsat a source, giving those cells a greater sucrose concentrationthan the surrounding cells (think lower solute potential—morenegative ψs). Water therefore enters the sieve tube elements fromxylem vessels by osmosis. The entry of this water causes agreater pressure potential (turgor pressure) at the source end ofthe sieve tube, so that the entire fluid content of the sieve tube ispushed toward the sink end of the tube—in other words, the sapmoves by bulk flow in response to a pressure gradient (Figure35.14). In the sink, the sucrose is unloaded both passively andby active transport and water moves back to xylem vessels. Inthis way the gradient of solute potential and pressure potentialneeded for movement of phloem sap is maintained.The pressure flow model of translocation in the phloem iscontrasted with the transpiration–cohesion–tension model ofxylem transport in Table 35.1.35.4 | HOW ARE SUBSTANCES TRANSLOCATED IN THE PHLOEM? 751The aphid’s stylethas successfullypenetrated thesieve tube.Sieve tubeelementStyletSap droplet Longistigma caryae35.13 Aphids Collect Sap Aphids feed on sap drawn from a sieve tube, which theypenetrate with a modified feeding organ, the stylet. Pressure inside the sieve tube forcessap through the aphid’s digestive tract.The pressure flow model has been experimentally testedEven though the pressure flow model was first proposed morethan half a century ago, some of its features are still being debated.Other mechanisms have been proposed to account fortranslocation in sieve tubes, but some have been disproved, andothers do not have as much support as the pressure flow model.Two requirements must be met in order for the pressure flowmodel to be valid:• The sieve plates must be unobstructed, so that bulk flowfrom one sieve tube element to the next is possible.• There must be an effective method for loading sucrose andother solutes into the phloem in source tissues and unloadingthem in sink tissues.Let’s see whether these requirements are met.ARE THE SIEVE PLATES OPEN? Early electron microscopic studiesof phloem samples cut from plants seemed to contradict thepressure flow model. The pores in the sieve plates always appearedto be plugged with masses of a fibrous protein, suggestingthat sieve tube sap could not flow freely.However, the fibrous protein seen in early electron micrographsturned out to be a normal plant response to wounding.When phloem is cut, the contents ofthe sieve elements are forced outthrough the sieve plate pores. Toprevent massive losses of phloemsap, a fibrous protein, called P-protein,is synthesized in companioncells, enters the sieve elementsthrough plasmodesmata, moves tothe sieve plate pores, and seals themoff. This short-term solution givesthe plant time to repair the woundsite by synthesizing a polysaccharide called callose,which is thought to strengthen the cell wall.More recent studies using rapid freezing, whichprevents the wounding response, show openpores (see Figure 35.13) in the sieve plates.HOW ARE SIEVE TUBE ELEMENTS LOADED AND UNLOADED?If the pressure flow model is correct,there must be mechanisms for loading sugars andother solutes into the phloem in source regionsand for unloading them in sink regions.Two general routes can be taken by sugars andother solutes as they move from the mesophyllcells to the phloem: apoplastic and symplastic.The exact details vary widely among plant species. In manyplants, sugars and other solutes follow the apoplastic pathway;they leave the mesophyll cells and enter the apoplast beforethey reach the sieve elements. Specific sugars and amino acidsare then actively transported into cells of the phloem, and inthis way reenter the symplast. Because the solutes cross at leastone selectively permeable membrane in the apoplastic pathway,selective transport can be used to regulate which specificsubstances enter the phloem. In other plants, solutes followa symplastic pathway; the solutes remain within thesymplast all the way from the mesophyll cells to the seive tubecells. Because no membranes are crossed in the symplasticpathway, a mechanism that does not involve membrane transportis used to load sucrose into the phloem.In the apoplastic pathway, sucrose is actively loaded into thecompanion cells and sieve tubes by sucrose–proton symport, asecondary active transport mechanism. Aproton pump activelypumps protons out of the phloem cells, increasing the concentrationof protons in the apoplast. The protons then diffuse back752 CHAPTER 35 | TRANSPORT IN PLANTS1 Transpirationpulls water upxylem vessels.2 Source cells load sucroseinto phloem sieve tubes,reducing their waterpotential…4 Internal pressuredifferences drive thesap along the sievetube to sink cells.5 Sucrose isunloaded intosink cells…6 …and water movesback to xylem vessels.3 …so water is taken upfrom xylem vesselsby osmosis, raising thepressure potential inthe sieve tubes.H2OSucroseSucroseSink cellSourcecellXylemPhloemsievetubeH2OH2OH2O35.14 The Pressure Flow Model Water potential differencesproduce a pressure gradient and bulk flow of phloemsap from sources to sinks.GO TO Animated Tutorial 35.2 • The PressureFlow ModelyourBioPortal.comTABLE 35.1Mechanisms of Sap Flow in Plant Vascular TissuesXYLEM PHLOEMDriving force for Transpiration from leaves Active transport of sucrosebulk flow at sourceSite of bulk flow Nonliving vessel elements Living sieve tube elementsand tracheidsPressure potential Negative (pull from top; Positive (push from source;in sap tension) pressure)into the phloem cells through sucrose–proton symport proteins,bringing sucrose with them.In sink regions, the solutes are actively transported out ofthe sieve tube elements and into the surrounding tissues. Thisunloading serves two purposes: it helps maintain the gradientof solute potential and hence of pressure potential in the sievetubes; and it helps build up high concentrations of sugars andstarch in storage organs, such as developing fruits and seeds.Thus the second requirement of the pressure flow model is met,and the model is supported.35.4 RECAPCarbohydrates produced by photosynthesis aretranslocated from source to sink through the phloemby a pressure flow mechanism.• Explain the difference between a source and a sink.See p. 750• How does loading of sucrose at the source result inbulk flow toward the sink? See p. 751 and Figure 35.1435.4 | HOW ARE SUBSTANCES TRANSLOCATED IN THE PHLOEM? 75335.1 How Do Plant Cells Take Up Water and Solutes?• Water moves through biological membranes by osmosis,always moving toward regions with a more negative waterpotential. The water potential (ψ) of a cell or solution is thesum of the solute potential and the pressure potential.Review Figure 35.2• Turgid plant cells have significant positive pressure potentialbecause the rigid cell wall pushes back on the protoplast. Thispositive pressure (turgor pressure) maintains the physical structureof many plant cells; if the pressure potential drops, theplant wilts. Review Figures 35.3 and 35.4• The movement of a solution due to a difference in pressurepotential between two parts of a plant is called bulk flow.• Aquaporins are channel proteins that facilitate movement ofwater molecules through biological membranes.• Mineral uptake requires transport proteins. Some minerals enterthe plant passively by facilitated diffusion; others enter byactive transport. A proton pump provides energy for the activetransport of many mineral ions across membranes in plants.Review Figure 35.5• Water and minerals pass from the soil into the root by way ofthe apoplast and symplast, but must pass through the symplastto cross the endodermis and enter the xylem. TheCasparian strip in the endodermis blocks movement of waterand minerals through the apoplast. Review Figure 35.6, WEBACTIVITY 35.135.2 How Are Water and Minerals Transported in theXylem?• Root pressure is responsible for guttation and for the oozingof sap from cut stumps, but it cannot account for the ascentof xylem sap in trees.• Water transport in the xylem results from the combined effectsof transpiration, cohesion, and tension—the transpiration–cohesion–tension mechanism. Evaporation from the leaf producestension in the mesophyll cells, which pulls a column ofwater—held together by cohesion—up through the xylem fromthe root. Review Figure 35.7, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 35.1• Transport in the xylem is by bulk flow. It does not require theexpenditure of energy. Dissolved minerals are carried passivelyin the water.35.3 How Do Stomata Control the Loss of Water andthe Uptake of CO2?• Stomata allow a compromise between water retention and carbondioxide uptake.• A pair of guard cells controls the size of the stomatal opening.A light-activated proton pump, moves protons out of the guardcells to the walls of surrounding epidermal cells, setting up anelectrochemical gradient that drives the transport of potassiumions into the guard cells. Water follows osmotically, swelling theguard cells and opening the stomata. Review Figures 35.9 and35.10• When threatened by dehydration, mesophyll cells releaseabscisic acid, which causes guard cells to close the stomata,even in the light.35.4 How Are Substances Translocated in the Phloem?• Products of photosynthesis, as well as some minerals, aretranslocated through sieve tubes in the phloem by way of livingsieve tube elements. Review Figure 35.12• Translocation in the phloem can proceed in both directions inthe stem, although it only goes one way in any given sievetube. Translocation requires a supply of ATP.• Translocation in the phloem is explained by the pressure flowmodel: the difference in solute concentration between sourcesand sinks creates a difference in (positive) pressure potentialalong the sieve tubes, resulting in bulk flow. Review Figure35.14 and Table 35.1, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 35.2CHAPTER SUMMARYSELF-QUIZ1. Osmosisa. requires ATP.b. results in the bursting of plant cells placed in pure water.c. can cause a cell to become turgid.d. is independent of solute concentrations.e. continues until the pressure potential equals the waterpotential.2. Water potentiala. is the difference between the solute potential and thepressure potential.b. is analogous to the air pressure in an automobile tire.c. is the movement of water through a membrane.d. determines the direction of water movement between cells.e. is defined as 1.0 MPa for pure water under no appliedpressure.
35.1 How Do Plant Cells Take Up Water and Solutes?• Water moves through biological membranes by osmosis,always moving toward regions with a more negative waterpotential. The water potential (ψ) of a cell or solution is thesum of the solute potential and the pressure potential.Review Figure 35.2• Turgid plant cells have significant positive pressure potentialbecause the rigid cell wall pushes back on the protoplast. Thispositive pressure (turgor pressure) maintains the physical structureof many plant cells; if the pressure potential drops, theplant wilts. Review Figures 35.3 and 35.4• The movement of a solution due to a difference in pressurepotential between two parts of a plant is called bulk flow.• Aquaporins are channel proteins that facilitate movement ofwater molecules through biological membranes.• Mineral uptake requires transport proteins. Some minerals enterthe plant passively by facilitated diffusion; others enter byactive transport. A proton pump provides energy for the activetransport of many mineral ions across membranes in plants.Review Figure 35.5• Water and minerals pass from the soil into the root by way ofthe apoplast and symplast, but must pass through the symplastto cross the endodermis and enter the xylem. TheCasparian strip in the endodermis blocks movement of waterand minerals through the apoplast. Review Figure 35.6, WEBACTIVITY 35.135.2 How Are Water and Minerals Transported in theXylem?• Root pressure is responsible for guttation and for the oozingof sap from cut stumps, but it cannot account for the ascentof xylem sap in trees.• Water transport in the xylem results from the combined effectsof transpiration, cohesion, and tension—the transpiration–cohesion–tension mechanism. Evaporation from the leaf producestension in the mesophyll cells, which pulls a column ofwater—held together by cohesion—up through the xylem fromthe root. Review Figure 35.7, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 35.1• Transport in the xylem is by bulk flow. It does not require theexpenditure of energy. Dissolved minerals are carried passivelyin the water.35.3 How Do Stomata Control the Loss of Water andthe Uptake of CO2?• Stomata allow a compromise between water retention and carbondioxide uptake.• A pair of guard cells controls the size of the stomatal opening.A light-activated proton pump, moves protons out of the guardcells to the walls of surrounding epidermal cells, setting up anelectrochemical gradient that drives the transport of potassiumions into the guard cells. Water follows osmotically, swelling theguard cells and opening the stomata. Review Figures 35.9 and35.10• When threatened by dehydration, mesophyll cells releaseabscisic acid, which causes guard cells to close the stomata,even in the light.35.4 How Are Substances Translocated in the Phloem?• Products of photosynthesis, as well as some minerals, aretranslocated through sieve tubes in the phloem by way of livingsieve tube elements. Review Figure 35.12• Translocation in the phloem can proceed in both directions inthe stem, although it only goes one way in any given sievetube. Translocation requires a supply of ATP.• Translocation in the phloem is explained by the pressure flowmodel: the difference in solute concentration between sourcesand sinks creates a difference in (positive) pressure potentialalong the sieve tubes, resulting in bulk flow. Review Figure35.14 and Table 35.1, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 35.2