Prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster) are small rodentsthat live in temperate climates, where they dig tunnelsin fields. When a male prairie vole encounters afemale, mating often ensues. After mating (which can takeas long as a day), the couple stays together, building a nestand raising their pups together. The two voles bond sotightly that they stay together for life. Contrast this behaviorwith that of the montane vole (M. montanus), which isclosely related to the prairie vole and lives in the hills notfar away. In this species, mating is quick, and afterwardsthe couple separates. The male looks for new mates andthe female abandons her young soon after they are born.The explanation for these dramatic behavioral differenceslies in the brains of these two species. NeuroscientistThomas Insel and his colleagues found that whenprairie voles mate for all those hours, their brains release a9-amino-acid peptide. In females, this peptide is oxytocin;in males, it is vasopressin. The peptide is circulated in thebloodstream and reaches all tissues in the body, but itbinds to only a few cell types. These cells have surfaceproteins, called receptors, that specifically bind the peptide,like a key inserting into a lock.The interaction of peptide and receptor causes the receptor,which extends across the plasma membrane, tochange shape. Within the cytoplasm, this change sets off aseries of events called a signal transduction pathway. Sucha pathway can cause many different cellular responses, butin this case, the notable changes are in behavior. The receptorsfor oxytocin and vasopressin in prairie voles aremost concentrated in the regions of the brain that are responsiblefor behaviors such as bonding and caring for theyoung. In montane voles, there are far fewer receptors andas a result, fewer postmating behaviors.These cause-and-effect relationships betweenpeptides, receptors, and behaviorhave been established through experiments.For example, a female prairie volethat is injected before mating with a moleculethat blocks oxytocin does not bondwith the male. Also, a female injected withoxytocin will bond with a male even withoutmating. Experiments with vasopressinin males give similar results. Furthermore,promiscuous vole males that were geneticallymanipulated to express prairie voleamounts of the vasopressin receptor grewup to behave more like prairie vole males.These experiments show that oxytocin andLove signals7Voles Prairie voles display extensive bondingbehaviors after mating. These behaviors aremediated by peptides acting as intercellularsignals.IN THIS CHAPTER we first describe the types of signalsthat affect cells. These include chemicals produced byother cells and substances from outside the body, as well asphysical and environmental factors such as light. Then weshow how a signal affects only those cells that have the specificreceptor to recognize that signal. Next, we describe thesteps of signal transduction in which the receptor communicatesto the cell that a signal has been received, thus causinga change in cell function.vasopressin are signals that induce bonding and caringbehaviors in voles. Could this also be true of humans?Neuroeconomist Paul Zaks thinks so. He has done experimentswith human volunteers, who were asked to“invest” funds with a stranger. A group of investors thatwas given a nasal spray containing oxytocin was moretrusting of the stranger (and invested more funds) than agroup that got an inert spray. So the oxytocin signalingpathway is important in human behavior too.A cell’s response to any signal molecule takes place inthree sequential steps. First, the signal binds to a receptorin the cell, often on the outside surface of the plasmamembrane. Second, signal binding conveys a messageto the cell. Third, the cell changes its activity in responseto the signal. And in a multicellular organism, this leadsto changes in that organism’s functioning.Oxytocin This peptide with 9 amino acids acts as a signalfor postmating behaviors.What Are Signals, and How Do Cells 7.1 Respond to Them?Both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells process information fromtheir environments. This information can be in the form of aphysical stimulus, such as the light reaching your eyes as youread this book, or chemicals that bathe a cell, such as lactose ina bacterial growth medium. It may come from outside the organism,such as the scent of a female moth seeking a mate inthe dark, or from a neighboring cell within the organism, suchas in the heart, where thousands of muscle cells contract in unisonby transmitting signals to one another.Of course, the mere presence of a signal does not mean thata cell will respond to it, just as you do not pay close attention toevery image in your environment as you study. To respond toa signal, the cell must have a specific receptor that can detect it.This section provides examples of some types of cellular signalsand one model of signal transduction. A signal transduction pathwayis a sequence of molecular events and chemical reactionsthat lead to a cell’s response to a signal. After discussing signalsin this section, we will consider their receptors in Section 7.2.Cells receive signals from the physical environmentand from other cellsThe physical environment is full of signals. Our sense organsallow us to respond to light, odors and tastes (chemical signals),temperature, touch, and sound. Bacteria and protists can respondto minute chemical changes in their environments. Plantsrespond to light as a signal as well as an energy source. Theamount and wavelengths of light reaching a plant’s surface differfrom day to night and in direct sunlight versus shade. Thesevariations act as signals that affect plant growth and reproduction.Some plants also respond to temperature: when theweather gets cold, they may respond either by becoming tolerantto cold or by accelerating flowering.Acell deep inside a large multicellular organism is far awayfrom the exterior environment. Such a cell’s environment consistsof other cells and extracellular fluids. Cells receive theirnutrients from, and pass their wastes into, extracellular fluids.Cells also receive signals—mostly chemical signals—from theirextracellular fluid environment. Most of these chemical signalscome from other cells, but they can also come from the environmentvia the digestive and respiratory systems. And cells canrespond to changes in the extracellular concentrations of cer-CHAPTER OUTLINE7.1 What Are Signals, and How Do Cells Respond toThem?7.2 How Do Signal Receptors Initiate a CellularResponse?7.3 How Is the Response to a Signal Transducedthrough the Cell?7.4 How Do Cells Change in Response to Signals?7.5 How Do Cells Communicate Directly?tain chemicals, such as CO2 and H+, which are affected by themetabolic activities of other cells.Inside a large multicellular organism, chemical signals madeby the body itself reach a target cell by local diffusion or by circulationwithin the blood. These signals are usually in tiny concentrations(as low as 10–10 M) (see Chapter 2 for an explanationof molar concentrations). Autocrine signals diffuse to andaffect the cells that make them; for example, part of the reasonmany tumor cells reproduce uncontrollably is because theyself-stimulate cell division by making their own division signals.Paracrine signals diffuse to and affect nearby cells; an exampleis a neurotransmitter made by one nerve cell that diffusesto an adjacent cell and stimulates it. (Figure 7.1A). Signalsto distant cells called hormones travel through the circulatorysystem (Figure 7.1B).A signal transduction pathway involves a signal,a receptor, and responsesFor the information from a signal to be transmitted to a cell, thetarget cell must be able to receive or sense the signal and respondto it, and the response must have some effect on the functionof the cell. In a multicellular organism, all cells may receivechemical signals that are circulated in the blood, such as the peptidesoxytocin and vasopressin that are released following matingin voles (see the opening of this chapter), but most body cellsare not capable of responding to the signals. Only the cells withthe necessary receptors can respond.The kinds of responses vary greatly depending on the signaland the target cell. Just a few examples are: a skin cell initiatingcell division to heal a wound; a cell moving to a new locationin the embryo to form a tissue; a cell releasing enzymes to digestfood; a plant cell loosening bonds that hold its cell wallpolymers together so that it can expand; and a cell in the eyesending messages to the brain about the book you are reading.Asignal transduction pathway involves a signal, a receptor, anda response (Figure 7.2).Let’s look at an example of such a pathway in the bacteriumEscherichia coli (E. coli). Follow the features of this pathway ingeneral (see Figure 7.2) and in particular (Figure 7.3).SIGNAL As a prokaryotic cell, a bacterium is very sensitive tochanges in its environment. One thing that can change is thetotal solute concentration (osmotic concentration—see Section6.3) in the environment surrounding the cell. In the mammalianintestine where E. coli lives, the solute concentration around130 CHAPTER 7 | CELL SIGNALING AND COMMUNICATIONAutocrine signals bind toreceptors on the samecell that secretes them.Cells withoutreceptors for aparticular signaldo not respondto that signal.Paracrine signals bind toreceptors on nearby cells.Circulating signals such as hormonesare transported by the circulatory systemand bind to receptors on distant cells.Circulatory vessel(e.g., a blood vessel)Target cellTarget cellTarget cellReceptorNot a target cell(no receptors)Secreting cellSecreting cell(A)(B)Signals are releasedfrom other tissues.1A signal molecule binds to areceptor protein in the cellsurface or inside the cytoplasm.2Signal binding changes thethree-dimensional shape of thereceptor and exposes its active site.3The activated receptor activates asignal-transduction pathway tobring about cellular changes.4SignalmoleculeReceptorInactivesignaltransductionmoleculeActivatedsignaltransductionmoleculeShort-termchanges:enzyme activation,cell movementLong-termchanges:altered DNAtranscription7.1 Chemical Signaling Systems (A) A signal molecule can diffuse toact on the cell that produces it, or on a nearby cell. (B) Many signals act ondistant cells and must be transported by the organism’s circulatory system.7.2 A Signal Transduction Pathway This general pathway is commonto many cells and situations. The ultimate effects on the cell areeither short-term or long-term molecular changes, or both.the bacterium often rises far above thesolute concentration inside the cell. Afundamental characteristic of all livingcells is that they maintain a constant internalenvironment, or homeostasis. Todo this, the bacterium must perceive andquickly respond to this environmentalsignal (Figure 7.3, step 1). The cell doesthis by a signal transduction pathway involvingtwo major components: a receptorand a responder.RECEPTOR The E. coli receptor protein forchanges in solute concentration is calledEnvZ. EnvZ is a transmembrane proteinthat extends across the bacterium’s plasmamembrane into the space between theplasma membrane and the highly porousouter membrane, which forms a complexwith the cell wall. When the solute concentrationof the extracellular environmentrises, so does the solute concentration inthe space between the two membranes.This change in the aqueous solutioncauses the part of the receptor protein thatsticks out into the intermembrane space toundergo a change in conformation (itsthree-dimensional shape).The conformational change in the intermembrane domain(a domain is a sequence of amino acids folded into a particularshape) causes a conformational change in the domain that liesin the cytoplasm and initiates the events of signal transduction.The cytoplasmic domain of EnvZ can act as an enzyme. As youwill see in more detail in Chapter 8, an enzyme is a biologicalcatalyst that greatly speeds up a chemical reaction, and theactive site is the region where the reaction actually takes place.The conformational change in EnvZ exposes an active site thatwas previously buried within the protein, so that EnvZ becomesa protein kinase—an enzyme that catalyzes the transferof a phosphate group from ATP to another molecule. EnvZtransfers the phosphate group to one of its own histidine aminoacids. In other words, EnvZ phosphorylates itself (Figure 7.3,step 2).What does phosphorylation do to a protein? As discussed inSection 3.2, proteins can have both hydrophilic regions (whichtend to interact with water on the outside of the protein macromolecule)and hydrophobic regions (which tend to interactwith one another on the inside of the macromolecule). Theseregions are important in giving a protein its three-dimensionalshape. Phosphate groups are charged, so an amino acid withEnvZ + ATP such a group tends to be on the outside of the protein. ThusEnvZEnvZ–P + ADP7.1 | WHAT ARE SIGNALS, AND HOW DO CELLS RESPOND TO THEM? 131Solutes enter the space betweenthe two membranes through largepores in the outer membrane ofE. coli.…and the phosphorylatedOmpR changes shape,enabling it to bind to DNAand stimulate transcriptionof the ompC gene.1. SignalOmpC protein inserts into the outermembrane, preventing solute entryand keeping the cell’s exteriorosmotically balanced.4. EffectsThe phosphate from EnvZ istransferred to the respondingOmpR protein…3. ResponderThe EnvZ receptor protein changesshape in response to the high soluteconcentration, catalyzing the additionof a phosphate from ATP.2. ReceptormRNAompCProteinsynthesisTranscriptionOmpCproteinOmpREnvZSolute(signal)IntermembranespacePlasmamembraneCellwallPoresOutermembraneExternalenvironmentDNACytoplasmPPPBacterial cellATPADP7.3 A Model Signal Transduction Pathway E. coliresponds to the signal of an increase in solute concentration inits environment. The basic steps of such a signal transductionpathway occur in all living organisms.GO TO Web Activity 7.1 • Signal TransductionyourBioPortal.comphosphorylation leads to a change in the shape and functionof a protein by changing its charge.RESPONDER A responder is the second component of a signaltransduction pathway. The charged phosphate group addedto the histidine of the EnvZ protein causes its cytoplasmic domainto change its shape again. It now binds to a second protein,OmpR, and transfers the phosphate to it. In turn, this phosphorylationchanges the shape of OmpR (Figure 7.3, step 3).The change in the responder is a key event in signaling, for threereasons:• The signal on the outside of the cell has now beentransduced to a protein that lies totally within the cell’scytoplasm.• The altered responder can do something. In the case of thephosphorylated OmpR, that “something” is to bind toDNAto alter the expression of many genes; in particular, itincreases the expression of the protein OmpC. This bindingbegins the final phase of the signaling pathway: the effectof the signal, which is an alteration in cell function.• The signal has been amplified. Because a single enzymecan catalyze the conversion of many substrate molecules,one EnvZ molecule alters the structure of many OmpRmolecules.Phosphorylated OmpR has the correct three-dimensionalstructure to bind to the ompC DNA, resulting in an increase inthe transcription of that gene. This results in the production ofOmpC protein, which enables the cell to respond to the increasein osmotic concentration in its environment (Figure 7.3, step4). The OmpC protein is inserted into the outer membrane ofthe cell, where it blocks pores and prevents solutes from enteringthe intermembrane space. As a result, the solute concentrationin the intermembrane space is lowered, and homeostasisis restored. Thus the EnvZ-OmpR signal transductionpathway allows the E. coli cell to function just as if the externalenvironment had a normal solute concentration.Many of the elements that we have highlighted in thisprokaryotic signal transduction pathway also exist in the signaltransduction pathways of eukaryotic organisms. A typicaleukaryotic signal transduction pathway has the following generalsteps:• Areceptor protein changes its conformation upon interactionwith a signal. This receptor protein may or may not bein a membrane.• Aconformational change in the receptor protein activatesits protein kinase activity, resulting in the transfer of aphosphate group from ATP to a target protein.• This phosphorylation alters the function of a responderprotein.• The signal is amplified.• Aprotein that binds to DNA is activated.• The expression of one or more specific genes is turnedon or off.• Cell activity is altered.7.1 RECAPCells are constantly exposed to molecular signalsthat can come from the external environment or fromwithin the body of a multicellular organism. To respondto a signal, the cell must have a specific receptorthat detects the signal and activates somecellular response.• What are the differences between an autocrine signal,a paracrine signal, and a hormone? See p. 130 andFigure 7.1• Describe the three components in a cell’s response toa signal. See pp. 130–132 and Figure 7.2• What are the elements of signal transduction that aredescribed at the close of this section?The general features of signal transduction pathways describedin this section will recur in more detail throughout the chapter.First let’s consider more closely the nature of the receptorsthat bind signal molecules.How Do Signal Receptors Initiate 7.2 a Cellular Response?Any given cell in a multicellular organism is bombarded withmany signals. However, it responds to only some of them, becauseno cell makes receptors for all signals. A receptor proteinthat binds to a chemical signal does so very specifically, inmuch the same way that a membrane transport protein bindsto the substance it transports. This specificity of binding ensuresthat only those cells that make a specific receptor will respondto a given signal.Receptors have specific binding sites for their signalsAspecific chemical signal molecule fits into a three-dimensionalsite on its protein receptor (Figure 7.4A). A molecule that bindsto a receptor site on another molecule in this way is called a ligand.Binding of the signaling ligand causes the receptor proteinto change its three-dimensional shape, and that conformationalchange initiates a cellular response. The ligand does not contributefurther to this response. In fact, the ligand is usually not metabolizedinto a useful product; its role is purely to “knock on thedoor.” (This is in sharp contrast to the enzyme–substrate interaction,which is described in Chapter 8. The whole purpose of thatinteraction is to change the substrate into a useful product.)Receptors bind to their ligands according to chemistry’s lawof mass action:R + L ~ RLThis means that the binding is reversible, although for most ligand–receptor complexes, the equilibrium point is far to theright—that is, binding is favored. Reversibility is important,however, because if the ligand were never released, the receptorwould be continuously stimulated.132 CHAPTER 7 | CELL SIGNALING AND COMMUNICATIONAn inhibitor (or antagonist) can also bind to a receptor protein,instead of the normal ligand. There are both natural andartificial antagonists of receptor binding. For example, manysubstances that alter human behavior bind to specific receptorsin the brain, and prevent the binding of the receptors’ specificligands. An example is caffeine, which is probably the world’smost widely consumed stimulant. In the brain, the nucleosideadenosine acts as a ligand that binds to a receptor on nerve cells,initiating a signal transduction pathway that reduces brain activity,especially arousal. Because caffeine has a similar molecularstructure to that of adenosine, it also binds to the adenosinereceptor (Figure 7.4B). But in this case binding does notinitiate a signal transduction pathway. Rather, it “ties up” thereceptor, preventing adenosine binding and thereby allowingnerve cell activity and arousal.Receptors can be classified by location and functionThe chemistry of ligand signals is quite variable, but they can bedivided into two groups, based on whether or not they can diffusethrough membranes. Correspondingly, a receptor can beclassified by its location in the cell, which largely depends on thenature of its ligand (Figure 7.5):• Cytoplasmic receptors: Small or nonpolar ligands can diffuseacross the nonpolar phospholipid bilayer of the plasmamembrane and enter the cell. Estrogen, for example, is alipid-soluble steroid hormone that can easily diffuse acrossthe plasma membrane; it binds to a receptor in the cytoplasm.• Membrane receptors: Large or polar ligands cannot cross thelipid bilayer. Insulin, for example, is a protein hormone thatcannot diffuse through the plasma membrane; instead, itbinds to a transmembrane receptor with an extracellularbinding domain.In complex eukaryotes such as mammals and higher plants,there are three well-studied categories of plasma membrane receptorsthat are grouped according to their functions: ion channels,protein kinase receptors, and G protein-linked receptors.ION CHANNEL RECEPTORS As described in Section 6.3, theplasma membranes of many types of cells contain gated ionchannels for ions such as Na+, K+, Ca2+, or Cl– to enter or leavethe cell (see Figure 6.11). The gate-opening mechanism is analteration in the three-dimensional shape of the channel proteinupon ligand binding; thus these proteins function as receptors.Each type of ion channel has its own signal, and these includesensory stimuli such as light, sound, and electric charge7.2 | HOW DO SIGNAL RECEPTORS INITIATE A CELLULAR RESPONSE? 133NNNNNH2H HH HNNNOONH3CCH3CH3OHOHOHOCaffeine AdenosineOutsideof cellPlasmamembraneInsideof cellThe similar structures of caffeine and adenosine allowthem both to bond the receptor, but only adenosinetriggers signal transduction.The receptor has both extracellularand intracellular regions connectedby a hydrophobic region.The signal (ligand) fitsinto the receptor atits extracellular region.(B)7.4 A Signal and Its Receptor (A) The adenosine 2A receptor occurs in the (A)human brain, where it is involved in inhibiting arousal. (B) Adenosine is the normalligand for the receptor. Caffeine has a similar structure to that of adenosine and canact as an antagonist that binds the receptor and prevents its normal functioning.A nonpolar signal can diffusedirectly across the lipidbilayer of the plasmamembrane to encounter itsreceptor in the cytoplasm.A signal that is polar and/orlarge cannot diffuse throughthe plasma membrane. Itsreceptor is embedded inthe membrane.NonpolarsignalPolarsignalPlasmamembraneReceptorInside of cellTransmembranereceptorOutsideof cell7.5 Two Locations for Receptors Receptors can be located in thecytoplasm or in the plasma membrane of the cell.differences across the plasma membrane, as well as chemicalligands such as hormones and neurotransmitters.The acetylcholine receptor, which is located in the plasma membraneof skeletal muscle cells, is an example of a gated ion channel.This receptor protein is a sodium channel that binds the ligandacetylcholine, which is a neurotransmitter—a chemical signalreleased from neurons (nerve cells) (Figure 7.6). When two moleculesof acetylcholine bind to the receptor, it opens for about athousandth of a second. That is enough time for Na+, which ismore concentrated outside the cell than inside, to rush into thecell, moving in response to both concentration and electrical potentialgradients. The change in Na+ concentration in the cellinitiates a series of events that result in muscle contraction.PROTEIN KINASE RECEPTORS Like the EnvZ receptor of E.coli, some eukaryotic receptor proteins become protein kinaseswhen they are activated. They catalyze the phosphorylationof themselves and/or other proteins, thus changingtheir shapes and therefore their functions.The receptor for insulin is an example of a protein kinasereceptor. Insulin is a protein hormone made by the mammalianpancreas. Its receptor has two copies each of two differentpolypeptide subunits (Figure 7.7). When insulinbinds to the receptor, the receptor becomes activated andable to phosphorylate itself and certain cytoplasmic proteinsthat are appropriately called insulin response substrates. Theseproteins then initiate many cellular responses, including theinsertion of glucose transporters (see Figure 6.14) into theplasma membrane.G PROTEIN-LINKED RECEPTORS A third category of eukaryoticplasma membrane receptors is the G protein-linked receptors,also referred to as the seven transmembrane domainreceptors. This descriptive name identifies a fascinating groupof receptors, each of which is composed of a single proteinwith seven transmembrane domains. These seven domainspass through the phospholipid bilayer and are separated byshort loops that extend either outside or inside the cell. Ligandbinding on the extracellular side of the receptor changesthe shape of its cytoplasmic region, exposing a site that bindsto a mobile membrane protein called a G protein. The G proteinis partially inserted into the lipid bilayer and partiallyexposed on the cytoplasmic surface of the membrane.Many G proteins have three polypeptide subunits andcan bind three different molecules (Figure 7.8A):• The receptor• GDP and GTP (guanosine diphosphate and triphosphate,respectively; these are nucleoside phosphateslike ADP and ATP)• An effector proteinWhen the G protein binds to an activated receptor protein,GDP is exchanged for GTP (Figure 7.8B). At the same time,the ligand is usually released from the extracellular side of thereceptor. GTP binding causes a conformational change in theG protein. The GTP-bound subunit then separates from therest of the protein, diffusing in the plane of the phospholipidbilayer until it encounters an effector protein to which it canbind. An effector protein is just what its name implies: it causesan effect in the cell. The binding of the GTP-bearing G protein134 CHAPTER 7 | CELL SIGNALING AND COMMUNICATIONAcetylcholine binds to two of the fiveAChR subunits, causing the channelto change shape and open.1Na+ buildup in cellsleads to musclecontraction.3The channel is linedwith negativelycharged aminoacids, allowing Na+to flow into the cell.2––––––––Acetylcholinereceptor (AChR)Na+Acetylcholine(ACh)PlasmamembraneInside of cellOutsideof cell…which phosphorylatesinsulin-responsesubstrates, triggering acascade of chemicalresponses inside the cell.A conformational change in theβ subunits transmits a signal to thecytoplasm that insulin is present.2The insulin signal activatesthe receptor’s protein kinasedomain in the cytoplasm…The α subunits ofthe receptor bindinsulin (the signal).431PhosphategroupsCellularresponsesInsulin-responsesubstrateOutside of cellInside of cellInsulinInsulinreceptorPPββPα αββ α αP PPPP P7.6 A Gated Ion Channel The acetylcholine receptor (AChR) is aligand-gated ion channel for sodium ions. It is made up of five polypeptidesubunits. When acetylcholine molecules (ACh) bind to two of thesubunits, the gate opens and Na+ flows into the cell. This channel helpsregulate membrane polarity (see Chapter 6).7.7 A Protein Kinase Receptor The mammalian hormone insulinbinds to a receptor on the outside surface of the cell and initiates aresponse.subunit activates the effector—which may be an enzyme or an ionchannel—thereby causing changes in cell function (Figure 7.8C).After activation of the effector protein, the GTP on the G proteinis hydrolyzed to GDP. The now inactive G protein subunitseparates from the effector protein and diffuses in the membraneto collide with and bind to the other two G protein subunits.When the three components of the G protein are reassembled,the protein is capable of binding again to an activatedreceptor. After binding, the activated receptor exchanges theGDP on the G protein for a GTP, and the cycle begins again.There are variations in all three G protein subunits, givingdifferent G protein complexes different functions. A G proteincan either activate or inhibit an effector protein. An example inhumans of an activating response involves the receptor for epinephrine(adrenaline), which is a hormone made by the adrenalgland in response to stress or heavy exercise. In heart muscle,this hormone binds to its G protein-linked receptor,activating a G protein. The GTP-bound subunit then activatesa membrane-bound enzyme to produce a small molecule, cyclicadenosine monophosphate (cAMP). This molecule, in turn, hasmany effects on the cell (as we will see below), including themobilization of glucose for energy and muscle contraction.G protein-mediated inhibition occurs when the same hormone,epinephrine, binds to its receptor in the smooth musclecells surrounding blood vessels lining the digestive tract. Again,the epinephrine-bound receptor changes its shape and activatesa G protein, and the GTP-bound subunit binds to a target enzyme.But in this case, the enzyme is inhibited instead of beingactivated. As a result, the muscles relax and the blood vessel diameterincreases, allowing more nutrients to be carried awayfrom the digestive system to the rest of the body. Thus the samesignal and signaling mechanism can have different consequencesin different cells, depending on the presence of specificreceptor and effector molecules.CYTOPLASMIC RECEPTORS Cytoplasmic receptors are locatedinside the cell and bind to signals that can diffuse across theplasma membrane. Binding to the signaling ligand causes thereceptor to change its shape so that it can enter the cell nucleus,where it affects expression of specific genes. But this generalview is somewhat simplified. The receptor for the steroid hormonecortisol, for example, is normally bound to a chaperoneprotein, which blocks it from entering the nucleus. Binding ofthe hormone causes the receptor to change its shape so thatthe chaperone is released (Figure 7.9). This release allows theHormone binding to the receptoractivates the G protein. GTPreplaces GDP.Part of the activated G protein activates aneffector protein that converts thousands ofreactants to products, thus amplifying theaction of a single signal molecule.1 23 The GTP on the Gprotein is hydrolyzed toGDP but remains boundto the protein.Outside of cellInside of cellSignal (hormone)G proteinlinkedreceptor InactiveG proteinInactive effectorproteinReactantProductAmplificationActivatedG proteinActivatedeffector protein(A) (B) (C)GDP GTP GDPThe receptor–chaperonecomplex cannotenter the nucleus.1…which allows thereceptor and thecortisol ligand toenter the nucleus.4Cortisol enters thecytoplasm and bindsto the receptor…2…causing thereceptor to changeshape and releasethe chaperone…3Outside of cell PlasmamembraneSignal (cortisol)NucleusTranscriptionInside of cellCortisolreceptorChaperoneproteinDNAmRNA7.8 A G Protein-Linked Receptor The G protein is an intermediarybetween the receptor and an effector.7.9 A Cytoplasmic Receptor The receptor for cortisol is bound to achaperone protein. Binding of the signal to the receptor releases thechaperone and allows the ligand–receptor complex to enter the cell’snucleus, where it binds to DNA. Changes in DNA transcription are longtermin comparison to the more immediate changes in enzyme activityobserved in other pathways (see Figure 7.20).GO TO Animated Tutorial 7.1 • Signal Transduction PathwayyourBioPortal.comreceptor to fold into an appropriate conformation for enteringthe nucleus and initiating DNA transcription.7.2 RECAPReceptors are proteins that bind, or are changed by,specific signals or ligands; the changed receptor initiatesa response in the cell. These receptors may beat the plasma membrane or inside the cell.• What are the nature and importance of specificity inthe binding of receptors to their particular ligands?See pp. 132–133• What are three important categories of plasma membranereceptors seen in complex eukaryotes? See pp.133–134 and Figures 7.6, 7.7, and 7.8Now that we have discussed signals and receptors, let’s examinethe characteristics of the molecules (transducers) that mediatebetween the receptor and the cellular response.How Is the Response to a Signal 7.3 Transduced through the Cell?As we have just seen with epinephrine, the same signal mayproduce different responses in different tissues. These differentresponses to the same signal–receptor complex are mediated bythe components of different signal transduction pathways. Signaltransduction may be either direct or indirect:• Direct transduction is a function of the receptor itself andoccurs at the plasma membrane. The interaction betweenthe signal (primary messenger) and receptor results in thecellular response. (Figure 7.10A).• In indirect transduction, which is more common, anothermolecule termed a second messenger diffuses into the cytoplasmand mediates additional steps in the signal transductionpathway (Figure 7.10B).In both cases, the signal can initiate a cascade of events, in whichproteins interact with other proteins until the final responsesare achieved. Through such a cascade, an initial signal can beboth amplified and distributed to cause several different responsesin the target cell.A protein kinase cascade amplifies a responseto ligand bindingWe have seen that when a signal binds to a protein kinase receptor,the receptor’s conformation changes, exposing a proteinkinase active site on the receptor’s cytoplasmic domain. Theprotein kinase then catalyzes the phosphorylation of target proteins.This process is an example of direct signal transduction,because the amplifying enzyme is the receptor itself. Protein kinasereceptors are important in binding signals called growthfactors that stimulate cell division in both plants and animals.A complete signal transduction pathway that occurs after aprotein kinase receptor binds a growth factor was discoveredin studies on a cell that went wrong. Many human bladder cancerscontain an abnormal form of a protein called Ras (so namedbecause a similar protein was previously isolated from a rat sarcomatumor). Investigations of these bladder cancers showedthat Ras was a G protein, and the abnormal form was alwaysactive because it was permanently bound to GTP, and thuscaused continuous cell division (Figure 7.11). If this abnormalform of Ras was inhibited, the cells stopped dividing. This discoveryhas led to a major effort to develop specific Ras inhibitorsfor cancer treatment.Other cancers have abnormalities in different aspects of signaltransduction. Biologists have compared the defects in thesecells with the normal signaling process in non-cancerous cells,and thus worked out the entire signaling pathway. It is an ex-136 CHAPTER 7 | CELL SIGNALING AND COMMUNICATIONA signal binds to areceptor protein……causing activationof its cytoplasmicdomain…2...leading to the formationof a second messengerthat amplifies the signal.2…which directlyactivates an effectorprotein that initiatesthe cell’s response.31 A signal (primary messenger)binds to a receptor protein…Outside of cell 1Inside of cellCellularresponse Cellular responseSignal SignalReceptorproteinReceptorproteinEffectorproteinEffectorproteinSecondmessenger(A) Direct transduction (B) Indirect transductionIonsIons7.10 Direct and Indirect Signal Transduction (A) All the events ofdirect transduction occur at or near the receptor (in this case, at the plasmamembrane). (B) In indirect transduction, a second messenger mediatesthe events inside the cell. The signal is considered to be the firstmessenger.ample of a more general phenomenon, called a protein kinasecascade, where one protein kinase activates the next, and so on(Figure 7.12). Such cascades are key to the external regulationof many cellular activities. Indeed, the eukaryotic genome codesfor hundreds, even thousands, of such kinases.Protein kinase cascades are useful signal transducers for fourreasons:• At each step in the cascade of events, the signal is amplified, becauseeach newly activated protein kinase is an enzyme thatcan catalyze the phosphorylation of many target proteins.• The information from a signal that originally arrived at theplasma membrane is communicated to the nucleus.• The multitude of steps provides some specificity to the process.• Different target proteins at each step in the cascade can providevariation in the response.Second messengers can stimulateprotein kinase cascadesAs we have just seen, protein kinase receptors initiate protein kinasecascades right at the plasma membrane. However, the stimulationof events in the cell is more often indirect. In a series ofclever experiments, Earl Sutherland and his colleagues at CaseWestern Reserve University discovered that a small water-solu-7.3 | HOW IS THE RESPONSE TO A SIGNAL TRANSDUCED THROUGH THE CELL? 137Receptor activation leads toactivation of the G protein, Ras.After a brief time in the activatedstate, Ras returns to its inactive form.Receptor activation leads toactivation of Ras, which stays active.(A) Normal cellGDPGDPBrief stimulationof cell divisionGTPRas RasPi(B) Cancer cellGDPGDPConstant stimulationof cell divisionRas RasAbnormalRasGTPGTPGTP…which phosphorylatesitself.A growth factor bindsits receptor…The activated receptor initiatesa series of events that allow Rasto bind GTP and become activated.3Activated MEK is a protein kinasethat phosphorylates manymolecules of MAP kinase.216Activated Ras bindsand activates Raf.4Activated Raf is a proteinkinase that phosphorylatesmany molecules of MEK.5MAP kinase, when activatedby phosphorylation, canenter the nucleus.7MAPkPPInside of cellInactiveActiveRas RasGTPMEKMAPk MAPkOutside of cellMEKRafGrowthfactorNucleusCellular responsesGDPRasRafPPP PPPP PP7.11 Signal Transduction and Cancer (A) Ras is a G protein thatregulates cell division. (B) In some tumors, the Ras protein is permanentlyactive, resulting in uncontrolled cell division.7.12 A Protein Kinase Cascade In a protein kinase cascade, a seriesof proteins are sequentially activated.GO TO Animated Tutorial 7.2 • Signal Transduction and CanceryourBioPortal.comble chemical messenger mediates the cytoplasmic events initiatedby a plasma membrane receptor. These researchers were investigatingthe activation of the liver enzyme glycogen phosphorylaseby the hormone epinephrine. The enzyme is releasedwhen an animal faces life-threatening conditions and needs energyfast for the fight-or-flight response. Glycogen phosphorylasecatalyzes the breakdown of glycogen stored in the liver sothat the resulting glucose molecules can be released to the blood.The enzyme is present in the liver cell cytoplasm, but is inactiveexcept in the presence of epinephrine.The researchers found that epinephrine could activate glycogenphosphorylase in liver cells that had been broken open, butonly if the entire cell contents, including plasma membrane fragments,were present. Under these circumstances epinephrinebound to the plasma membranes, but the active phosphorylasewas present in the solution. The researchers hypothesized thatthere must be a second “messenger” that transmits the signalof epinephrine (the “first messenger,” which binds to a receptorat the plasma membrane) to the phosphorylase (in the cytoplasm).To investigate the production of this messenger, theyseparated plasma membrane fragments from the cytoplasms ofbroken liver cells and followed the sequence of steps describedin Figure 7.13. This experiment confirmed their hypothesis thathormone binding to the membrane receptor causes the productionof a small, water-soluble molecule that diffuses into the cytoplasmand activates the enzyme. Later, this second messengerwas identified as cyclic AMP (cAMP). (We will describe thesignal transduction pathway leading to the fight-or-flight responsein more detail in Section 7.4.) Second messengers do nothave enzymatic activity; rather, they act to regulate target enzymes(see Chapter 8).A second messenger is a small molecule that mediates latersteps in a signal transduction pathway after the first messenger—the signal or ligand—binds to its receptor. In contrast to the specificityof receptor binding, second messengers allow a cell to respondto a single event at the plasma membrane with many eventsinside the cell. Thus, second messengers serve to amplify the signal—for example, binding of a single epinephrine molecule leadsto the production of many molecules of cAMP, which then activatemany enzyme targets by binding to them noncovalently. Inthe case of epinephrine and the liver cell, glycogen phosphorylaseis just one of several enzymes that are activated.Cyclic AMPis a second messenger in a wide variety of signaltransduction pathways. An effector protein, adenylyl cyclase,catalyzes the formation of cAMP from ATP. Adenylyl cyclase islocated on the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma membrane oftarget cells (Figure 7.14). Usually a G protein activates the enzymeafter it has itself been activated by a receptor.Cyclic AMP has two major kinds of targets—ion channelsand protein kinases. In many sensory cells, cAMP binds to ionchannels and thus opens them. Cyclic AMP may also bind to aglycogenglycogen phosphorylaseepinephrineglucose138 CHAPTER 7 | CELL SIGNALING AND COMMUNICATIONCONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE7.13 The Discovery of a Second MessengerGlycogen phosphorylase is activated in liver cells afterepinephrine binds to a membrane receptor. Sutherland andhis colleagues observed that this activation could occur in vivoonly if fragments of the plasma membrane were present.They designed experiments to show that a second messengercaused the activation of glycogen phosphorylase.HYPOTHESIS A second messenger mediates betweenreceptor activation at the plasma membraneand enzyme activation in the cytoplasm.A soluble second messenger, produced byhormone-activated membranes, is present inthe solution and activates enzymes in thecytoplasm.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTS Active glycogen phosphorylase is present inthe cytoplasm.3 The membranes areremoved by centrifugation,leaving only the solution inwhich they were incubated.Drops of membrane-free solutionare added to the cytoplasm.The hormone epinephrineis added to the membranesand allowed to incubate.Liver tissue is homogenizedand separated into plasmamembrane and cytoplasmfractions.421CytoplasmcontainsinactiveglycogenphosphorylaseMembranescontainepinephrinereceptorsLiverFURTHER INVESTIGATION: The soluble molecule produced in thisexperiment was later identified ascAMP. How would you show thatcAMP, and not ATP, is the secondmessenger in this system?protein kinase in the cytoplasm, activating its catalytic function.Aprotein kinase cascade (see Figure 7.12) ensues, leading to thefinal effects in the cell.Second messengers can be derived from lipidsIn addition to their role as structural components of the plasmamembrane, phospholipids are also involved in signal transduction.When certain phospholipids are hydrolyzed into their componentparts by enzymes called phospholipases, second messengersare formed.The best-studied examples of lipid-derived second messengerscome from the hydrolysis of the phospholipid phosphatidylinositol-bisphosphate (PIP2). Like all phospholipids, PIP2 has ahydrophobic portion embedded in the plasma membrane: twofatty acid tails attached to a molecule of glycerol, which togetherform diacylglycerol, or DAG. The hydrophilic portion of PIP2 isinositol trisphosphate, or IP3, which projects into the cytoplasm.As with cAMP, the receptors involved in this second-messengersystem are often G protein-linked receptors. AG proteinsubunit is activated by the receptor, then diffuses within theplasma membrane and activates phospholipase C, an enzymethat is also located in the membrane. This enzyme cleaves offthe IP3 from PIP2, leaving the diacylglycerol (DAG) in the phospholipidbilayer:IP3 and DAG, both second messengers, have different modes ofaction that build on each other, activating protein kinase C(PKC) (Figure 7.15). PKC refers to a family of protein kinasesthat can phosphorylate a wide variety of target proteins, leadingto a multiplicity of cellular responses that vary dependingon the tissue or cell type.The IP3/DAG pathway is apparently a target for the ionlithium (Li+), which was used for many years as a psychoactivedrug to treat bipolar (manic-depressive) disorder. This seriousillness occurs in about 1 in every 100 people. In these patients,an overactive IP3/DAG signal transduction pathway in thephospholipase CPIP2 IP3 + DAGin membrane released to in membranecytoplasm–O P O CH2OO–P O POO–OOO–H HOH OHNH2NNNNCCHO CH2H HO OHNH2NNNNCCHOHCCCCCCHHCOO–OPHCHC CHATP cAMP PPi +ATPPhosphate groupsCyclic AMP (cAMP)AdenylylcyclaseAdenineOutside cellInside cellHigh Ca2+PPPPPPPPP21 The receptor binds the hormone.56The activated G proteinsubunit dissociates andactivates phospholipase C.The activated enzymeproduces the secondmessengers DAG andIP3 from PIP2.DAG and Ca2+ activateprotein kinase C (PKC).PKC phosphorylatesenzymes and otherproteins.34 IP3 opens Ca2+channels.Outside of cellInside of cellCellularresponsesCa2+IP3PIP2HormoneReceptorLi+ blocks Li+ blocksDAGPKCGTPPhospholipase CLumen of smoothendoplasmic reticulum7.14 The Formation of Cyclic AMP The formation of cAMP from ATPis catalyzed by adenylyl cyclase, an enzyme that is activated by G proteins.7.15 The IP3/DAG Second-Messenger System Phospholipase Chydrolyzes the phospholipid PIP2 into its components, IP3 and DAG, bothof which are second messengers. Lithium ions (Li+) block this pathwayand are used to treat bipolar disorder (red type).7.3 | HOW IS THE RESPONSE TO A SIGNAL TRANSDUCED THROUGH THE CELL? 139brain leads to excessive brain activity in certain regions. Lithium“tones down” this pathway in two ways, as indicated by thered notations in Figure 7.15. It inhibits G protein activation ofphospholipase C, and also inhibits the synthesis of IP3. The overallresult is that brain activity returns to normal.Calcium ions are involved in many signaltransduction pathwaysCalcium ions (Ca2+) are scarce inside most cells, which have cytosolicCa2+ concentrations of only about 0.1 mM. Ca2+ concentrationsoutside cells and within the endoplasmic reticulumare usually much higher. Active transport proteins in the plasmaand ER membranes maintain this concentration difference bypumping Ca2+ out of the cytosol. In contrast to cAMP and thelipid-derived second messengers, Ca2+ cannot be made in orderto increase the intracellular Ca2+ concentration. Instead, Ca2+ion levels are regulated via the opening and closing of ion channels,and the action of membrane pumps.There are many signals that can cause calcium channels toopen, including IP3 (see Figure 7.15). The entry of a sperm intoan egg is a very important signal that causes a massive openingof calcium channels, resulting in numerous and dramaticchanges that prepare the now fertilized egg for cell divisionsand development (Figure 7.16). Whatever the initial signal thatcauses the calcium channels to open, their opening results in adramatic increase in cytosolic Ca2+ concentration, which can increaseup to one hundredfold within a fraction of a second. Aswe saw earlier, this increase activates protein kinase C. In addition,Ca2+ controls other ion channels and stimulates secretionby exocytosis in many cell types.Nitric oxide can act in signal transductionMost signaling molecules and second messengers are solutesthat remain dissolved in either the aqueous or hydrophobiccomponents of cells. It was a great surprise to find that a gascould also be active in signal transduction. PharmacologistRobert Furchgott, at the State University of New York in Brooklyn,was investigating the mechanisms that cause the smoothmuscles lining blood vessels in mammals to relax, thus allowingmore blood to flow to certain organs. The neurotransmitteracetylcholine (see Section 7.2) appeared to stimulate theIP3/DAG signal transduction pathway to produce an influx ofCa2+, leading to an increase in the level of another second messenger,cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). Cyclic GMPthen binds to a protein kinase, stimulating a protein kinase cascadethat leads to muscle relaxation. So far, the pathway seemedto conform to what was generally understood about signaltransduction in general.While this signal transduction pathway seemed to work inintact animals, it did not work on isolated strips of artery tissue.However, when Furchgott switched to tubular sections ofartery, signal transduction did occur. What accounted for thedifferent results between tissue strips and tubular sections?Furchgott realized that the endothelium, the delicate inner layerof cells lining the blood vessels, was lost during preparation ofthe tissue strips. He hypothesized that the endothelium wasproducing some chemical that diffused into the smooth musclecells and was needed for their response to acetylcholine. However,the substance was not easy to isolate. It seemed to breakdown quickly, with a half-life (the time in which half of it disappeared)of 5 seconds in living tissue.Furchgott’s elusive substance turned out to be a gas, nitricoxide (NO), which formerly had been recognized only as a toxicair pollutant! In the body, NO is made from the amino acid arginineby the enzyme NO synthase. When the acetylcholine receptoron the surface of an endothelial cell is activated, IP3 is released,causing a calcium channel on the ER membrane to openand a subsequent increase in cytosolic Ca2+. The Ca2+ then activatesNO synthase to produce NO. NO is chemically very unstable,readily reacting with oxygen gas as well as other smallmolecules. Although NO diffuses readily, it does not get far.Conveniently, the endothelial cells are close to the smooth musclecells, where NO acts as a paracrine signal. In smooth muscle,NO activates an enzyme called guanylyl cyclase, catalyzingthe formation of cGMP, which in turn relaxes the muscle cells(Figure 7.17).The discovery of NO as a participant in signal transductionexplained the action of nitroglycerin, a drug that has been usedfor over a century to treat angina, the chest pain caused by insufficientblood flow to the heart. Nitroglycerin releases NO, whichresults in relaxation of the blood vessels and increased blood flow.The drug sildenafil (Viagra) was developed to treat angina viathe NO signal transduction pathway, but was only modestly usefulfor that purpose. However, men taking it reported more pronouncedpenile erections. During sexual stimulation, NO actsas a signal causing an increase in cGMP and a subsequent relaxationof the smooth muscles surrounding the arteries in the corpuscavernosum of the penis. As a result of this signal, the penis140 CHAPTER 7 | CELL SIGNALING AND COMMUNICATIONStart Sperm entry pointRed colorindicatescalcium ionsFinish7.16 Calcium Ions as Second Messengers The concentration ofCa2+ can be measured using a dye that fluoresces when it binds the ion.Here, fertilization in a starfish egg causes a rush of Ca2+ from the environmentinto the cytoplasm. Areas of high calcium ion concentration are indicatedby the red color and the events are photographed at 5-secondintervals. Calcium signaling occurs in virtually all animal groups and triggerscell division in fertilized eggs, initiating the development of newindividuals.fills with blood, producing an erection. Sildenafil acts by inhibitingan enzyme (a phosphodiesterase) that breaks down cGMP—resulting in more cGMP and better erections.Signal transduction is highly regulatedThere are several ways in which cells can regulate the activityof a transducer. The concentration of NO, which breaks downquickly, can be regulated only by how much of it is made. Onthe other hand, membrane pumps and ion channels regulatethe concentration of Ca2+, as we have seen. To regulate proteinkinase cascades, G proteins, and cAMP, there are enzymes thatconvert the activated transducer back to its inactive precursor(Figure 7.18).The balance between the activities of enzymes that activatetransducers (for example, protein kinase) and enzymes thatinactivate them (for example, protein phosphatase) is whatdetermines the ultimate cellular response to a signal. Cells canalter this balance in several ways:• Synthesis or breakdown of the enzymes involved. For example,synthesis of adenylyl cyclase and breakdown of phosphodiesterase(which breaks down cAMP) would tilt the balancein favor of more cAMP in the cell.• Activation or inhibition of the enzymes by other molecules. Examplesinclude the activation of a G protein-linked receptorby ligand binding, and inhibition of phosphodiesterase(which also breaks down cGMP) by sildenafil.Because cell signaling is so important in diseases such as cancer,a search is under way for new drugs that can modulatethe activities of enzymes that participate signal transductionpathways.7.3 | HOW IS THE RESPONSE TO A SIGNAL TRANSDUCED THROUGH THE CELL? 141Acetylcholine binds to receptorson endothelial cells of bloodvessels; activation of the receptorcauses production of IP3.1IP3 opens Ca2+ channels on theER membrane, releasing Ca2+into the cytosol.2NO diffuses to the smoothmuscle cells, where itstimulates cGMP synthesis.43cGMP promotesmuscle relaxation.5Ca2+ stimulates NO synthase,the enzyme that makes nitricoxide gas (NO) from arginine.GTPcGMP+ PPiArginineGuanylylcyclaseNO synthaseSmoothmuscle cellNOEndothelial cellSmooth muscleBlood vesselAcetylcholinereceptor (AChR)Acetylcholine(ACh)Inside of cellSmooth EROutside of cellPPPPPPCa2+Ca2+IP3NOInactiveenzymeInactiveG proteinActiveG proteinAdenylylcyclase(A)(B)(C)ActiveenzymeGDPATPATPGTPPProtein kinaseProteinphosphataseReceptor bindingGTPasecAMPPhosphodiesteraseAMPPi7.17 Nitric Oxide in Signal Transduction Nitric oxide (NO) is anunstable gas, which nevertheless serves as a mediator between a signal,acetylcholine (ACh), and its effect: the relaxation of smooth muscles.7.18 Regulation of Signal Transduction Some signals lead to theproduction of active transducers such as (A) protein kinases, (B) G proteins,and (C) cAMP. Other enzymes (red type) inactivate or remove thesetransducers.7.3 RECAPSignal transduction is the series of steps betweenthe binding of a signal to a receptor and the ultimatecellular response. A receptor can activate a signaltransduction pathway, such as a protein kinase cascade,directly. In many cases, a second messengerserves to amplify the signal and activate the signalingpathway indirectly. Protein kinase cascades amplify,distribute, and regulate signaling.• How does a protein kinase cascade amplify asignal’s message inside the cell? See pp. 136–137and Figure 7.12• What is the role of cAMP as a second messenger?See p. 138• How are signal transduction cascades regulated?See p. 141 and Figure 7.18We have seen how the binding of a signal to its receptor initiatesthe response of a cell to the signal, and how signal transductionpathways amplify the signal and distribute its effectsto numerous targets in the cell. In the next section we will considerthe third step in the signal transduction process, the actualeffects of the signal on cell function.How Do Cells Change in Response 7.4 to Signals?The effects of a signal on cell function take three primary forms:the opening of ion channels, changes in the activities of enzymes,or differential gene expression. These events set the cellon a path for further and sometimes dramatic changes in formand function.Ion channels open in response to signalsThe opening of ion channels is a key step in the response ofthe nervous system to signals. In the sense organs, specializedcells have receptors that respond to external stimuli such aslight, sound, taste, odor, or pressure. The alteration of the receptorresults in the opening of ion channels. We will focus here onone such signal transduction pathway, that for the sense ofsmell, which responds to gaseous molecules in the environment.The sense of smell is well developed in mammals. Each ofthe thousands of neurons in the nose expresses one of many differentodorant receptors. The identification of which chemicalsignal, or odorant, activates which receptor is just getting underway. Humans have the genetic capacity to make about 950different odorant receptor proteins, but very few people expressmore than 400 of them. Some express far fewer, which may explainwhy you are able to smell certain things that your roommatecannot, or vice versa.Odorant receptors are G-protein linked, and signal transductionleads to the opening of ion channels for sodium and calciumions, which have higher concentrations outside the cellthan in the cytosol (Figure 7.19). The resulting influx of Na+ and142 CHAPTER 7 | CELL SIGNALING AND COMMUNICATIONChanges in ion concentrationsinside the cell initiate a signalto a specific area of the brain,which perceives the signalas a scent.Binding of an odorant toits receptor activates aG protein.The G protein activatesthe synthesis of cAMP.2 cAMP causes ionchannels to open.431To brainNeuronBrainNasalcavityOdorantmoleculescAMPSignal tobrainGTP GTPNa+Ca2+Outside of cellInside of cellAdenylylcyclasecAMP-gatedchannelOdorantreceptorOdorantmoleculeG proteinCa2+ Na+ATP7.19 A Signal Transduction Pathway Leads to the Opening of Ion Channels The signaltransduction pathway triggered by odorant molecules in the nose results in the opening of ion channels.The resulting influx of Na+ and Ca2+ into the neuron cells of the nose stimulates the transmissionof a scent message to a specific region of the brain.Ca2+ causes the neuron to become stimulated so that it sends asignal to the brain that a particular odor is present.Enzyme activities change in response to signalsProteins will change their shapes if they are modified either covalentlyor noncovalently. We have seen examples of both typesof modification in our description of signal transduction. Aproteinkinase adds a phosphate group to a target protein, and thiscovalent change alters the protein’s conformation and activatesor inhibits a function. Cyclic AMPbinds noncovalently to a targetprotein, and this changes the protein’s shape, activating orinhibiting its function. In the case of activation, a previously inaccessibleactive site is exposed, and the target protein goes onto perform a new cellular role.The G protein-mediated protein kinase cascade that is stimulatedby epinephrine in liver cells results in the activation bycAMP of a key signaling molecule, protein kinase A. In turn,protein kinase A phosphorylates two other enzymes, with oppositeeffects:• Inhibition. Glycogen synthase, which catalyzes the joining ofglucose molecules to synthesize the energy-storing moleculeglycogen, is inactivated when a phosphate group isadded to it by protein kinase A. Thus the epinephrine signalprevents glucose from being stored in glycogen (Figure7.20, step 1).• Activation. Phosphorylase kinase is activated when a phosphategroup is added to it. It is part of a protein kinase cascadethat ultimately leads to the activation of glycogenphosphorylase, another key enzyme in glucose metabolism.This enzyme results in the liberation of glucose molecules fromglycogen (Figure 7.20, steps 2 and 3).The amplification of the signal in this pathway is impressive;as detailed in Figure 7.20, each molecule of epinephrine that arrivesat the plasma membrane ultimately results in 10,000 moleculesof blood glucose:1 molecule of epinephrine bound to the membrane activates20 molecules of cAMP, which activate20 molecules of protein kinase A, which activate100 molecules of phosphorylase kinase, which activate1,000 molecules of glycogen phosphorylase, which produce10,000 molecules of glucose 1-phosphate, which produce10,000 molecules of blood glucose7.4 | HOW DO CELLS CHANGE IN RESPONSE TO SIGNALS? 143Phosphorylation activatesglycogen phosphorylase,releasing stored glucosemolecules from glycogen.Release of glucose fuels“fight-or-flight” response.Phosphorylation, induced by epinephrinebinding, inactivates glycogen synthase,preventing glucose from being stored asglycogen.1The protein kinase cascade amplifiesthe signal. Here, for every molecule ofepinephrine bound, 20 molecules ofcAMP are made, each of which activatesa molecule of protein kinase A.234EpinephrinecAMPActive phosphorylase kinaseGlucose 1-phosphateInactive protein kinase AInactive phosphorylase kinaseInactive glycogen phosphorylaseGlycogenGlucoseBlood glucoseEpinephrinereceptorInside of cellPlasmamembraneOutside of cellOutside of cell10,00010,0001,00010020201ATPGTPActivatedG proteinsubunitActivatedadenylyl cyclaseActive protein kinase AActive glycogen phosphorylaseActive glycogensynthaseInactive glycogensynthase7.20 A Cascade of Reactions Leads to Altered Enzyme ActivityLiver cells respond to epinephrine by activating G proteins, which in turnactivate the synthesis of the second messenger cAMP. Cyclic AMP initiatesa protein kinase cascade, greatly amplifying the epinephrine signal,as indicated by the blue numbers. The cascade both inhibits the conversionof glucose to glycogen and stimulates the release of previouslystored glucose.Signals can initiate DNA transcriptionAs we introduce in Section 4.1, the genetic material, DNA, is expressedby transcription as RNA, which is then translated intoa protein whose amino acid sequence is specified by the originalDNA sequence. Proteins are important in all cellular functions,so a key way to regulate specific functions in a cell is toregulate which proteins are made, and therefore, which DNAsequences are transcribed.Signal transduction plays an important role in determiningwhich DNAsequences are transcribed. Common targets of signaltransduction are proteins called transcription factors, which bindto specific DNA sequences in the cell nucleus and activate or inactivatetranscription of the adjacent DNA regions. For example,the Ras signaling pathway ends in the nucleus (see Figure 7.12).The final protein kinase in the Ras signaling cascade, MAPk, entersthe nucleus and phosphorylates a protein which stimulatesthe expression of a number of genes involved in cell proliferation.In this chapter we have concentrated on signaling pathwaysthat occur in animal cells. However, as you will see in Part Eightof this book, plants also have signal transduction pathways,with equally important roles.7.4 RECAPCells respond to signal transduction by activatingenzymes, opening membrane channels, or initiatinggene transcription.• What role does cAMP play in the sense of smell? Seepp. 142–143 and Figure 7.19• How does amplification of a signal occur and why is itimportant in a cell’s response to changes in its environment?See p. 143 and Figure 7.20We have described how signals from a cell’s environment caninfluence the cell. But the environment of a cell in a multicellularorganism is more than the extracellular medium—it includesneighboring cells as well. In the next section we’ll look at specializedjunctions between cells that allow them to signal oneanother directly.7.5 How Do Cells Communicate Directly?Most cells are in contact with their neighbors. Section 6.2 describesvarious ways in which cells adhere to one another, suchas via recognition proteins that protrude from the cell surface,or via tight junctions and desmosomes. But as we know fromour own experience with our neighbors (and roommates), justbeing in proximity does not necessarily mean that there is functionalcommunication. Neither tight junctions nor desmosomesare specialized for intercellular communication. However, manymulticellular organisms have specialized cell junctions that allowtheir cells to communicate directly. In animals, these structuresare gap junctions; in plants, they are plasmodesmata.Animal cells communicate by gap junctionsGap junctions are channels between adjacent cells that occur inmany animals, occupying up to 25 percent of the area of theplasma membrane (Figure 7.21A). Gap junctions traverse the narrowspace between the plasma membranes of two cells (the “gap”)by means of channel structures called connexons. The walls ofa connexon are composed of six subunits of the integral membraneprotein connexin. In adjacent cells, two connexons cometogether to form a gap junction that links the cytoplasms of thetwo cells. There may be hundreds of these channels betweena cell and its neighbors. The channel pores are about 1.5 nmin diameter—far too narrow for the passage of large moleculessuch as proteins. But they are wide enough to allow small mol-144 CHAPTER 7 | CELL SIGNALING AND COMMUNICATIONThe connexons of two cells cometogether to form a narrow (~1.5 nm)channel through which ions and smallsignal molecules can pass.Cell 1 Cell 2Connexins(A) Plasma membranes(B)“Gap” between cells (~2 nm)PlasmodesmaCellwallsProteinsPlasmamembraneSmoothendoplasmic reticulumDesmotubuleCell 2Cell 1Connexon7.21 Communicating Junctions (A) An animal cell may contain hundredsof gap junctions connecting it to neighboring cells. The pores ofgap junctions allow small molecules to pass from cell to cell, assuringsimilar concentrations of important signaling molecules in adjacent cellsso that the cells can carry out the same functions. (B) Plasmodesmataconnect plant cells. The desmotubule, derived from the smooth endoplasmicreticulum, fills up most of the space inside a plasmodesma, leavinga tiny gap through which small metabolites and ions can pass.ecules to pass between the cells. Experiments in which labeledsignal molecules or ions are injected into one cell show thatthey can readily pass into adjacent cells if the cells are connectedby gap junctions. Why is it necessary to have these linkagesbetween the cytoplasms of adjacent cells?Gap junctions permit metabolic cooperation between the linkedcells. Such cooperation ensures the sharing between cells of importantsmall molecules such as ATP, metabolic intermediates,amino acids, and coenzymes (see Section 8.4). In some tissues,metabolic cooperation is needed so that signals and metabolicproducts can be passed from cells at the edges of tissues to cellsin the interior and vice versa. It is not clear how important thisfunction is in many tissues, but it is known to be vital in some.For example, in the lens of the mammalian eye only the cellsat the periphery are close enough to the blood supply to allowdiffusion of nutrients and wastes. But because lens cells are connectedby large numbers of gap junctions, material can diffusebetween them rapidly and efficiently.As mentioned above, there is evidence that signal moleculessuch as hormones and second messengers such as cAMP canmove through gap junctions. If this is true, then only a few cellswould need receptors for a signal in order for the signal to betransduced throughout the tissue. In this way, a tissue can havea coordinated response to the signal.Plant cells communicate by plasmodesmataInstead of gap junctions, plants have plasmodesmata (singularplasmodesma), which are membrane-lined tunnels that traversethe thick cell walls separating plant cells from one another.Atypical plant cell has several thousand plasmodesmata.Plasmodesmata differ from gap junctions in one fundamentalway: unlike gap junctions, in which the wall of the channel ismade of integral proteins from the adjacent plasma membranes,plasmodesmata are lined by the fused plasma membranes themselves.Plant biologists are so familiar with the notion of a tissueas cells interconnected in this way that they refer to these continuouscytoplasms as a symplast (see Figure 35.6).The diameter of a plasmodesma is about 6 nm, far larger thana gap junction channel. But the actual space available for diffusionis about the same—1.5 nm. Examination of the interiorof the plasmodesma by transmission electron microscopy revealsthat a tubule called the desmotubule, apparently derivedfrom the endoplasmic reticulum, fills up most of the opening ofthe plasmodesma (Figure 7.21B). Typically, only small metabolitesand ions can move between plant cells. This fact is importantin plant physiology because the bulk transport system inplants, the vascular system, lacks the tiny circulatory vessels(capillaries) that many animals have for bringing gases and nutrientsto every cell. Diffusion from cell to cell across plasmamembranes is probably inadequate to account for the movementof a plant hormone from the site of production to the siteof action. Instead, plants rely on more rapid diffusion throughplasmodesmata to ensure that all cells of a tissue respond to asignal at the same time. There are cases in which larger moleculesor particles can pass between cells via plasmodesmata.For example, some viruses can move through plasmodesmataby using “movement proteins” to assist their passage.7.5 RECAPCells can communicate with their neighbors throughspecialized cell junctions. In animals, these structuresare gap junctions; in plants, they are plasmodesmata.• What are the roles that gap junctions and plasmodesmataplay in cell signaling?7.5 | HOW DO CELLS COMMUNICATE DIRECTLY? 1457.1 What Are Signals, and How Do Cells Respond toThem?• Cells receive many signals from the physical environment andfrom other cells. Chemical signals are often at very low concentrations.Autocrine signals affect the cells that make them;paracrine signals diffuse to and affect nearby cells. ReviewFigure 7.1, WEB ACTIVITY 7.1• A signal transduction pathway involves the interaction of a signalmolecule with a receptor; the transduction and amplificationof the signal via a series of steps within the cell; and effectson the function of the cell. Review Figure 7.27.2 How Do Signal Receptors Initiate a Cellular Response?• Cells respond to signals only if they have specific receptor proteinsthat can bind those signals. Depending on the nature of itssignal or ligand, a receptor may be located in the plasma membraneor in the cytoplasm of the target cell. Review Figure 7.5• Receptors located in the plasma membrane include ion channels,protein kinases, and G protein-linked receptors.• Ion channel receptors are “gated”: the gate “opens” when thethree-dimensional structure of the channel protein is altered byligand binding. Review Figure 7.6• A G protein has three important binding sites, which bind a Gprotein-linked receptor, GDP or GTP, and an effector protein. AG protein can either activate or inhibit an effector protein.Review Figure 7.8, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 7.1• Lipid-soluble signals, such as steroid hormones, can diffusethrough the plasma membrane and meet their receptors in thecytoplasm; the ligand–receptor complex may then enter thenucleus to affect gene expression. Review Figure 7.97.3 How Is the Response to a Signal Transducedthrough the Cell?• Direct signal transduction is a function of the receptor itselfand occurs at the plasma membrane. Indirect transductioninvolves a soluble second messenger. Review Figure 7.10• A protein kinase cascade amplifies the response to receptorbinding. Review Figure 7.12, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 7.2CHAPTER SUMMARY
7.1 What Are Signals, and How Do Cells Respond toThem?• Cells receive many signals from the physical environment andfrom other cells. Chemical signals are often at very low concentrations.Autocrine signals affect the cells that make them;paracrine signals diffuse to and affect nearby cells. ReviewFigure 7.1, WEB ACTIVITY 7.1• A signal transduction pathway involves the interaction of a signalmolecule with a receptor; the transduction and amplificationof the signal via a series of steps within the cell; and effectson the function of the cell. Review Figure 7.27.2 How Do Signal Receptors Initiate a Cellular Response?• Cells respond to signals only if they have specific receptor proteinsthat can bind those signals. Depending on the nature of itssignal or ligand, a receptor may be located in the plasma membraneor in the cytoplasm of the target cell. Review Figure 7.5• Receptors located in the plasma membrane include ion channels,protein kinases, and G protein-linked receptors.• Ion channel receptors are “gated”: the gate “opens” when thethree-dimensional structure of the channel protein is altered byligand binding. Review Figure 7.6• A G protein has three important binding sites, which bind a Gprotein-linked receptor, GDP or GTP, and an effector protein. AG protein can either activate or inhibit an effector protein.Review Figure 7.8, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 7.1• Lipid-soluble signals, such as steroid hormones, can diffusethrough the plasma membrane and meet their receptors in thecytoplasm; the ligand–receptor complex may then enter thenucleus to affect gene expression. Review Figure 7.97.3 How Is the Response to a Signal Transducedthrough the Cell?• Direct signal transduction is a function of the receptor itselfand occurs at the plasma membrane. Indirect transductioninvolves a soluble second messenger. Review Figure 7.10• A protein kinase cascade amplifies the response to receptorbinding. Review Figure 7.12, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 7.2
• Second messengers include cyclic AMP (cAMP), inositoltrisphosphate (IP3), diacylglycerol (DAG), and calcium ions. IP3and DAG are derived from the phospholipid phosphatidyl inositol-bisphosphate (PIP2).• The gas nitric oxide (NO) is involved in signal transduction inhuman smooth muscle cells. Review Figure 7.17• Signal transduction can be regulated in several ways. The balancebetween activating and inactivating the moleculesinvolved determines the ultimate cellular response to a signal.Review Figure 7.187.4 How Do Cells Change in Response to Signals?• The cellular responses to signals may be the opening of ionchannels, the alteration of enzyme activities, or changes in geneexpression. Review Figure 7.19• Protein kinases covalently add phosphate groups to target proteins;cAMP binds target proteins noncovalently. Both kinds ofbinding change the target protein’s conformation to expose orhide its active site.• Activated enzymes may activate other enzymes in a signaltransduction pathway, leading to impressive amplification of asignal. Review Figure 7.207.5 How Do Cells Communicate Directly?• Many adjacent animal cells can communicate with one anotherdirectly through small pores in their plasma membranes calledgap junctions. Protein structures called connexons form thinchannels between two adjacent cells through which small signalmolecules and ions can pass. Review Figure 7.21A• Plant cells are connected by somewhat larger pores called plasmodesmata,which traverse both plasma membranes and cellwalls. The desmotubule narrows the opening of the plasmodesma.Review Figure 7.21BSEE WEB ACTIVITY 7.2 for a concept review of this chapter.