In horse racing, bettors speak of the “future book” oddson a horse’s chances in an upcoming race. On the morningafter winning a race in 2005, the future book oddsfor Greg’s Gold did not look good—he was limping becauseof a shredded tendon in his right front leg. A tendonis like a rubber band connecting muscles and bones,and tendons in the legs store energy when an animalruns. Typically, a damaged tendon is allowed to heal naturally,but scar tissue makes it less flexible, and a horse cannotrun as fast as it did before injuring a tendon. So itlooked as if Greg’s Gold might have to retire from racing.Greg’s Gold’s trainer, David Hofmans, decided to try anew therapy. A veterinarian removed a small amount ofadipose (fatty) tissue from the horse’s hindquarters andsent it to a cell biology laboratory. There, the tissue wastreated with enzymes to digest the extracellular moleculesthat held the cells together. Several cell populationswere obtained, among them mesenchymal stem cells.Stem cells are actively dividing, unspecialized cells thathave the potential to produce different cell types dependingon the signals they receive from the body. Mesenchymalstem cells are able to differentiate into various kindsof connective tissue, including bone, cartilage, blood vessels,tendons, and muscle.Two days after the tissue was taken, Greg’s Gold’s veterinarianreceived the stem cells back from the lab and injectedthem into the site of the damaged tendon. Afterseveral months, the tendon healed with little scar tissue,and Greg’s Gold’s trainer returned him to the racetrack.Greg’s Gold raced for almost two more years, winningover $1 million in purse money before being retired.The mesenchymal stem cell treatment has been usedsuccessfully on several thousand horses, and on dogs witharthritis. Most stem cell therapies for humans are still atthe experimental stage, particularly in the United States,where controversy over the use of embryonic stem cellshas slowed the progress of researchand the adoption of therapeutictechniques. But in Japan, women undergoingreconstructive surgery afterthe removal of breast cancer havehad more favorable outcomes whentreated with their own mesenchymalstem cells. Bone marrow transplantationis one form of stem cell therapythat has been used successfully formore than thirty years in the UnitedStates, to treat patients with cancerssuch as leukemia and lymphoma.On track with stem cells19Greg’s Gold Fat stem cells helpedrepair damage to his tendons and hewas able to race—and win—again.What Are the Processes 19.1 of Development?Development is the process by which a multicellular organism,beginning with a single cell, goes through a series of changes,taking on the successive forms that characterize its life cycle (Figure19.1). After the egg is fertilized, it is called a zygote, and inthe earliest stages of development a plant or animal is called anembryo. Sometimes the embryo is contained within a protectivestructure such as a seed coat, an eggshell, or a uterus. An embryodoes not photosynthesize or feed itself. Instead, it obtainsits food from its mother either directly (via the placenta) or indirectly(by way of nutrients stored in a seed or egg). A seriesof embryonic stages precedes the birth of the new, independentorganism. Many organisms continue to develop throughout theirlife cycle, with development ceasing only with death.Development involves distinct but overlappingprocessesThe developmental changes an organism undergoes as it progressesfrom an embryo to mature adulthood involve fourprocesses:• Determination sets the developmental fate of a cell—whattype of cell it will become—even before any characteristicsof that cell type are observable. For example, the mesenchymalstem cells described in the opening story look unspecialized,but their fate to become connective tissue cells hasalready been determined.• Differentiation is the process by which different types ofcells arise, leading to cells with specific structures and functions.For example, mesenchymal stem cells differentiate tobecome muscle, fat, tendon, or other connective tissue cells.• Morphogenesis (Greek for “origin of form”) is the organizationand spatial distribution of differentiated cells into themulticellular body and its organs.• Growth is the increase in size of the body and its organs bycell division and cell expansion.Determination and differentiation occur largely because of differentialgene expression. The cells that arise from repeated mitosesin the early embryo may look the same superficially, butthey soon begin to differ in terms of which of the thousands ofgenes in the genome are expressed.Morphogenesis involves differential gene expression and theinterplay of signals between cells. Morphogenesis can occur inseveral ways:IN THIS CHAPTER we begin by describing how almostevery cell in a multicellular organism contains all of the genespresent in the zygote that gave rise to that organism. Thenwe explain how cellular changes during development resultfrom the differential expression of those genes. Finally, weshow how the various mechanisms of transcriptional controland chemical signaling that are discussed in previouschapters work together to produce a complex organism.The processes by which an unspecialized stem cell proliferatesand forms specialized cells and tissues with distinctiveappearances and functions are similar to the developmentalprocesses that occur in the embryo. Much ofour knowledge of developmental biology has come fromstudies on model organisms such as the fruit flyDrosophila melanogaster, the nematode wormCaenorhabditis elegans, zebrafish, the mouse, and thesmall flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Eukaryotesshare many similar genes, and the cellular and molecularprinciples underlying their development also turn out tobe similar. Thus discoveries from one organism can aid usin understanding other organisms, including ourselves.CHAPTER OUTLINE19.1 What Are the Processes of Development?19.2 Is Cell Differentiation Irreversible?19.3 What Is the Role of Gene Expression in CellDifferentiation?19.4 How Is Cell Fate Determined?19.5 How Does Gene Expression Determine PatternFormation?Fat as a Source of Stem Cells This centrifuge separatesdense fatty tissues from the lighter stem cells. Stem cells fromfat have been found to be capable of differentiating into severalspecialized cell types.• Cell division is important in both plants and animals.• Cell expansion is especially important in plant development,where a cell’s position and shape are constrained by the cellwall.• Cell movements are very important in animal morphogenesis(see Section 44.2)• Apoptosis (programmed cell death) is essential in organdevelopment.Growth can occur by an increase in the number of cells or bythe enlargement of existing cells. Growth continues throughoutthe individual’s life in some organisms, but reaches a more orless stable end point in others.Cell fates become progressively more restrictedduring developmentDuring development, each undifferentiated cell will becomepart of a particular type of tissue—this is referred to as the cellfate of that undifferentiated cell. Acell’s fate is a function of bothdifferential gene expression and morphogenesis. The role ofmorphogenesis in determining cell fate was revealed in experimentsin which undifferentiated cells were removed from specificlocations in early embryos and grafted into new positionson other embryos. The cells were marked with stains so thattheir development into adult structures could be traced. Suchexperiments on amphibian embryos indicated that the fates ofearly embryonic cells are not irrevocably determined, but dependon the cells’ environment and stage of development (Figure19.2). In this example, the cells that would have become skintissue if left in place became brain or notochord tissues, dependingon the locations of the grafts.But as development proceeds from zygote to mature organism,the developmental potential of cells becomes more restricted.For example, if tissue is removed from the brain areaof a later-stage frog embryo, it will become brain tissue, evenif transplanted to a part of an early-stage embryo that is destinedto become another structure.As we will discuss in this chapter, cell fate determination is influencedby changes in gene expression as well as the extracellularenvironment. Determination is not something that is visibleunder the microscope—cells do not change their appearancewhen they become determined. Determination is followed by differentiation—the actual changes in biochemistry, structure, andfunction that result in cells of different types. Determination is acommitment; the final realization of that commitment is differentiation.“Heart”embryo8-celledembryoTwocellsZygote(fertilized egg) “Torpedo”embryoZygote(fertilized egg)Eight cells Blastula(cross section)Gastrula(cross section)LarvaAdult sea starSeed leaves(cotyledons)Mature plantANIMAL DEVELOPMENTPLANT DEVELOPMENT“Globular”embryoSuspensorEmbryo19.1 From Fertilized Egg to Adult The stages of development fromzygote to maturity are shown for an animal and for a plant. The blastula isa hollow sphere of cells; the gastrula has three cell layers.GO TO Web Activity 19.1 • Stages of DevelopmentyourBioPortal.com19.1 | WHAT ARE THE PROCESSES OF DEVELOPMENT? 40719.1 RECAPDevelopment takes place via theprocesses of determination, differentiation,morphogenesis, and growth.Cells in the very early embryo havenot yet had their fates determined;as development proceeds, theirpotential fates become more andmore restricted.• What are the four processes of development?See p. 405• Explain what the experiment in Figure19.2 told us about how cell fatesbecome determined. See p. 407Is a mesophyll cell in a plant leaf or a liver cell ina human being irrevocably committed to thatspecialization? Under the right experimentalcircumstances, differentiation is reversible insome cells. The next section describes how thegenomes of some cells can be induced to expressdifferent sets of genes used in differentiation.Is Cell Differentiation 19.2 Irreversible?A zygote has the ability to give rise to everytype of cell in the adult body; in other words,it is totipotent (toti, “all”; potent, “capable”).Its genome contains instructions for all of thestructures and functions that will arisethroughout the life cycle of the organism. Laterin development, the cellular descendants of thezygote lose their totipotency and become determined.These determined cells then differentiateinto specialized cells. The human livercell and the leaf mesophyll cell generally retaintheir differentiated forms and functionsthroughout their lives. But this does not necessarilymean that they have irrevocably lost theirtotipotency. Most of the differentiated cells ofan animal or plant have nuclei containing theentire genome of the organism and thereforehave the genetic capacity for totipotency. Weexplore here several examples of how this capacityhas been demonstrated experimentally.Plant cells can be totipotentAcarrot root cell normally faces a dark future.It cannot photosynthesize and generally doesnot give rise to new carrot plants. However, in1958 Frederick Steward at Cornell Universityshowed that if he isolated cells from a carrot408 CHAPTER 19 | DIFFERENTIAL GENE EXPRESSION IN DEVELOPMENTHYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODThe hypothesis is rejected. Cell fates in the early embryo arenot determined, but can change depending on the environment.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: What would happen if tissue from an adult weretransplanted into an early embryo?19.2 Developmental Potential in Early Frog EmbryosIn an early embryo, the cells look alike. But marking experiments suggested that thefates of these cells were determined early in development. Was the fate of a cellirrevocable or did it still retain the ability to become a different cell type? To answerthis question, biologists transplanted cells from one location in one embryo to adifferent location in a second embryo. The cells took on the fate of cells at the newlocation. Therefore, cells in the early embryo retained the ability to form other celltypes if placed in the right environment.The fate of the cells in an early amphibian embryo is irrevocablydetermined.RESULTSGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, andrelevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.INVESTIGATING LIFE2a1These cells would normallybecome skin tissue……and these,brain tissue……and these, tissueof the notochord.Tissue destined to become part ofa tadpole’s skin is cut from an earlyembryo (donor) and transferred toanother early embryo (host).The donor tissue istransplanted to the“brain” region.3a The donortissuebecomesbrain tissue.3b The donortissuebecomesnotochordtissue.3c The donortissuebecomesskin tissue.2b The donor tissue istransplanted to the“notochord” region.2c The donor tissue istransplanted to the“skin” region (control).Experiment 1 Experiment 2 Experiment 3Early frogembryoDonorHost Host HostNotochordBrain19.2 | IS CELL DIFFERENTIATION IRREVERSIBLE? 409root and maintained them in a suitable nutrient medium, hecould induce them to dedifferentiate—to lose their differentiatedcharacteristics. The cells could divide and give rise to masses ofundifferentiated cells called calli (singular callus), which could bemaintained in culture indefinitely. But, if they were provided withthe right chemical cues, the cells could develop into embryos andeventually into complete new plants (Figure 19.3). Since the newplants were genetically identical to the cells from which theycame, they were clones of the original carrot plant.The ability to clone an entire carrot plant from a differentiatedroot cell indicated that the cell contained the entire carrotgenome, and that under the right conditions, the cell and its descendantscould express the appropriate genes in the right sequenceto form a new plant. Many types of cells from otherplant species show similar behavior in the laboratory. This abilityto generate a whole plant from a single cell has been invaluablein agriculture and forestry. For example, trees from plantedforests are used in making paper, lumber, and other products.To replace the trees reliably, forestry companies regenerate newtrees from the leaves of selected trees with desirable traits. Thecharacteristics of these clones are more uniform and predictablethan those of trees grown from seeds.Nuclear transfer allows the cloning of animalsAnimal somatic cells cannot be manipulated as easily as plantcells can. However, experiments such as the one shown in Figure19.2 have demonstrated the totipotency of early embryonic cellsfrom animals. In humans, this totipotency permits both geneticscreening (see Section 15.5) and certain assisted reproductive technologies(see Section 43.4). A human embryo can be isolated inthe laboratory and one or a few cells removed and examined todetermine whether a certain genetic condition is present. Dueto their totipotency, the remaining cells can develop into a completeembryo, which can be implanted into the mother’s uterus,where it develops into a normal fetus and infant.Until recently, it was not possible to induce a cell from a fullydeveloped animal to dedifferentiate and then redifferentiate intoanother cell type. However, nuclear transfer experiments haveshown that the genetic information from an animal cell can beused to create cloned animals. Robert Briggs and Thomas Kingperformed the first such experiments in the 1950s using frogembryos. First they removed the nucleus from an unfertilizedegg, forming an enucleated egg. Then, with a very fine glass needle,they punctured a cell from an early embryo and drew uppart of its contents, including the nucleus, which they injectedinto the enucleated egg. They stimulated the eggs to divide, andmany went on to form embryos, and eventually frogs, that wereclones from the original implanted nucleus. These experimentsled to two important conclusions:• No information is lost from the nuclei of cells as they passthrough the early stages of embryonic development. Thisfundamental principle of developmental biology is knownas genomic equivalence.• The cytoplasmic environment around a cell nucleus canmodify its fate.In 1996, Ian Wilmut and his colleagues in Scotland clonedthe first mammal by the cell fusion method. To produce donorcells suitable for nuclear transfer, they took differentiated cellsfrom a ewe’s udder and starved them of nutrients for a week,halting the cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. One of thesecells was fused with an enucleated egg from a different breedCONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE19.3 Cloning a PlantWhen cells were removed from a plant and put into a mediumwith nutrients and hormones, they lost many of their specializedfeatures—in other words, they dedifferentiated. Did these cellsretain the ability to differentiate again? Frederick Steward foundthat a cultured carrot cell did indeed retain the ability to developinto an embryo and a new plant.HYPOTHESIS Differentiated plant cells can be totipotentand can be induced to generate all types ofthe plant's cells.Differentiated plant cells can be totipotent.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.RESULTSMETHOD1 Clumps of differentiatedcells are grown in anutrient medium, wherethey dedifferentiate (losetheir differentiation).2 A dedifferentiatedcell divides…3 …and develops intoa mass of cells calleda callus.5 After transplantingto soil a fertile plantis produced.4 The callus is planted in aspecialized medium withhormones and nutrientsso that a plant embryocan form and develop.Root ofcarrot plantof ewe. Signals from the egg’s cytoplasm stimulated the donornucleus to enter S phase, and the rest of the cell cycle proceedednormally. After several cell divisions, the resulting early embryowas transplanted into the womb of a surrogate mother(Figure 19.4).Out of 277 successful attempts to fuse adult cellswith enucleated eggs, one lamb survived to be born;she was named Dolly, and she became world-famousovernight. DNA analyses confirmed thatDolly’s nuclear genes were identical to those of theewe from whose udder the donor nucleus had beenobtained. Dolly grew to adulthood, mated, and producedoffspring in the normal manner, thus provingher status as a fully functioning adult animal.Many other animal species, including cats, dogs,horses, pigs, rabbits, and mice have since beencloned by nuclear transfer. The cloning of animalshas practical uses and has given us important informationabout developmental biology. There are severalreasons to clone animals:• Expansion of the numbers of valuable animals: Onegoal of Wilmut’s experiments was to develop amethod of cloning transgenic animals carryinggenes with therapeutic properties. For example,a cow that was genetically engineered to makehuman growth hormone in milk has beencloned to produce two more cows that do thesame thing. Only 15 such cows would supplythe world’s need for this medication, which isused to treat short stature due to growth hormonedeficiency.• Preservation of endangered species: The banteng, arelative of the cow, was the first endangered animalto be cloned, using a cow enucleated eggand a cow surrogate mother. Cloning may bethe only way to save endangered species withlow rates of natural reproduction, such as thegiant panda.• Preservation of pets: Many people get great personalbenefit from pets, and the death of a petcan be devastating. Companies have been setup to clone cats and dogs from cells providedby their owners. Of course, the behavioral characteristicsof the beloved pet, which are certainlyderived in part from the environment,may not be the same in the cloned pet as in itsgenetic parent.Multipotent stem cells differentiate inresponse to environmental signalsIn plants, the growing regions at the tips of the rootsand stems contain meristems, which are clusters ofundifferentiated, rapidly dividing stem cells. Thesecells can give rise to the specialized cell types thatmake up the various parts of roots and stems. Ingeneral, plants have far fewer (15–20) broad cell types thananimals (as many as 200).In mammals, stem cells are found in adult tissues that needfrequent cell replacement, such as the skin, the inner lining ofthe intestine, and the bone marrow, where blood and other types410 CHAPTER 19 | DIFFERENTIAL GENE EXPRESSION IN DEVELOPMENTTOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE19.4 Cloning a MammalThe experimental procedure described here produced the first cloned mammal,a Dorset sheep named Dolly (shown on the left in the photo). As anadult, Dolly mated and subsequently gave birth to a normal offspring (thelamb on the right), thus proving the genetic viability of cloned mammals.1 Cells are removed fromthe udder of a Dorset ewe.2 An egg is removed from aScottish blackface ewe.4 The nucleus isremoved fromthe egg.3 Udder cells are deprivedof nutrients in culture tohalt the cell cycle priorto DNA replication.5 The udder cell (donor) andenucleated egg are fused.6 Mitosis-stimulating inducerscause the cell to divide.7 An early embryodevelops and istransplanted intoa receptive ewe.8 The embryo develops and a Dorsetsheep, genetically identical to #1, is born.Scottishblackfacesheep (#3)MicropipetteScottishblackfacesheep (#2)Dorsetsheep (#1)NucleusDonor nucleus (from sheep #1)Enucleated egg (from sheep #2)19.2 | IS CELL DIFFERENTIATION IRREVERSIBLE? 411of cells are formed. Canadian cell biologistsErnest McCulloch and James Till discoveredmammalian stem cells in the early 1960swhen they injected bone marrow cells intoadult mice. They noticed that the recipientmice developed small clumps of tissue in thespleen. When they looked more carefully atthe clumps, they found that each was composedof undifferentiated stem cells. Beforethis, stem cells were believed to be presentonly in animal embryos.As they divide, stem cells producedaughter cells that differentiate to replacedead cells and maintain the tissues. Theseadult stem cells in animals are not totipotent,because their ability to differentiate is limitedto a relatively few cell types. In otherwords, they are multipotent. For example,there are two types of multipotent stem cellsin bone marrow. One type (called hematopoieticstem cells) produces the variouskinds of red and white blood cells, while theother type (mesenchymal stem cells) producesthe cells that make bone and surroundingconnective tissues, such as muscle.The differentiation of multipotent stem cells is “on demand.”The blood cells that differentiate in the bone marrow do so inresponse to specific signals known as growth factors. This is thebasis of an important cancer therapy called hematopoietic stemcell transplantation (HSCP) (Figure 19.5). Because some treatmentsthat kill cancer cells also kill other dividing cells, bonemarrow stem cells in patients will die if exposed to these treatments.To circumvent this problem, stem cells are removed fromthe patient’s blood and given growth factors to increase theirnumbers in the laboratory. The cells are stored during treatment,and then added back to populate the depleted bone marrowwhen treatment is over. The stored stem cells retain their abilityto differentiate in the bone marrow environment. By allowingthe use of high doses of treatment to kill tumors, bone marrowtransplantation saves thousands of lives each year.Adjacent cells can also influence stem cell differentiation. Wesaw this in the opening story of this chapter, in which stem cellsfrom fat differentiated to form cells of the tendon. Bone marrowstem cells that can form muscle will do so if implanted intothe heart. Such stem cell transplantation for heart repair hasbeen demonstrated in animals and even in people who hadheart attacks, in experiments that used the stem cells to repaira damaged heart. Multipotent stem cells have been found inmany organs and tissues, and their use in treating diseases isunder intensive investigation.Pluripotent stem cells can be obtained in two waysAs stated earlier, totipotent stem cells that can form an entirenew animal are found only in very early embryos. In both miceand humans, the earliest embryonic stage before differentiationoccurs is called a blastocyst (see Figure 44.4). Although theycannot form an entire embryo, a group of cells in the blastocyststill retains the ability to form all of the cells in the body: thesecells are pluripotent (“pluri,” many; “potent,” capable). In mice,these embryonic stem cells (ESCs) can be removed from the blastocystand grown in laboratory culture almost indefinitely if providedwith the right conditions. When cultured mouse ESCs areinjected back into a mouse blastocyst, the stem cells mix with theresident cells and differentiate to form all the cell types in themouse. This indicates that the ESCs do not lose any of their developmentalpotential while growing in the laboratory.ESCs growing in the laboratory can also be induced to differentiatein a particular way if the right signal is provided (Figure19.6A). For example, treatment of mouse ESCs with a derivativeof vitamin Acauses them to form neurons, while othergrowth factors induce them to form blood cells. Such experimentsdemonstrate both the cells’ developmental potential andthe roles of environmental signals. This finding raises the possibilityof using ESC cultures as sources of differentiated cellsto repair specific tissues, such as a damaged pancreas in diabetes,or a brain that malfunctions in Parkinson’s disease.ESCs can be harvested from human embryos conceived byin vitro (“under glass”—in the laboratory) fertilization, with theconsent of the donors. Since more than one embryo is usuallyconceived in this procedure, embryos not used for reproductionmight be available for embryonic stem cell isolation. These cellscould then be grown in the laboratory and used as sources oftissues for transplantation into patients with tissue damage.There are two problems with this approach:• Some people object to the destruction of human embryosfor this purpose.• The stem cells, and tissues derived from them, would provokean immune response in a recipient (see Chapter 42).Blood stemcells are putback intopatient.Before treatment, stemcells are removed fromthe blood and grownin the lab.Radiation anddrug therapy killblood stem cellsas well as tumorcells.1 High-dose 3therapies killthe tumor andstem cells.2TumorStem cells19.5 Stem Cell Transplantation Multipotent blood stem cells can be used in hematopoieticstem cell transplantation, to replace stem cells destroyed by cancer therapy.Shinya Yamanaka and coworkers at KyotoUniversity in Japan have developed anotherway to produce pluripotent stem cellsthat gets around these two problems (Figure19.6B). Instead of extracting ESCs fromblastocysts, they make induced pluripotentstem cells (iPS cells) from skin cells. Theydeveloped this method systematically:1. First, they used gene chips to compare thegenes expressed in ESCs with nonstemcells (see Figure 18.9). They found severalgenes that were uniquely expressed at high levels inESCs. These genes were believed to be essential to theundifferentiated state and function of stem cells.2. Next, they isolated the genes and inserted them intoa vector for genetic transformation of skin cells (seeSection 18.5). They found that the skin cells now expressedthe newly added genes at high levels.3. Finally, they showed that the iPS cells were pluripotentand could be induced to differentiate into many tissues.Because the iPS cells can be made from skin cells of the individualwho is to be treated, an immune response may be avoided.Such cells have already been used for cell therapy in animals fordiseases similar to human Parkinson’s disease (a brain disorder),diabetes, and sickle cell anemia. Human uses are sure to follow.19.2 RECAPEven differentiated cells retain their ability to differentiateinto other cell types, given appropriate chemicalsignals. This has made cloning and stem celltechnologies possible.• Describe the differences between totipotent, pluripotent,and multipotent cells. See pp. 408–411• How are stem cells found in adult body tissues differentfrom embryonic stem cells? See pp. 410–411• What are the two ways to produce pluripotent stemcells? See pp. 411–412 and Figure19.6Cloning experiments and observations of stem cells have shownthat most differentiated cells in an organism share the samegenes. But not all genes are expressed in every cell. What turnsgene expression on and off as cells differentiate? In the next sectionwe explore several of the mechanisms controlling thechanges in gene expression that lead to cell differentiation.What Is the Role of Gene Expression 19.3 in Cell Differentiation?Although every cell contains all the genes needed to produceevery protein encoded by its genome, each cell expresses onlyselected genes. For example, certain cells in hair follicles producekeratin, the protein that makes up hair, while other celltypes in the body do not. What determines whether a cell willproduce keratin? Chapter 16 describes a number of ways inwhich cells regulate gene expression and protein production—by controlling transcription, translation, and posttranslationalprotein modifications. But the mechanisms that control gene expressionresulting in cell differentiation generally work at thelevel of transcription.Differential gene transcription is a hallmark ofcell differentiationThe gene for β-globin, one of the protein components of hemoglobin,is expressed in red blood cells as they form in thebone marrow of mammals. That this same gene is also present—but unexpressed—in neurons in the brain (which do not makehemoglobin) can be demonstrated by nucleic acid hybridiza-412 CHAPTER 19 | DIFFERENTIAL GENE EXPRESSION IN DEVELOPMENT1a 1b2a 2bThe early embryo,or blastocyst, iscultured in anutrient medium.Skin cells areremoved froma patient.3 A vector carryingseveral genescontrolled by anactive promoteris added.Cell are grownin lab culture.4 Cells carryingthe vector are5 selected. Cells grow toa mass ofpluripotent cells.6 Cells are induced to differentiate tospecialized cells and transplanted topatients as needed.The outer layercollapses and theinner cell mass isfreed from theembryo. Chemicalsare added todisaggregate theinner cell mass intosmaller clumps.Bone tissues Muscle tissues Nerve tissuesInnercellmass19.6 Two Ways to Obtain Pluripotent Stem (A) Embryonic stem cells (B) Induced pluripotent stem cellsCells Pluripotent stem cells can be obtainedeither from human embryos (A) or by adding highlyexpressed genes to skin cells to transform theminto stem cells (B).GO TO Animated Tutorial 19.1 • EmbryonicStem CellsyourBioPortal.com19.3 | WHAT IS THE ROLE OF GENE EXPRESSION IN CELL DIFFERENTIATION? 413tion. Recall that in nucleic acid hybridization, a probe made ofsingle-stranded DNA or RNA of known sequence is added todenatured DNAto reveal complementary coding regions on theDNAtemplate strand (see Figure 15.16). Aprobe for the β-globingene can be applied to DNA from brain cells and immaturered blood cells (recall that mature mammalian red blood cellslose their nuclei during development). In both cases, the probefinds its complement, showing that the β-globin gene is presentin both types of cells. On the other hand, if the β-globinprobe is applied to mRNA, rather than DNA, from the two celltypes, it finds β-globin mRNA only in the red blood cells, not inthe brain cells. This result shows that the gene is expressed inonly one of the two cell types.What leads to this differential gene expression? One wellstudiedexample of cell differentiation is the conversion of undifferentiatedmuscle precursor cells into cells that are destinedto form muscle (Figure 19.7). In the vertebrate embryo thesecells come from a layer called the mesoderm (see Section 44.2).Akey event in the commitment of these cells to become muscle isthat they stop dividing. Indeed, in many parts of the embryo,cell division and cell differentiation are mutually exclusive. Cell signalingactivates the gene for a transcription factor called MyoD(myoblast-determining gene). Recall that transcription factorsare DNA binding proteins that regulate the expression of specificgenes. In this case, MyoD activates the gene for p21, aninhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases that normally stimulatethe cell cycle at G1 (see Figure 11.6). Expression of the p21 genecauses the cell cycle to stop, and other transcription factors thenenter the picture so that differentiation can begin. Interestingly,myoD is also activated in stem cells that are present in adultmuscle, indicating a role of this transcription factor in repair ofmuscle as it gets damaged and worn out.Genes such as myoD that direct the most fundamental decisionsin development (often by regulating other genes on otherchromosomes) usually encode transcription factors. In somecases, a single transcription factor can cause a cell to differentiatein a certain way. In others, complex interactions betweengenes and proteins determine a sequence of transcriptionalevents that leads to differential gene expression.19.3 RECAPDifferentiation involves selective gene expression,controlled at the level of transcription by transcriptionfactors.• What techniques could you use to identify genes expressedduring cell differentiation? See pp. 412–413• What is the role of transcription factors in controllingdifferentiation? See p. 413 and Figure 19.7Cell differentiation involves extensive transcriptional regulationof genes. But what causes a cell to express one set of genes, andnot some other set? In other words, how is a cell’s fate determined?19.4 How Is Cell Fate Determined?The fertilized egg undergoes many cell divisions to produce themany differentiated cells in the body (such as liver, muscle, andnerve cells). How can one cell produce so many different celltypes? There are two ways that this occurs:• Cytoplasmic segregation (unequal cytokinesis). Afactorwithin an egg, zygote, or precursor cell may be unequally distributedin the cytoplasm. After cell division, the factor endsup in some daughter cells or regions of cells, but not others.• Induction (cell-to-cell communication). Afactor is activelyproduced and secreted by certain cells to induce other cellsto become determined.Cytoplasmic segregation can determine polarityand cell fateSome differences in gene expression patterns are the result ofcytoplasmic differences between cells. One such cytoplasmic differenceis the emergence of distinct “top” and “bottom” ends ofan organism or structure; such a difference is called polarity.1 In multipotent embryo cells,myoD is activated and bindsthe promoter of the p21 gene.3 Cell cycle is blockedat G1, allowingdifferentiation to occur.4 Other transcription factorsare involved in finaldifferentiation of myoblastsinto mature muscle cells.2 p21 is made andbinds to cdk.mRNADNAPromotermyoDMesodermcellsCdkp21MyoblastsMuscle cellp21 gene19.7 Transcription and Differentiation in the Formation of MuscleCells Activation of a transcription factor, MyoD, is important in musclecell differentiation.Many examples of polarity are observed as development proceeds.Our heads are distinct from our rear ends, and the distal(far) ends of our arms and legs (wrists, ankles, fingers, toes)differ from the proximal (near) ends (shoulders and hips). Polaritymay develop early; even within the fertilized egg, the yolkand other factors are often distributed asymmetrically. Duringearly development in animals, polarity is specified by an animalpole at the top of the zygote and a vegetal pole at the bottom.In the early twentieth century Hans Driesch at the MarineBiological Station in Naples, Italy, demonstrated the effects ofcytoplasmic segregation on development (Figure 19.8). Veryearly development in sea urchins occurs by rapid, equal mitoticdivisions of the fertilized egg; there is no increase in sizeat this stage, just a partitioning of the cells. If an eight-cell embryois carefully separated vertically into two four-celledhalves, both halves develop into normal (albeit small) larvae.But if an eight-cell embryo is cut horizontally, the top half doesnot develop at all, while the bottom half develops into a small,abnormal larva.Clearly, then, there must be at least one factor essential fordevelopment that is segregated in the vegetal half of the seaurchin egg, such that the bottom cells of the 8-cell embryo getthis essential factor and the top cells do not. Experiments haveestablished that certain materials, called cytoplasmic determinants,are distributed unequally in the egg cytoplasm. Cytoplasmicdeterminants play roles in directing the embryonic developmentof many organisms (Figure 19.9). What are thesedeterminants and what accounts for their unequal distribution?The cytoskeleton contributes to the asymmetric distributionof cytoplasmic determinants in the egg. Recall from Section5.3 that an important function of the microtubules and microfilamentsin the cytoskeleton is to help move materials in thecell. Two properties allow these structures to accomplish this:• Microtubules and microfilaments have polarity—they growby adding subunits to the plus end.• Cytoskeletal elements can bind specific proteins, which canbe used in the transport of mRNA.For example, in the sea urchin egg, a protein binds to both thegrowing (+) end of a microfilament and to an mRNA encoding acytoplasmic determinant. As the microfilament grows toward oneend of the cell, it carries the mRNA along with it. The asymmetricaldistribution of the mRNA leads to a similar distribution ofthe protein it encodes. So what were once unspecified cytoplasmicdeterminants can now be defined in terms of cellular structures,mRNAs, and proteins.Inducers passing from one cell to another can determinecell fatesThe term “induction” has different meanings in different contexts.In biology it can be used broadly to refer to the initiation of, orcause of, a change or process. But in the context of cellular differentiation,it refers to the signaling events by which cells in a developingembryo communicate and influence one another’s developmentalfate. Induction involves chemical signals and signaltransduction mechanisms. We will describe two examples of thisform of induction: one in the developing vertebrate eye, and theother in a developing reproductive structure of the nematodeCaenorhabditis elegans.414 CHAPTER 19 | DIFFERENTIAL GENE EXPRESSION IN DEVELOPMENTCONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE19.8 Asymmetry in the Early Sea Urchin EmbryoAs an embryo develops, cells become determined and theirultimate fate gets more and more narrowly defined. The cells ofan eight-celled sea urchin embryo look identical and so mightbe expected to have the same developmental potential. Butdo they? Hans Driesch separated different parts of this tinyembryo from one another, to examine their developmentalpotentials. His experiments showed that even at the eight-cellstage, cell fate determination is underway.HYPOTHESIS Different regions in the fertilized egg and theembryo have different developmental fates.The upper and lower halves of a sea urchinembryo differ in their developmental potential.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSThe embryo is bisectedvertically, leaving eachhalf with both upperand lower cells.The embryo is bisectedhorizontally, separating uppercells from lower cells.EggFertilization andcell division8-Cell stage8-CellstageGlassneedleTop cellsremainembryonicBottom cellsproduceabnormal larvaTwo small, but normal,larvae are producedTop(animal pole)Bottom(vegetal pole)GO TO Animated Tutorial 19.2 • Early Asymmetry in the EmbryoyourBioPortal.comLENS DIFFERENTIATION IN THE VERTEBRATE EYE The developmentof the lens in the vertebrate eye is a classic example of induction.In a frog embryo, the developing forebrain bulges out atboth sides to form the optic vesicles, which expand until theycome into contact with the cells at the surface of the head (Figure19.10). The surface tissue in the region of contact thickens,forming a lens placode—tissue that will ultimately form the lens.The lens placode bends inward, folds over on itself, and ultimatelydetaches from the surface tissue to produce a structurethat will develop into the lens. If the growing optic vesicle is cutaway before it contacts the surface cells, no lens forms. Placingan impermeable barrier between the optic vesicle and the surfacecells also prevents the lens from forming. These observationssuggest that the surface tissue begins to develop into a lenswhen it receives a signal from the optic vesicle. Such a signalis termed an inducer.Inducers trigger sequences of gene expression in the respondingcells. How cells switch on different sets of genes thatgovern development and direct the formation of body plans isof great interest to developmental and evolutionary biologists.They use model organisms to investigate the major principlesgoverning these processes.VULVAL DIFFERENTIATION IN THE NEMATODE The tiny nematodeCaenorhabditis elegans is a favorite model organism for studyingdevelopment. Its genome was one of the first eukaryotic genomesto be sequenced (see Section 17.3). It develops from fertilized eggto larva in only about 8 hours, and the worm reaches the adultstage in just 3.5 days. The process is easily observed using a lowmagnificationdissecting microscope because the body coveringis transparent (Figure 19.11A).The adult nematode is hermaphroditic, containing both maleand female reproductive organs. It lays eggs through a porecalled the vulva on the ventral (lower) surface. During development,a single cell, called the anchor cell, induces the vulva toform from six cells on the worm’s ventral surface. In this case,there are two molecular signals, the primary inducer and the secondaryinducer (or lateral signal). Each of the six ventral cellshas three possible fates: it may become a primary vulval precursorcell, a secondary vulval precursor cell, or simply becomepart of the worm’s skin—an epidermal cell. You can follow thesequence of events in Figure 19.11B. The concentration gradientof the primary inducer, LIN-3, is key: the anchor cell producesLIN-3, which diffuses out of the cell and forms a concentrationgradient with respect to adjacent cells. Cells thatreceive the most LIN-3 become vulval precursor cells; cellsslightly farther from the anchor cell receive less LIN-3 and becomeepidermal cells. Induction involves the activation or inactivationof specific genes through signal transduction cascadesin the responding cells (Figure 19.12).Nematode development illustrates the important observationthat much of development is controlled by molecular switches that allowa cell to proceed down one of two alternative tracks. One challengefor developmental biologists is to find these switches and determinehow they work. The primary inducer, LIN-3, released bythe C. elegans anchor cell is a growth factor homologous to a ver-19.4 | HOW IS CELL FATE DETERMINED? 415Unequal distribution of acytoplasmic componentin a fertilized egg……is retained in daughter cellsas the cell divides.A subsequent cell division, however,segregates the cytoplasmic componentin specific cells. The top cells and bottomcells now have different fates.Animal poleVegetal pole19.9 The Principle of Cytoplasmic Segregation The unequal distributionof some component in the cytoplasm of a cell may determine thefates of its descendants.The optic vesiclebulges out fromthe forebrain.DevelopingforebrainSurface tissue1 The optic vesicle inducesoverlying tissue to formthe lens placode.2 The optic cupforms and induceslens formation.3The developing lens separatesfrom the surface tissue andinduces it to form the cornea,the outer surface of the eye.4Lens placode tissueOpticcupDeveloping lensCorneaLensOpticnerveRetinaFrog head(dorsal view)19.10 Embryonic Inducers inVertebrate Eye Development Theeye of a frog develops as different cellsinduce changes in neighboring cells.tebrate growth factor called EGF (epidermal growth factor). LIN-3 binds to a receptor on the surfaces of vulval precursor cells,setting in motion a signal transduction cascade involving the Rasprotein and MAP kinases (see Figure 7.12). This results in increasedtranscription of the genes involved in the differentiationof vulval cells.19.4 RECAPCellular differentiation involves cytoplasmic segregationand induction. Cytoplasmic segregation is theunequal distribution of gene products in the egg,zygote, or early embryo. Induction occurs when onecell or tissue sends a chemical signal to another.• How does cytoplasmic segregation result in polarity ina fertilized egg, and how does polarity affect cell differentiation?See pp. 413–414 and Figure 19.9• Describe an example of how induction influences tissueformation in the vertebrate eye. See p. 416 andFigure 19.10• How do inducer molecules interact with transcriptionfactors to produce differentiated cells? See p. 416 andFigure 19.12416 CHAPTER 19 | DIFFERENTIAL GENE EXPRESSION IN DEVELOPMENT1 The primary inducer, produced by the anchorcell, activates genes whose products determinethat cells will develop as vulval precursorsrather than epidermal cells.2 The secondary inducer activatesother genes, thus determining thatcells will develop as secondaryprecursors.PharynxOvary IntestineEggs VulvaRectumAnus(B)(A) 1 mmAnchor cellGene set 1 off Gene set 1 onGene set 2 onGene set 1 offGene set 2 onNo primary inducerto activate gene set 1.Gene set 3 onNo primary inducerto activate gene set 1.Gene set 3 onPrimaryprecursorsVulvaSecondaryprecursorsSecondaryprecursorsEpidermalprecursorsEpidermalprecursorsEpidermalprecursorsPrimary induceractivates gene set 1Secondaryinduceractivatesgene set 2and inactivatesgene set 1Secondaryinduceractivatesgene set 2and inactivatesgene set 1Epidermis Epidermis19.11 Induction during Vulval Development in Caenorhabditiselegans (A) In the nematode C. elegans, it has been possible to followall of the cell divisions from the fertilized egg to the 959 cells found in thefully developed adult. (B) During vulval development, a molecule secretedby the anchor cell (the LIN-3 protein) acts as the primary inducer. The primaryprecursor cell (the one that received the highest concentration ofLIN-3) then secretes a secondary inducer (the lateral signal) that acts onits neighbors. The gene expression patterns triggered by these molecularswitches determine cell fates.19.5 | HOW DOES GENE EXPRESSION DETERMINE PATTERN FORMATION? 417We have seen that cytoplasmic segregation and induction leadto cell differentiation, and have seen two examples of how theseprocesses lead to organ formation in developing multicellularorganisms. We now take a closer look at how gene expressionaffects differentiation and development.How Does Gene Expression Determine 19.5 Pattern Formation?Pattern formation is the process that results in the spatial organizationof a tissue or organism. It is inextricably linked tomorphogenesis, the creation of body form. You might expectmorphogenesis to involve a lot of cell division, followed by differentiation—and it does. But what you might not expect is theamount of programmed cell death—apoptosis—that occurs duringmorphogenesis.Multiple genes interact to determine developmentalprogrammed cell deathWe noted in Section 11.6 that apoptosis is a programmedseries of events that leads to cell death. Apoptosis is an integralpart of the normal development and life of an organism.For example, in an early human embryo, thehands and feet look like tiny paddles: the tissues that willbecome fingers and toes are linked by connective tissue.Between days 41 and 56 of development, the cells betweenthe digits die, freeing the individual fingers and toes:Many cells and structures form and then disappear during development,in processes involving apoptosis.Model organisms have been very useful in studying thegenes involved in apoptosis. For example, the nematode wormC. elegans produces precisely 1,090 somatic cells as it developsfrom a fertilized egg into an adult, but 131 of those cells die(leaving 959 cells in the adult worm). The sequential expressionof two genes called ced-4 and ced-3 (for cell death) appears tocontrol this programmed cell death (Figure 19.13).In the nematode nervous system, 302 neurons come from 405precursors; thus 103 neural precursor cells undergo apoptosis.If the protein encoded by either ced-3 or ced-4 is nonfunctional,all 405 cells form neurons, resulting in abnormal brain develop-Day 41 Day 562 Diffusion of theinducer forms aconcentrationgradient.3b …while this cellreceives verylittle inducer,even though ithas receptors.3a This cell receivesmany inducermolecules thatbind to many ofthe receptors…4 Inducer bindingresults in transcriptionfactoractivation ortranslocation tothe nucleus.5 Transcription factorbinds a promoter,activating genetranscription.6a The protein encodedby the gene stimulatescell differentiation.6b The protein is notproduced and the celldoes not differentiate.1 A cell producesan inducer.Inducer moleculesTranscription factormRNAProteinDNAPromoterNo transcriptionTranscription19.12 Induction The concentration of an inducer directly affects thedegree to which a transcription factor is activated. The inducer acts bybinding to a receptor on the target cell. This binding is followed by signaltransduction involving transcription factor activation or translocation fromthe cytoplasm to the nucleus. In the nucleus it acts to stimulate theexpression of genes involved in cell differentiation.(A) C. elegans (B) Human neuronCytoplasmInside organelleIntracellularmembraneCED-9 Bcl-2CED-4CED-3ApoptosisApaf1Caspase-3Caspase-9Apoptosis19.13 Pathways for Apoptosis In the worm C. elegans (A) andhumans (B) similar pathways for apoptosis are controlled by genes withsimilar sequences and functions.ment. A third gene, ced-9, encodes an inhibitor of apoptosis—that is, it codes for a protein that blocks the functionof the ced-3 and ced-4 genes. Where apoptosis is required,ced-3 and ced-4 are active and ced-9 is inactive;if apoptosis is not appropriate, ced-9 is active andblocks ced-3 and ced-4.Asimilar system controls apoptosis in humans. Theapoptosis pathway in humans involves a class of enzymescalled caspases (see Figure 11.22), which aresimilar in amino acid sequence to the protein encodedby ced-3 in C. elegans. Humans have one protein,Bcl-2, that inhibits apoptosis and is similar to the productof ced-9, and another protein, Apaf1, that stimulates apoptosislike CED-4. As the human nervous system develops, halfof the neurons that are formed undergo apoptosis. So humansand nematodes, two species separated by more than 600 millionyears of evolutionary history, have similar genes controllingprogrammed cell death (see Figure 19.13). The commonalityof this pathway indicates its importance: mutations areharmful and evolution selects against them.Plants have organ identity genesLike animals, plants have organs—for example, leaves androots. Many plants form flowers, and many flowers are composedof four types of organs: sepals, petals, stamens (male reproductiveorgans), and carpels (female reproductive organs).These floral organs occur in concentric whorls, with groups ofeach organ type encircling a central axis. The sepals are on theoutside and the carpels are on the inside (Figure 19.14A).418 CHAPTER 19 | DIFFERENTIAL GENE EXPRESSION IN DEVELOPMENTDNAThe four organs in a flower aredetermined by four groups ofcells in the meristem.In wild-type plants,the combinationsof AA, AB, BC,and CC each act tostimulate expressionof genes for aparticular organ.If gene B is mutated, only AA andCC are formed and so only sepalsand carpels are formed.Three genes, A, B, and C, codefor polypeptides that combine inpairs to make transcription factors.In this case, the combination ABstimulates transcription of genesfor petal formation.FlowerphenotypeSepal Petal Petal SepalA A A AB BGene C mutatedCarpel Stamen Stamen CarpelC C C CB BGene A mutated(C)Sepal PetalPetalStamen CarpelA A CA B CCB BFlowerstructureGenesexpressedGenesexpressedGenesexpressedGenesexpressedWild typeSepal Sepal Carpel CarpelA A C CGene B mutatedFlowerstructureFlowerstructureFlowerstructureWhorl 1 Whorl 2 Whorl 3 Whorl 4Mature flowerEarly flower differentiation(meristems)(A) (B)Whorl 1:sepalWhorl 2:petalWhorl 3:stamenWhorl 4:carpelGenotypeGenotypeGenotypeGenotype19.14 Organ Identity Genes in Arabidopsis Flowers(A) The four organs of a flower—carpels (yellow), stamens(green), petals (purple), and sepals (pink)—grow in whorlsthat develop from the floral meristem. (B) Floral organs aredetermined by three genes whose polypeptide productscombine in pairs to form transcription factors. (C) When amutation in one of the three organ identity genes occurs,one type of organ replaces another. Such mutations helpedscientists decipher the pattern of gene expression thatgives rise to normal flowers.19.5 | HOW DOES GENE EXPRESSION DETERMINE PATTERN FORMATION? 419In the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana (thale cress), flowersdevelop in a radial pattern around the shoot apex as it developsand elongates. The whorls develop from a meristem of about700 undifferentiated cells arranged in a dome, which is at thegrowing point on the stem. How is the identity of a particularwhorl determined? Agroup of genes called organ identity genesencode proteins that act in combination to produce specificwhorl features (Figure 19.14B and C):• Genes in class Aare expressed in whorls 1 and 2 (whichform sepals and petals, respectively).• Genes in class B are expressed in whorls 2 and 3 (whichform petals and stamens).• Genes in class C are expressed in whorls 3 and 4 (whichform stamens and carpels).Two lines of experimental evidence support this model of organidentity gene function:• Loss-of-function mutations: for example, a mutation in a classAgene results in no sepals or petals. In any organism, the replacementof one organ for another is called homeosis, and thistype of mutation is a homeotic mutation (see Figure 19.14C).• Gain-of-function mutations: for example, a promoter for aclass C gene can be artificially coupled to a class Agene. Inthis case, the class Agene is expressed in all four whorls, resultingin only sepals and petals.Genes in classes A, B, and C code for transcription factors thatare active as dimers, that is, proteins with two polypeptide subunits.Gene regulation in these cases is combinatorial—that is, thecomposition of the dimer determines which genes will be activated.For example, a dimer made up of two class Amonomersactivates transcription of the genes that make sepals; a dimermade up of A and B monomers results in petals, and so forth.Acommon feature of the A, B, and C proteins, as well as manyother plant transcription factors, is a DNA-binding domaincalled the MADS box. These proteins also have domains that canbind to other proteins in a transcription initiation complex. As wediscuss in Chapter 16, transcription initiation in eukaryotes iscontrolled by a complex of proteins that interact with DNA andother proteins at the promoter. The MADS box proteins participatein this complex to control the expression of specific genes.Some familiar ornamental plants have mutations in floral organidentity genes. For example, many rose varieties have mutationsin a C gene, resulting in multiple rows of petals instead ofthe single set of five petals found in wild roses. An understandingof the molecular basis of floral organ identity may have practicaluses. Many of the foods that make up the human diet comefrom fruits and seeds, which form from parts of the carpel—thefemale reproductive organ of the flower. Genetically modifyingplants to produce more carpels could increase the amount of fruitor grain a crop produces. Agenetic system similar to the one describedhere for Arabidopsis controls floral organ formation in rice,humanity’s most widely consumed plant. Appropriate mutationsin these genes might lead to more grain produced per plant.Transcription of the floral organ identity genes is controlledby other gene products, including the LEAFY protein. Plantswith loss-of-function mutations in the LEAFY gene make floweringstems instead of flowers, with increased numbers of modifiedleaves called bracts. The wild-type LEAFY protein acts asa transcription factor, stimulating expression of the class A, B,and C genes so that they produce flowers. This finding, too, haspractical applications. It usually takes 6–20 years for a citrus treeto produce flowers and fruits. Scientists have made transgenicorange trees expressing the LEAFY gene coupled to a stronglyexpressed promoter. These trees flower and fruit years earlierthan normal trees.Morphogen gradients provide positional informationDuring development, the key cellular question, “What am I (orwhat will I be)?” is often answered in part by “Where am I?”Think of the cells in the developing nematode, which developinto different parts of the vulva depending on their positionsrelative to the anchor cell. This spatial “sense” is called positionalinformation. Positional information often comes in theform of an inducer called a morphogen, which diffuses fromone group of cells to surrounding cells, setting up a concentrationgradient. There are two requirements for a signal to be considereda morphogen:• It must directly affect target cells, rather than triggering a secondarysignal that affects target cells.• Different concentrations of the signal must cause different effects.Developmental biologist Lewis Wolpert uses the “French flagmodel” to explain morphogens (Figure 19.15). This model canbe applied to the differentiation of the vulva in C. elegans (seeFigure 19.11) and to the development of vertebrate limbs.The position value is interpreted by thecells, which differentiate to form a pattern.The position of eachcell is defined by theconcentration ofmorphogen.Each cell has thepotential to developas blue, white, or red.Concentrationof morphogen1 2 3 4 5 61 2 3 4 5 6Threshold for inducing “blue” fateFrench flagThreshold for inducing “white” fate19.15 The French Flag Model In the “French flag” model, a concentrationgradient of a diffusible morphogen signals each cell to specify itsposition.The vertebrate limb develops from a paddle-shaped limb bud(Figure 19.16). The cells that develop into different digits mustreceive positional information; if they do not, the limb will betotally disorganized (imagine a hand with only thumbs or onlylittle fingers). A group of cells at the posterior base of the limbbud, just where it joins the body wall, is called the zone of polarizingactivity (ZPA). The cells of the ZPAsecrete a morphogencalled Sonic hedgehog (Shh), which forms a gradient that determinesthe posterior–anterior (little finger to thumb) axis of thedeveloping limb. The cells getting the highest dose of Shh formthe little finger; those getting the lowest dose develop into thethumb. Recall the French flag model when considering the gradientof Shh.A cascade of transcription factors establishes bodysegmentation in the fruit flyPerhaps the best-studied example of how gene expression affectscell fate in response to morphogens is body segmentationin the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. The body segments ofthis model organism are clearly different from one another. Theadult fly has an anterior head (composed of several fused segments),three different thoracic segments, and eight abdominalsegments at the posterior end. Each segment develops into differentbody parts: for example, antennae and eyes develop fromhead segments, wings from the thorax, and so on.The life cycle of Drosophila from fertilized egg to adult takesabout 2 weeks at room temperature. The egg hatches into alarva, which then forms a pupa, which finally is transformedinto the adult fly. By the time a larva appears—about 24 hoursafter fertilization—there are recognizable segments. The thoracicand abdominal segments all look similar, but the fates of thecells to become different adult segments is already determined. Thedetermination events in the first 24 hours will be our focus here.Several types of genes are expressed sequentially in the embryoto define these segments:• First, cells in the mother that are adjacent to the maturingegg release products that set up anterior–posterior anddorsal–ventral axes in the egg.• Next, a series of gene products in the embryo successivelydefine the position of each cell in a segment relative tothese axes. For example, a cell might first be defined asbeing in the head rather than in the abdomen in theanterior–posterior axis; then it might be defined as beingon the ventral (top) side of the head.• Finally, a set of genes called Hox genes control the ultimateidentity of each body part; for example, determining thatthe cells at a particular position in the head will makemouthparts.The genes involved in each of these steps code for transcriptionfactors, which in turn control the synthesis of other transcriptionfactors acting on the next set of genes. This cascade ofevents may remind you of a signal transduction cascade (seeSection 7.3), only in this case it is a cascade of events that occursover time and location, rather than abruptly and in a single cell.The genes finally expressed are the ones familiar to you: theycode for protein kinases, receptors, and other proteins that carryout the functions of the cell.The description of these events in fruit fly development is oneof the great achievements in modern biology. It gave biologistsa deep understanding of how the events that specify cell identityunfold. We will only skim the surface of the process here,but keep in mind the basic principle of a transcriptional cascade.As we will see in Chapter 20, the fruit fly has been a true modelorganism in this case, because these findings have informed researchon other organisms, including mammals.Experimental genetics was used to elucidate the events leadingto cell fate determination in Drosophila:• First, developmental mutations were identified. For example,a mutant strain might produce larvae with two headsor no segments.• Then, the mutant was compared with wild-type flies, andthe gene responsible for the developmental mistake, and itsprotein product (if appropriate), were isolated.• Finally, experiments with the gene (making transgenic flies)and protein (injecting the protein into an egg or into anembryo) were done to confirm the proposed developmentalpathway.Together, these approaches revealed a sequential pattern of geneexpression that results in the determination of each segmentwithin 24 hours after fertilization. Several classes of genes areinvolved.The ZPA produces the morphogenShh, which makes a gradient oncells that will form limbs.The thumb formswhen Shh is absent.Limb buds form frontand rear limbs.The little finger formswhen there is a lotof Shh.LimbbudZPAShh19.16 Specification of the Vertebrate Limb and the French FlagModel The zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) in the limb bud of theembryo secretes the morphogen Sonic hedgehog (Shh). Cells in thebud form different digits depending on the concentration of Shh.420 CHAPTER 19 | DIFFERENTIAL GENE EXPRESSION IN DEVELOPMENTMATERNAL EFFECT GENES Like the eggs and early embryos ofsea urchins, Drosophila eggs and larvae are characterized by unevenlydistributed cytoplasmic determinants (see Figure 19.9).These molecular determinants, which include both mRNAs andproteins, are the products of specific maternal effect genes.These genes are transcribed in the cells of the mother’s ovarythat surround what will be the anterior portion of the egg. Thetranscription products are passed to the egg by cytoplasmicbridges. Two maternal effect genes, called Bicoid and Nanos, helpdetermine the anterior–posterior axis of the egg. (The dorsal–ventral [back–belly] axis is determined by other maternal effectgenes that will not be described here.)The mRNAs for Bicoid and Nanos diffuse from the mother’scells into what will be the anterior end of the egg. The BicoidmRNAis translated to produce Bicoid protein, which diffusesaway from the anterior end, establishing a gradient in the eggcytoplasm (Figure 19.17). Where it is present in sufficient concentration,Bicoid acts as a transcription factor to stimulate thetranscription of the Hunchback gene in the early embryo. Agradientof the Hunchback protein establishes the head, or anterior,region.Meanwhile, the egg’s cytoskeleton transports the NanosmRNAfrom the anterior end of the egg, where it was deposited,to the posterior end, where it is translated. The Nanos proteinforms a gradient with the highest concentration at the posteriorend. At that end, the Nanos protein inhibits the translation ofHunchback mRNA. Thus, the action of both Bicoid and Nanosestablish the Hunchback gradient, which determines the anteriorand posterior ends of the embryo.How did biologists elucidate these pathways? Let’s lookmore closely at the experimental approaches used in this case.• Females that are homozygous for a particular bicoid mutationproduce larvae with no head and no thorax; thus the Bicoidprotein must be needed for the anterior structures to develop.• If the eggs of these bicoid mutants are injected at the anteriorend with cytoplasm from the anterior region of a wildtypeegg, the injected eggs develop into normal larvae. Thisexperiment also shows that the Bicoid protein is involvedin the development of anterior structures.• If cytoplasm from the anterior region of a wild-type egg isinjected into the posterior region of another egg, anteriorstructures develop there. The degree of induction dependson how much cytoplasm is injected.• Eggs from homozygous nanos mutant females develop intolarvae with missing abdominal segments.• If cytoplasm from the posterior region of a wild-type egg isinjected into the posterior region of a nanos mutant egg, itwill develop normally.These and other experiments led scientists to understand thecascade of events that determine cell fates.The events involving Bicoid, Nanos, and Hunchback begin beforefertilization and continue after it, during the multinucleatestage, which lasts a few hours. At this stage, the embryo lookslike a bunch of indistinguishable nuclei under the light microscope.But the cell fates have already begun to be determined.After the anterior and posterior ends have been established, thenext step in pattern formation is the determination of segmentnumber and locations.SEGMENTATION GENES The number, boundaries, and polarityof the Drosophila larval segments are determined by proteins encodedby the segmentation genes. These genes are expressedwhen there are about 6,000 nuclei in the embryo (about threehours after fertilization). Three classes of segmentation genesact one after the other to regulate finer and finer details of thesegmentation pattern:• Gap genes organize broad areas along the anterior–posterioraxis. Mutations in gap genes result in gaps in the bodyplan—the omission of several consecutive larval segments.• Pair rule genes divide the embryo into units of two segmentseach. Mutations in pair rule genes result in embryosmissing every other segment.Bicoid mRNAAnterior Posterior1 Bicoid mRNA is depositedby maternal cells thatsurround the anterior endof the egg.4 High concentrationsof Bicoid stimulate thehead-specifying genes2 Translation producesBicoid protein, atranscription factor.3 A gradient ofBicoid proteinresults.19.17 Bicoid Protein Provides Positional Information The anterior–posterior axis of Drosophila arises from the gradient of a morphogenencoded by Bicoid, a maternal effect gene. Bicoid protein is also a transcriptionfactor, which activates a gene to specify that the anterior regionwill become the head of the fly. Other maternal effect genes in the posteriorregion of the embryo inhibit Bicoid, thus limiting its activity in that region.19.5 | HOW DOES GENE EXPRESSION DETERMINE PATTERN FORMATION? 421• Segment polarity genes determine the boundaries and anterior–posterior organization of the individual segments. Mutationsin segment polarity genes can result in segments inwhich posterior structures are replaced by reversed (mirrorimage)anterior structures.The expression of these genes is sequential (Figure 19.18). Thematernal effect protein Bicoid, which begins the cascade, acts asa morphogen and transcription factor to stimulate the expressionof genes such as Hunchback that set up the anterior–posterior axis.As a result, a nucleus in the early embryo “knows” where it is.The Hunchback protein stimulates gap gene transcription,the products of the gap genes activate pairrule genes, and the pair rule gene products activatesegment polarity genes. By the end of this cascade,nuclei throughout the embryo “know” which segmentthey will be part of in the adult fly.The next set of genes in the cascade determinesthe form and function of each segment.HOX GENES Hox genes encode a family of transcriptionfactors that are expressed in different combinationsalong the length of the embryo, and help determinecell fate within each segment. Hox geneexpression tells the cells of a segment in the head tomake eyes, those of a segment in the thorax to makewings, and so on. The Drosophila Hox genes occur intwo clusters on chromosome 3, in the same orderas the segments whose function they determine (Figure19.19). By the time the fruit fly larva hatches,its segments are completely determined. Hox genesare homeotic genes that are shared by all animals,and they are functionally analogous to the organidentity genes of plants. However, they differ fromplant homeotic genes in DNA sequence and encoded422 CHAPTER 19 | DIFFERENTIAL GENE EXPRESSION IN DEVELOPMENT1 Gap genes defineseveral broad areasand regulate…3a …segment polarity genes,which determine the boundariesand anterior–posterior orientationof each segment...3b ...and Hox geneswhich define the roleof each segment.2 …pair rule genes,which refine thesegment locationsand regulate…Maternal effect genesdetermine the anterior–posterior axis andinduce three classes ofsegmentation genes.(A)(B)(C)(D)19.18 A Gene Cascade Controls PatternFormation in the Drosophila Embryo (A) Maternaleffect genes (see Figure 19.17) induce gap, pair rule,and segment polarity genes—collectively referred to assegmentation genes. (B) Two gap genes, Hunchback(orange) and Krüppel (green) overlap; both genes aretranscribed in the yellow area. (C) The pair rule geneFushi tarazu is transcribed in the dark blue areas. (D)The segment polarity gene Engrailed (bright green) isseen here at a slightly more advanced stage than isdepicted in (A). By the end of this cascade, a group ofnuclei at the anterior of the embryo, for example, isdetermined to become the first head segment in theadult fly.In the adult fly,this segment…This diagramapproximates thepositions of geneexpression in theembryo.…is determinedby this gene.Antennapedia clusterHeadThorax(T1–T3)Abdomen(A1–A8)Bithorax clusterA3T1 A4 T2 T3A6 A7A8A1 A2A5lab pb Dfd Scr Antp Ubx AbdA AbdBDrosophilaembryo(10 hours)19.19 Hox Genes in Drosophila Determine Segment Identity Two clusters of Hoxgenes on chromosome 3 (center) determine segment function in the adult fly (top). Thesegenes are expressed in the embryo (bottom) long before the structures of the segmentsactually appear.GO TO Animated Tutorial 19.3 •Pattern Formation in the Drosophila EmbryoyourBioPortal.com19.5 | HOW DOES GENE EXPRESSION DETERMINE PATTERN FORMATION? 423protein structure. This is not surprising, given that the last commonancestor of plants and animals was unicellular, and thereforemulticellularity evolved independently for plants andanimals.In Drosophila, the maternal effect genes, segmentation genes,and Hox genes interact to “build” a larva step by step, beginningwith the unfertilized egg. How do we know that the Hoxgenes determine segment identity? An important clue camefrom bizarre homeotic mutations observed in Drosophila. Theantennapedia mutation causes legs to grow on the head in placeof antennae (Figure 19.20), and the bithorax mutation causes anextra pair of wings to grow in a thoracic segment where wingsdo not normally occur (see Figure 20.3). Edward Lewis at Caltechfound that antennapedia and bithorax mutations resultedfrom changes in Hox genes.The first cluster of Hox genes—the Antennapedia cluster—specifies anterior segments, starting with genes for the differenthead segments and ending with thoracic segments. The secondcluster (Bithorax) contains three genes. It begins with a genespecifying the last thoracic segment, followed by a gene forthe anterior abdominal segments, and ends with a gene for theposterior abdominal segments (see Figure 19.19). Lewis hypothesizedthat all of the Hox genes might have come from the duplicationof a single gene in an ancestral, unsegmented organism.Since Lewis put forward this hypothesis, molecular researchmethods became available to test it.Hox genes encode transcription factorsMolecular biologists confirmed Lewis’s hypothesis using nucleicacid hybridization. Several scientists found that probes fora sequence found in the Bithorax cluster could bind to other sequencesin both the Bithorax and Antennapedia clusters. In otherwords, this DNA sequence is common to all the Hox genes inboth clusters. It is also found in several of the segmentationgenes, as well as other genes that encode transcription factors.This 180-base-pair DNA sequence is called the homeobox. Itencodes a 60-amino acid sequence called the homeodomain. Thehomeodomain recognizes and binds to a specific DNA sequencein the promoters of its target genes. However, this recognitionis usually not sufficient to allow the transcription factor to bindfully to a promoter and turn the target gene on or off. Othertranscription factors are also involved.The Hox genes are found in animals with an anterior–posterioraxis, where they play a role in development similar to thatplayed by MADS box genes in plants. But the homeobox is foundin many different transcription factors, including some fromplants. The evolutionary significance of these common pathwaysfor development will be discussed in the next chapter.19.5 RECAPA cascade of transcription factors governs patternformation and the subsequent development of animaland plant organs. Often these transcription factorscreate or respond to morphogen gradients. Inplants, cell fate is often determined by MADS boxgenes, and in animal embryos, cell fate is determinedin part by Hox genes.• How is apoptosis crucial in shaping the developingembryo? See p. 417• How do organ identity genes act in Arabidopsis?See pp. 418–419 and Figure 19.14• List the key attributes of a morphogen. How does theBicoid protein fit this definition? See pp. 420–421 andFigure 19.17• How is segment identity established in the Drosophilaembryo? Review pp. 421–422 and Figure 19.19(A)AntennaLeg where antennashould be(B)19.20 A Homeotic Mutation in Drosophila Mutations of the Hox genescause body parts to form on inappropriate segments. (A) A wild-type fruit fly. (B)An antennapedia mutant fruit fly. Mutations such as this reveal the normal role ofthe Antennapedia gene in determining segment function.
19.1 What Are the Processes of Development?• A multicellular organism begins its development as an embryo.A series of embryonic stages precedes the birth of an independentorganism. Review Figure 19.1, WEB ACTIVITY 19.1• The processes of development are determination, differentiation,morphogenesis, and growth.• Differential gene expression is responsible for the differencesbetween cell types. Cell fate is determined by environmentalfactors, such as the cell’s position in the embryo, as well as byintracellular influences. Review Figure 19.2• Determination is followed by differentiation, the actual changesin biochemistry, structure, and function that result in cells of differenttypes. Determination is a commitment; differentiation isthe realization of that commitment.19.2 Is Cell Differentiation Irreversible?• The zygote is totipotent; it is capable of forming every type ofcell in the adult body.• The ability to create clones from differentiated cells demonstratesthe principle of genomic equivalence. Review Figures19.3 and 19.4• Stem cells produce daughter cells that differentiate when providedwith appropriate intercellular signals. Some multipotentstem cells in the adult body can differentiate into a limitednumber of cell types to replace dead cells and maintain tissues.Review Figure 19.5• Embryonic stem cells are pluripotent and can be cultured in thelaboratory. Under suitable environmental conditions, these cellscan differentiate into any tissue type. Induced pluripotent stemcells have similar characteristics. This has led to technologies toreplace cells or tissues damaged by injury or disease. ReviewFigure 19.6, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 19.119.3 What Is the Role of Gene Expression in CellDifferentiation?• Differential gene expression results in cell differentiation.Transcription factors are especially important in regulating geneexpression during differentiation.• Complex interactions of many genes and their products areresponsible for differentiation during development. ReviewFigure 19.719.4 How Is Cell Fate Determined?• Cytoplasmic segregation—the unequal distribution of cytoplasmicdeterminants in the egg, zygote, or early embryo—canestablish polarity and lead to cell fate determination. ReviewFigures 19.8 and 19.9, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 19.2• Induction is a process by which embryonic animal tissues directthe development of neighboring cells and tissues by secretingchemical signals, called inducers. Review Figure 19.10• The induction of the vulva in the nematode Caenorhabditiselegans offers an example of how inducers act as molecularswitches to direct a cell down one of two differentiation paths.Review Figures 19.11 and 19.1219.5 How Does Gene Expression Determine PatternFormation?• Pattern formation is the process that results in the spatialorganization of a tissue or organism.• During development, selective elimination of cells by apoptosisresults from the expression of specific genes. Review Figure19.13• Sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels form in plants as a result ofcombinatorial interactions between transcription factors encodedby organ identity genes. Review Figure 19.14• The transcription factors encoded by floral organ identity genescontain an amino acid sequence called the MADS box that canbind to DNA.• Both plants and animals use positional information as a basisfor pattern formation. Positional information usually comes inthe form of a signal called a morphogen. Different concentrationsof the morphogen cause different effects. See Figures19.15 and 19.16• In the fruit fly D. melanogaster, a cascade of transcriptional activationsets up the axes of the embryo, the development of thesegments, and finally the determination of cell fate in each segment.The cascade involves the sequential expression of maternaleffect genes, gap genes, pair rule genes, segment polaritygenes, and Hox genes. Review Figures 19.18 and 19.19,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 19.3• Hox genes help to determine cell fate in the embryos of all animals.The homeobox is a DNA sequence found in Hox genesand other genes that code for transcription factors. Thesequence of amino acids encoded by the homeobox is calledthe homeodomain.