There is no Nobel Prize for agriculture as there is formedicine, the other branch of applied biology. Thisis not because plant biology is unimportant; it is becauseagriculture was not mentioned in the will of theprize’s benefactor, Alfred Nobel. But a Nobel prize wasawarded in this field: plant geneticist Norman Borlaugreceived the Peace Prize for research on wheat that hasbeen estimated to have saved a billion lives.In their constant search for ways to help farmers producemore food for a growing population, biologists havedeveloped crop plants whose physiology allows them toproduce more grain per plant (higher yield). However,when a plant produces a lot of seeds, the sheer weight ofthe load may cause the stem to bend over, or even break.This makes harvesting the seeds impossible: think of howhard it would be to get enough food for your family if youhad to pick up seeds on the ground, some of which hadalready sprouted.In 1945, the U.S. Army temporarily occupied Japan,which it had defeated in World War II. During the war,Japan, an island nation, was blockaded and could not importfood. How had they been able to grow enough grainto feed their people? The answer lay in the fields: theJapanese had bred genetic strains of rice and wheat withshort, strong stems that could bear a high yield of grainwithout bending or breaking. This innovation made animpression on an agricultural advisor who happened tobe among the first wave of U.S. occupiers, and seeds ofthe Japanese strains were sent back to the U.S.A decade later, Borlaug, who was working in Mexico atthe time, began genetic crosses ofwhat were known as semi-dwarf wheatplants from Japan with varieties thathad genes conferring rapid growth,adaptability to varying climates, andresistance to fungal diseases. The resultswere genetic strains of wheat thatgave record yields, first in Mexico andthen in India and Pakistan in the 1960s.At about the same time and using asimilar strategy, scientists in the Philippinesdeveloped semi-dwarf rice withequally spectacular results. People whohad lived on the edge of starvationnow produced enough food. Countriesthat had been relying on food aid fromSaving millions of lives by regulation of plant development37Norman Borlaug Seen here in a field ofsemi-dwarf wheat, plant geneticist NormanBorlaug carried out a program of geneticcrosses that led to high-yielding varietiesand saved millions from starvation.How Does Plant Development 37.1 Proceed?As Chapter 34 describes, plants are sessile organisms that mustseek out resources above and below the ground. Features thatmaximize the ability of plants to obtain the resources that theyneed to grow and reproduce include:• Meristems. Plants have permanent collections of stem cells(undifferentiated, constantly dividing cells) that allowthem to continue growing throughout their lifetimes (seeSection 34.4).• Post-embryonic organ formation. Unlike animals, plants caninitiate development of new organs such as leaves andflowers throughout their lifetimes.• Differential growth. Plants can allocate their resources so thatthey grow more of the organs that will benefit them most;for example, more leaves to harvest more sunlight or moreroots to obtain more water and nutrients.To use growth for maximal advantage, plants must continuouslymonitor their environment and redirect their growth asappropriate. Under normal circumstances a plant’s environmentis never completely stable. For example, the amount of lightchanges from day to night and from season to season. In addition,other plants are often vying for what light there is, andplants modulate their growth to compete with their neighborsfor this precious resource. As you will see in this chapter, severalmechanisms have evolved in plants to sense their environmentand trigger appropriate growth responses.The development of a plant—the series of progressive changesthat take place throughout its life—is regulated in many ways.Key factors involved in regulating plant growth and developmentare:• Environmental cues, such as day length• Receptors that allow a plant to sense environmental cues,such as photoreceptors that absorb light, and chemoreceptorsthat signal the presence of pathogens (see Chapter 39)• Hormones—chemical signals that mediate the effects of theenvironmental cues, including those sensed by receptors• The plant’s genomes, which encode regulatory proteinsand enzymes that catalyze the biochemical reactions ofdevelopmentWe will explore these regulatory mechanisms in more detaillater in this chapter. But first let’s look at the initial steps of plantdevelopment—from seed to seedling—and the types of internaland external cues that guide them.IN THIS CHAPTER we will give a brief overview of thelife of a flowering plant and its developmental stages. Wewill explore the nature of the environmental cues, photoreceptors,and hormones (including gibberellin) that regulateplant growth and development. We will also consider themultiple roles and interactions of these different elements.other countries were now growing so much grain thatthey could export the surplus. The development of thesesemi-dwarf grains began what was called the “GreenRevolution.”It is only recently that plant biologists have discoveredwhy semi-dwarf wheat and rice have short stems.In normal plants a hormone called gibberellin stimulatesstem elongation. But in the semi-dwarf plants, a mutationaffects the signal transduction mechanism for gibberellinso that the stem cells do not respond to it andgrowth is reduced. The lives of countless people havebeen saved by a disruption of hormone signaling.CHAPTER OUTLINE37.1 How Does Plant Development Proceed?37.2 What Do Gibberellins Do?37.3 What Does Auxin Do?37.4 What are the Effects of Cytokinins, Ethylene, andBrassinosteroids?37.5 How Do Photoreceptors Participate in PlantGrowth Regulation?Semi-Dwarf Rice The short variety of rice can give higheryields of grain than its taller counterpart (right). The differenceis that the latter can respond to the hormone gibberellin.In early development, the seed germinatesand forms a growing seedlingIf all developmental activity is suspended in a seed, even whenconditions appear to be suitable for its growth, the seed is saidto be dormant. Cells in dormant seeds do not divide, expand,or differentiate. For the embryo to begin developing, seed dormancymust be broken by one of the mechanisms discussedlater in this section.As the seed begins to germinate—to develop into aseedling—it takes up water. The growing embryo then obtainschemical building blocks—carbohydrate, amino acid, and lipidmonomers—for its development by digesting the polysaccharides,fats, and proteins stored in the seed. As we will see later,the embryos of some plant species secrete hormones that directthe mobilization of these reserves. Germination is completedwhen the radicle (embryonic root) emerges from the seed coat.The plant is then called a seedling.If the seed germinates underground, the new seedling mustelongate rapidly (in the right direction!) and cope with a periodof life in darkness or dim light. Aseries of photoreceptors directthis stage of development and prepare the seedling for growthin the light.Early shoot development varies among the flowering plants.Figure 37.1 shows the shoot development patterns of monocotsand eudicots.Environment cues can initiate seed germinationThe seeds of some plant species are capable of germinating assoon as they have matured. All they need for germination is water.But the seeds of many species are dormant at maturity. Seedstorage and dormancy may last for weeks, months, years, oreven centuries, as we saw in the opening story of Chapter 29:in 2005 a botanist was able to germinate a date palm seed recoveredfrom a 2000-year-old storage bin at Masada in Israel.The mechanisms that maintain seed dormancy are numerousand diverse, but three principal strategies dominate:• Exclusion of water or oxygen from the embryo by an impermeableseed coat• Mechanical restraint of the embryo by a tough seed coat• Chemical inhibition of germinationSeed dormancy must be broken before germination can begin.The dormancy of seeds with impermeable seed coats canbe broken if the coat is abraded as the seed tumbles across theground or through a creek bed or passes through the digestivetract of an animal. Cycles of freezing and thawing can also aidin making the seed coat permeable, as can soil microorganisms.Fire can end seed dormancy by melting waterproof wax in seedcoats, allowing water to reach the embryo. Fire can also releasemechanical restraint by cracking the seed coat. Leaching—the dissolving and diffusing away of water-soluble chemical inhibitorsby prolonged exposure to water—is another way inwhich dormancy can be broken.37.1 | HOW DOES PLANT DEVELOPMENT PROCEED? 773A coleoptile (acylindrical sheath ofcells) protects theearly shoot as itgrows to the soilsurface.1When the epicotylelongates, the firstfoliage leavesemerge.2 In other eudicots, such as peas,the shoot apex is pulled up asthe bent epicotyl elongates.The shoot apex of most eudicots 1is protected by the cotyledons asthe upper part of the plant ispulled above the soil surface bythe elongating hypocotyl.1After the shoot emerges from thesoil, it continues to elongate andthe leaves emerge.2 The cotyledons of peasremain in the soil.2(A) Monocot (corn) (B) Eudicot (bean) (C) Eudicot (pea)Primary rootColeoptileSeed coatSeedcoatYoungshootHypocotyl (epicotyl)CotyledonsFirstfoliage leaf Foliage leafHypocotylEpicotylPrimary Primary rootrootSecondaryroots37.1 Patterns of Early Shoot Development (A) In grasses and someother monocots, growing shoots are protected by a coleoptile until theyreach the soil surface. (B) In most eudicots, the growing point of the shootis protected within the cotyledons. (C) In some eudicots, the cotyledonsremain in the soil, and the apex is protected by the first true leaves.GO TO Web Activity 37.1 • Monocot Shoot DevelopmentAND Web Activity 37.2 • Eudicot Shoot DevelopmentyourBioPortal.comSeed dormancy affords adaptive advantagesWhat are the potential advantages of seed dormancy? Formany plant species, dormancy ensures survival during unfavorableconditions and results in germination when conditionsare more favorable for growth. To avoid germination in the drydays of late summer, for example, some seeds require exposureto a long cold period (winter) before they will germinate. Otherseeds will not germinate until a certain amount of time haspassed, regardless of how they are treated. Among other things,this strategy prevents germination while the seeds are still attachedto the parent plant. Plants whose seeds need fire tobreak dormancy avoid competition with other plants by germinatingonly where an area has been cleared by fire. Dormancyalso helps seeds to survive long-distance dispersal, allowingplants to colonize new territory.The dormancy of some seeds is broken by exposure to light.These seeds, which germinate only at or near the surface ofthe soil, are generally tiny and have few food reserves. Seedlingsfrom such seeds would not have enough food to reach the lightif they germinated deep in the soil. Conversely, the germinationof some other seeds is inhibited by light; these seeds germinateonly when deeply buried. Light-inhibited seeds are oftenlarge and well-stocked with nutrients.Dormancy may also increase the likelihood of a seed germinatingin a favorable ecological setting. Some cypress trees, forexample, grow in standing water, and their seeds germinate onlyif germination inhibitors are leached away by water (Figure 37.2).Seed germination begins with the uptake of waterSeeds begin to germinate when dormancy is broken and environmentalconditions are satisfactory. The first step in germinationis the uptake of water, called imbibition (from imbibe, “todrink in”). Adormant seed contains very little water; only 5 to15 percent of a seed’s weight is water compared to 80 to 95 percentfor most other plant parts. Seeds also contain polar macromolecules,such as cellulose and starch, that attract and bind polarwater molecules. Consequently a seed has a very negativewater potential (see Section 35.1), and will take up water if theseed coat is permeable. The force exerted by imbibing seeds,which expand several-fold in volume, demonstrates the magnitudeof seed water potential. Imbibing cocklebur seeds canexert a pressure of up to 1,000 atmospheres (approximately 100kilopascals or 15,000 pounds per square inch)!As a seed takes up water, it undergoes metabolic changes:enzymes are activated upon hydration, RNA and then proteinsare synthesized, the rate of cellular respiration increases, andother metabolic pathways are activated. In many seeds, there isno initiation of the cell division cycle during the early stagesof germination. Instead, growth results solely from the expansionof small preformed cells. DNA is synthesized only after theradicle begins to grow and ruptures the seed coat.The embryo must mobilize its reservesTo fuel its metabolic activities, the embryo must use the reservesof energy and raw materials stored in the seed. Until the youngplant is able to photosynthesize, it depends on these reserves,which are stored in the cotyledons (see Figure 37.1) or in theendosperm (the specialized nutritive tissue) of the seed. Theprincipal reserve of energy and carbon in many seeds, such aswheat, is starch. Other seeds, such as sunflower, store fats oroils. Usually the seed holds amino acid reserves in the form ofproteins, rather than as free amino acids.Before they can be used to support growth of the embryo,starch, lipids, and proteins must be broken down by enzymesinto monomers. Starch breakdown yields glucose for energymetabolism and for the synthesis of cellulose andother cell wall constituents. Digestion of storedproteins provides the amino acids the embryoneeds to synthesize its own proteins. Lipids arebroken down into glycerol and fatty acids, bothof which can be metabolized for energy. Glyceroland fatty acids can also be converted to glucose,which permits fat-storing plants to make all thebuilding blocks they need for growth.Several hormones and photoreceptorshelp regulate plant growthThis survey of the early stages of plant developmentillustrates the many internal and externalcues that influence plant growth. A plant’s responsesto these cues are initiated and maintainedby two types of regulators: hormones andphotoreceptors.Hormones are regulatory molecules that act atvery low concentrations at sites often distant fromwhere they are produced. Unlike animals, whichusually produce each hormone in specific cells774 CHAPTER 37 | REGULATION OF PLANT GROWTH37.2 Breaking dormancy The seeds of bald cypress, a tree adapted to moist or wetenvironments, germinate only after being leached by water, which increases the chancesthat they will germinate in a location suitable for their growth.within the body, plants produce hormones in many types of cells.Each plant hormone plays multiple regulatory roles, affectingseveral different aspects of plant development (Table 37.1). Interactionsamong these hormones can be complex. Several hormonesregulate plant growth from seedling to adult. Other hormonesare involved in the plant’s defenses against herbivores andmicroorganisms (discussed in Chapter 39).Photoreceptors, like hormones, are involved in many developmentalprocesses in plants. However, unlike plant hormones,which are small molecules, plant photoreceptors consist of pigments(molecules that absorb light) associated with proteins.Light acts directly on photoreceptors, which in turn regulate developmentalprocesses that need to be responsive to light, suchas the many changes that occur as a young seedling germinatesand emerges from the soil.Signal transduction pathways are involved in all stagesof plant developmentPlants, like other organisms, make extensive use of signal transductionpathways, sequences of biochemical reactions by whicha cell generates a response to a stimulus (see Chapter 7). Cellsignaling in plant development generally involves a receptor(for a hormone or for light) and a signal transduction pathway,and concludes with a cellular response that is relevant todevelopment. Protein kinase cascades often amplify responsesto signals in plants, as they do in other organisms (see Figure7.12). We will look at several plant signal transduction pathwaysin more detail in the remaining sections of this chapter.No matter what cues regulate development, the plant’sgenome ultimately determines the limits of plant development.The genome encodes the master plan,but its interpretation depends on conditionsin the environment. For severaldecades biologists focused on identifyingthe hormones and photoreceptorsthat control plant development, but recentadvances in molecular geneticshave now made it possible to explorethe underlying processes that regulatedevelopment, such as signal transductionpathways.Studies of Arabidopsis thalianahave increased our understandingof plant signal transductionMany recent advances in understandingplant growth and developmenthave come from work with Arabidopsisthaliana, a weed in the mustard family.This plant is used as a model organismby researchers because its body andseeds are tiny, its nuclear genome is unusuallysmall for a flowering plant (125million base pairs), and it flowers andforms many seeds (up to 10,000 perplant) within weeks of germination.Furthermore, its genomes (nuclear,plastid, and mitochondrial) are fully sequenced,so researchers have an accountingof all genes in the plant.In Chapter 19, we describe how geneticscan be used to identify the stepsalong a developmental pathway. Youwill recall the theme of these experiments:if a mutation for a certain biochemicalprocess disrupts a developmentalevent, then the biochemical processmust be essential for that developmentalevent. Similarly, genetics can be usedto dissect pathways for receptor activationand signal transduction in37.1 | HOW DOES PLANT DEVELOPMENT PROCEED? 775TABLE 37.1Plant Growth HormonesHORMONE STRUCTURE TYPICAL ACTIVITIESAbscisic acid* Maintains seed dormancy;closes stomataAuxins (e.g., Promote stem elongation, adventitiousindole-3-acetic root initiation, and fruit growth;acid) inhibit axillary bud outgrowth, leafabscission, and root elongationBrassinosteroids Promote stem and pollen tubeelongation; promote vascular tissuedifferentiationCytokinins Inhibit leaf senescence; promote celldivision and axillary bud outgrowth;affect root growthEthylene Promotes fruit ripening and leafabscission; inhibits stem elongationand gravitropismGibberellins Promote seed germination, stemgrowth, and fruit development; breakwinter dormancy; mobilize nutrientreserves in grass seeds*See Chapter 38.NHOOHN NHNC CHNHN CH3CH2OHCH2CH3COCO2HOHH CH2HOHOHOOOHOHCHHCHHOOHH3CCH3CH3 COOHCH3plants: if proper signaling does not occur in a mutantstrain, the mutant gene must be involved in the signaltransduction process. Mapping the mutant gene andcharacterizing its molecular phenotype is a starting pointfor understanding the signaling pathway.One technique for identifying genes involved in aplant signal transduction pathway is illustrated in Figure37.3. Called a genetic screen, the process involvescreating a collection of mutants and identifying those individualsthat are likely to have a defect in the pathwaybeing studied. Genes can be randomly mutated intwo ways:• Insertion of a transposon (see Section 17.2)• Point mutation by a chemical mutagen, usuallyethyl methane sulfonateIn both cases, a large number of mutated plants are thenexamined for a specific phenotype, usually a characteristicthat is easy to see or measure (e.g., height). Thegrowth conditions and plant characteristics used for thescreen are carefully chosen to maximize the chances thatthe selected plants will have a defect in the pathway ofinterest. Once mutant plants have been selected, theirgenotypes and phenotypes are compared to those ofwild-type plants. Arabidopsis mutants with altered developmentalpatterns have provided a wealth of new informationabout the hormones present in plants and themechanisms of hormone and photoreceptor action.37.1 RECAPPlant development is under the control of externalcues in the environment as well as internalhormones. In both cases, signal transductionpathways regulate plant development.Genetic screens have been useful in describingsignal transduction pathways in the modelplant Arabidopsis thaliana. Seed dormancy oftenprecedes seed germination.• Describe how monocots and eudicots differ inearly development. See p. 773 and Figure 37.1• Under what circumstances is seed dormancyadvantageous? See p. 774• What fuels the metabolic activities of a youngplant embryo before it is able to commencephotosynthesis? See p. 774• What is a genetic screen and how can it be usedto analyze the regulation of plant development?See p. 776 and Figure 37.3You have now seen the early stages of plant development andgrowth, and how the environment influences these processes.Plant hormones are central to the internal regulation of development,a subject to which we now turn. We will describe howhormones were discovered and what physiological effects theyhave on plants. We will emphasize how genetic screens andother methods have led to a deeper molecular understandingof the action of plant hormones.37.2 What Do Gibberellins Do?In Asia, rice farmers have known about “foolish seedling disease”(bakanae in Japanese) for centuries. Seedlings affected bythis disease grow more rapidly than their healthy neighbors,but this rapid growth gives rise to tall, spindly plants that diebefore producing rice grains, having expended most of their energyon vegetative growth. At first, the disease was attributedto an inherited defect in the plants themselves. But by the twentiethcentury it was clear that it is caused by infection with the776 CHAPTER 37 | REGULATION OF PLANT GROWTHTOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE37.3 A Genetic ScreenGenetics of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana can be used to identify thesteps of a signal transduction pathway. If a mutant strain does not respondto a hormone (in this case, ethylene), the corresponding wild-type gene mustbe essential for the pathway (in this case, ethylene response). This methodhas been instrumental to scientists in understanding plant growth regulation.1 A phenotype of interest is chosen,in this case response to ethylene.Growth of wild-type seedlings inthe dark is inhibited by ethylene (right).3 The mutated plants are screenedafter growing them in the dark andexposing them to ethylene. Onemutant shows insensitivity to thehormone (uninhibited growth).Seeds are treated with amutagen and then planted.2The gene involved in ethylene signalingis mapped, cloned, and studied.4No ethyleneaddedMany seedssuspended inliquid in atest tubeGene required for ethylene responseEthyleneaddedEthyleneinsensitivemutantEthylene sensitive(wild-type) plantsascomycete fungus Gibberella fujikuroi. How does the infectioncause the disease?The mystery of foolish seedling disease was solved in 1925by Japanese biologist Eiichi Kurosawa. He hypothesized thatthe fungus must release a molecule that overstimulates plantgrowth. To isolate it, he grew the fungus in a liquid mediumand then removed the fungus from the medium by filtration.He heated the filtered medium to kill any remaining fungus,but found that the resulting heat-treated filtrate was still capableof inducing rapid growth in rice seedlings. Medium that hadnever contained the fungus did not have this effect. This experimentestablished that G. fujikuroi produces a growth-promotingchemical substance, which Kurosawa called a gibberellin.Soon, gibberellin was isolated and its chemical nature described(see Table 37.1).Gibberellins are plant hormonesOnce externally applied gibberellin was shown to affect riceplant growth, a question arose: does a plant make the same or similarmolecules to regulate its own growth? Biologists used a geneticapproach to answer this question, by studying mutant strainsof corn and tomato that were dwarfs—they had abnormallyshort stems. The stems hardly grew, even though other parts ofthe plants appeared normal. Because this was the exact oppositeof the effect of too much gibberellin (in the fungus-infectedrice plants), the biologists hypothesized that the dwarf mutantshad too little gibberellin. This hypothesis was tested in two ways:• Gibberellin was applied to the dwarf plants. As a result,they grew to normal height (Figure 37.4).• The levels of gibberellin were measured in wild-type anddwarf plants, and the wild-type plants had much moregibberellin.These experiments clearly showed that gibberellin is made byplants and acts to stimulate stem elongation. Numerous chemicallyrelated gibberellins exist, all belonging to a family of commonplant metabolites called diterpenoids.Gibberellins have many effects on plant growthand developmentThe functions of gibberellins can be inferred from the effects ofexperimentally decreasing gibberellins or blocking their actionat various points in plant development. Such experimentsreveal that gibberellins have multiple roles in regulating plantgrowth.FRUIT GROWTH Gibberellins and other hormones regulate thegrowth of fruits. Grapevines that produce seedless grapes developsmaller fruit than varieties that produce seed-bearinggrapes. Biologists wanting to explain this phenomenon removedseeds from immature seeded grapes and found thatthis prevented normal fruit growth, suggesting that the seedsare sources of a growth regulator. Biochemical studies showedthat developing seeds produce gibberellins, which diffuse outinto the immature fruit tissue. Spraying young seedless grapeswith a gibberellin solution causes them to grow as large asseeded ones, and this is now a standard commercial practice(Figure 37.5).MOBILIZATION OF SEED RESERVES Early in seed germinationhydrolytic enzymes are produced to break down stored reservesof starch, proteins, and lipids. Just after imbibition ingerminating seeds of barley and other cereals, the embryosecretes gibberellins. The hormones diffuse through the endospermto a surrounding tissue called the aleurone layer,which lies underneath the seed coat. The gibberellins triggera cascade of events in the aleurone layer, causing it to syn-37.2 | WHAT DO GIBBERELLINS DO? 777This untreated controlplant remained a dwarf.22 days after beingsprayed with a dilutegibberellin solution, thisplant reached the sizeof a nondwarf plant.37.4 The Effect of Gibberellins on Dwarf Plants Both of the dwarftomato plants in this photograph were the same size when the one onthe right was treated with gibberellins.37.5 Gibberellin and Fruit Growth Spraying developing seedlessgrapes with gibberellins (right) increases their size compared tountreated fruit (left).thesize and secrete enzymes that digest proteins and starchstored in the endosperm (Figure 37.6). These observationshave practical importance: in the beer brewing industry, gibberellinsare used to enhance the “malting” (germination) ofbarley and the breakdown of its endosperm, producing sugarthat is fermented to alcohol.STEM ELONGATION The effects of gibberellins on wild-typeplants are not as dramatic as those seen on dwarf plants. However,gibberellins are indeed active in wild-type plants, becauseinhibitors of gibberellin synthesis cause a reduction in stemelongation. Such inhibitors can be put to practical uses. For example,plants such as chrysanthemums that are grown in greenhousestend to get too tall; but leggy plants, unfortunately, donot appeal to consumers. Flower growers thus spray such plantswith gibberellin synthesis inhibitors to control their height.Some wheat crops are similarly sprayed to keep them short, sothey do not fall over when they produce grain—this is essentiallya chemically induced version of the semi-dwarf geneticvarieties described in the opening story of this chapter. In someplants, such as cabbage, the normal growth habit is to be a squat,leafy head near the ground. When environmental signals areright, however, the plant “bolts,” quickly producing a tall stemwith flowers. This response is mediated by gibberellins.Gibberellins act by initiating the breakdown oftranscriptional repressorsThe molecular mechanisms underlying gibberellin action havebeen worked out with the help of genetic screens. Biologistsstarted by identifying mutant plants whose growth and developmentare insensitive to gibberellins; that is, they are not affectedby added gibberellins. Several such mutants have been found—both natural mutant strains and induced mutants selected fromgenetic screens—and they fall into two general categories:• Excessively tall plants. These plants resemble wild-type plantsgiven an excess of gibberellin, and get no taller when givenextra gibberellin. They are also tall even when treated withinhibitors of gibberellin synthesis. Their gibberellin responseis always “on,” even in the absence of the hormone. It is presumedthat the normal allele for the mutant gene codes foran inhibitor of the gibberellin signal transduction pathway.In wild-type plants, the pathway is “off” but in the mutantplants, the pathway is “on” and the plant grows tall.• Dwarf plants. These plants resemble dwarf tomato or maizeplants that are deficient in gibberellin synthesis, but they donot respond to added gibberellin. In these mutants the gibberellinresponse is always “off,” regardless of the presenceof the hormone.The two types of mutations described above affect the sameprotein, which turns out to be a repressor of a transcription factorthat stimulates the expression of growth-promoting genes.The repressor protein has two important domains, explaininghow mutations in the same protein can have seemingly oppositeeffects:• One region of the repressor protein binds to the transcriptioncomplex to inhibit transcription. This is the region mutated inthe excessively tall plants: the growth-promoting genes arealways “on” because the repressor does not bind to thetranscription complex.• Another part of the repressor protein causes it to be removed fromthe transcription complex. This is the region mutated in the778 CHAPTER 37 | REGULATION OF PLANT GROWTH1 The embryo 2 4imbibes H2Oand swells.The embryo secretes gibberellinsthat diffuse into the aleurone layer,where they trigger the digestion ofproteins to amino acids.3 Digestive enzymes are synthesizedfrom the amino acids. These enzymes,along with other enzymes from thealeurone, move into the endosperm.The enzymes digest the proteinsand starch in the endosperm,releasing monomers from whichthe embryo synthesizes new cells.Fruit andseed coatGibberellins EnzymesAleuronelayerEndosperm(with storedreserves)EmbryoNutrients(monomers)H2O37.6 Embryos Mobilize Their Reserves During seed germination incereal grasses, gibberellins trigger a cascade of events that result in theconversion of starch and protein reserves into monomers that can beused by the developing embryo.GO TO Web Activity 37.3 • Events of Seed GerminationyourBioPortal.comdwarf plants: the growth-promoting genes are always “off”because the repressor is always bound to the complex.How does gibberellin act in this system? Gibberellin acts by removingthe repressor from the transcription complex (Figure 37.7).It does this by binding to a receptor protein, which in turn bindsto the repressor. Binding of the gibberellin–receptor complexstimulates poly-ubiquitination of the repressor, targeting it forbreakdown in the proteasome (see Figure 16.24). The gibberellinreceptor contains a region called an F-box that facilitates protein–protein interactions necessary for protein breakdown.While animal genomes have few F-box containing proteins,plant genomes have hundreds, an indication that this type ofgene regulation is common in plants. As you will see, this regulatorymechanism underlies the effects of another importantplant hormone: auxin.37.2 RECAPGibberellins are plant hormones that affect stemgrowth, fruit size, seed germination, and many otheraspects of plant development; the effects vary fromspecies to species.• How were gibberellins shown to be plant hormones?See p. 777• How do gibberellins contribute to the germination ofbarley seeds? See Figure 37.6• Explain how gibberellins work at the molecular level.See pp. 778–779 and Figure 37.7Most other hormones, like the gibberellins, have multiple effectswithin the plant, and they often interact with one anotherto regulate developmental processes. In controlling stem elongation,for example, gibberellins interact with another hormone,auxin, to which we now turn.37.3 What Does Auxin Do?Auxin was discovered as a result of investigations into phototropism,the growth of plants toward light (as in shoots) or awayfrom it (as in roots). Ever the curious biologist, Charles Darwinwanted to know how plants bend toward a source of light.In 1880, he and his son Francis published the results of their experimentson what part of a plant senses light.The Darwins worked with canary grass (Phalaris canariensis)seedlings grown in the dark. A young grass seedling has acoleoptile—a cylindrical sheath a few cells thick that protectsthe delicate shoot as it pushes through the soil (see Figure37.1A). When the seedling breaks through the soil surface, thecoleoptile soon stops growing, and the shoot emerges unharmed.The coleoptiles of grasses are phototropic—they growtoward the light.To find the light-receptive region of the coleoptile, the Darwins“blindfolded” the coleoptiles of dark-grown canary grassseedlings in various places, and then illuminated them from oneside (Figure 37.8). The coleoptile grew toward the light wheneverits tip was exposed. If the top millimeter or more of thecoleoptile was covered, however, the coleoptile showed no phototropicresponse. Thus, the Darwins were able to conclude thatthe tip contains the photoreceptor that responds to light. Theactual bending toward the light, however, takes place in a growingregion a few millimeters below the tip. Therefore, the Darwinsreasoned, some type of signal must travel from the tip of thecoleoptile to the growing region. Later, others demonstrated thatthis signal is a chemical substance by showing that it can movethrough certain permeable materials, such as gelatin, but notthrough impermeable materials, such as a metal sheet.37.3 | WHAT DOES AUXIN DO? 7791 In the absence of GA, arepressor inhibits transcriptionof growth-stimulating genes.2 GA binds to a receptorprotein and the complexenters the nucleus.4 Binding stimulatesthe addition ofubiquitin to therepressor.5 The repressor isbroken down in theproteasome. Growthstimulatinggenes arenow transcribed.3 The GA–receptorcomplex binds tothe repressor.CytoplasmNucleusNuclearenvelopeDNAmRNATranscriptionProteasomeGibberellin (GA)ReceptorRepressorTranscription factorUbiquitin37.7 How Gibberellin Works Gibberellin acts to stimulate gene transcriptionby inactivating a repressor protein, a common mechanism forplant hormone action.GO TO Animated Tutorial 37.1 • TropismsyourBioPortal.com780 CHAPTER 37 | REGULATION OF PLANT GROWTHCONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE37.9 Went’s ExperimentPrevious experiments had indicated that the tip of a coleoptileproduces a growth-inducing substance. Went verified thisconclusion by placing agar blocks containing the substancecontained within coleoptile tips on one side of a decapitatedcoleoptile. In the absence of light, the coleoptile bent awayfrom the side with the substance. The substance was lateridentified as auxin.HYPOTHESIS A growth hormone can be isolated from acoleoptile tip.A growth hormone diffused from the tip intothe agar, and from the agar into another plant.It had an effect on the growth of the plantsimilar to that of a coleoptile tip.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHOD RESULTS1 Remove thecoleoptile tip andplace on agar.2 Place the agar onone edge of anotherdecapitated coleoptile.3 The coleoptilecurves away fromthe agar as it grows.1 For the control,remove thecoleoptile tip.2 Place a plain agarblock on one edgeof the coleoptile.3 The coleoptiledoes notcurve.OatseedlingOatseedlingExperimentControlGO TO Animated Tutorial 37.2 • Went’s ExperimentyourBioPortal.comCONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE37.8 The Darwins’ Phototropism ExperimentCharles Darwin and his son Francis wanted to know howplants bend toward the light. They grew canary grass seedlings(coleoptiles) in the dark. To discover what part of the coleoptileresponds to light, they covered up ("blindfolded") differentregions of each coleoptile and then exposed the seedlings tolight from one side. The Darwins discovered that the tip of theseedling senses the light and that growth occurs below the tip.Their observations led them to hypothesize the existence of agrowth-promoting signal produced by the coleoptile tip.HYPOTHESIS Only part of the coleoptile senses the light thattriggers phototropism.The part of the coleoptile that senses light isin the tip, and it sends a signal from the tipto the growing region.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTS3 Coleoptiles responded to lightonly when the tip was exposed.1 Grow seedlingsin the dark.2 “Blindfold” the seedlings in different placesand expose to light on one side.PrimaryrootColeoptileBlindfoldLightIn the 1920s, the Dutch botanist Frits Went followed up on theDarwins’ experiment. He removed coleoptile tips and placedtheir cut surfaces on a block of agar. Then he placed pieces ofthat agar on decapitated coleoptiles—positioned to cover onlyone side (Figure 37.9). As they grew, the coleoptiles curved awayfrom the side with the agar, showing that the agar contained asubstance that stimulated elongation of cells on that side of thecoleoptile. This substance had diffused into the agar block fromthe isolated coleoptile tips. Eventually, the hormone indole-3-acetic acid (see Table 37.1) was isolated from similar agar blocksand was nicknamed auxin (from the Latin “to increase”).Auxin transport is polar and requires carrier proteinsThe experiments we have just described showed that in coleoptilesauxin movement is strictly polar—that is, it is unidirectionalalong a line from apex to base. Auxin transport is polar in otherorgans as well. For example, in a leaf petiole, which connectsthe leaf blade to the stem, auxin moves from the leaf blade endtoward the stem. In roots, auxin moves unidirectionally towardthe root tip. How does this directional transport occur?Polar transport depends on four biochemical conditions thatshould be familiar from earlier chapters (Figure 37.10):• Diffusion across a plasma membrane. Polar molecules diffuseacross the plasma membrane less readily than nonpolarmolecules.• Membrane protein asymmetry. Active transport carriers forauxin are located only at the basal (bottom) end of theplasma membrane.• Proton pumping/chemiosmosis. An ATP-driven proton pumpremoves H+ from the cell, thereby increasing the intracellularpH and decreasing the pH in the cell wall. Protonpumping also sets up an electrochemical gradient, with potentialenergy to drive the transport of auxin by the carriersnoted above.• The ionization of a weak acid. Indole-3-acetic acid (which, recall,is the chemical name for auxin; see Table 37.1) is a weak acid:A– + H+~HAWhen the pH is low, the increased H+ concentration drives thisreaction to the right and HA (non-ionized auxin) is the predominantform. When the pH is higher, there is more A– (ionizedauxin).Auxin transport mediates responses to light and gravityWhile polar auxin transport distributes the hormone along thelongitudinal axis of the plant, lateral (side-to-side) redistributionof auxin is responsible for plant movements. This redistributionis carried out by auxin carrier proteins that move fromthe base of the cell to one side; because of this, auxin exits thecell only on that side of the cell, rather than at the base, andmoves sideways within the tissue.When light strikes a grass coleoptile on one side, auxin at thetip moves laterally toward the shaded side. The asymmetry thusestablished is maintained as polar transport moves auxin downthe coleoptile, so that in the growing region below, the auxinconcentration is highest on the shaded side. Cell elongation isthus speeded up on that side, causing the coleoptile to bend towardthe light (phototropism; Figure 37.11A). If you have noticeda houseplant bending toward a window, you have observedphototropism.Light is not the only signal that can cause redistribution ofauxin. Auxin moves to the lower side of a shoot that has beentipped sideways, causing more rapid growth in the lower sideand, hence, an upward bending of the shoot. Such growth in adirection determined by gravity is called gravitropism (Figure37.11B). The upward gravitropic response of shoots is definedas negative gravitropism; that of roots, which bend downward, ispositive gravitropism.How does a plant cell sense light and gravity and respondwith an asymmetric distribution of auxin? Different mechanismshave been proposed:• The phototropic response. As you will see later in the chapter,plants have a membrane receptor called phototropin thatabsorbs blue light. This receptor was discovered in a geneticscreen in Arabidopsis for mutant plants that failed tobend toward light. When the receptor is activated, a signaltransduction pathway results in redistribution of auxintransport carriers so that the hormone is transported to thecells on the shaded side. This results in bending towardlight (see Figure 37.11).• The gravitropic response. Some types of plant cells containstarch that is stored in large plastids called amyloplasts.These plastids tend to settle on the downward side of a cell37.3 | WHAT DOES AUXIN DO? 78121 Auxin enters the cellby passive diffusion asan uncharged acid (HA).3 A– predominates inthe cytosol, whichhas a neutral pH.Proton pumps in theplasma membranemaintain the cell wallat an acidic pH andset up a chemiosmoticgradient to drive thetransport of HA.4 A– exits the cell viaauxin anion effluxcarriers that areconcentrated at thebasal end of each cell.5 In the cell wall, thelower pH causes A–to become HA,which diffuses intothe next cell.PlasmamembraneCell wall(pH 5)A–A–A–HAHAATP ATPDirection of transportHA(pH 7)H+ H+CytosolATPH+37.10 Polar Transport of Auxin Proton pumps set up a chemiosmoticgradient directing A– toward the basally placed auxin activetransport carriers, leading to a net movement of auxin in a basal direction.in response to gravity. How gravity-induced plastid movementis sensed is not well understood, but it may bethrough disturbance of endoplasmic reticulum membraneson the downward side of the cell. This in turn triggersauxin transport to the bottom side of the root or shoot,which causes bending in the appropriate direction.Auxin affects plant growth in several waysLike the gibberellins, auxin has many roles in plant development.It affects the vegetative and reproductive growth of plantsin a number of ways.ROOT INITIATION Cuttings from the shoots of some plants canproduce roots and develop into entire new plants. For this to occur,certain undifferentiated cells in the interior of the shoot, originallydestined to function only in food storage, must set off ona new mission: they must change their cell fate and become organizedinto the apical meristem of a new root. These changesare similar to those that take place in the pericycle of a root whena lateral root forms (see Figure 34.13A). Shoot cuttings of manyspecies can be made to develop roots by dipping the cut surfacesinto an auxin solution. These observations suggest that in an intactplant the plant’s own auxin plays a role in the initiation oflateral roots. Commercial preparations that enhance the rootingof plant cuttings typically contain synthetic auxins.LEAF ABSCISSION In contrast to its stimulatory effect on root initiation,auxin inhibits the detachment of old leaves from stems.This detachment process, called abscission, is the cause of autumnleaf fall. Most leaves consist of a blade and a petiole thatattaches the blade to the stem. Abscission results from the breakdownof a specific part of the petiole, the abscission zone (Figure37.12). If the blade of a leaf is cut off, the petiole falls fromthe plant more rapidly than if the leaf had remained intact. Ifthe cut surface is treated with an auxin solution, however, thepetiole remains attached to the plant, often longer than an intactleaf would have. The timing of leaf abscission in nature appearsto be determined in part by a decrease in the movementthrough the petiole of auxin produced in the blade.APICAL DOMINANCE Auxin helps maintain apical dominance,a phenomenon in which apical buds inhibit the growth of axillarybuds (see Figure 34.1), resulting in the growth of a singlemain stem with minimal branching. A diffusion gradient ofauxin from the apical tip of the shoot down the stem results inlower branches receiving less auxin and therefore branchingmore. The effect of the auxin gradient is apparent in conifers:next time you see a decorated tree during the winter holidays,think of auxin and apical dominance.AuxinLowHigh782 CHAPTER 37 | REGULATION OF PLANT GROWTH1 Auxin moves to theshaded side withinthe tip.1 Auxin moves downwardin response togravitational stimulus.2 A higher auxin concentrationcauses more rapid growth on thelower side. The tip curves upward.2 The redistributedauxin moves downthe coleoptile.3 A higher auxinconcentration causesmore rapid growth on theshaded side. The tipcurves toward the light.Coleoptile(A) Phototropism(B) Negative gravitropism of shootLightAuxin37.11 Plants Respond to Light and Gravity (A) Phototropism and (B)gravitropism occur in shoot apices in response to a redistribution of auxin.Abscission zoneStem PetioleLeaf bladePetiole37.12 Changes Occur when a Leaf Is About to FallThe breakdown of cells in the abscission zone of the petiole causesthe leaf to fall.Apical dominance can be demonstrated by an experimentwith a young seedling. If the plant remains intact, the stem elongatesand the axillary buds remain inactive. Removal of the apicalbud—the major site of auxin production—results in growthof the axillary buds. If the cut surface of the stem is treated withauxin, however, the axillary buds do not grow. The apical budsof branches also exert apical dominance: the axillary buds onthe branch are inactive unless the apex of the branch is removed.That is why gardeners prune shrubs to encourage branching.In the experiments on leaves and stems just discussed, removalof a particular part of the plant elicits a response—abscissionor loss of apical dominance—and that response is preventedby treatment with auxin. These results are consistentwith other data showing that the excised part of the leaf or stemis an auxin source and that auxin in the intact plant delays theabscission of leaves and helps maintain apical dominance.FRUIT DEVELOPMENT Fruit development normally depends onprior fertilization of the ovule (egg), but in many species treatmentof an unfertilized ovary with auxin or gibberellins causesparthenocarpy—fruit formation without fertilization. Parthenocarpicfruits form spontaneously in some cultivated varietiesof plants, including seedless grapes, bananas, and somecucumbers.CELL EXPANSION The expansion of plant cells is what causesplant growth. Because the plant cell wall normally prevents expansionof the protoplast (see Section 35.1), the cell wall playsa key role in controlling the rate and direction of plant cellgrowth. Auxin acts on cell walls to regulate this process.The expansion of a plant cell is driven primarily by the uptakeof water, which enters the cytoplasm of the cell and accumulatesin its central vacuole (see Section 35.1). Growth of thevacuole accounts for most of the increase in volume of a growingcell, and the vacuole often makes up more than 90 percentof the volume of a mature cell. As the vacuole expands, it pressesthe cytoplasm against the cell wall, and the wall resists this force(the basis of turgor pressure). The cell wall is an extensivelycross-linked network of polysaccharides and proteins, dominatedby cellulose fibrils (see Figure 34.5). If the cell is to expand,some adjustments must be made in the wall structure to allowthe wall to “give” under turgor pressure. Think of a balloon (thecell surrounded by a membrane) inside a box (the cell wall). Howdoes the cell wall “box” loosen to allow expansion?The acid growth hypothesis offers a possible explanation forauxin-induced cell expansion (Figure 37.13). The hypothesisholds that protons (H+) are pumped from the cytoplasm into thecell wall, lowering the pH of the wall and activating enzymescalled expansins that catalyze changes in the cell wall structuresuch that the polysaccharides adhere to each otherless strongly. This loosens the cell wall, making iteasier to stretch as the cell expands. Auxin is believedto have two roles in this process: to increasethe synthesis of the proton pumps, and to guidetheir insertion into the plasma membrane. Auxinmay also increase the activity of proton pump proteinsalready in the plasma membrane. Severallines of evidence support the acid growth hypothesis.For example, adding acid to the cell wall tolower the pH stimulates cell expansion even in theabsence of auxin. Conversely, when a buffer is usedto prevent the wall from becoming more acidic,auxin-induced cell expansion is blocked. Themodel works more or less well depending onspecies; in some plants auxin stimulates secretionof new cell wall components quickly enough to accountfor even rapid changes in growth rate.37.3 | WHAT DOES AUXIN DO? 783Proton1 pumpAuxin entersthe cell...2 ...and stimulatesexpression of theproton pump gene.4 The pH ofthe cell wall isreduced (acidified).6 The cell wall isloosened to allowcell expansion.5 Reduced pH activatesexpansins, which disruptinteractions between cellwall polymers.3 Auxin acts with another proteinto stabilize the proton pumpand direct insertion of the pumpinto the plasma membrane.PlasmamembraneCell wallAuxinNucleusDNAmRNACytoplasm CellulosemicrofibrilsCross-linkingpolymersExpansinATPH+H+H+ H+H+H+H+ H+H+H+H+H+H+H+H+H+H+H+H+37.13 How Auxin Affects the Cell Wall The plant cellwall is an extensive network of cross-linked polymers. Auxininduces wall loosening by activating a proton pump thatreduces pH in the cell wall.GO TO Animated Tutorial 37.3 • Auxin Affects Cell WallsyourBioPortal.com784 CHAPTER 37 | REGULATION OF PLANT GROWTHAt the molecular level, auxin and gibberellinsact similarlyGiven that auxin induces so many different physiological responsesin plants, biologists expected that the hormone mightact through several different signal transduction pathways.However, genetic screens have revealed a single, relatively simplemechanism that accounts for many of auxin’s actions. Thismechanism is similar to that involved in the action of gibberellins(see Figure 37.7).Like gibberellin, auxin acts by countering the inhibition ofgenes involved in the cellular response to the hormone. In the absenceof auxin, a repressor blocks transcription of these genes.Auxin binds to a receptor, which then binds to the repressor. Thisstimulates addition of ubiquitin to the repressor and causes it tobe degraded by the proteasome (Figure 37.14), thereby allowingtranscription. The molecular response takes longer, and islonger-lasting than the rapid acid growth response in the cell wall.37.3 RECAPAuxin regulates stem elongation (cell expansion) andmediates phototropism and gravitropism; it alsoplays roles in apical dominance, leaf abscission, androot initiation. The acid growth hypothesis explainsauxin-induced cell wall loosening. Similar molecularmechanisms explain the effects of auxin and gibberellinon gene expression.• What is the evidence for polar transport of auxin andhow does it occur? See pp. 779–780 and Figures 37.9and 37.10• Explain why, even though auxin moves away from thelighted side of a coleoptile tip, the coleoptile bends towardthe light. See p. 781 and Figure 37.11• How does auxin cause cell wall loosening? See p. 783and Figure 37.13• What are the similarities between the signal transductionpathways for auxin and gibberellin? See p. 784and Figures 37.7 and 37.14How can a single hormone, such as auxin or a gibberellin, haveso many effects? As we have seen, a single signal transductionpathway may affect more than one gene. We learn about otherimportant plant hormones in the next section, and they, too,have multiple effects.What Are the Effects of Cytokinins, 37.4 Ethylene, and Brassinosteroids?Like animal cells, plant cells differentiate after they form fromundifferentiated stem cells (called meristem cells in plants). Butunlike animal cells, which generally do not divide after differentiation,plant cells retain the ability to divide. For example, inleaf abscission (see Figure 37.12) differentiated parenchyma cellsin the petiole resume division, forming a specialized, weak layerof cells. Also, cells of the phloem and cortex can resume divisionand form secondary meristems. What stimulates these cellsto divide? An answer came from studies of cells isolated fromthe plant and cultured in the laboratory.Cytokinins are active from seed to senescenceLike bacteria and yeast, plant cells such as parenchyma cells canbe grown in a liquid or solidified growth medium containingsugars and salts. The cells will divide continuously until theyrun out of nutrients. In the early days of plant cell culturing,scientists experimented with many supplements to determinethe optimal chemical environment for growth. The best supplementwas coconut milk, the fluid that surrounds the developingembryo in coconut fruit. Investigators suspected that a moleculein the fluid must stimulate plant cell division.1 Auxin binds toits receptor.2 The auxin–receptorcomplex catalyzesubiquitin additionto the repressor.3 The repressor isdegraded in theproteasome.A repressor blockstranscription.Nucleus(A) Repression: Auxin absentDNA PromoterTranscription isinhibitedTranscriptionfactorRepressorReceptorGenes that respond to auxinNuclearenvelope(B) Activation: Auxin presentDNATranscriptionfactorRepressorAuxinReceptormRNATranscription isactivatedProteasomeCytoplasmCytoplasm37.14 Signal Transduction Pathway for Auxin As with gibberellins(see Figure 37.7), the auxin response involves the release from inhibitionof transcription.Aclue to the identity of the molecule came when Folke Skoogat the University of Wisconsin tested various pure substancesthat might substitute for coconut milk. DNA was among thesubstances tested, and it did not work; however, heating DNAat high pressure in an autoclave produced a mixture thatstrongly promoted plant cell division. A derivative of adeninecalled kinetin was identified as the active ingredient. Because itstimulated cell division (cytokinesis), it was called a cytokinin.Kinetin does not exist in cells, but it gave scientists a hint asto what type of molecule might be the active ingredient in coconutmilk. In 1963, an adenine derivative called zeatin was extractedfrom corn endosperm, the “coconut milk of corn” (seeTable 37.1). Since then, over 150 different cytokinins have beenisolated, and most are derivatives of adenine.Cytokinins have a number of different effects, in many casesinteracting with auxin:• Adding an appropriate combination of auxin and cytokininsto a growth medium induces rapid proliferation ofcultured plant cells.• Cytokinins can cause certain light-requiring seeds to germinateeven when kept in constant darkness.• In cell cultures, a high cytokinin-to-auxin ratio promotes the formationof shoots; a low ratio promotes the formation of roots.• Cytokinins usually inhibit the elongation of stems, but theycause lateral swelling of stems and roots (the fleshy roots ofradishes are an extreme example).• Cytokinins stimulate axillary buds to grow into branches;the auxin-to-cytokinin ratio controls the extent of branching(bushiness) of a plant.• Cytokinins delay the senescence of leaves. If leaf blades aredetached from a plant and floated on water or a nutrientsolution, they quickly turn yellow and show other signs ofsenescence. If instead they are floated on a solution containinga cytokinin, they remain green and senesce much moreslowly. Roots contain abundant cytokinins, and cytokinintransport to the leaves delays senescence.Cytokinin signaling appears to act through a pathway that includesproteins with amino acid sequences similar to proteinsin two-component systems in bacteria (see Figure 7.3). Indeed, thissystem was one of the first of its kind discovered in eukaryotes.The two components in such a system are:• Areceptor that can act as a protein kinase, phosphorylatingitself as well as a target protein• Atarget protein, generally a transcription factor, that can actas an effectorGenetic screens in Arabidopsis for abnormalities in the responseto cytokinin have identified the receptor (AHK; Arabidopsis histidinekinase) and target effector (ARR; Arabidopsis response regulator),the latter acting as a transcription factor when phosphorylated.The cytokinin signal transduction pathway also includesa third protein (AHP; Arabidopsis histidine phosphotransfer protein),which transfers phosphates from the receptor to the effector(Figure 37.15). The plant genome has over 20 genes thatare expressed in response to this signaling pathway.37.4 | WHAT ARE THE EFFECTS OF CYTOKININS, ETHYLENE, AND BRASSINOSTEROIDS? 7851 As long as cytokinin is notbound to its receptor (AHK)...2 ...cytokinin responsegenes are not expressed.3 Binding of cytokinin to its receptorcauses a conformational change thatexposes the active site for the proteinkinase domain of the receptor.4 An intermediateprotein (AHP) isphosphorylated...5 ...enters the nucleus,and phosphorylates atranscription factor (ARR).6 The phosphorylated transcription factorbinds to promoters of over 20 cytokininresponse genes, initiating their transcription.CytoplasmCytoplasmOutside of cellNucleusNucleusNuclearenvelopeCytokininReceptor (AKH)DNAPromoterGenes that respond to cytokininOutside of cellNuclearenvelopeCytokininReceptorDNAPPPPPTranscriptionfactor (ARR)mRNATranscriptionAHPPromoter37.15 The Cytokinin Response Pathway Plant cells respond tocytokinins using a signal transduction pathway related to bacterial twocomponentsystems.Ethylene is a gaseous hormone that hastens leafsenescence and fruit ripeningWhereas the cytokinins delay senescence, another plant hormonepromotes it: the gas ethylene (see Table 37.1), which is sometimescalled the senescence hormone. Ethylene can be produced by allparts of the plant, and, like all plant hormones, it has several effects.Back when streets were lit by gas rather than by electricity,leaves on trees near street lamps dropped earlier than those on treesfarther from the lamps. We now know why: ethylene, a combustionproduct of the illuminating gas, caused the early abscission.While auxin delays leaf abscission, ethylene strongly promotes it;thus the balance of auxin and ethylene controls abscission.FRUIT RIPENING By promoting senescence, ethylene also speedsthe ripening of fruit. As a fruit ripens, it loses chlorophyll and itscell walls break down; ethylene promotes both of these processes.Ethylene also causes an increase in its own production. Thus, onceripening begins, more and more ethylene forms, and because it isa gas, it diffuses readily throughout the fruit and even to neighboringfruits on the same or other plants. The old saying “one rottenapple spoils the barrel” is true. That rotten apple is a rich sourceof ethylene, which speeds the ripening and subsequent rottingof the other fruit in a barrel or other confined space.Farmers in ancient times poked holes in developing figs tomake them ripen faster. We now know that wounding causes anincrease in ethylene production by the fruit and that the raisedethylene level promotes ripening. Today commercial shippersand storers of fruit hasten ripening by adding ethylene to storagechambers. This use of ethylene is the single most importantuse of a natural plant hormone in agriculture and commerce.Ripening can also be delayed by the use of “scrubbers” and adsorbentsthat remove ethylene from the atmosphere in fruit storagechambers. This strategy can even be used in the home. Manysupermarkets sell plastic bags designed to keep fruits fresh; thebags are impregnated with a substance that binds ethylene.As flowers senesce, their petals may abscise, decreasing theirvalue in the cut-flower industry. Growers and florists often immersethe cut stems of ethylene-sensitive flowers in dilute solutionsof silver thiosulfate before sale. Silver salts inhibit ethyleneaction by interacting directly with the ethylene receptor—thusthey delay senescence, keeping flowers “fresh” for longer.STEM GROWTH Although it is associated primarily with senescence,ethylene is active at other stages of plant development, aswell. The stems of many eudicot seedlings form an apical hookthat protects the delicate shoot apex while the stem grows throughthe soil (Figure 37.16). The apical hook is maintained through anasymmetrical production of ethylene gas, which inhibits the elongationof cells on the inner surface of the hook. Once the seedlingbreaks through the soil surface and is exposed to light, ethylenesynthesis stops, and the cells of the inner surface are no longer inhibited.These cells now elongate, and the hook unfolds, raisingthe shoot apex and the expanding leaves into the sun.Ethylene also inhibits stem elongation in general, promoteslateral swelling of stems (as do the cytokinins), and decreasesthe sensitivity of stems to gravitropic stimulation. Together,these three phenomena constitute the triple response, a wellcharacterizedstunted growth habit observed when plants aretreated with ethylene.THE ETHYLENE SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION PATHWAY The mechanismof ethylene action has been worked out by analyzing Arabidopsismutants that have ethylene-related defects. Some of thesemutants do not respond to applied ethylene, and others act asif they have been exposed to ethylene even though they havenot. Researchers studied the mutant genes and compared theirprotein products to other known proteins; thus they worked outsome of the details of the signal transduction pathway throughwhich ethylene acts (Figure 37.17).The pathway includes two membrane proteins in the endoplasmicreticulum. The first is an ethylene receptor (labeled Ain the figure) and the second is a channel protein (C). In theabsence of ethylene, a protein kinase (B) keeps C inactive byphosphorylation. When receptor Abinds ethylene it inactivatesB. Without B to inactivate it, C activates a transcription factor(D), which then moves into the nucleus, where it turns on thegenes that produce ethylene’s effects in the cell. In other words,ethylene turns off the “off” signal.Brassinosteroids are plant steroid hormonesIn animals, steroid hormones such as cortisol and estrogen areformed from cholesterol (see Figure 3.22). Animal steroids arewidespread and have been well studied for many decades. Incontrast, plant steroid hormones are a relatively recent discovery.In the 1970s, biologists isolated a steroid (see Table 37.1)from the pollen of rape, a member of the Brassicaceae (mustardfamily). When applied to various plant tissues, this brassinosteroidstimulated cell elongation, pollen tube elongation, andvascular tissue differentiation, but it inhibited root elongation.Since then, dozens of chemically related, growth-affectingbrassinosteroids have been found in plants.786 CHAPTER 37 | REGULATION OF PLANT GROWTHApical hook37.16 The Apical Hook of a Eudicot Asymmetrical production ofethylene is responsible for the apical hook of this bean seedling. Theethylene concentration was highest on the right side, so more rapidgrowth on the left caused and maintained the hook.Mutant plants that either do not make brassinosteroids orhave defects in brassinosteroid reception and signal transductionare usually dwarf, infertile, and slow to develop. Theseeffects can be reversed by adding small amounts of brassinosteroids,indicating that brassinosteroids are true hormones.These hormones have diverse effects, which vary among plants.Brassinosteroids can:• enhance cell elongation and cell division in shoots• promote xylem differentiation• promote growth of pollen tubes during reproduction• promote seed germination• promote apical dominance and leaf senescenceThe signaling pathway for these plant steroids differssharply from those for steroid hormones in animals. In animals,steroids diffuse through the plasma membrane and bindto receptors in the cytoplasm. In contrast, the receptor forbrassinosteroids is an integral protein in the plasma membrane(Figure 37.18). Binding of a brassinosteroid by the receptor inactivatesa protein kinase that would otherwise inactivate atranscription factor. The genes activated by this pathway code1 When A isnot active,…2 …enabling A toinactivate kinase B.3 C becomes activeand activates D…4 …which turns on the genes thatproduce ethylene’s effects on the cell.4 …D has no effectin the nucleus.2 …activated kinaseB keeps themembrane proteinC inactive.3 Without active C,the transcriptionfactor D is inactive,and…1 Ethylene binds itsreceptor, A…(A) Ethylene absent (B) Ethylene presentEthylenereceptor EthyleneCytoplasmCytoplasmLumen ofendoplasmicreticulumTranscriptionfactorMembraneof ERDNAPromoterNucleusA AC CBBDDDKinase37.17 The Signal Transduction Pathway for Ethylene This diagramshows the roles of four proteins (A, B, C, and D) in the signal transductionpathway through which ethylene exerts its many effects.1 In the absence of BR, a proteinkinase phosphorylates atranscription factor to inactivateit, and genes for the BRresponse are not transcribed.2 BR binding causes thereceptor to changeshape, which inhibitsthe protein kinase.3 The transcription factorretains its active shape…4 …and the BR responsegenes are transcribed.CytoplasmOutside of cellNucleusProteinkinaseNuclearenvelopeReceptorDNAGenes that respond to BRPTranscriptionfactorTranscriptionfactorCytoplasmOutside of cellBrassinosteroid (BR)ReceptorDNAmRNATranscriptionNo transcriptionPromoter37.18 The Brassinosteroid Signal Transduction Pathway Beginsat the Plasma Membrane Unlike the receptors for animal steroid hormones,the brassinosteroid (BR) receptor is a membrane protein. The signaltransduction pathway concludes by activating certain genes.for proteins involved in cell expansion and, significantly, theresponse to light. As we will see, light has profound effects onplant development.RECAP 37.4Cytokinins, ethylene, and brassinosteroids work inconcert with auxin and gibberellins to mediate plantdevelopment. Their signaling pathways vary from asimple two-component receptor–effector system(cytokinin) to inhibition of an inhibitor of an effector(ethylene and brassinosteroids).• How do cytokinins interact with auxin to regulate aplant’s development? See p. 785• What is the role of ethylene in fruit ripening? How isthis knowledge used commercially? See p. 786• Describe how the signaling pathways for cytokininsand brassinosteroids differ. See p. 787 and Figures37.15 and 37.18Aplant’s response to light—the energy source for photosynthesis—is crucial to its survival. We saw how the Darwins’ pioneeringinvestigations of phototropism led to the discovery of auxin.Let’s now look more closely at how plants sense and respondto light.How Do Photoreceptors Participate 37.5 in Plant Growth Regulation?Plants respond to two aspects of light: (1) its quality—that is, thewavelengths of light that can be absorbed by molecules in theplant; and (2) its quantity—that is, the intensity and durationof light exposure.Chapter 10 describes photosynthesis: how chlorophyll andother pigments absorb light at certain wavelengths (quality),and how light intensity affects photosynthetic rate (quantity).Here, we consider how light affects plant development. Earlierin this chapter, we described phototropism and how auxinmediates a plant stem’s bending toward light. In addition tophototropism, light influences seed germination, shoot elongation,the initiation of flowering, and many other important aspectsof plant development. Several photoreceptors take part inthese processes. Three or more types of blue-light receptors mediatethe effects of higher-intensity blue light, and phytochromemediates the effects of red light.Phototropins, cryptochromes, and zeaxanthin are bluelightreceptorsCharles and Francis Darwin showed that the apical tip of agrowing coleoptile receives light as a signal and then redistributesauxin to stimulate cell elongation below the tip on theshaded side. You may recall from Chapter 10 that an action spectruminvolves exposing plants to different wavelengths of lightto determine what wavelengths are most effective in drivinga given process (e.g., photosynthesis). For photosynthesis, suchstudies showed that the most effective wavelengths are thoseabsorbed by chlorophylls (see Figure 10.6). When an actionspectrum was obtained for phototropism of coleoptiles, bluelight (peak 436 nm) was found to be the most effective at inducingthe coleoptile to curve (Figure 37.19). What is the bluelight-absorbing receptor/pigment? Biologists have used a geneticapproach to answer this question, once again employingthe model plant Arabidopsis.Researchers recovered blue-light-insensitive Arabidopsis mutantsfrom a genetic screen and identified the gene for a bluelightreceptor protein located in the plasma membrane calledphototropin. Phototropin protein has a flavin mononucleotideassociated with it that absorbs blue light, leading to a change inthe shape of the protein. This change exposes an active site fora protein kinase, which in turn initiates a signal transductioncascade that ultimately results in stimulation of cell elongationby auxin.Phototropin is also involved in chloroplast movements in relationto light, and participates with another type of blue-lightreceptor, the plastid pigment zeaxanthin, in the light-inducedopening of stomata (see Figure 35.9).Yet another class of blue-light receptors is the cryptochromes,which absorb blue and ultraviolet light. These yellow pigmentsare located primarily in the plant cell nucleus and affect seedlingdevelopment and flowering. The exact mechanism of cryptochromeaction is not yet known. Strong blue light inhibits cellelongation through the action of cryptochromes, although themost rapid responses are mediated by phototropins.788 CHAPTER 37 | REGULATION OF PLANT GROWTHStimulation of phototropism400 450 500 550 600 650 700Wavelength (nm)00.20.40.60.81.0LightTime =0 minutesTime =90 minutes(A)(B)436 nm37.19 Action Spectrum for Phototropism (A) The action spectrumfor bending of a coleoptile toward light is similar to the absorption spectrumfor the receptor, phototropin. (B) After 90 minutes, only the coleoptilesexposed to blue light bend.Phytochromes mediate the effectsof red and far-red lightA number of physiological and developmentalevents in plants are controlled by light, a processcalled photomorphogenesis. For example:• Abean seedling germinating below groundhas an elongated stem, a pale yellow, foldedleaf, and a hook that protects the leaf (see Figures37.2 and 37.16)—it is etiolated. As theseedling reaches the surface of the soil, it undergoesseveral light-induced changes: theapical hook straightens, the rudimentary leafunfolds, and chlorophyll is made so thatphotosynthesis can begin. Even very dimlight will induce these changes.• Lettuce seeds spread on the soil will germinateonly in response to light. Even just aflash of dim light will suffice.• Adult cocklebur plants flower when they areexposed to long nights. If there is a brief lightflash in the middle of the night, they do notflower.Action spectra of the above processes show thatthey are induced by red light (650–680 nm). Thisindicates that plants must have a photoreceptorpigment that absorbs red light and initiates photomorphogenesis.What is especially remarkable about these redlight responses is that they are reversible by far-redlight (710–740 nm). For example, if lettuce seedsare exposed to brief, alternating periods of redand far-red light in close succession, they respondonly to the final exposure. If it is red, they germinate;if it is far-red, they remain dormant (Figure37.20). This reversibility of the effects of redand far-red light regulates many other aspectsof plant development, including flowering and seedling growth.The basis for the effects of red and far-red light resides in abluish photoreceptor pigment protein in the cytosol of plantscalled phytochrome. Phytochrome exists in two interconvertible“isoforms” or states. The molecule undergoes a conformationalchange upon absorbing light at particular wavelengths.The default or “ground” state, which absorbs principally redlight, is called Pr. When Pr absorbs a photon of red light it is convertedinto Pfr. The Pfr form preferentially absorbs far-red light;when it does so, it is converted back to Pr.Pfr, not Pr, is the active form of phytochrome—the form that triggersimportant biological processes in various plants. As wehave seen, these processes include seed germination, shootdevelopment after etiolation, and flowering.For a plant in nature, the ratio of red to far-red light determineswhether a phytochrome-mediated response will occur.For example, during daylight, the ratio is about 1.2:1; becausethere is more red than far-red light, the Pfr form predominates.But for a plant growing in the shade of other plants, the ratiois as low as 0.13:1, and phytochrome is mostly in the Pr form.The low ratio of red to far-red light in the shade results from absorptionof red light by chlorophyll in the leaves overhead, soless of the red light gets through to the plants below. Shade-intolerantspecies respond by stimulating cell elongation in thestem and thus growing taller to escape the shade. Shade cast byother plants also prevents germination of seeds that require redlight to germinate (see Figure 37.20). The reflective propertiesof the soil can also affect the red to far-red ratio—and thus plantbehavior. For example, cotton seedlings grow more slowly onsoils (such as clay) that reflect more red than far-red light.Red lightPhytochrome (Pr)absorbs red light andis converted to Pfr.Phytochrome (Pfr)absorbs far-red lightand is converted to Pr.ChlorophyllsynthesisHook unfoldingLeaf expansionFar-red lightPr Pfr37.5 | HOW DO PHOTORECEPTORS PARTICIPATE IN PLANT GROWTH REGULATION? 789HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODRed light and far-red light reverse each other's effects.37.20 Sensitivity of Seeds to Red and Far-Red LightLettuce seeds will germinate if exposed to a brief period of light. An actionspectrum indicated that red light was most effective in promoting germination, butfar-red light would reverse the stimulation if presented right after the red light flash.Harry Borthwick and his colleagues asked what would be the effect of repeatedalternating flashes of red and far-red light. In each case, the final exposuredetermined the germination response. This observation led to the conclusion thata single, photoreversible molecule was involved. That molecule turned out to bephytochrome.The effects of red and far-red light on lettuce seed germinationare mutually reversible.RESULTSGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevantlinks for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.INVESTIGATING LIFER R FR R FR R FR R FR R R FR R FR R FR R FRExpose lettuce seeds to alternate periods of red light for 1 minute andfar-red light for 4 minutes.RFR…Most germinate Few germinate Most germinate Few germinate…Seeds germinateif the final exposureis to red R ……and remain dormantif the final exposure isto far-red F R .Phytochrome stimulates gene transcriptionHow does phytochrome, or more specifically, Pfr, work? Phytochromeis a cytoplasmic protein composed of two subunits (Figure37.21). Each subunit has a protein chain and a nonproteinpigment from the plastid called a chromophore. In Arabidopsis, thereis a gene family that encodes five slightly different phytochromes,each functioning in different photomorphogenic responses.Gene transcription is stimulated when Pr is converted tothe Pfr isoform. When Pr absorbs red light, the chromophorechanges shape, which leads to a change in the conformation ofthe protein itself from the Pr form to the Pfr form. Conversionto the Pfr form exposes two important regions of the phytochromeprotein (see Figure 37.21), both of which affect transcriptionalactivity:• Exposure of a nuclear localization sequence (see Figure 14.20)results in movement of Pfr from the cytosol to the nucleus.Once in the nucleus, Pfr binds to transcription factors andthereby stimulates expression of genes involved in photomorphogenesis.• Exposure of a protein kinase domain causes Pfr protein tophosphorylate itself and other proteins involved in redlightsignal transduction, resulting in changes in the activityof transcription factors.The effect of activating these transcription factors is quite large:In Arabidopsis, phytochrome affects an amazing 2,500 genes(10 percent of the entire genome!) by either increasing or decreasingtheir expression. Some of these genes are related toother hormones. For example, when Pfr is formed in seed germination,genes for gibberellin synthesis are activated and genesfor gibberellin breakdown are repressed. As a result, gibberellinsaccumulate and seed reserves are mobilized.Circadian rhythms are entrained by light receptionThe timing and duration of biological activities in living organismsare governed in all eukaryotes and some prokaryotes bywhat is commonly called a “biological clock”—an oscillatorwithin cells that alternates back and forth between two statesat roughly 12-hour intervals. The major outward manifestationsof this clock are known as circadian rhythms (Latin circa, “about,”and dies, “day”). Think of your own life: in all probability yousleep at night, and you are awake during the day. In plants, circadianrhythms influence, for example, the opening (during theday) and closing (at night) of stomata in Arabidopsis, and the raisingtoward the sun (during the day) and lowering (at night) ofleaves in bean plants. From these two examples, it is obvious thatcircadian rhythms are ecologically useful adaptations, in thatthey relate the plant’s physiology to its environment.Two qualities characterize circadian rhythms, as well as otherregular biological cycles: the period is the length of one cycle,and the amplitude is the magnitude of the change over thecourse of a cycle. The circadian rhythms of plants have severalnoteworthy characteristics:• The period of a circadian rhythm is remarkablyinsensitive to temperature, althoughlowering the temperature maydrastically reduce the amplitude.• Circadian rhythms are highly persistent;they may continue for days, even in theabsence of environmental cues, such aslight–dark periods.• Circadian rhythms can be entrained,within limits, by light–dark cycles thatdo not exactly correspond to 24 hours.That is, the period of a rhythm can bemade to coincide (within limits) withthat of the light–dark cycle to which theorganism is exposed.790 CHAPTER 37 | REGULATION OF PLANT GROWTH2 Changes in the conformation of thechromophore induce changes in theshape of the phytochrome polypeptides,exposing NLS and protein kinase domains.1 The phytochrome chromophoreabsorbs red light.3 Pfr moves tothe nucleus.4 Some Pfr interacts directlywith transcription factors tochange transcription.5 Some Pfr acts as aprotein kinase,phosphorylating otherproteins that in turnaffect transcription.CytoplasmChromophorePr PfrRed lightFar-red lightNucleusChanges intranscriptionChanges intranscriptionPTranscriptionfactorDNANuclear localizationsequence (NLS)Protein kinase37.21 Phytochrome Stimulates GeneTranscription Phytochrome is composed oftwo polypeptide chains, each with a chromophorepigment. This pair of polypeptides undergoesa conformational change upon absorbinglight. When phytochrome absorbs red light, itconverts to the Pfr form, which activates transcriptionof phytochrome-responsive genes.Consider what happens when a personabruptly moves across many time zones: whatwas the night becomes the day, and graduallythe person’s sleep–wakefulness circadianrhythm entrains to the new environmentalcues. Similar entrainment occurs in plantsadapting to day length as the seasons progressduring the year. The action spectrum for plantentrainment indicates that phytochrome (andto a lesser extent, blue-light receptors) is verylikely involved. At sundown phytochrome ismostly in the active Pfr form. But as the nightprogresses, Pfr gradually gets converted backto the inactive Pr form. By dawn phytochromeis mostly in the Pr state, but as daylight begins,it rapidly converts to Pfr. The switch to thePfr state resets the plant’s biological clock.However long the night, the clock is still resetat dawn every day. Thus while the total periodmeasured by the clock is consistent, theclock adjusts to changes in day length over thecourse of the year.37.5 | HOW DO PHOTORECEPTORS PARTICIPATE IN PLANT GROWTH REGULATION? 79137.5 RECAPLight controls a number of physiological and developmental eventsin plants, a process called photomorphogenesis. Pigment photoreceptorssuch as phototropin, cryptochromes, and phytochrome mediatethe effects of light on plant growth and development. Phytochromeexists in two interconvertible states; conversion from onestate to the other is controlled by the ratio of red to far-red light. Circadianrhythms are influenced by light reception.• Give the evidence for blue-light receptors in plants. See p. 788 andFigure 37.19• Why does red light affect seed germination differently from far-redlight? See p. 789 and Figure 37.20• What are circadian rhythms? How are they related to photoreception?See p. 790Photoreceptors also play a regulatory role in flowering. In addition to light, anotherenvironmental cue—temperature—regulates flowering. We will examinethese topics and others in the next chapter, which focuses on reproduction in floweringplants.CHAPTER SUMMARY37.1 How Does Plant Development Proceed?• As sessile organisms, plants maximize their ability to grow byusing meristems, forming new organs and growing throughoutlife.• The environment, photoreceptors, hormones, and the plant’sgenome all regulate plant development.• Seed dormancy, which has adaptive advantages, is maintainedby a variety of mechanisms. In nature, dormancy is broken by,for example, abrasion, fire, leaching, and low temperatures.When dormancy ends and the seed imbibes water, it germinatesand develops into a seedling. Review Figure 37.1, WEBACTIVITIES 37.1 and 37.2• Plants have several hormones, each of which regulates multipleaspects of development. Interactions among these hormonesare often complex. Review Table 37.1• Hormones and photoreceptors act through signal transductionpathways to regulate seedling development. Before the germinatingembryo can begin photosynthesis, it relies on energyreserves in the cotyledons or the endosperm.• Genetic screens using the model organism Arabidopsis thalianahave contributed greatly to our understanding of signaling inplants. Review Figure 37.337.2 What Do Gibberellins Do?• The embryos of cereal seeds secrete gibberellins, which causethe aleurone layer to synthesize and secrete digestive enzymesthat break down macromolecules stored in the endosperm.Review Figure 37.6, WEB ACTIVITY 37.3• Dozens of gibberellins exist. These hormones regulate thegrowth of stems and some fruits.• Gibberellins act through the breakdown of transcriptionalrepressors. Review Figure 37.737.3 What Does Auxin Do?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 37.1• In coleoptiles, auxin is made in cells at the tip and moves downto the growing region. Review Figures 37.8 and 37.9,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 37.2• Auxin transport is polar. Auxin active transport carriers—membrane proteins confined to the basal ends of cells—causeauxin to move from the tip to the base of the shoot. ReviewFigure 37.10• Lateral movement of auxin, mediated by auxin transport carriers,is responsible for phototropism and gravitropism. ReviewFigure 37.11• Auxin plays roles in root formation, leaf abscission, apicaldominance, and parthenocarpic fruit development. Certainsynthetic auxins are used as selective herbicides.• The acid growth hypothesis explains how auxin promotes cellexpansion by disrupting interactions between cell wallmicrofibrils. Review Figure 37.13, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 37.3• The molecular mechanism underlying auxin action is similar tothat of gibberellin; as long as auxin is not bound to its receptor,transcription is repressed. When the auxin–receptor complexbinds to a transcriptional repressor, the repressor is degradedand transcription is initiated. Review Figure 37.1437.4 What Are the Effects of Cytokinins, Ethylene, andBrassinosteroids?• Cytokinins are adenine derivatives. They promote plant celldivision, promote seed germination in some species, inhibitstem elongation, promote lateral swelling of stems and roots,stimulate the growth of axillary buds, promote the expansionof leaf tissue, and delay leaf senescence.CHAPTER SUMMARY
37.1 How Does Plant Development Proceed?• As sessile organisms, plants maximize their ability to grow byusing meristems, forming new organs and growing throughoutlife.• The environment, photoreceptors, hormones, and the plant’sgenome all regulate plant development.• Seed dormancy, which has adaptive advantages, is maintainedby a variety of mechanisms. In nature, dormancy is broken by,for example, abrasion, fire, leaching, and low temperatures.When dormancy ends and the seed imbibes water, it germinatesand develops into a seedling. Review Figure 37.1, WEBACTIVITIES 37.1 and 37.2• Plants have several hormones, each of which regulates multipleaspects of development. Interactions among these hormonesare often complex. Review Table 37.1• Hormones and photoreceptors act through signal transductionpathways to regulate seedling development. Before the germinatingembryo can begin photosynthesis, it relies on energyreserves in the cotyledons or the endosperm.• Genetic screens using the model organism Arabidopsis thalianahave contributed greatly to our understanding of signaling inplants. Review Figure 37.337.2 What Do Gibberellins Do?• The embryos of cereal seeds secrete gibberellins, which causethe aleurone layer to synthesize and secrete digestive enzymesthat break down macromolecules stored in the endosperm.Review Figure 37.6, WEB ACTIVITY 37.3• Dozens of gibberellins exist. These hormones regulate thegrowth of stems and some fruits.• Gibberellins act through the breakdown of transcriptionalrepressors. Review Figure 37.737.3 What Does Auxin Do?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 37.1• In coleoptiles, auxin is made in cells at the tip and moves downto the growing region. Review Figures 37.8 and 37.9,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 37.2• Auxin transport is polar. Auxin active transport carriers—membrane proteins confined to the basal ends of cells—causeauxin to move from the tip to the base of the shoot. ReviewFigure 37.10• Lateral movement of auxin, mediated by auxin transport carriers,is responsible for phototropism and gravitropism. ReviewFigure 37.11• Auxin plays roles in root formation, leaf abscission, apicaldominance, and parthenocarpic fruit development. Certainsynthetic auxins are used as selective herbicides.• The acid growth hypothesis explains how auxin promotes cellexpansion by disrupting interactions between cell wallmicrofibrils. Review Figure 37.13, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 37.3• The molecular mechanism underlying auxin action is similar tothat of gibberellin; as long as auxin is not bound to its receptor,transcription is repressed. When the auxin–receptor complexbinds to a transcriptional repressor, the repressor is degradedand transcription is initiated. Review Figure 37.1437.4 What Are the Effects of Cytokinins, Ethylene, andBrassinosteroids?• Cytokinins are adenine derivatives. They promote plant celldivision, promote seed germination in some species, inhibitstem elongation, promote lateral swelling of stems and roots,stimulate the growth of axillary buds, promote the expansionof leaf tissue, and delay leaf senescence.
• Cytokinins act on plant cells by a signal transduction pathwaythat is similar to bacterial two-component systems. ReviewFigure 37.15• A balance between auxin and ethylene controls leaf abscission.Ethylene promotes senescence and fruit ripening. It causes theformation of a protective apical hook in eudicot seedlings. Instems, it inhibits elongation, promotes lateral swelling, andcauses a loss of gravitropic sensitivity.• Ethylene acts on cells by a protein kinase pathway located inthe endoplasmic reticulum. Review Figure 37.17• Dozens of different brassinosteroids affect cell elongation,pollen tube elongation, vascular tissue differentiation, and rootelongation. Some effects of light are mediated by changes inthe action and levels of brassinosteroids. These steroids act at aplasma membrane receptor. Review Figure 37.1837.5 How Do Photoreceptors Participate in PlantGrowth Regulation?• Phototropins are blue-light photoreceptors for phototropismand chloroplast movements. Zeaxanthin acts in conjunctionwith the phototropins to mediate the light-induced opening ofstomata. Cryptochromes are blue-light photoreceptors that controlseedling development, stem elongation, and floral initiation.• Phytochromes exist in the cytosol in two interconvertibleforms, Pr and Pfr. The relative amounts of these two forms are afunction of the ratio of red to far-red light. Phytochromes affectseedling growth, flowering, and etiolation. Review Figure 37.20• The phytochrome signal transduction pathway affects transcriptionin two different ways; the Pfr form interacts directly withsome transcription factors, and influences transcription indirectlythrough interactions with protein kinases. Review Figure 37.21• Circadian rhythms are activities that occur on a near-24-hourcycle. Light can entrain these activities through photoreceptorssuch as phytochrome.