In March 1996 the body of an apparent suicide victimwas discovered under the bushes near the railroadtracks in Cologne, Germany. The corpse was badly decomposed,and most of the abdominal organs had disintegratedcompletely. When an autopsy was performed,masses of maggots—fly larvae—about 8 mm long werefound in what remained of the body cavity, and the leatherypatches of dried skin were almost totally covered witha layer of pale yellow eggs. When he examined the body,Mark Benecke, a forensic entomologist, was able to recovera single adult fly, which he identified as Piophilacasei, also known as the cheese skipper.The community of species that colonizes a humancorpse is diverse, and its composition varies predictablyover time as decomposition progresses. Among the manyinsect species that infest dead bodies, cheese skippers arelatecomers—female cheese skippers do not find a corpseattractive until the proteins in the body begin to breakdown, typically after 1 to 3 months, depending on seasonand locality. The abundance of P. casei eggs suggested toBenecke that the cheese skippers had undergone at leasttwo generations in the decomposing corpse. Knowingthat their development time from egg to adult rangedfrom 11 to 19 days under local weather conditions, he calculatedthat the first adult cheese skippers probably arrivedand laid their eggs about 90 days after death, andthat an additional 22 to 38 days would have been requiredfor two generations to complete their development.Thus he calculated that death must have occurredbetween 112 and 128 days earlier. As it turned out, a 38-year-old woman had been reported missing about 4months earlier; the estimated postmortem interval helpedinvestigators to identify her as the suicide victim found bythe railroad tracks.Insects are found in decomposing corpses for manyreasons. Some species, such as cheese skippers, consumethe dead flesh; others, such as hide beetles, eat the hairand nails. Others prey on the insects consuming thecorpse or eat their excrement and shedexoskeletons. Thus a dead body cansupport an entire community of organisms—one with complex connectionsamong its inhabitants. Where and howan individual died can influence thecomposition of that community; bodiesthat are submerged, for example, arecolonized by a different suite of insectsthan those that are buried in theground.Dead reckoning57Dead Reckoning Attracted by the odor ofdecaying flesh, bluebottle flies feed on thefur of a dead mole. The insect species on adecomposing corpse change in such a predictablefashion over time that forensic entomologistscan estimate the time of death byidentifying the species that are present.57.1 What Are Ecological Communities?An ecological community is a group of species that coexist andinteract within a defined area. Although each species has uniqueinteractions with the other species in its community, the communityas a whole can be studied on the basis of the distributionof energy and biomass within it.Communities vary greatly in size and scope. Whereas oneecologist might study the community of species inhabiting adead body, another might study the community of species thatinhabit Lake Superior, the largest of the Great Lakes. The boundariesdefining a community are not always easy to recognize.The community of organisms within a pond, for example, is forthe most part bounded by the borders of the pond. Pond speciesinteract with one another to a far greater extent than with speciesoutside the pond. The boundaries of other communities are notso clear-cut. For example, while prairie pothole communities(above left) may appear to be self-contained, many of their componentsoriginate far away. Seeds arrive at these relatively isolatedwetlands via duck excrement; mallards and other ducksmay consume, but not digest, seeds in one location and, in the5–11 hours it takes for the seeds to move from one end of the digestivetract to the other, fly up to 1,400 km before depositingthe seeds when they alight to feed again.Communities may differ conspicuously in species richness—that is, in the number of species they contain. Even the sametype of community may contain different numbers of species indifferent places. The number of plant species in prairie potholecommunities, for example, may vary more than twofold acrossthe upper Midwest. Although communities vary in size andcomplexity by orders of magnitude, ecologists have devisedmethods for quantifying basic properties of community structureand organization irrespective of their scale. These methodshave revealed patterns that reflect underlying community assemblyrules and general principles.What determines how many species constitute a communityin any particular place? One important factor is the amount ofenergy available to sustain organisms.Energy enters communities through primary producersSunlight is the ultimate source of energy for most of Earth’scommunities. Sunlight makes photosynthesis possible, and photosynthesis,in the vast majority of communities, makes energyIN THIS CHAPTER we will investigate how energyflows through communities and how that flow influencestheir structure, complexity, and composition. We will investigatehow communities are assembled over time and howthey are reassembled after a disturbance. Finally, we willconsider the relationships between species diversity,productivity, and stability in communities.What species occur where and when is the concern ofcommunity ecologists. The composition of communitiescan change in a predictable way over time and overspace. The spatial scales of these changes can vary froma dead body in a patch of shrubbery to a patch of Amazonianrainforest, and the time scales can range fromdays to millennia. But the ecological processes affectinga community are similar whatever its scale. The study ofthe seemingly esoteric patterns of change in the compositionof carrion communities has not only allowed ecologiststo help find evidence that can identify a missingperson or convict a murderer, but has added greatly toour understanding of ecological communities.CHAPTER OUTLINE57.1 What Are Ecological Communities?57.2 How Do Interactions among Species InfluenceCommunity Structure?57.3 What Patterns of Species Diversity HaveEcologists Observed?57.4 How Do Disturbances Affect EcologicalCommunities?57.5 How Does Species Richness Influence CommunityStability?Prairie Potholes These wetland communities occur indepressions in the prairie landscapes of midwestern NorthAmerica. The potholes, formed when the glaciers of the lastice age receded, support communities characterized by manyaquatic plant species, including sedges, bulrushes, andpondweeds.available to other organisms in an edible form. All nonphotosyntheticorganisms (heterotrophs) consume, either directly orindirectly, the energy-rich organic molecules produced by theplants and other photosynthetic organisms that get their energydirectly from sunlight (autotrophs). Photosynthetic autotrophs,along with a handful of chemoautotrophs (organisms that obtainchemical energy from inorganic molecules in their environment),are known as primary producers (Figure 57.1).Gross primary productivity (GPP) is the rate at which allthe primary producers in a particular community turn solarenergy into stored chemical energy via photosynthesis.The energy that is accumulated is called gross primary production.(The terms “productivity” and “production” areoften used interchangeably; productivity measures the rateof energy accumulation; production measures energy accumulationas a product.)Not all GPP becomes available to heterotrophs, because primaryproducers use some of that energy for respiration andother metabolic processes. Net primary productivity (NPP) isthe rate at which energy is incorporated into the primaryproducers’ bodies through growth and reproduction. Thusnet primary production is the amount of primary producerbiomass (weight of organic matter) available for consumptionby heterotrophs. This relationship is described mathematicallyasNPP = GPP – Rwhere R is the energy lost through respiration.Consumers use diverse sources of energyAn organism’s trophic level indicates where in that sequence itobtains its energy (Table 57.1). Primary producers start the chainof trophic levels. At the next level are primary consumers —the herbivores that dine on the primary producers. Organismsthat eat herbivores, called secondary consumers, are the nexttrophic level. Those that eat secondary consumers are tertiaryconsumers, and so on. The waste products and dead bodies oforganisms provide another source of energy, as we saw at theTABLE 57.1The Major Trophic LevelsTROPHIC LEVEL SOURCE OF ENERGY EXAMPLESPhotosynthesizers (primary producers) Solar energy Green plants, photosynthetic bacteria and protistsHerbivores (primary consumers) Tissues of primary producers Termites, grasshoppers, gypsy moth larvae, anchovies,deer, geese, white-footed micePrimary carnivores (secondary consumers) Herbivores Spiders, warblers, wolves, copepodsSecondary carnivores (tertiary consumers) Primary carnivores Tuna, falcons, killer whalesOmnivores Several trophic levels Humans, opossums, crabs, robinsDetritivores (decomposers) Dead bodies and waste Fungi, many bacteria, vultures, earthwormsproducts of other organismsThe greatest amount ofenergy is used in metabolismand respiration and isunavailable to organisms atthe next trophic level.Herbivores(primary consumers)MetabolismPhotosyntheticorganisms,chemoautotrophs(primaryproducers)TertiaryconsumersSecondaryconsumersPhotosynthesisDigestion, assimilation,and growthExcretion and deathExcretionand deathMetabolismDetritivores(decomposers)Sun 57.1 Energy Flow through Trophic Levels Much of the energyof the biomass at each trophic level is lost (often as heat) to metabolismand respiration by the organisms at that level. In this diagram,the width of each arrow is roughly proportional to the amount ofenergy flowing through that channel. Arrows indicate directions ofenergy flow.GO TO Web Activity 57.1 • Energy Flow through anEcological CommunityyourBioPortal.com57.1 | WHAT ARE ECOLOGICAL COMMUNITIES? 1205opening of this chapter. Organisms that consume such materialsare called detritivores or decomposers (see Figure 57.1).Some organisms, called omnivores, feed on multiple trophiclevels. Opossums, for example, are famously omnivorous. Investigatorsin Portland, Oregon, dissected the stomachs of roadkilledopossums and found remains of mammals, birds, insects,earthworms, snails, fruits, bulbs, seeds, leaves, grass, pet food,and garbage, along with some items they couldn’t even identify.Although few organisms are as omnivorous as opossums,most species in a community eat and are eaten by more thanone other species. A food chain depicts the linear sequence ofwho eats whom in a given community; food chains are interwovenin a food web (Figure 57.2). Most communities containso many species interacting in so many different ways that it isimpossible to enumerate (or even identify) all of the links. Nevertheless,simplified diagrams of food webs are useful in envisioninghow energy flows through a community.Fewer individuals and less biomass can be supportedat higher trophic levelsOne important way to characterize a community is by the distributionof energy and biomass within it. The flow of energythrough a food web is governed by the physical laws that regulateenergy transformations, foremost among which are thefirst and second laws of thermodynamics. Recall from Section8.1 that the amount of energy in the universe is constant, andthat when energy is converted from one form to another, partof it becomes unavailable to do work. As Figure 57.1 illustrates,at each trophic level energy is lost to metabolism andrespiration. On average, only about 10 percent of the energyof one trophic level is transferred the next, for a number ofreasons:• Heat loss. Organisms incorporate much of the energy theyaccumulate into biomass, but much more is used for respirationand other metabolic processes. That energy is dissipatedas heat and is lost to the community.• Biomass availability. Not all biomass can be ingested. Grazersroutinely miss blades of grass; effective plant defensesprevent herbivory; prey can escape predators or leave thecommunity.• Indigestibility. Not all biomass ingested can be assimilatedby consumers. Tree bark, for example, contains lignin andcellulose, which cannot be digested by most herbivores.The overall transfer of energy from one trophic level to the next(which can be expressed as the ratio of consumer production toproducer production) is called ecological efficiency.Pyramid diagrams such as Figure 57.3A can be used to illustratethe proportions of energy transferred from each successivetrophic levels and to compare those proportions among differentcommunities. Pyramid diagrams can also be used to illustratethe amount of biomass or numbers of individuals foundat each level (Figure 57.3B). Progressive energy loss throughthe inefficiencies of energy transfer puts limits on the numberof trophic levels in a food chain or food web; largely for this reason,most communities support only three to five trophic levels.Furthermore, each successive trophic level tends to havefewer species, and the species at each level tend to have lowerreproductive rates, smaller populations, and larger body sizes.Productivity and species richness are linkedJust as the diversity and complexity of trophic levels tend tobe positively correlated with the amount of energy availableto them, the species richness of a community tends to be positivelycorrelated with its productivity, up to a point. Anumberof factors that influence productivity, and thus species richness,vary among communities.The most obvious variation that influences productivity is energyinput. The amount of solar energy reaching Earth’s surfaceTrophic levelRed fox Gray wolf Raven(detritivore)Red squirrel SnowshoehareMooseBeaverPine Maple Balsam fir Aspen, white birch Aquatic plantsPrimaryproducersPrimaryconsumersSecondaryconsumers57.2 Food Webs Show Trophic Interactions in a Community Thisfood web for Isle Royale National Park, located on a large island in LakeSuperior, includes only large vertebrates and the plants on which theydepend. Even with these restrictions, the web is complex. The arrowsshow who eats whom.GO TO Web Activity 57.2 • The Major Trophic LevelsyourBioPortal.comvaries by latitude, as we saw in Figure 54.1.The ability of plants to photosynthesize, however,depends not only on the supply of energyfrom the sun, but also on the supply ofwater and nutrients. The species richness oftrees across different regions of North America,for example, can be best predicted not bymeasuring incoming solar radiation, but bymeasuring an ecological attribute of those regionscalled annual evapotranspiration: theamount of water released from the land surfaceby evaporation from streams, lakes, andsoil and by transpiration from plants. The annualevapotranspiration of a region is measureof the amount of water available to the organismsliving there.The number of species in a community increases with productivityonly up to a point, however; if productivity increasesbeyond that point, species richness may actually decline (Figure57.4). Why should that be? As local productivity increases,so does the number of individuals the local habitat can support(its carrying capacity). Thus populations can grow larger, andlarger population sizes should reduce the risk of species extinction.Why, then, should species richness decrease when productivityis very high?One hypothesis postulates that interspecific competition becomesmore intense when productivity is very high, resultingin competitive exclusion of some species (see Section 56.4). Thishypothesis is supported by the results of a long-term experimentat the Rothamsted Experiment Station in England, begunin 1857 and still ongoing. Fertilizer has been added regularly toselected plots of land to increase their productivity, and fertilizedand unfertilized plots have been monitored continuously.Over 150 years, the number of plant species in the unfertilizedplots has remained roughly constant, whereas that number hasdeclined in the fertilized plots, supporting the premise thatspecies richness can decline when productivity rises.57.1 RECAPAn ecological community is a group of species thatcoexist and interact within a defined area. Net primaryproduction—the amount of biomass that primaryproducers make available to heterotrophsthrough photosynthesis—is an important factor determiningthe species richness and number oftrophic levels in a community.• Explain the difference between gross primary productivityand net primary productivity. See p. 1205• Describe three trophic levels that might appear in afood web. See pp. 1205–1206, Table 57.1, and FigureFigure 57.2• What is a typical distribution of energy among thetrophic levels of a community? See pp. 1205–1206and Figures 57.1 and 57.357.1 | WHAT ARE ECOLOGICAL COMMUNITIES? 1207A marine community produces strikinglydifferent patterns of biomass. The primaryproducers are unicellular algae, which divideso rapidly that a small biomass can supporta much larger biomass of herbivores.Most of the biomass in agrassland is found in thegreen plants, and most ofthe energy flows throughthem.In forests, the majorityof biomass is tied up inwood, so its energy is notavailable to most herbivores.ForestSecondary consumersPrimary consumersPrimary producersOpen oceanGrassland(B) Biomass(grams/m2)(A) Energy flow(calories/m2/day)Trophic levelThe number of species presentis highest at an intermediatelevel of productivity.Ecosystem productivityNumber of rodent species present13579Lower Higher57.3 Energy and Biomass Distributions Pyramid diagrams allowecologists to compare (A) patterns of energy flow through trophic levels indifferent communities and (B) the amount of biomass present at the differenttrophic levels.57.4 Species Richness Peaks at Intermediate Productivity Thenumber of rodent species living in ecosystems of varying productivity inthe Gobi Desert exemplifies a pattern in which species richness increasesonly up to a certain point. Beyond that point, it can actually decline withproductivity.Although energy and biomass distributions reveal much aboutthe structure and dynamics of ecological communities, they reflectprimarily the abiotic mechanisms that influence the community.In the next section we will see how the species interactionsdescribed in Chapter 56 shape community structure.How Do Interactions among Species 57.2 Influence Community Structure?All of the interaction types discussed in Chapter 56, and especiallythe antagonistic interactions, have a strong influence onan ecological community. Species are not identical bags of biomassthrough which energy flows. Species in one part of a foodweb can affect many other species without necessarily eatingthem.Species interactions can cause trophic cascadesThe interactions of a single consumer with other species in itscommunity can cause a progression of indirect effects acrosssuccessive trophic levels, a pattern called a trophic cascade. Thereintroduction of wolves into Lamar Valley, in Yellowstone NationalPark, initiated just such a pattern.The food web in Yellowstone National Park is complex.Wolves in the park feed on moose, pronghorn, mule deer, elk,bison, and bighorn sheep. Although they share these prey withcoyotes, mountain lions, and grizzly and black bears, wolves exertparticularly strong effects on the park community’s structureand dynamics, as demonstrated by the effects of their absenceduring most of the twentieth century. By 1926, unrestricted huntinghad eliminated wolves from the park community.Annual censuses of elk were initiated by park managers in1920. To prevent elk from exceeding the park’s carrying capacity,the park service culled elk herds (that is, they selectivelykilled some members of the herds) until 1968, when, in responseto public pressure, the culls were stopped. When the cullingended, the elk population rapidly increased (Figure 57.5A). Theelk browsed aspen trees so intensely that no young trees wereadded to the population after 1920 (Figure 57.5B). The elk alsoseverely browsed streamside willows, with the result thatbeavers, which depend on willows for food, were nearly exterminatedfrom Lamar Valley. In regions of the park where elkwere absent, however, aspen and willow trees flourished. Thisobservation suggested that the decline of the trees elsewhere inthe park was indeed due to elk browsing, rather than to climaticconditions or some other factor.In 1995, after a 70-year absence, park managers reintroducedwolves to Yellowstone, and their population grew rapidly. Thewolves preyed primarily on elk. The elk population of LamarValley dropped, and elk avoided the aspen groves, where theywere especially vulnerable to wolf predation. Young aspen beganto grow, willows regrew along streams, and the numberof beaver colonies increased from one in 1996 to seven in2003. Thus the presence or absence of a single predator influencednot only populations of its prey, but also thestructure of the vegetation and populations of otherspecies that depend on that vegetation.1208 CHAPTER 57 | COMMUNITY ECOLOGYIn the absence of wolves, browsing by elkprevented the establishment of young aspens.Populus tremuloidesNumber of elk (thousand)1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 2020YearEstablishment dates05101520Number of aspens recruited51015202530Number ofwolvesWolvesextirpated(1926)Wolvesrestored(1995)HighLow1800 1850 19001920 19991950Wolves present Wolves absent(A)(B)Elk cullingsuspended(1968)Wolf populationElk population57.5 Wolves Initiated a Trophic Cascade (A) Number of elkand relative size of the wolf population in Wyoming’s YellowstoneNational Park. Once the wolves were gone, the elk populationincreased to the point where the young aspen trees were seriouslyovergrazed. (B) Aspen establishment in the presence and in theabsence of wolves. With overgrazing by elk, young trees were notrecruited; the photo shows a resulting stand of only mature trees.Herbivores, too, can have indirect effects on other trophic levels,to produce an interaction cascade. The savannas of centralKenya are dominated by large grazing mammals such as zebras,eland, elephants, Grant’s gazelles, giraffes, buffaloes, and hartebeests.A team of investigators used exclosures (areas protectedby a barrier, such as a fence, designed to keep organisms out)to investigate the influence of these grazers on the savanna community.They created six exclosures and compared communitystructure within the exclosures with that in paired sites wherelarge mammals could graze freely. Over 19 months of monitoring,they found that trees, beetles, and an insectivorous lizardspecies were all more abundant within the exclosures. The eliminationof grazing increased the abundance of trees, which inturn increased the number of beetles by providing more foodand habitat, which in turn increased the number of lizards,which feed preferentially on beetles.Interaction cascades can be initiated by the behaviors ofspecies as well as by their diets. Beavers preferentially cut downsome species of trees to build their dams; by so doing, they alterthe composition of the vegetation. In addition, the beaverdams create wetlands, meadows, and ponds that provide habitatfor species that would otherwise not be able to live in thearea. Organisms that build structures that alter existing habitatsor create new habitats are called ecosystem engineers.Keystone species have wide-ranging effectsA species that exerts an influence on a community disproportionateto its abundance is called a keystone species. Keystonespecies influence both the species richness and the number oftrophic levels in a community. The ochre sea star (Pisasterochraceus), which lives in rocky intertidal zones on the Pacificcoast of North America, is a good example. Its preferred prey isthe mussel Mytilus californianus. In the absence of sea stars, thesemussels crowd out other organisms in a broad belt of the intertidalzone. By consuming mussels, P. ochraceus creates barespaces on the rocky substratum that are taken over by a varietyof other species (Figure 57.6).In a classic experiment, Robert Paine of the University ofWashington demonstrated the disproportionate influence ofochre sea stars on species richness by removing them from selectedsites repeatedly over a 5-year period. Two major changesoccurred in the areas where sea stars were absent. First, the loweredge of the mussel bed extended farther down into the intertidalzone, showing that sea stars are able to eliminate mussels completelyin areas that are submerged most of the time. Second, andmore dramatically, 28 species of animals and algae disappearedfrom the sea star removal sites. Eventually only M. californianus—the dominant competitor for space in the community—occupiedthe entire substratum. Through its effect on competitive relationships,predation by the sea star determines how many speciescan thrive in its rocky intertidal community.Species other than consumers can be keystone species. Aplant species that serves as food for many different animals canalso be a keystone species. Fig trees in tropical forests producefruits several times every year, so their fruits are abundant attimes when few, if any, other trees are fruiting. Dozens of frugivoresdepend on figs when no other fruits are present. Fig-eatinganimals include fruit bats, parrots, toucans, pigeons, flycatchers,trogons, orioles, rodents, howler monkeys, and evenfish, which eat figs that fall into nearby streams. All of these animalsprovide prey for a diverse community of predators. Moreover,the trunks of fig trees provide habitat for several thousandspecies of insects, reptiles, rodents, and birds. Without fig trees,rainforest communities around the world would be profoundlydiminished in species richness.57.2 RECAPSome interactions between consumers and otherspecies result in a trophic cascade of indirect effectson species at successive trophic levels. Keystonespecies are species with especially strong effects onthe species richness and number of trophic levels incommunities.• Describe an example of a consumer whose interactionswith other species cause indirect effects acrosstrophic levels.• What are some of the ways in which keystone speciescan affect other species in their communities?See p. 120957.2 | HOW DO INTERACTIONS AMONG SPECIES INFLUENCE COMMUNITY STRUCTURE? 1209Pisaster ochraceusMussels57.6 Some Sea Stars Are Keystone Species Ochre sea stars(Pisaster ochraceus) have harvested all the mussels from the lower partsof these rocks on the Olympic Peninsula of Washington. By consumingmussels, the sea star creates bare spaces on the rocks that are occupiedby a variety of other intertidal species.We have seen how certain keystone species influence the overallspecies richness of their communities. But species richnessis only one measure of community diversity. The next sectiontakes a closer look at other ways in which ecologists measurespecies diversity.What Patterns of Species Diversity 57.3 Have Ecologists Observed?Communities clearly vary in their diversity, both geographicallyon scales ranging from local to global, and over time on scalesranging from a day to centuries. Comparing the diversity of twoor more communities can be challenging because diversity hasmany different components depending on the scale at which itis measured:• Alpha diversity is diversity within a single community orhabitat.• Beta diversity is between-habitat diversity, a measure of thechange in species composition from one community orhabitat to another.• Gamma diversity is the regional diversity found over a rangeof communities or habitats in a geographic region.A community’s diversity can be measuredwith a diversity indexThe most straightforward way to quantify the alpha diversityof a community is simply to count the number of species presentin a sample (that is, the species richness). The larger the areathat is sampled, the greater the likelihood that rare species inthe community will be found and that the resulting assessmentof its species richness will be accurate.To say that two communities of the same size have the samespecies richness tells only part of the story, however. Imaginethat we take samples of 12 individuals in each of two communities.Our sample from community Acontains 3 individuals ofeach of 4 species (an even distribution of individuals). Our samplefrom community B, however, contains 9 individuals of onespecies and only 1 individual each of the other 3 species (an unevendistribution). Even though the species richness of the twocommunities is the same (4), community B is considered less diversebecause the less abundant species are encountered infrequentlycompared with the single most abundant species (Figure57.7). Thus estimates of diversity should account for bothspecies richness and species evenness.Ecologists have devised mathematical formulas to quantifydiversity that take both species richness and species evennessinto account. One widely used measure is the Shannon diversityindex, based on a mathematical expression of the certainty withwhich the next item sampled in a series can be predicted. If, forexample, we picked individuals from community B in Figure57.7 at random, we would be fairly certain which species wouldbe picked first, second, third, and so on: most of the time, itwould be the most abundant species. The Shannon diversity index(H) describes diversity as a measure of that certainty. Thehigher H is, the lower would be our certainty about the speciescomposition of our sample and, thus, the greater the diversityof the community. In other words, when we know that the abundanceof a particular species is high, we can be reasonably certainthat we are likely to collect that species in a random sample.We can calculate H in three steps:• Determine the proportion of the total number of individualsin the community that are in each species (pi) and multiplythat proportion by its logarithm• Sum the values obtained for all species in the community• For mathematical reasons, multiply the result by –1In algebraic notation, this calculation is written asH = –[(p1 ln p1) + (p2 ln p2) + (p3 ln p3) … (pn ln pn)]Estimating the alpha diversity of a single community with theShannon diversity index requires only that we know the totalnumber of individuals collected in a sample and the number ofspecies in the sample. But describing the species diversity of a1210 CHAPTER 57 | COMMUNITY ECOLOGYCommunity ACommunity BAlthough the two communities have the samespecies richness, community A has a more evendistribution of species, and is thus consideredmore diverse than community B.Figure 57.7 Species Richness and Species Evenness Contributeto Diversity These two hypothetical mushroom communities are thesame size (12) and have the same species richness (4) but differ inspecies evenness. The more even distribution results in greater diversity.geographic region that comprises multiple communities requiresa different approach. Recall that measures of beta diversityestimate the change in species composition from onecommunity to another. Sorenson’s index (CS) is one such measure,calculatedwhere 2j is twice the number of species found in both communities,a is the number of species in the first community, and bis the number of species in the second community.Gamma diversity—the overall diversity across a geographicregion containing many different communities—can be used tomake comparisons of diversity among regions. Gamma diversityis equivalent to the alpha diversity of each community combinedwith the beta diversity between the communities.Partitioning diversity within a community, between communities,and across an entire region can provide insights into theecological characteristics of the species making up those communitiesas well as the processes by which those communitieswere assembled. High beta diversity, for example, shows thatfew species are shared between the communities being compared,suggesting that those communities consist mostly of specialists,species with unique habitat requirements, or specieswith poor dispersal abilities.Astudy of diversity patterns in an agricultural area of southernEngland demonstrates how these three measures of diversityestimates are applied at different scales. Investigators sampledplants and macroinvertebrates in three types of freshwatercommunities—rivers, ponds, and ditches—in an area of Englishcountryside. Rivers had high species richness (i.e., high alphadiversity), but most rivers in the area contained the sameassortment of species, so beta diversity, from river to river, waslow. In contrast, the ponds displayed a wide range of variationin species richness (i.e., the ponds, with high beta diversity, weremore different from one another in species composition thanthe rivers were). Thus the ponds contributed more to gammadiversity—the overall diversity of the area—than the rivers didbecause they contained more unique or rare species. Surprisingly,the ditches, many of which contained water for only ashort time, had the lowest alpha diversity (the fewest speciesoverall) of the three community types, but many of the speciesfound in ditches were found nowhere else in the area, includinginsects that live only in temporary bodies of water (includinga very rare water beetle). Ponds and ditches, despite beingrelatively species-poor, contributed disproportionately to regionaldiversity (i.e., gamma diversity) because the few speciesthey supported were found nowhere else in the region.Latitudinal gradients in diversity are observedin both hemispheresIt has long been known that diversity varies with latitude. About200 years ago, the German explorer and naturalist Alexandervon Humboldt spent 5 years traveling around Latin America.He remarked in the account of his voyages that “the nearer weapproach the tropics, the greater the increase in the variety ofstructure, grace of form, and mixture of colors, as also in perpetualyouth and vigour of organic life.” Humboldt would not havebeen surprised to learn that, if he had sailed toward the poles,the diversity he observed would have decreased. These latitudinalgradients in diversity have been observed in a wide varietyof taxa, including birds, mammals, and insects (Figure 57.8).Although most ecologists agree that latitudinal gradients indiversity exist, there is less consensus as to why they exist. Atleast four hypotheses have been advanced to account for latitudinalgradients in diversity:CS =2+ja b57.3 | WHAT PATTERNS OF SPECIES DIVERSITY HAVE ECOLOGISTS OBSERVED? 121110Tropic ofCancerEquatorTropic ofCapricorn20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90Number of species40503020100102030405060701346697981653019169357.8 Latitudinal Gradientsin Diversity Among swallowtailbutterflies (Papilionidae),species diversity decreaseswith latitude both north andsouth of the equator. Similarlatitudinal gradients of diversityhave been observed in manyother taxa.• The time hypothesis argues that organisms in tropical regionshave had more time to diversify under relatively stable climaticconditions than have more temperate regions.• The spatial heterogeneity hypothesis suggests that tropicalregions have high spatial heterogeneity—more differenttypes of microclimates, vegetation, soils, and so forth—andthus contain more different habitats and many morespecies.• The specialization hypothesis attributes latitudinal gradientsin diversity greater of biological competition in the tropics,which lead to narrower niches and more species.• The predation hypothesis proposes that predation intensity isgreater in the tropics (and thus conflicts with the specializationhypothesis). Where predation is high, it argues, preypopulations are held to levels so low that interspecific competitionnever comes into play, and rare species can persist.Why can’t ecologists agree on the mechanism underlying latitudinalgradients in species diversity? Corroborative evidencecan be found for each of these hypotheses, varying with taxon,locality, and scale. It may be that multiple factors are responsiblefor this widespread ecological pattern.The theory of island biogeography suggests thatspecies richness reaches an equilibriumWhile latitudinal gradients prevail on a global scale, other factorsinfluence species diversity within any latitudinal band. In theWest Indies, for example, small islands tend to have fewer speciesof butterflies than large islands, irrespective of latitude. Furthermore,oceanic islands generally have fewer species, irrespectiveof taxon, than continental areas of comparable size. Thisspecies–area relationship is a well-established mathematical relationshipbetween the size of an area of habitat and the numberof species that area contains. The biologist Edward O. Wilsonwas struck by this relationship, which he encountered throughhis exhaustive collection of ant species from all over the world.With Robert MacArthur, Wilson developed the theory of islandbiogeography. They based their theory on just two processes: theimmigration of new species to an island and the extinction ofspecies already present on that island (Figure 57.9A).The premise of island biogeography is that the number ofspecies on an island (or in another geographically defined and isolatedarea) represents a balance, or equilibrium, between the rateat which species immigrate to the island and the rate at which residentspecies go locally extinct. The rate of immigration is determinedin part by the number of species in the area providing theimmigrants, known as the species pool. In the case of oceanic islands,the species pool comprises all the species on the nearestcontinent. Not all species that reach the island will persist, however.The more species there are on an island, the higher the likelihoodthat any one of those species will go extinct.Rates of immigration and extinction are influenced by twoother factors:• Distance of the island from the species pool. The farther the islandfrom the source of immigrants, the fewer species willsuccessfully make the trip and the lower the immigrationrate.• The size (area) of the island. The smaller the island, the fewerresources it provides, and the higher the extinction rate.Larger islands provide greater habitat diversity and cansustain larger populations (which in general have lowerextinction rates than small populations).1212 CHAPTER 57 | COMMUNITY ECOLOGYThe number of speciesreaches an equilibrium (S)when the number of newspecies arriving equals thenumber becoming extinct.Small islands far fromthe mainland (SSF) havethe fewest species.Large islands nearthe mainland (SLN)have the largestnumber of species.(A)RateRateNumber of species Number of speciesRate of arrivalof new speciesExtinctionrateEquilibrium (S)0 S 0 SSF SLFSSNSLNRate of arrivalof new speciesExtinction rate(B)Island near mainland SmallislandIsland farfrom mainlandLarge island57.9 MacArthur and Wilson’s Theory of Island Biogeography(A) The rate of arrival of new species and the rate of extinction of speciesalready present determine the equilibrium number of species on an island.(B) These rates are affected by the size of the island and its distance fromthe mainland.GO TO Animated Tutorial 57.1 • Biogeography SimulationyourBioPortal.comAt some point, the number of species arrivingfrom the source and the number of residentspecies going extinct should balance,and the number should remain stable atthis balance point—the equilibrium numberof species (Figure 57.9B).Wilson and his student Daniel Simberloffdevised an ingenious experiment totest the theory of island biogeography.They used four small, isolated clumps ofred mangrove (Rhizophora mangel), 11–18 min diameter, in the Florida Keys. Thesemangrove islands were small enough thatSimberloff and Wilson could count thearthropod species on each one, then encloseit in a tent and gas it with methyl bromideto kill all the arthropods. After defaunation,Simberloff and Wilson monitoredand tracked recolonization of the islandsby arthropods (Figure 57.10). Recolonizationwas generally rapid, but was sloweston the island farthest from the mainland,as predicted by the theory of island biogeography.Furthermore, all of the islandseventually supported roughly the samenumber of species that they had before defaunation—again, as predicted.The theory of island biogeography hasbeen widely accepted since Simberloff andWilson’s landmark study. In addition, ithas been retrospectively tested by studiesof recolonization after major disturbancesthat serve as “natural experiments.” Forexample, in August 1883, the island ofKrakatau was devastated by a series of volcaniceruptions that destroyed all life on itssurface. After the lava cooled, plants andanimals from Sumatra to the west and Javato the east recolonized Krakatau. By 1933,the island was again covered with a tropicalevergreen forest, and 271 species ofplants and 27 species of resident land birdswere found there (Table 57.2). Today thenumbers of plant and bird species are notincreasing as fast as they did between 1900and 1930, but colonizations and extinctionscontinue, as predicted by the theory of islandbiogeography.The theory of island biogeography is sorobust that it can be applied equally well tohabitat islands—isolated patches of suitablehabitat surrounded by extensive areas ofunsuitable habitat. Thus an oasis in thedesert or a prairie pothole surrounded byhousing subdivisions may acquire an equilibriumnumber of species in much thesame way an oceanic island does.57.3 | WHAT PATTERNS OF SPECIES DIVERSITY HAVE ECOLOGISTS OBSERVED? 1213HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODThe data support the premise that an island supports a certainequilibrium number of species.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: This experiment assessed only arthropod species, and itsduration (2 years) was brief in terms of evolutionary time. Whatexperiments might you conduct to assess some of thebroader predications of the theory?57.10 Testing the Theory of Island BiogeographyBy experimentally removing all the arthropods on four small mangrove islands,Simberloff and Wilson were able to observe the rates at which arthropods recolonizedthe islands and compare these data with the predictions of island biogeography theory.Defaunated islands will be rapidly recolonized and will achieve aboutthe same number of species that were present prior to defaunation.RESULTSGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.INVESTIGATING LIFEDots indicate the number ofspecies present before defaunation.Number of arthropod species0 40 80 120 160 200 240 280 320 360 400 680 720 760Days after defaunation102030401. Census the terrestrial arthropod species on 4 small (11–25 m2)mangrove islets.2. Erect scaffolding and tent the islets. Fumigate with methyl bromide, achemical that kills arthropods but does not harm plants.3. Remove tenting. Monitor recolonization for the following 2 years,periodically censusing terrestrial arthropod species.Recolonization was fastest on the closer islands, slowest on the one farthestfrom the mainland. Two years after defaunation, each island had about thesame number of species it had before the experiment.Closest to mainlandFarthest from mainland57.3 RECAPSpecies diversity encompasses both species richnessand species evenness. It is highest in the tropics,decreasing in higher latitudes. Island biogeographytheory states that species diversity on an islandor other isolated habitat fragment represents a balancebetween immigration and extinction rates.• Explain the concepts of alpha, beta, and gammadiversity. See p. 1210• What is the difference between species richness andspecies evenness? See p. 1210 and Figure 57.7• What factors influence the equilibrium number ofspecies on an island, according to the theory of islandbiogeography? See p. 1212 and Figure 57.9Droughts, fires, and volcanic eruptions are examples of ecologicaldisturbances. The next section looks at the effects of suchdisturbances on ecological communities.How Do Disturbances Affect 57.4 Ecological Communities?An ecological disturbance is any abiotic event that changes theprobability of persistence of one or more species in an ecologicalcommunity. Disturbances may remove some species froma community, but may open up space and resources for otherspecies. The magnitude of the effect of a disturbance varies enormously.Some disturbances are limited to small areas—for example,a log carried by waves may crush algae and animalsattached to rocks in an intertidal community. In contrast, hurricanes,forest fires, and volcanic eruptions can affect communitiesover hundreds or thousands of hectares. Although smallscaledisturbances are far more frequent than large ones, a fewlarge events may be responsible for most of the changes in acommunity. Asingle hurricane, for example, may fell more treesthan years of “normal” storms.Acommunity’s history of disturbance may explain patternsof species diversity that would otherwise be puzzling. The sub-Antarctic Province Islands, located in the South Indian Ocean,provide an example. The climate of these islands is cool, withmonthly average temperatures above freezing for only 6 monthsof the year. Precipitation is high, and gale force winds are notuncommon; the vegetation is primarily tundra. South Africanentomologist S. L. Chown, an expert on life in the Antarctic,compared the insect faunas on the four largest of these islandsand found that the two largest, Marion and Kerguelen, housedfewer arthropod species (16 and 22, respectively) than the significantlysmaller Cochons and Possessions (26 and 38).Why do the species diversity patterns on these islands fail toconform to the theory of island biogeography? One possible explanationis the different geological histories of the islands. Thetwo smaller islands have escaped extensive glaciation, and accordinglyhave been accumulating species over a longer timethan have the larger islands. Thus, the theory of island biogeographynotwithstanding, island area may not always be the bestpredictor of species diversity. Geological history—particularlythe history of disturbances—is often a better predictor.Succession is the predictable pattern of changein a community after a disturbanceHow does a community reassemble itself after a disturbance,particularly one as massive as a glacier? The pattern of changein community composition following a disturbance is knownas succession. The most common type of succession is directionalsuccession, which is characterized by an orderly (or atleast predictable) progression of community assemblages.Species come and go until a particular community—one that iscapable of perpetuating itself under local climatic and soil conditions—persists for a relatively long time. This persistent stageis called the climax community.Directional succession is easiest to observe after a disturbancestrips away all preexisting living organisms and exposes a baresubstratum; this type of directional change is known as primarysuccession. Disturbances such as glaciers, volcanic activity, andin some cases, floods can initiate primary succession.Primary succession can be seen in the change in plantgrowth form and community composition following the retreatof a glacier in Glacier Bay, Alaska, over the last 200 years (Figure57.11). The glacier scraped the landscape down to bare rockand left a series of moraines—gravel deposits formed where theglacial front was stationary for a number of years. No humanobserver was present to measure changes over the entire 200-year period, but ecologists have inferred the temporal patternof succession by studying the vegetation on moraines of differentages. The youngest moraines, closest to the current glacialfront, are populated with bacteria, fungi, and photosyntheticmicroorganisms that can support themselves on bare rock.Slightly older moraines farther from the glacial front havelichens, mosses, and a few species of shallow-rooted herbs,such as mountain avens (Dryas octopetala). Still farther from theglacial front, successively older moraines have shrubby willows,alders, and spruces.1214 CHAPTER 57 | COMMUNITY ECOLOGYTABLE 57.2Number of Land Plant and ResidentLand Bird Species on KrakatauNUMBER OF NUMBER OFTIMEa PLANT SPECIES BIRD SPECIES1883 (t = 0) 0 01886 (t = 3) 26 01897 (t = 14) 64 81908 (t = 25) 115 131920 (t = 37) 184 271928 (t = 45) 214 271934 (t = 51) 271 29a Time is given as the year, followed by the number of years since thevolcanic eruption that destroyed all life on the island.Nitrogen is virtually absent from glacial moraines, so theplants that grow best on recently formed moraines at GlacierBay are Dryas and alders (Alnus), both of which have nitrogenfixingbacteria in nodules on their roots (see Figure 36.9). Nitrogenfixation by these plants improves the soil so that sprucescan grow. Spruces then outcompete and displace the earlycolonists. If the local climate does not change dramatically, a climaxcommunity dominated by spruce trees is likely to persistfor many centuries on old moraines at Glacier Bay.Directional succession following a disturbance that some organisms,particularly those in the soil, survive is called secondarysuccession. Secondary successions are often initiated by humanactivities as well as by natural disasters. Generally easierto monitor than primary succession, secondary successions alsotend to occur more frequently and progressmore rapidly.A typical sequence of secondary successionin eastern North America beginswhen forested land that had been clearedfor agriculture is abandoned (Figure57.12) The first plants to appear in oldagricultural fields are fast-growing annualssuch as pigweed, ragweed, andlamb’s-quarter. These pioneer species arequickly replaced by more competitive biennialsand perennials, such as milkweed,goldenrod, and thistles. Eventually,shrubby plants such as dogwood, easternred cedar, and sumac become established,followed by tree species such as cottonwood,cherry, and red maple. Ultimately,shade-tolerant trees, including beech and sugar maple, dominatethe landscape. The beech–maple forest is the climax communityfor much of the region.Directional succession, irrespective of where it takes place,is characterized by certain trends. In general, the colonizingspecies of early successional stages tend to be good disperserswith high intrinsic rates of reproduction (r-strategists). Earlystages of succession are characterized by high productivity andsimple food webs; most nutrients are present as detritus or inabiotic forms. As succession proceeds, nutrients accumulate inbiomass, food webs become more complex, and abiotic sourcesof nutrients become less important. Species typical of late successionalstages tend to be good competitors with relatively lowintrinsic rates of reproduction (K-strategists).Both facilitation and inhibitioninfluence successionTo some extent, the progress of succession dependson the activity of successive colonists, each ofwhich modifies the environment in such a way asto facilitate colonization by other species. Predatorsare unlikely to colonize a habitat with no preyspecies, nor can primary consumers exist before57.4 | HOW DO DISTURBANCES AFFECT ECOLOGICAL COMMUNITIES? 1215Dryas and alders fix nitrogen,improving conditions for thegrowth of spruces.PioneerplantsYoungestmoraineSlightlyolder moraineGlacial front Older moraineOldest moraineOldest moraineAlders TransitionstageClimax(spruce forest)1 50 100Age of moraine (years)150 200Nitrogen concentration(g per m2 of surface)50100150200250300In forest floorIn mineral soil57.11 Primary Succession As the communityoccupying a glacial moraine at Glacier Bay,Alaska, changes from an assemblage of pioneerplants such as Dryas to a spruce forest,nitrogen accumulates in the soil.GO TO Animated Tutorial 57.2 • PrimarySuccession on a Glacial MoraineyourBioPortal.comBarefieldForb/grass/sedge(annual)Shrub/forb/grass(perennial)Shrub YoungtreesHardwoodclimax0 1–5 6–10 11–50 51–100 >100Approximate time (years)Successional stage57.12 Secondary Succession Secondary successionis the process by which land that once supported an agriculturalfield can ultimately support a long-lasting climaxcommunity characterized by shade-tolerant trees.plants are established. The fixation of nitrogen by Dryas andalders that allows spruces to become established in Glacier Bay(see Figure 57.11) is an example of such facilitation.Although secondary succession is often described in terms ofchanges in plant species composition, colonization by plants isactually facilitated by heterotrophs. Often the first organismsto arrive on bare soil after a disturbance are detritivores, whichprocess dead organic matter and release nutrients (especially nitrogen)and thus facilitate the establishment of plants. In a studyof intensively burned 20-year-old pine plantations in northernGermany, the first organisms to colonize the burned forests wereslime molds, liverworts, mosses, and mushrooms. These detritivoreswere followed by algae-feeding flies, fungus-feeding beetles,and moss-feeding springtails. Flowering plants such as fireweedmoved in, at which point leaf-feeding insects appeared,soon followed by predaceous ground beetles and wolf spiders.In other cases, the effect of early colonists is inhibition, ratherthan facilitation, of colonization by other species. Old-fieldspecies such as goldenrod and thistle produce root exudatesthat inhibit the germination and growth of potential competitors.Eventually, when these plants grow old and die, other plantspecies can become established.Cyclical succession requires adaptation toperiodic disturbancesSome patterns of succession are cyclical, rather than directional.In such cases, the climax community depends on periodic disturbancein order to persist. The lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta)forests that grow in the pumice plateau area of southern Oregonare maintained by periodic forest fires (Figure 57.13) In thisfire-adapted community, fires return nutrients to the soil inthe form of burned organic matter and provide proper conditionsfor seed germination. The cones of lodgepole pines aresealed shut by resins; only when they are subjected to high temperaturesthat melt the resins do they open and release theirseeds. The lodgepole pine is attacked by Dendroctonus ponderosae,the mountain pine beetle, and is also prone to infectionby a fungus, Phaeolus schweinitzii, which causes the rootsand heartwood of the pines to rot. Trees that have lived longenough to experience and be scarred by a fire are much morelikely to become infected by the fungus than are trees that havenot been scarred. Fungus-infected, weakened trees are preferentiallyattacked by beetles. After a beetle outbreak, in whichmany fire-scarred mature trees are killed, the dead trees serveas potential fuel for a fire. The next fire frees up their nutrientsfor use by the remaining trees as well as new seedlings.Heterotrophic succession generatesdistinctive communitiesPlants play a vital role in most patterns of succession because,as autotrophs, they are the source of energy for the other organismsin the community. Successional changes, however, can takeplace without the participation of plants. Detritus-based communities—found in dung, carrion, or dead plants—undergo aseries of changes known as heterotrophic succession. Thesechanges differ from those in other types of directional succession.First, succession begins heterotrophically: energy resourcesare greatest when the habitat first becomes available to colonistsand are depleted as succession takes place. There is no mechanism,such as photosynthesis, for generating more energy. Second,total biomass and species diversity decrease over time asthe resource base declines. Third, these temporary habitats arenot really self-contained, so predators can outnumber primaryconsumers (detritivores, in these communities) in apparent violationof the laws of thermodynamics.Because the habitats in which heterotrophic succession occursare so conveniently small, many patterns of heterotrophicsuccession have been thoroughly investigated. One such patternis faunal succession in human corpses, as we saw at theopening of this chapter. M. G. Motter’s 1898 study of 150 disinterments,followed by more recent studies on pig decomposition(after disinterments of human bodies for scientific purposeswere discouraged), allowed for precise reconstruction ofthe temporal sequence of species in these communities.There are three major stages of decomposition, each characterizedby a distinctive faunal community. The first stage, autolysis,is characterized by fermentative changes generated bythe body itself: degradation of proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates,accompanied by the release of gases such as hydrogensulfide. Putrefaction, decomposition by microorganisms and invasivesaprobes, follows. Dry decay takes place after most fluidshave evaporated.The faunas of decomposing corpses consist primarily of insects,but their exact composition varies with those factors thatinfluence the rate and nature of decomposition: climate, season,1216 CHAPTER 57 | COMMUNITY ECOLOGY57.13 Some Communities are Adapted to Disturbance Forestcommunities dominated by lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta) are adaptedto periodic fires. Fire removes mature trees weakened by pest infestation,revitalizes the soil, and provides essential conditions for seed germinationand new growth.and the condition of the body, including whether it is immersedor buried, wrapped or exposed. Typically, immediately afterdeath, as autolysis begins, blow flies, bluebottles, and house fliesarrive to lay eggs. As a detectable odor develops, other flies, includinggreenbottles and flesh flies, arrive. Fat breakdown, withits accompanying release of volatile fatty acids, attracts a rangeof carrion-feeding beetles. As proteins decompose, cheese skippersmove in. Other species have less interest in the corpse thanin the corpse-eaters: rove beetles prey on the maggots that developfrom the flies’ eggs. During dry decay, skin beetles, hidebeetles, and clothes moths (which can feed on the keratin inmammalian hair) dominate. In the final stages of decomposition,spider beetles and other scavengers arrive to feed on the excrementand shed exoskeletons of the insects consuming the corpse.This succession varies tremendously with climate and geography,but within any particular region it is sufficiently predictablethat it is admissible in court as evidence of the time since death.57.4 RECAPDisturbances are abiotic events that change theprobability of persistence of one or more species inan ecological community. Ecological succession—apredictable pattern of change in community composition—typically follows a disturbance.• How do primary succession and secondary successiondiffer? See pp. 1214–1215 and Figures 57.11 and57.12• Describe some ways in which early colonists facilitateor inhibit colonization by the species that follow themin a pattern of succession. See pp. 1215–1216Now that we have seen how communities change in compositionover time we will look at how certain communities (suchas climax communities) can persist over time and withstand disturbancewith little change. In this context, we return to productivityas an important arbiter of community stability.How Does Species Richness Influence 57.5 Community Stability?Up to a point, higher productivity favors higher species richness,as we saw in Section 57.1. Does species richness in turn influenceproductivity? And do both of those properties influencecommunity stability? Species richness might enhance productivitybecause no two species in a community have the same relationshipwith the environment, so a mixture of more speciesmight result in a more complete use of the available resources.Moreover, if environmental conditions should change, a speciesrichcommunity is more likely to contain some species that canpersist under the new conditions. Thus a species-rich communityshould be more stable—that is, it should change less overtime in either productivity or species composition—than aspecies-poor community.Species-rich communities use resources more efficientlyTo test the hypothesis that species-rich communities are morestable than species-poor communities, David Tilman and hiscolleagues at the University of Minnesota cleared several outdoorplots, in which they planted grasses in mixtures rangingfrom a few to 25 species. At the end of each growing season,they measured total plant cover (a measure of grass biomass,and thus of net primary production) and the population densitiesof all the grasses in each plot. Over a period of 11 years,which included a serious drought, the plots with more specieswere more productive, and their productivity was less variablefrom year to year. These findings were consistent with the hypothesisthat species richness promotes productivity and stability(Figure 57.14A). Moreover, in the plots with greater speciesrichness, soil nitrogen was used more efficiently (Figure 57.14B).However, the population densities of individual species in theplots were not stable over the years (regardless of a plot’sspecies richness) because different species performed better duringdrought years and wet years.57.5 | HOW DOES SPECIES RICHNESS INFLUENCE COMMUNITY STABILITY? 1217(A) Productivity increases with species richness(B)Total plant cover (%)0 5 10 15 20 25Number of species2530354045505560Nitrogen remaining in soil(mg N/kg biomass)5 10 15 20 25Species richness0.20.40.60.81.01.21.457.14 Species Richness Enhances Community Productivity Atotal of 120 grassland plots, containing from 2 to 22 grass species, werecultivated for 11 years. (A) The plots with greater species richnessshowed greater stability (with total plant cover being the measure of stability).(B) The plots with greater species richness utilized soil nitrogenmore efficiently, as shown by the smaller amount of nitrogen remaining inthe soil.Researchers continue to debate whether species diversity isresponsible for maintaining stability or is simply correlated withstability. This question is important because many of the alterationshumans have made in the structure of natural communitieshave reduced their species richness, and many of thesehuman-altered communities—notably, agricultural communities—are notoriously unstable.Diversity, productivity, and stability differ betweennatural and managed communitiesAlthough ecologists have been debating the relationships betweencommunity diversity, productivity, and stability for onlya few decades, humans have been experimenting with those relationships,albeit inadvertently, for millennia—since plantswere domesticated and agriculture was invented. Since thedawn of agriculture, crops have been susceptible to insect outbreaks:massive (often sudden) increases in the population sizesof species that destroy or damage crops.The practice of growing crops as monocultures—plantings ofonly a single species—is one reason why modern agriculturalecosystems are particularly unstable. Most farmers have little tolerancefor the presence of any potential competitors for their cropsand actively eliminate weeds (and the herbivore species that livewith them) from their fields. Thus a typical agroecosystem hasvery low species diversity. So the answer to the question ofwhether diversity causes or is merely correlated with stability maybe sought in modern farming practices. The predisposition foragroecosystems to play host to outbreaks may well result fromhuman-induced alterations in patterns of community structure.For the last 20 years, ecologists have been using traditionalsubsistence agroecosystems as experimental models for testingthe relationships between diversity and stability. Throughoutthe world, many farmers with small land holdings grow multiplecrops on the same plot. In Costa Rica, for example, cornis often grown together with sweet potato. Corn–sweet potatodicultures contain fewer sweet potato pests and many more parasitoidwasps than corn monocultures do. Corn pollen providesnutrition for the wasps, and the tall corn plants act as a structuralbarrier, shade plant, and source of disruptive chemical signalsthat interfere with the ability of the sweet potato pests tofind their host plants.In recent years, such applications of community ecology havebeen paying dividends. Although monoculture is overwhelminglythe dominant agricultural practice, polycultures are underdevelopment for agricultural production systems as variedas carp and shrimp farming, vermicomposting (raising wormsfor compost), and biofuel feedstock production.57.5 RECAPCommunities with higher species diversity tend tobe more productive and more stable than less diversecommunities because they use resourcesmore efficiently. Modern agricultural monoculturesare notoriously unstable.• What relationships have ecologists observed betweenspecies diversity, community productivity, and communitystability? See p. 1217 and Figure 57.14• Describe some agricultural practices that might resultin more stable ecological communities. See p. 12181218 CHAPTER 57 | COMMUNITY ECOLOGY57.1 What Are Ecological Communities?• An ecological community is a group of species that coexist andinteract within a defined area. The number of species living in acommunity is its species richness.• Gross primary productivity (GPP) is the rate at which the primaryproducers in a community turn solar energy into chemicalenergy via photosynthesis. Net primary production (NPP)represents the energy incorporated into primary producerbiomass that is available for consumption by heterotrophs.Review Figure 57.1, WEB ACTIVITY 57.1• The organisms in a community can be divided into trophic levelsbased on the source of their energy. Primary producers gettheir energy from sunlight; primary consumers get their energyby eating primary producers; secondary consumers gettheir energy by eating primary consumers; and so on. ReviewTable 57.1, WEB ACTIVITY 57.2• Organisms that consume the dead bodies of other organisms ortheir waste products are called detritivores or decomposers.Omnivores are organisms that feed on multiple trophic levels.• A food chain diagrams who eats whom. A food web shows howthe food chains in a community are interconnected. ReviewFigure 57.2• Ecological efficiency is the overall transfer of energy from onetrophic level to the next. Pyramid diagrams illustrate the proportionsof energy or biomass that flow between trophic levels.Review Figure 57.3• Species richness tends to increase with productivity up to apoint; however; if productivity increases beyond that point,species richness may decline. Review Figure 57.457.2 How Do Interactions among Species InfluenceCommunity Structure?• The interactions of a consumer with other species can result ina a trophic cascade: a series of indirect effects across successivetrophic levels. Review Figure 57.5• Organisms that build structures that create habitat for otherspecies are known as ecosystem engineers.• Keystone species have an influence on both the species richnessand the number of trophic levels in communities out ofproportion to their abundance.CHAPTER SUMMARY
57.1 What Are Ecological Communities?• An ecological community is a group of species that coexist andinteract within a defined area. The number of species living in acommunity is its species richness.• Gross primary productivity (GPP) is the rate at which the primaryproducers in a community turn solar energy into chemicalenergy via photosynthesis. Net primary production (NPP)represents the energy incorporated into primary producerbiomass that is available for consumption by heterotrophs.Review Figure 57.1, WEB ACTIVITY 57.1• The organisms in a community can be divided into trophic levelsbased on the source of their energy. Primary producers gettheir energy from sunlight; primary consumers get their energyby eating primary producers; secondary consumers gettheir energy by eating primary consumers; and so on. ReviewTable 57.1, WEB ACTIVITY 57.2• Organisms that consume the dead bodies of other organisms ortheir waste products are called detritivores or decomposers.Omnivores are organisms that feed on multiple trophic levels.• A food chain diagrams who eats whom. A food web shows howthe food chains in a community are interconnected. ReviewFigure 57.2• Ecological efficiency is the overall transfer of energy from onetrophic level to the next. Pyramid diagrams illustrate the proportionsof energy or biomass that flow between trophic levels.Review Figure 57.3• Species richness tends to increase with productivity up to apoint; however; if productivity increases beyond that point,species richness may decline. Review Figure 57.457.2 How Do Interactions among Species InfluenceCommunity Structure?• The interactions of a consumer with other species can result ina a trophic cascade: a series of indirect effects across successivetrophic levels. Review Figure 57.5• Organisms that build structures that create habitat for otherspecies are known as ecosystem engineers.• Keystone species have an influence on both the species richnessand the number of trophic levels in communities out ofproportion to their abundance.
57.3 What Patterns of Species Diversity HaveEcologists Observed?• Alpha diversity is a measure of diversity within a single communityor habitat, whereas beta diversity is a measure of thechange in species composition from one community or habitatto another. Gamma diversity is the diversity found over a rangeof communities in a geographic region.• Species diversity encompasses species evenness as well asspecies richness. Review Figure 57.7• Diversity indexes are mathematical formulas used to quantifydiversity. The Shannon diversity index is a measure of alphadiversity that takes species evenness into account. Sorensen’sindex is a measure of beta diversity.• Latitudinal gradients in diversity, with the greatest diversity atlow latitudes, have been observed in many taxa. Review Figure57.8• According to the theory of island biogeography, the equilibriumnumber of species on an island represents a balancebetween the rate at which species immigrate to the island fromthe mainland species pool and the rate at which residentspecies go extinct. Review Figures 57.9 and 57.10, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 57.157.4 How Do Disturbances Affect EcologicalCommunities?• A disturbance is an abiotic event that changes the probabilityof persistence of one or more species in a community.• Succession is a predictable pattern of change in communitycomposition following a disturbance. In directional succession,species come and go in a predictable sequence until a climaxcommunity persists for an extended time.• Primary succession begins on sites that lack living organisms.Secondary succession begins on sites where some organismshave survived a disturbance. Review Figures 57.11 and 57.12,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 57.2• In any pattern of succession, species that have already becomeestablished may facilitate or inhibit colonization by otherspecies.• In cyclical succession, the climax community is maintained byperiodic disturbances.• Heterotrophic succession in detritus-based communities doesnot rely on photosynthesis and therefore differs in a number ofways from other types of succession.57.5 How Does Species Richness Influence CommunityStability?• Species-rich communities use resources more efficiently, andthus tend to vary less in productivity, than do less diverse communities.Review Figure 57.14• Monocultures are subject to pest outbreaks, whereas agroecosystemscontaining greater species diversity tend to be morestable.