If all the carbohydrates produced by photosynthesis in ayear were in the form of sugar cubes, there would be300 quadrillion of them. Lined up, these cubes wouldextend from Earth to Pluto—a lot of photosynthesis! Asyou may have learned from previous courses, photosyntheticorganisms use atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) toproduce carbohydrates. The simplified equation says it all:CO2 + H2O →O2 + carbohydratesGiven the role of CO2, how will photosynthesis changewith increasing levels of atmospheric CO2? Over the past200 years, the concentration of atmospheric CO2 has increased—from 280 parts per million (ppm) in 1800 to 386ppm in 2008. This increase is correlated with industrializationand the accompanying use of fossil fuels such as coaland oil, which release CO2 into the atmosphere when theyare burned. The Intergovernmental Panel of ClimateChange, sponsored by the United Nations, estimates thatatmospheric CO2 will continue to rise over the next century.Carbon dioxide is a “greenhouse gas” that traps heat inthe atmosphere, and the rising CO2 level is predicted toresult in global climate change. Policy makers concernedabout climate change are asking plant biologists to answertwo questions about the rise in CO2: will it lead to increasedphotosynthesis, and if so, will it lead to increasedplant growth? To answer these questions, scientists initiallymeasured the rate of photosynthesis of plantsgrown in greenhouses with elevated concentrations ofCO2. The results were surprising: at first, the rate of photosynthesiswent up, but then it returned to near normal asthe plants adapted to the higher CO2 levels.To determine how plants might respond under morerealistic conditions, scientists developed a way to exposeplants to high levels of CO2 in the field. Free-air concentrationenrichment (FACE) involves the use of rings ofpipes that release CO2 to the air surrounding plants in fieldsor forests. Wind speed and direction are monitored by acomputer, which constantly controls which pipes releaseCO2. Data from these experiments confirm that photosyntheticrates increase as the concentration of CO2 rises—although generally the increase is not as high as that seeninitially in the greenhouse experiments. Nevertheless,these measurements indicate that as atmospheric CO2rises globally, there will be an increase in photosynthesis.Will this increase in photosynthesis result in an increasein plant growth? Keep in mind that plants, like all organisms,use carbohydrates as an energy source. They performcellular respiration with the general equation:carbohydrates + O2→CO2 + H2OPhotosynthesis and global climate change10Primary Producers Covering less than 2 percent of Earth’ssurface, rainforests are photosynthetic dynamos. They may actas a “sink” for increasing atmospheric CO2.10.1 What Is Photosynthesis?Photosynthesis (literally, “synthesis from light”) is a metabolicprocess by which the energy of sunlight is captured and usedto convert carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O) into carbohydrates(which we will represent as a six-carbon sugar, C6H12O6)and oxygen gas (O2). By early in the nineteenth century, scientistshad grasped these broad outlines of photosynthesis andhad established several facts about the way the process works:• The water for photosynthesis in land plants comes primarilyfrom the soil, and must travel from the roots to the leaves.• Plants take in carbon dioxide, producing carbohydrates(sugars) for growth, and plants release O2 (Figure 10.1).• Light is absolutely necessary for the production of oxygenand sugars.By 1804, scientists had summarized photosynthesis as follows:carbon dioxide + water + light energy →sugar + oxygenIn molecular terms, this equation seems to be the reverse ofthe overall equation for cellular respiration (see Section 9.1).More precisely, photosynthesis can be written as:6 CO2 + 6 H2O →C6H12O6 + 6 O2While this equation and the one for cellular respiration (givenin the chapter opening story) are essentially correct, they are toogeneral for a real understanding of the processes involved. Anumber of questions arise: What are the precise chemical reactionsof photosynthesis? What role does light play in these reactions?How do carbons become linked to form carbohydrates?What carbohydrates are formed? And where does the oxygengas come from: CO2 or H2O?Experiments with isotopes show that in photosynthesisO2 comes from H2OIn 1941 Samuel Ruben and Martin Kamen, at the University ofCalifornia, Berkeley, performed experiments using the isotopes18O and 16O to identify the source of the O2 produced duringphotosynthesis (Figure 10.2). Their results showed that all theoxygen gas produced during photosynthesis comes from water,as is reflected in the revised balanced equation:6 CO2 + 12 H2O →C6H12O6 + 6 O2 + 6 H2OIN THIS CHAPTER we begin with a consideration oflight energy, and move on to describe how photosynthesisconverts light energy into chemical energy, in the form ofreduced electron carriers and ATP. Then, we show how thesetwo sources of chemical energy are used to drive the synthesisof carbohydrates from CO2. Finally, we describe howthese processes relate to plant metabolism and growth.The challenge facing plant biologists is to determine thebalance between photosynthesis and respiration andhow this affects the rate of plant growth. The FACE experimentsindicate that crop yields increase underhigher CO2 concentrations, suggesting that the overallincrease in photosynthesis is greater than the increase inrespiration. But climate change alters rainfall patterns aswell as temperatures. These changes affect where plantsgrow, and could shift the balance between plant growthand cellular respiration.As with much in science, the initial questions at firstappeared amenable to simple answers. Instead, they ledto more questions, and more data are needed. An understandingof the processes of photosynthesis, describedin this chapter, provides us with a foundation for askingand answering these urgent questions about climatechange and its effects on our world.CHAPTER OUTLINE10.1 What Is Photosynthesis?10.2 How Does Photosynthesis Convert Light Energyinto Chemical Energy?10.3 How Is Chemical Energy Used to SynthesizeCarbohydrates?10.4 How Do Plants Adapt to the Inefficiencies ofPhotosynthesis?10.5 How Does Photosynthesis Interact with OtherPathways?FACE Free-air carbon dioxide enrichment uses pipes torelease CO2 around plants in the field, to estimate the effects ofrising atmospheric CO2 on photosynthesis and plant growth.Water appears on both sides of the equation because it is bothused as a reactant (the twelve molecules on the left) and releasedas a product (the six new ones on the right). This revised equationaccounts for all the water molecules needed for all the oxygengas produced.The realization that water was the source of photosyntheticO2 led to an understanding of photosynthesis in terms of oxidationand reduction. As we describe in Chapter 9, oxidation–reduction (redox) reactions are coupled: when one molecule becomesoxidized in a reaction, another gets reduced. In this case,oxygen atoms in the reduced state in H2O get oxidized to O2:12 H2O →24 H+ + 24 e– + 6 O2while carbon atoms in the oxidized state in CO2 get reduced tocarbohydrate, with the simultaneous production of water:6 CO2 + 24 H+ + 24 e–→C6H12O6 + 6 H2OAdding these two equations (chemistry students will recognizethem as half-cell reactions) gives the overall equation shownabove. As you will see, there is an intermediary carrier of theH+ and electrons between these two processes—the redox coenzyme,nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+).Photosynthesis involves two pathwaysThe equations above summarize the overall process of photosynthesis,but not the stages by which it is completed. Like glycolysisand the other metabolic pathways that harvest energyin cells, photosynthesis is a process consisting of many reactions.These reactions are commonly divided into two mainpathways:• The light reactions convert light energy into chemical energyin the form of ATP and the reduced electron carrierNADPH. This molecule is similar to NADH (see Section9.1) but with an additional phosphate group attached to thesugar of its adenosine. In general, NADPH acts as a reducingagent in photosynthesis and other anabolic reactions.• The light-independent reactions (carbon-fixation reactions)do not use light directly, but instead use ATP, NADPH (madeby the light reactions), and CO2 to produce carbohydrate.Sugars, the products ofphotosynthesis, aretransported throughoutthe plant body.CO2 enters and O2 andwater exit the leavesthrough pores on the leafsurface called stomata.O2StemLeafRootH2OSunlightSugarsH2OCO2CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE10.2 The Source of the Oxygen Produced byPhotosynthesisAlthough it was clear that O2 was made during photosynthesis,its molecular source was not known. Two possibilities werethe reactants, CO2 and H2O. In two separate experiments,Samuel Ruben and Martin Kamen labeled the oxygen in thesemolecules with the isotope 18O, then tested the O2 producedby a green plant to find out which molecule contributedthe oxygen.HYPOTHESIS The oxygen released by photosynthesis comesfrom water rather than CO2.Water is the source of the O2 produced byphotosynthesis.METHODRESULTSGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: How would you test for the source ofoxygen atoms in the carbohydratesmade by photosynthesis?Give plants isotopelabeledwater andunlabeled CO2.The oxygen releasedis labeled.The oxygen releasedis unlabeled.Give plants isotopelabeledCO2 andunlabeled water.18O2H2O, C 18O2O2Experiment 2H218O , CO2Experiment 110.1 The Ingredients for Photosynthesis A typical terrestrial plantuses light from the sun, water from the soil, and carbon dioxide from theatmosphere to form organic compounds by photosynthesis.10.1 | WHAT IS PHOTOSYNTHESIS? 191GO TO Animated Tutorial 10.1 • The Source of the OxygenProduced by PhotosynthesisyourBioPortal.comThe light-independent reactions are sometimes called the darkreactions because they do not directly require light energy. Theyare also called the carbon-fixation reactions. However, both thelight reactions and the light-independent reactions stop in thedark because ATP synthesis and NADP+ reduction require light.The reactions of both pathways proceed within the chloroplast,but they occur in different parts of that organelle (Figure 10.3).As we describe these two series of reactions in more detail,you will see that they conform to the principles of biochemistrythat we discuss in Chapters 8 and 9: energy transformations,oxidation-reduction, and the stepwise nature of biochemicalpathways.10.1 RECAPThe light reactions of photosynthesis convert lightenergy into chemical energy. The light-independentreactions use that chemical energy to reduce CO2 tocarbohydrates.• What is the experimental evidence that water is thesource of the O2 produced during photosynthesis?See pp. 190–191 and Figure 10.2• What is the relationship between the light reactionsand the light-independent reactions of photosynthesis?See pp. 191–192 and Figure 10.3We will describe the light reactions and the light-independentreactions separately and in detail. But since these two photosyntheticpathways are powered by the energy of sunlight, let’sbegin by discussing the physical nature of light and the specificphotosynthetic molecules that capture its energy.How Does Photosynthesis 10.2 Convert Light Energy intoChemical Energy?Light is a form of energy, and it can be convertedto other forms of energy such as heat or chemicalenergy. Our focus here will be on light asthe source of energy to drive the formation ofATP (from ADP and Pi) and NADPH (fromNADP+ and H+).Light is a form of energy withdual propertiesLight is a form of electromagnetic radiation. Itis propagated in waves, and the amount of energyin light is inversely proportional to its wavelength—the shorter the wavelength, the greater the energy.The visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum(Figure 10.4) encompasses a wide range of wavelengths and energylevels. In addition to traveling in waves, light also behavesas particles, called photons, which have no mass. In plants andother photosynthetic organisms, receptive molecules absorbphotons in order to harvest their energy for biological processes.Because these receptive molecules absorb only specific wavelengthsof light, the photons must have the correct amount ofenergy—they must be of the appropriate wavelength.Molecules become excited when they absorb photonsWhen a photon meets a molecule, one of three things can happen:• The photon may bounce off the molecule—it may be scatteredor reflected.• The photon may pass through the molecule—it may betransmitted.• The photon may be absorbed by the molecule, adding energyto the molecule.Neither of the first two outcomes causes any change in the molecule.However, in the case of absorption, the photon disappearsand its energy is absorbed by the molecule. The photon’s energycannot disappear, because according to the first law of thermodynamics,energy is neither created nor destroyed. When themolecule acquires the energy of the photon it is raised from aground state (with lower energy) to an excited state (with higherenergy) (Figure 10.5A).SugarsThylakoidCALVINCYCLENADPHCYCLEATPCYCLEELECTRONTRANSPORTLightreactionsLightindependentreactionsChlorophyllLight(photon)O2+ NADPH NADP++ChloroplastPiStromaH+H2OADPPlant cellChloroplastCO2ATP10.3 An Overview of Photosynthesis Photosynthesis consists of two pathways: the lightreactions and the light-independent reactions. These reactions take place in the thylakoidsand the stroma of chloroplasts, respectively.The difference in free energy between the molecule’s excitedstate and its ground state is approximately equal to the freeenergy of the absorbed photon (a small amount of energy is lostto entropy). The increase in energy boosts one of the electronswithin the molecule into a shell farther from its nucleus; thiselectron is now held less firmly (Figure 10.5B), making the moleculeunstable and more chemically reactive.Absorbed wavelengths correlate with biological activityThe specific wavelengths absorbed by a particular molecule arecharacteristic of that type of molecule. Molecules that absorbwavelengths in the visible spectrum are called pigments.When a beam of white light (containing all the wavelengthsof visible light) falls on a pigment, certain wavelengths are absorbed.The remaining wavelengths, which are scattered or transmitted,make the pigment appear to us as colored. For example,if a pigment absorbs both blue and red light (as does chlorophyll)what we see is the remaining light, which is primarily green. Ifwe plot light absorbed by a purified pigment against wavelength,the result is an absorption spectrum for that pigment.In contrast to the absorption spectrum, an action spectrumis a plot of the biological activity of an organism as a function ofthe wavelengths of light to which it is exposed. The experimentaldetermination of an action spectrum might be performed asfollows:1. Place a plant (a water plant with thin leaves is convenient) ina closed container.2. Expose the plant to light of a certain wavelength for a periodof time.3. Measure photosynthesis by the amount of O2 released.4. Repeat with light of other wavelengths.Shorter wavelengths aremore energetic.Longer wavelengths areless energetic.X raysCosmic raysGamma raysMicrowavesRadio wavesVisiblelight110102103104105106Wavelength (nm)700400600500VioletBlueGreenYellowOrangeRedUltraviolet (UV)Infrared (IR)10.4 The Electromagnetic Spectrum The portion of theelectromagnetic spectrum that is visible to humans as light isshown in detail at the right.When a molecule in the ground state absorbs a photon,it is raised to an excited state and possesses more energy.The absorption of the photon boosts an electron to ashell farther from its atomic nucleus.Increasing energy(A)(B)PhotonExcitedstateGroundstateAbsorptionof photon bymoleculeElectronNucleusGround state Excited statePhoton10.5 Exciting a Molecule (A) When a molecule absorbs the energy ofa photon, it is raised from a ground state to an excited state. (B) In theexcited state, an electron is boosted to a shell more distant from theatomic nucleus, where it is held less firmly.10.2 | HOW DOES PHOTOSYNTHESIS CONVERT LIGHT ENERGY INTO CHEMICAL ENERGY? 193Figure 10.6 shows the absorption spectrum of the pigmentchlorophyll a, which was isolated from the leaves of Anacharis, acommon aquarium plant. Also shown is the action spectrum forphotosynthetic activity by the same plant. A comparison of thetwo spectra shows that the wavelengths at which photosynthesisis highest are the same wavelengths at which chlorophyll aabsorbs light.Several pigments absorb energy for photosynthesisThe light energy used for photosynthesis is not absorbed by justone type of pigment. Instead, several different pigments withdifferent absorption spectra collect the energy that is eventuallyused for photosynthesis. In photosynthetic organisms as diverseas green algae, protists, and bacteria, these pigments includechlorophylls, carotenoids, and phycobilins.CHLOROPHYLLS In plants, two chlorophylls are responsible forabsorbing the light energy that is used to drive the light reactions:chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b. These two molecules differ onlyslightly in their molecular structures. Both have a complex ringstructure similar to that of the heme group of hemoglobin (Figure10.7). In the center of the chlorophyll ring is a magnesiumatom. Attached at a peripheral location on the ring is a long hydrocarbon“tail,” which anchors the chlorophyll molecule to integralproteins in the thylakoid membrane of the chloroplast. (SeeFigure 5.13 to review the anatomy of a chloroplast.)ACCESSORY PIGMENTS We saw in Figure 10.6 that chlorophyll absorbsblue and red light, which are near the two ends of the visiblespectrum. Thus, if only chlorophyll were active in photosynthesis,much of the visible spectrum would go unused. Thisappears to be the case in higher plants. But lower plants (such asalgae) and cyanobacteria possess accessory pigments, which absorbphotons intermediate in energy between the red and the bluewavelengths and then transfer a portion of that energy to thechlorophylls. Among these accessory pigments are carotenoidssuch as β-carotene (see Figure 3.21), which absorb photons in theblue and blue-green wavelengths and appear deep yellow. Thephycobilins, which are found in red algae and in cyanobacteria,absorb various yellow-green, yellow, and orange wavelengths.Light absorption results in photochemical changeAny pigment molecule can become excited when its absorptionspectrum matches the energies of incoming photons. After a194 CHAPTER 10 | PHOTOSYNTHESIS: ENERGY FROM SUNLIGHTBlue and red wavelengthsare absorbed by chlorophyll aand result in the highest ratesof photosynthesis.400 450 500 550Wavelength (nm)600 650 700 750Visible spectrumAbsorption spectrumof chlorophyll aAction spectrumof photosynthesisby AnacharisAnacharisAbsorbance/activity10.6 Absorption and Action Spectra The absorption spectrumof the purified pigment chlorophyll a from the aquatic plant Anacharisis similar to the action spectrum obtained when different wavelengthsof light are shone on the intact plant and the rate of photosynthesisis measured. In the thicker leaves of land plants, the action spectrashow less of a dip in the green region (500–650 nm).O OHCHH3CCH3CH3CH3H2CH3CCH2CH2O CHHN NN NMgOCH3CHCH2CH2CHHC CH(CHO in chlorophyll b)CCOCLight is absorbed by thecomplex ring structure ofa chlorophyll molecule.Hydrocarbon tails securechlorophyll molecules tohydrophobic proteins insidethe thylakoid membrane.ChloroplastThylakoidThylakoid lumenStromaThylakoidmembraneChlorophyllmoleculesProteins10.7 The Molecular Structure ofChlorophyll Chlorophyll consists of acomplex ring structure (green area) with amagnesium atom at the center, plus ahydrocarbon “tail.” The tail anchorschlorophyll molecules to integral membraneproteins in the thylakoid membrane.Chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b are identicalexcept for the replacement of amethyl group (—CH3 ) with analdehyde group (—CHO) atthe upper right.pigment molecule absorbs a photon and enters an excited state(see Figure 10.5), there are several alternative fates for the absorbedenergy:• It can be released as heat and/or light.• It may be rapidly transferred to a neighboring pigmentmolecule.• It can be used as free energy to drive a chemical reaction.When the excited molecule gives up the absorbed energy it returnsto the ground state.Sometimes the absorbed energy is given off as heat and light,in a process called fluorescence. Because some of the energy ofthe original absorbed photon is lost as heat, the photon that isreleased as fluorescence has less energy and a longer wavelengththan the absorbed light. When there is fluorescence, thereare no permanent chemical changes made or biological functionsperformed—no chemical work is done.On the other hand, the excited pigment molecule may passthe absorbed energy along to another molecule—provided thatthe target molecule is very near, has the right orientation, andhas the appropriate structure to receive the energy. This is whathappens in photosynthesis.The pigments in photosynthetic organisms are arranged intoenergy-absorbing antenna systems, also called light-harvestingcomplexes. These form part of a large multi-protein complex calleda photosystem. The photosystem spans the thylakoid membrane,and consists of multiple antenna systems, with their associatedpigment molecules, all surrounding a reaction center. The pigmentmolecules in the antenna systems are packed together insuch a way that the excitation energy from an absorbed photoncan be passed along from one pigment molecule to another (Figure10.8). Excitation energy moves from pigments that absorbshorter wavelengths (higher energy) to pigments that absorblonger wavelengths (lower energy). Thus the excitation ends upin the pigment molecules that absorb the longest wavelengths.These pigment molecules are in the reaction center of the photosystem,and form special associations with the photosystem proteins(see Figure 10.8). The ratio of antenna pigments to reactioncenter pigments can be quite high (over 300:1).The reaction center converts the absorbed light energy intochemical energy. A pigment molecule in the reaction centerabsorbs sufficient energy that it actually gives up its excited electron(is chemically oxidized) and becomes positively charged.In plants, the reaction center contains a pair of chlorophyll amolecules. There are many other chlorophyll a molecules in theantenna systems, but because of their interactions with antennaproteins, all of them absorb light at shorter wavelengths thanthe pair in the reaction center.Excited chlorophylls in the reaction centeract as electron donorsChlorophyll has two vital roles in photosynthesis:• It absorbs light energy and transforms it into excitedelectrons.• It transfers those electrons to other molecules, initiatingchemical changes.We have dealt with the first role; now we turn to the second.Photosynthesis harvests chemical energy by using the excitedchlorophyll molecules in the reaction center as electrondonors (reducing agents) to reduce a stable electron acceptor(see Figure 10.8). Ground-state chlorophyll (symbolized by Chl)is not much of a reducing agent, but excited chlorophyll (Chl*)is a good one. This is because in the excited molecule, one of theelectrons has moved to a shell that is farther away from the nucleusthan the shell it normally occupies. This electron is heldless tightly than in the normal state, and it can be transferred ina redox reaction to an electron acceptor (an oxidizing agent):Chl* + acceptor →Chl+ + acceptor –This, then, is the first consequence of light absorption by chlorophyll:a reaction center chlorophyll (Chl*) loses its excited electron ina redox reaction and becomes Chl+ (because it gives up a negativecharge—it gets oxidized).Reduction leads to electron transportThe electron acceptor that is reduced by Chl* is the firstin a chain of electron carriers in the thylakoid membranethat participate in a process termed electron transport. Thisenergetically “downhill” series of reductions and oxidationsis similar to what occurs in the respiratory chain of10.2 | HOW DOES PHOTOSYNTHESIS CONVERT LIGHT ENERGY INTO CHEMICAL ENERGY? 195e–e–The energized electron from the chlorophyll moleculescan be passed on to an electron acceptor to reduce it.Light energy isabsorbed by antennachlorophylls andpassed on to thereaction center.Photosystem embeddedin thylakoid membraneReaction centerChlorophyllmoleculePhotonHydrocarbontailProteinsExcited stateElectronacceptor10.8 Energy Transfer and Electron Transport Rather than being lost asfluorescence, energy from a photon may be transferred from one pigmentmolecule to another. In a photosystem, energy is transferred through a seriesof molecules to one or more pigment molecules in the reaction center. If areaction center molecule becomes sufficiently excited, it will give up its excitedelectron to an electron acceptor.mitochondria (see Section 9.3). The final electron acceptor isNADP+ (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate), whichgets reduced:NADP+ + H+ + 2 e–→NADPHThe energy-rich NADPH is a stable, reduced coenzyme.There are two different systems of electron transport in photosynthesis:• Noncyclic electron transport produces NADPH and ATP. Essentially,the excited electron is “lost” from chlorophyll andthe transport process ends up with a reduced coenzyme.• Cyclic electron transport produces only ATP. Essentially, thetransport process ends up with the excited electron returningto chlorophyll, after giving up energy to make ATP.We’ll consider these two systems before describing the productionof ATP from ADP and Pi.Noncyclic electron transport produces ATP and NADPHIn noncyclic electron transport, light energy is used to oxidizewater, forming O2, H+, and electrons. In quantitative terms thiswould beH2O →2 H+ + 1/2 O2 + 2 e–We saw above that a key reaction in photosynthesis occurswhen chlorophyll that is excited by absorbing light (Chl*) givesup its excited electron, becoming oxidized:Chl* →Chl+ + e–Because it lacks an electron, Chl+ is very unstable; it has a verystrong tendency to “grab” an electron from another molecule toreplenish the one it lost.Chl+ + e–→ChlSo in chemical terms, Chl+ is a strong oxidizing agent. The replenishingelectrons come from water, splitting the H–O–H bonds.H2O →1/2 O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e–2 e– + 2 Chl+→2 ChlOverall: 2 Chl* + H2O →2 Chl + 2 H+ + 1/2 O2Notice that this is a more precise description of what Ruben andKamen had found, namely that the source of O2 in photosynthesisis H2O (see Figure 10.2).The electrons are passed from chlorophyll to NADP+ througha chain of electron carriers in the thylakoid membrane. Theseredox reactions are exergonic, and some of the released free energyis ultimately used to form ATP by chemiosmosis (see p. 180).TWO PHOTOSYSTEMS ARE REQUIRED Noncyclic electron transportrequires the participation of two different photosystems in thethylakoid membrane. What is the evidence of the existence ofthese two photosystems? In 1957, Robert Emerson at the Universityof Illinois shone light of various wavelengths onto cells ofChlorella, a freshwater protist. Both red light (wavelength 680 nm)and far-red light (700 nm) resulted in modest rates of photosynthesis,as measured by O2 production. But when the two lightswere combined, the rate of photosynthesis was much greater thanthe rates under either red light or far red light. In fact it wasgreater than the two rates added together. This phenomenon wastermed photo enhancement (Figure 10.9). Afew years later, photoenhancement was explained by the existence of not one but tworeaction centers, which act together to enhance photosynthesis.• Photosystem I uses light energy to pass an excited electronto NADP+, reducing it to NADPH.• Photosystem II uses light energy to oxidize water molecules,producing electrons, protons (H+), and O2.The reaction center for photosystem I contains a pair of chlorophylla molecules called P700 because it can best absorb light witha wavelength of 700 nm. Similarly, the pair of chlorophyll a moleculesin the photosystem II reaction center is called P680 becauseit absorbs light maximally at 680 nm. Thus photosystem II requiresphotons that are somewhat more energetic (i.e., haveshorter wavelengths) than those required by photosystem I. Tokeep noncyclic electron transport going, both photosystems mustbe constantly absorbing light, thereby boosting electrons to highershells from which they may be captured by specific electron acceptors.Amodel for the way photosystems I and II interact andcomplement each other is called the “Z scheme,” because whenthe path of the electrons is placed along an axis of rising energylevel, it resembles a sideways letter Z (Figure 10.10).ELECTRON TRANSPORT: THE Z SCHEME In the Z scheme model,which describes the reactions of noncyclic electron transportfrom water to NADP+, photosystem II comes before photosystemI. When photosystem II absorbs photons, electrons passfrom P680 to the primary electron acceptor and P680* is oxidizedto P680+. Then an electron from the oxidation of water is passedto P680+, reducing it to P680 once again, so that it can receive moreenergy from neighboring chlorophyll molecules in the antennasystems. The electrons from photosystem II pass through a seriesof transfer reactions, one of which is directly responsible forthe physical movement of protons from the stroma (the matrixoutside the thylakoids) across the thylakoid membrane and intothe lumen (see Figure 10.12). In addition to these protons, theprotons derived from the splitting of water are deposited intothe thylakoid lumen. Furthermore, protons in the stroma areFar-redlight onOff Red light Off OffonBothlights onTimeRelative rate ofphotosynthesis10.9 Two Photosystems The absorption and action spectra forchlorophyll and photosynthesis indicated that the rate of photosynthesiswould increase in red light. Robert Emerson shone red (660 nm) and farred(>700 nm) light both separately and together on algal cells to look forcooperative effects.196 CHAPTER 10 | PHOTOSYNTHESIS: ENERGY FROM SUNLIGHTconsumed during the reduction of NADP+, and together thesereactions create a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane,which provides the energy for ATP synthesis.In photosystem I, the P700 molecules in the reaction center becomeexcited to P700*, leading to the reduction of an electron carriercalled ferredoxin (Fd) and the production of P700+. P700+ returnsto the reduced state by accepting electrons passed throughthe electron transport system from photosystem II. Having identifiedthe role of the electrons produced by photosystem II, wecan now ask, “What is the role of the electrons transferred toFd from photosystem I?” These electrons are used in the last stepof noncyclic electron transport, in which two electrons and a protonare used to reduce a molecule of NADP+ to NADPH.In summary:• Noncyclic electron transport extracts electrons from waterand passes them ultimately to NADPH, utilizing energyabsorbed by photosystems I and II, and resulting in ATPsynthesis.• Noncyclic electron transport yields NADPH, ATP, and O2.Cyclic electron transport produces ATP but no NADPHNoncyclic electron transport results in the production of ATP andNADPH. However, as we will see, the light-independent reactionsof photosynthesis require more ATP than NADPH + H+.If only the noncyclic pathway is operating, there is the possibilitythat there will not be enough ATP formed. Cyclic electrontransport makes up for the imbalance. This pathway,which produces only ATP, is called cyclic because an electronpassed from an excited chlorophyll molecule at the outset cyclesback to the same chlorophyll molecule at the end of thechain of reactions (Figure 10.11).Cyclic electron transport begins and ends in photosystem I.AP700 chlorophyll molecule in the reaction center absorbs a photonand enters the excited state, P700*. The excited electron ispassed from P700* to a primary acceptor, and then to oxidizedferredoxin (Fdox), producing reduced ferredoxin (Fdred). Fdredpasses its added electron to a different oxidizing agent, plastoquinone(PQ, a small organic molecule), resulting in the transferof two H+ from the stroma to the thylakoid lumen. The electronpasses from reduced PQ through the electron transportsystem until it completes its cycle by returning to P700+, restoringit to its uncharged form, P700. This electron transport is carriedout by plastocyanin (PC) and cytochromes that are similarto those of the mitochondrial respiratory chain.By the time the electron from P700* travels through the electrontransport system and comes back to reduce P700+, all theenergy from the original photon has been released. The releasedenergy is stored in the form of a proton gradient that can be usedto produce ATP.Chemiosmosis is the source of the ATP produced inphotophosphorylationIn Chapter 9 we describe the chemiosmotic mechanism for ATPformation in the mitochondrion. A similar mechanism, calledphotophosphorylation, operates in the chloroplast, where electrontransport is coupled to the transport of protons (H+) across10.2 | HOW DOES PHOTOSYNTHESIS CONVERT LIGHT ENERGY INTO CHEMICAL ENERGY? 197The Chl in the reaction center ofphotosystem II absorbs lightmaximally at 680 nm, becomingChl*. Water gets oxidized.1 2 H+ from H2O and electron transport 3 4through the electron transport chaincapture energy for the chemiosmoticsynthesis of ATP.The Chl in the reaction center ofphotosystem I absorbs lightmaximally at 700 nm, becomingChl*.Photosystem I reducesferredoxin, which inturn reduces NADP+to NADPH.e–e–e–P700+Energy of moleculesNADP+reductaseFdNADP+NADPH+H2OO22P680 1/2PhotonPhotonH+H+e–e–Electron transportADP + Pi ATP2Photosystem I2 e–Photosystem II10.10 Noncyclic Electron Transport Uses Two PhotosystemsAbsorption of light energy by chlorophyll molecules in the reaction centersof photosystems I and II allows them to pass electrons into a series ofredox reactions. The term “Z scheme” describes the path (blue arrows) ofelectrons as they travel through the two photosystems. On this schemethe vertical positions represent the energy levels of the molecules in theelectron transport system.the thylakoid membrane, resulting in a proton gradientacross the membrane (Figure 10.12).The electron carriers in the thylakoid membraneare oriented so that protons are actively pumpedfrom the stroma into the lumen of the thylakoid.Thus the lumen becomes acidic with respect to thestroma, resulting in an electrochemical gradientacross the thylakoid membrane, whose bilayer is notpermeable to H+. Water oxidation and NADP+ reductionalso contribute to this gradient, whichdrives the movement of protons back out of the thylakoidlumen through specific protein channels inthe thylakoid membrane. These channels are enzymes—ATP synthases—that couple the movementof protons to the formation of ATP, as they do in mitochondria(see Figure 9.9). Indeed, chloroplast ATPsynthase is about 60 percent identical to human mitochondrialATP synthase—a remarkable similarity,given that plants and animals had their most recent198 CHAPTER 10 | PHOTOSYNTHESIS: ENERGY FROM SUNLIGHTThe Chl* in the reaction center ofphotosystem I passes electrons to anelectron carrier, ferredoxin, leavingpositively charged chlorophyll (Chl+).431The carriers of theelectron transport chainare in turn reduced.2Energy fromelectron flow iscaptured forchemiosmoticsynthesis of ATP.The last reduced electroncarrier passes electrons toelectron-deficient chlorophyll,allowing the reactionsto start again.Energy of moleculesPhotosystem IFdElectron transportP700e–e–e–PhotonATP ADP + Pi10.11 Cyclic Electron Transport Traps Light Energyas ATP Cyclic electron transport produces ATP, but noNADPH.Protons are actively transported into thethylakoid lumen by proteins in the photosyntheticelectron transport chain, usingthe energy of electrons from photosystem II.ATP synthase couples theformation of ATP to the movementof protons back into the stroma.H+H+ELECTRONTRANSPORTPhotonPhotonNADPreductaseATPsynthase+Photosystem IIPhotosystem IADP Pi ATPNADP+NADPHPCFdCytPQ22ELECTRON TRANSPORT ATP SYNTHESISThylakoid interior(high concentration of H+)Stroma(low concentration of H+)12O2H2OH+H+ H+H+H+H+H+H+H+H+ H+H+H+H+H+ H+H+e–e–e–e–e–e– e–ThylakoidPhotonCALVINCYCLENADPHCYCLEATPCYCLEStroma10.12 Chloroplasts Form ATP Chemiosmotically Compare this illustrationwith Figure 9.9, where a similar process is depicted in mitochondria.GO TO Animated Tutorial 10.2 • PhotophosphorylationyourBioPortal.comcommon ancestor more than a billion years ago. This is testimonyto the evolutionary unity of life.The mechanisms of the two enzymes are similar, but theirorientations differ. In chloroplasts, protons flow through theATP synthase out of the thylakoid lumen into the stroma (wherethe ATP is synthesized) but in mitochondria they flow out ofthe cytosol into the mitochondrial matrix.10.2 RECAPConversion of light energy into chemical energy occurswhen pigments absorb photons. Light energy isused to drive a series of protein-associated redox reactionsin the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplast.• How does chlorophyll absorb and transfer light energy?See pp. 194–195 and Figure 10.8• How are electrons produced in photosystem II andhow do they flow to photosystem I? See pp. 196–197and Figure 10.10• How does cyclic electron transport in photosystem Iresult in the production of ATP? See p. 197 and Figure10.11We have seen how light energy drives the synthesis of ATP andNADPH in the stroma of chloroplasts. We now turn to the lightindependentreactions of photosynthesis, which use energy-richATP and NADPH to reduce CO2 and form carbohydrates.How Is Chemical Energy Used to 10.3 Synthesize Carbohydrates?Most of the enzymes that catalyze the reactions of CO2 fixationare dissolved in the stroma of the chloroplast, where thosereactions take place. These enzymes use the energy in ATP andNADPH to reduce CO2 to carbohydrates. Therefore, with someexceptions, CO2 fixation occurs only in the light, when ATP andNADPH are being generated.Radioisotope labeling experiments revealedthe steps of the Calvin cycleTo identify the reactions by which the carbon from CO2 ends upin carbohydrates, scientists found a way to label CO2 so that theycould isolate and identify the compounds formed from it duringphotosynthesis. In the 1950s, Melvin Calvin, Andrew Benson, andtheir colleagues used radioactively labeled CO2 in which someof the carbon atoms were the radioisotope 14C rather than thenormal 12 C. Although 14 C emits radiation, its chemical behavioris virtually identical to that of nonradioactive 12 C.Calvin and his colleagues exposed cultures of the unicellulargreen alga Chlorella to 14CO2 for various lengths of time. Thenthey rapidly killed the cells and extracted the organic compounds.They separated the different compounds from one anotherby paper chromatography and exposed the paper to Xrayfilm (Figure 10.13). When the film was developed, darkCONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE10.13 Tracing the Pathway of CO2How is CO2 incorporated into carbohydrate during photosynthesis?What is the first stable covalent linkage thatforms with the carbon of CO2? Short exposures to 14CO2were used to identify the first compound formed from CO2.HYPOTHESIS The first product of CO2 fixation is a3-carbon molecule.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSThe initial product of CO2 fixation is 3PG.Later, the carbon from CO2 ends up inmany molecules.Algae were rapidly killed and theirmetabolites partially extracted byputting the cells in boiling ethanol.14CO2 wasinjected here.The algal extract was spottedhere and run in two directionsto separate compounds fromone another.After separation of thecompounds, the chromatogramwas overlaid with X-ray film.A chromatogram made after30 seconds of exposure to14CO2 shows 14C in manymolecules.A chromatogram madeafter 3 seconds of exposureto 14CO2 shows 14C onlyin 3PG (3-phosphoglycerate).Thin flask of green algaePaperchromatogramSecondrunFirstrunALAGLUTGLY SERASP CIT3PGG3PHEXOSE-PSUC3PGBright light source(energy for photosynthesis)GO TO Animated Tutorial 10.3 • Tracing the Pathway of CO2yourBioPortal.comspots indicated the locations of compounds containing 14C inthe paper.To discover the first compound in the pathway of CO2 fixation,Calvin and his team exposed the algae to 14CO2 for shorterand shorter periods of time. The 3-second exposure revealedthat only one compound was labeled—a 3-carbon sugar phosphatecalled 3-phosphoglycerate (3PG) (the 14C is shown in red):With successive exposures longer than 3 seconds, Calvin andhis colleagues were able to trace the route of 14C as it movedthrough a series of compounds, including monosaccharides andamino acids. It turned out that the pathway the 14C movedthrough was a cycle. In this cycle, the CO2 initially bonds covalentlyto a larger five-carbon acceptor molecule, which thenbreaks into two three-carbon molecules. As the cycle repeats acarbohydrate is produced and the initial CO2 acceptor is regenerated.This was appropriately named the Calvin cycle.The initial reaction in the Calvin cycle adds the 1-carbon CO2to an acceptor molecule, the 5-carbon compound ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP). The product is an intermediate 6-carboncompound, which quickly breaks down and forms two moleculesof 3PG (Figure 10.14). The intermediate compound is brokendown so rapidly that Calvin did not observe radioactive labelappearing in it first. But the enzyme that catalyzes itsformation, ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (rubisco),is the most abundant protein in the world! It constitutesup to 50 percent of all the protein in every plant leaf.The Calvin cycle is made up of three processesThe Calvin cycle uses the ATP and NADPH made in the lightto reduce CO2 in the stroma to a carbohydrate. Like all biochemicalpathways, each reaction is catalyzed by a specific enzyme.The cycle is composed of three distinct processes (Figure 10.15):• Fixation of CO2. As we have seen, this reaction is catalyzedby rubisco, and its stable product is 3PG.• Reduction of 3PG to form glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate(G3P). This series of reactions involves a phosphorylation(using the ATP made in the light reactions) and a reduction(using the NADPH made in the light reactions).• Regeneration of the CO2 acceptor, RuBP. Most of the G3Pends up as ribulose monophosphate (RuMP), and ATP isused to convert this compound into RuBP. So for every“turn” of the cycle, with one CO2 fixed, the CO2 acceptor isregenerated.The product of this cycle is glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate(G3P), which is a 3-carbon sugar phosphate, also called triosephosphate:In a typical leaf, five-sixths of the G3P is recycled into RuBP.There are two fates for the remaining G3P, depending on thetime of day and the needs of different parts of the plant:• Some of it is exported out of the chloroplast to the cytosol,where it is converted to hexoses (glucose and fructose).These molecules may be used in glycolysis and mitochondrialrespiration to power the activities of photosyntheticcells (see Chapter 9) or they may be converted into the disaccharidesucrose, which is transported out of the leaf toother organs in the plant. There it is hydrolyzed to its constituentmonosaccharides, which can be used as sources ofenergy or as building blocks for other molecules.CC OH HHH O PC OHGlyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P)CCOO–H OHHH OCCP3-Phosphoglycerate (3PG)Carboxyl group200 CHAPTER 10 | PHOTOSYNTHESIS: ENERGY FROM SUNLIGHTCP CCCCCH2OCOO–HO HP H2OH C OHP CH2OP CH2OCC OH OHH C OHOO–+CCCCCCC O2 +The fate of the carbonatom in CO2 is followedin red.The enzyme rubiscocatalyzes the reactionof CO2 with RuBP.The reaction intermediatesplits into two molecules of3-phosphoglycerate (3PG).CarbondioxideRubiscoRibulose 1,5-bisphosphate(RuBP)Six-carbonskeletonof reactionintermediate10.14 RuBP Is the Carbon Dioxide Acceptor CO2 isadded to a 5-carbon compound, RuBP. The resulting 6-carboncompound immediately splits into two molecules of the sugarphosphate 3PG.• As the day wears on, glucose accumulates inside of thechloroplast, and these glucose units are linked to form thepolysaccharide starch. This stored carbohydrate can then bedrawn upon during the night so that the photosynthetic tissuescan continue to export sucrose to the rest of the plant,even when photosynthesis is not taking place. In addition,starch is abundant in nonphotosynthetic organs such asroots, underground stems and seeds, where it provides aready supply of glucose to fuel cellular activities, includingplant growth.The carbohydrates produced in photosynthesis are used by theplant to make other compounds. The carbon molecules are incorporatedinto amino acids, lipids, and the building blocks ofnucleic acids—in fact all the organic molecules in the plant.The products of the Calvin cycle are of crucial importance tothe Earth’s entire biosphere. For the majority of living organismson Earth, the C—H covalent bonds generated by the cycleprovide almost all of the energy for life. Photosynthetic organisms,which are also called autotrophs (“self-feeders”), releasemost of this energy by glycolysis and cellular respiration, anduse it to support their own growth, development, and reproduction.But plants are also the source of energy for other organisms.Much plant matter ends up being consumed by heterotrophs(“other-feeders”), such as animals, which cannot photosynthesize.Heterotrophs depend on autotrophs for both rawmaterials and energy. Free energy is released from food by glycolysisand cellular respiration in heterotroph cells.Light stimulates the Calvin cycleAs we have seen, the Calvin cycle uses NADPH and ATP, whichare generated using energy from light. Two other processes connectthe light reactions with this CO2 fixation pathway. Bothconnections are indirect but significant:• Light-induced pH changes in the stroma activate someCalvin cycle enzymes. Proton pumping from the stromainto the thylakoid lumen causes an increase in the pH ofthe stroma from 7 to 8 (a tenfold decrease in H+ concentration).This favors the activation of rubisco.• The light-induced electron transport reduces disulfidebonds in four of the Calvin cycle enzymes, thereby activat-CO2 combines withits acceptor, RuBP,forming 3PG.3PG is reduced to G3Pin a two-step reactionrequiring ATP and NADPH.2About one-sixth of the G3P moleculesare used to make sugars—the outputof the cycle.431The remaining five-sixths of theG3P molecules are processedin the series of reactions thatproduce RuMP.RuMP is converted toRuBP in a reactionrequiring ATP. RuBPis ready to acceptanother CO2.5ELECTRONTRANSPORTThylakoidPhotonCALVINCYCLENADPHCYCLEATPCYCLEStromaC P P C CC P C C C P C CP P C C C C CC P C C12 NADP+ +1212 NADPH12 Pi6121210 G3POther carbon compounds6 RuMP6 RuBPCarbonfixationRegenerationof RuBPReduction andsugar production12 G3PCALVIN CYCLEADPCO2 STARTSugars66ADPATPATPH+12 3PG2 G3P10.3 | HOW IS CHEMICAL ENERGY USED TO SYNTHESIZE CARBOHYDRATES? 20110.15 The Calvin Cycle The Calvincycle uses the ATP and NADPH generatedin the light reactions and CO2 toproduce carbohydrate. Six turns of thecycle produce the equivalent of onemolecule of glucose, a hexose sugar.GO TO Web Activity 10.1 • The Calvin CycleyourBioPortal.coming them (Figure 10.16). When ferredoxin is reduced inphotosystem I (see Figure 10.10), it passes some electrons toa small, soluble protein called thioredoxin, and this proteinpasses electrons to four enzymes in the CO2 fixation pathway.Reduction of the sulfurs in the disulfide bridges ofthese enzymes (see Figure 3.5) forms SH groups and breaksthe bridges. The resulting changes in their three-dimensionalshapes activate the enzymes and increase the rate atwhich the Calvin cycle operates.10.3 RECAPATP and NADPH produced in the light reactionspower the synthesis of carbohydrates by the Calvincycle. This cycle fixes CO2, reduces it, and regeneratesthe acceptor, RuBP, for further fixation.• Describe the experiments that led to the identificationof RuBP as the initial CO2 acceptor in photosynthesis.See pp. 199–200 and Figure 10.13• What are the three processes of the Calvin cycle?See pp. 200–201 and Figure 10.15• In what ways does light stimulate the Calvin cycle?See pp. 201–202 and Figure 10.16Although all green plants carry out the Calvin cycle, some plantshave evolved variations on, or additional steps in, the lightindependentreactions. These variations and additions have permittedplants to adapt to and thrive in certain environmentalconditions. Let’s look at these environmental limitations and themetabolic bypasses that have evolved to circumvent them.How Do Plants Adapt to the 10.4 Inefficiencies of Photosynthesis?In addition to fixing CO2 during photosynthesis, rubisco can reactwith O2. This reaction leads to a process called photorespiration,which lowers the overall rate of CO2 fixation in someplants. After examining this problem, we’ll look at some biochemicalpathways and features of plant anatomy that compensatefor the limitations of rubisco.Rubisco catalyzes the reaction of RuBP with O2 or CO2As its full name indicates, rubisco is an oxygenase as well as acarboxylase—it can add O2 to the acceptor molecule RuBP insteadof CO2. The affinity of rubisco for CO2 is about ten timesstronger than its affinity for O2. This means that inside a leafwith a normal exchange of air with the outside, CO2 fixation isfavored even though the concentration of CO2 in the air is farless than that of O2. But if there is an even higher concentrationof O2 in the leaf, it acts as a competitive inhibitor, and RuBPreacts with O2 rather than CO2. This reduces the overall amountof CO2 that is converted into carbohydrates, and may play a rolein limiting plant growth.When O2 is added to RuBP, one of the products is a 2-carboncompound, phosphoglycolate:RuBP + O2→phosphoglycolate + 3-phosphoglycerate (3PG)The 3PG formed by oxygenase activity enters the Calvincycle but the phosphoglycolate does not. Plants have evolved ametabolic pathway that can partially recover the carbon in phosphoglycolate.The phosphoglycolate is hydrolyzed to glycolate,which diffuses into membrane-enclosed organelles called peroxisomes(Figure 10.17). There, a series of reactions converts itinto the amino acid glycine:glycolate + O2→glycineThe glycine then diffuses into a mitochondrion, where twoglycine molecules are converted in a series of reactions intothe amino acid serine, which goes back to the peroxisome andis converted into glycerate (a 3-carbon molecule) and CO2:2 glycine →→glycerate + CO2The glycerate moves into the chloroplast, where it is phosphorylatedto make 3PG, which enters the Calvin cycle. So overall:phosphoglycolate (4 carbons) + O2→3PG (3 carbons) + CO2This pathway thus reclaims 75 percent of the carbons fromphosphoglycolate for the Calvin cycle. In other words, the reactionof RuBP with O2 instead of CO2 reduces the net carbonfixed by the Calvin cycle by 25 percent. The pathway is calledphotorespiration because it consumes O2 and releases CO2 andbecause it occurs only in the light (due to the same enzyme activationprocesses that were mentioned above with regard tothe Calvin cycle).Why does rubisco act as an oxygenase as well as a carboxylase?Several factors are involved: active site affinities, concentrationsof CO2 and O2, and temperature.202 CHAPTER 10 | PHOTOSYNTHESIS: ENERGY FROM SUNLIGHTElectrons from lightinducedelectron flowreduce ferrodoxin.Thioredoxin in turn reducesdisulfide bonds to activateenzymes in the Calvin cycle.Electrons fromferredoxin thenreduce thioredoxin.SH SHe–PhotonSH SH S SS SFerredoxinox FerredoxinredThioredoxinInactiveenzymesActiveenzymes10.16 The Photochemical Reactions Stimulate the Calvin CycleBy reducing (breaking) disulfide bridges, electrons from the light reactionsactivate enzymes in CO2 fixation.• As noted above, rubisco has a ten times higher affinity forCO2 than for O2, and this favors CO2 fixation.• In the leaf, the relative concentrations of CO2 and O2 vary. IfO2 is relatively abundant, rubisco acts as an oxygenase andphotorespiration ensues. If CO2 predominates, rubisco fixesit for the Calvin cycle.• Photorespiration is more likely at high temperatures. On ahot, dry day, small pores in the leaf surface called stomataclose to prevent water from evaporating from the leaf (seeFigure 10.1). But this also prevents gases from entering andleaving the leaf. The CO2 concentration in the leaf falls asCO2 is used up in photosynthetic reactions, and the O2 concentrationrises because of these same reactions. As the ratioof CO2 to O2 falls, the oxygenase activity of rubisco is favored,and photorespiration proceeds.C3 plants undergo photorespirationbut C4 plants do notPlants differ in how they fix CO2, and can be distinguishedas C3 or C4 plants, based on whether the firstproduct of CO2 fixation is a 3- or 4-carbon molecule.In C3 plants such as roses, wheat, and rice, the firstproduct is the 3-carbon molecule 3PG—as we havejust described for the Calvin cycle. In these plants thecells of the mesophyll, which makes up the mainbody of the leaf, are full of chloroplasts containingrubisco (Figure 10.18A). On a hot day, these leavesclose their stomata to conserve water, and as a result,rubisco acts as an oxygenase as well as a carboxylase,and photorespiration occurs.C4 plants, which include corn, sugarcane, andtropical grasses, make the 4-carbon molecule oxaloacetateas the first product of CO2 fixation (Figure10.18B). On a hot day, they partially close theirstomata to conserve water, but their rate of photosynthesisdoes not fall, nor does photorespiration occur.What do they do differently?10.4 | HOW DO PLANTS ADAPT TO THE INEFFICIENCIES OF PHOTOSYNTHESIS? 203In the chloroplast stroma,RuBP reacts with O2.Glycolate is formed.1 Glycolate diffuses into aperoxisome, where it isconverted to glycine.2Serine moves back tothe peroxisome and isconverted to glycerate.Glycerate moves to the 4chloroplast, where it isconverted to 3PG andenters the Calvin cycle.5Glycine moves to themitochondrion and isconverted to serine,releasing CO2.3MitochondrionPeroxisomeChloroplast(A)(B)CarboxylasereactionOxygenasereactionCO2CO2Rubisco3-PGA2-PGO2O2Calvin cyclePhotorespirationCarbon gained Carbon lost10.17 Organelles of Photorespiration (A) The reactions of photorespirationtake place in the chloroplasts, peroxisomes, and mitochondria.(B) Overall, photorespiration consumes O2 and releases CO2.Mesophyll cells haverubisco and fix CO2 toRuBP to form 3PG.Bundle sheath cells havefew chloroplasts and littlerubisco; they do not fix CO2.Bundle sheath cells havemodified chloroplasts thatconcentrate CO2 around rubisco.Close proximity permits CO2“pumping” from mesophyll cellsto bundle sheath cells.Mesophyll cells have the enzymePEP carboxylase, which catalyzesthe reaction of CO2 and PEP toform the 4-carbon moleculeoxaloacetate, which is convertedto malate.(A) Arrangement of cells in a C3 leafUpper epidermisVeinSpongy mesophyll cellLower epidermis(B) Arrangement of cells in a C4 leaf10.18 Leaf Anatomy of C3 and C4 Plants Carbon dioxide fixationoccurs in different organelles and cells of the leaves in (A) C3 plants and(B) C4 plants. Cells that are tinted blue have rubisco.GO TO Web Activity 10.2 • C3 and C4 Leaf AnatomyyourBioPortal.comC4 plants perform the normal Calvin cycle, but they have anadditional early reaction that fixes CO2 without losing carbonto photorespiration. Because this initial CO2 fixation step canfunction even at low levels of CO2 and high temperatures, C4plants very effectively optimize photosynthesis under conditionsthat inhibit it in C3 plants. C4 plants have two separate enzymesfor CO2 fixation, located in different parts of the leaf (Figure10.19; see also Figure 10.18B). The first enzyme, called PEP carboxylase,is present in the cytosols of mesophyll cells near thesurface of the leaf. It fixes CO2 to a 3-carbon acceptor compound, phosphoenolpyruvate(PEP), to produce the 4-carbon fixation product, oxaloacetate.PEP carboxylase has two advantagesover rubisco:• It does not have oxygenase activity.• It fixes CO2 even at very low CO2levels.So even on a hot day when the stomataare partially closed and the ratio of O2 toCO2 rises, PEP carboxylase just keeps on fixing CO2.Oxaloacetate is converted to malate, which diffuses out ofthe mesophyll cells and into the bundle sheath cells (see Figure10.18B), located in the interior of the leaf. (Some C4 plantsconvert the oxaloacetate to aspartate instead of malate, but wewill only discuss the malate pathway here.) The bundle sheathcells contain modified chloroplasts that are designed to concentrateCO2 around the rubisco. There, the 4-carbon malate losesone carbon (is decarboxylated), forming CO2 and pyruvate. Thelatter moves back to the mesophyll cells where the 3-carbon acceptorcompound, PEP, is regenerated at the expense of ATP.Thus the role of PEP is to bind CO2 from the air in the leaf sothat it can be transferred to the bundle sheath cells, where it isdelivered to rubisco. This process essentially “pumps up” theCO2 concentration around rubisco, so that it acts as a carboxylaseand begins the Calvin cycle.C3 plants have an advantage over C4 plants in that they don’texpend extra ATP to “pump up” the concentration of CO2 nearrubisco. But this advantage begins to be outweighed under conditionsthat favor photorespiration, such as warmer seasons andclimates. Under these conditions C4 plants have the advantage.For example, Kentucky bluegrass is a C3 plant that thrives onlawns in April and May. But in the heat of summer it does notdo as well and Bermuda grass, a C4 plant, takes over the lawn.The same is true on a global scale for crops: C3 plants such assoybean, wheat, and barley have been adapted for human foodproduction in temperate climates, while C4 plants such as cornand sugarcane originated and are grown in the tropics.THE EVOLUTION OF CO2 FIXATION PATHWAYS C3 plants are certainlymore ancient than C4 plants. While C3 photosynthesis appearsto have begun about 3.5 billion years ago, C4 plants appearedabout 12 million years ago. A possible factor in theemergence of the C4 pathway is the decline in atmospheric CO2.When dinosaurs dominated Earth 100 million years ago, theconcentration of CO2 in the atmosphere was four times what itis now. As CO2 levels declined thereafter, the more efficient C4204 CHAPTER 10 | PHOTOSYNTHESIS: ENERGY FROM SUNLIGHTPEP carboxylase in C4mesophyll cells catalyzesthe formation of the 4-carboncompound oxaloacetate.1Oxaloacetate is converted tomalate, which diffuses throughplasmodesmata to a bundlesheath cell, where it isdecarboxylated, releasing CO2.2Starch grains in the bundlesheath cell indicate that theCalvin cycle is active andthat glucose (and thenstarch) is being produced.3C4 cycleCO2MesophyllcellBundlesheathcellPlasmamembraneCell wallCarboxylation4C compound4C compoundDecarboxylation3C compound3C compoundRegenerationPEPCalvincycleCO2CarboxylationReductionRegenerationMesophyllcellMesophyllcellBundlesheath cell(A)(B)Triose-P 3C sugar5C sugar10.19 The Anatomy and Biochemistry ofC4 Carbon Fixation (A) Carbon dioxide isfixed initially in the mesophyll cells, but entersthe Calvin cycle in the bundle sheath cells. (B)The two cell types share an interconnectedbiochemical pathway for CO2 assimilation.plants would have gained an advantage over their C3 counterparts.As we described in the opening essay of this chapter, CO2levels have been increasing over the past 200 years. Currently,the level of CO2 is not enough for maximal CO2 fixation by rubisco,so photorespiration occurs, reducing the growth rates ofC3 plants. Under hot conditions, C4 plants are favored. But ifCO2 levels in the atmosphere continue to rise, the reverse willoccur and C3 plants will have a comparative advantage. Theoverall growth rates of crops such as rice and wheat shouldincrease. This may or may not translate into more food, giventhat other effects of the human-spurred CO2 increase (such asglobal warming) will also alter Earth’s ecosystems.CAM plants also use PEP carboxylaseOther plants besides the C4 plants use PEP carboxylase to fixand accumulate CO2. They include some water-storing plants(called succulents) of the family Crassulaceae, many cacti,pineapples, and several other kinds of flowering plants. TheCO2 metabolism of these plants is called crassulacean acid metabolism,or CAM, after the family of succulents in which it wasdiscovered. CAM is much like the metabolism of C4 plants inthat CO2 is initially fixed into a 4-carbon compound. But inCAM plants the initial CO2 fixation and the Calvin cycle are separatedin time rather than space.• At night, when it is cooler and water loss is minimized, thestomata open. CO2 is fixed in mesophyll cells to form the 4-carbon compound oxaloacetate, which is converted intomalate and stored in the vacuole.• During the day, when the stomata close to reduce waterloss, the accumulated malate is shipped to the chloroplasts,where its decarboxylation supplies the CO2 for the Calvincycle and the light reactions supply the necessary ATP andNADPH.CAM benefits the plant by allowing it to close its stomata duringthe day. As you will learn in Chapter 35, plants lose most ofthe water that they take up in their roots by evaporation throughthe leaves (transpiration). In dry climates, closing stomata is akey to water conservation and survival.Table 10.1 compares photosynthesis in C3,C4, and CAM plants.10.4 RECAPRubisco catalyzes the carboxylation of RuBP to formtwo 3PG, and the oxygenation of RuBP to form one3PG and one phosphoglycolate. The diversion of rubiscoto its oxygenase function decreases net CO2fixation. C4 photosynthesis and CAM allow plants toadapt to environmental conditions that result in alimited availability of CO2 inside the leaf.• Explain how photorespiration recovers some of thecarbon that is channeled away from the Calvin cycle.See pp. 202–203 and Figure 10.17• What do C4 plants do to keep the concentration of CO2around rubisco high, and why? See pp. 203–204 andFigure 10.19• What is the pathway for CO2 fixation in CAM plants?See p. 205Now that we understand how photosynthesis produces carbohydrates,let’s see how the pathways of photosynthesis areconnected to other metabolic pathways.How Does Photosynthesis Interact 10.5 with Other Pathways?Green plants are autotrophs and can synthesize all the moleculesthey need from simple starting materials: CO2, H2O, phosphate,sulfate, ammonium ions (NH4+), and small quantitiesof other mineral nutrients. The NH4+ is needed to synthesizeamino acids and nucleotides, and it comes from either the conversionof nitrogen-containing molecules in soil water or theconversion of N2 gas from the atmosphere by bacteria, as wewill see in Chapter 36.Plants use the carbohydrates generated in photosynthesis toprovide energy for processes such as active transport and anabolism.Both cellular respiration and fermentation can occurin plants, although the former is far more common. Unlike photosynthesis,plant cellular respiration takes place both in thelight and in the dark.10.5 | HOW DOES PHOTOSYNTHESIS INTERACT WITH OTHER PATHWAYS? 205TABLE 10.1Comparison of Photosynthesis in C3, C4, and CAM PlantsC3 PLANTS C4 PLANTS CAM PLANTSCalvin cycle used? Yes Yes YesPrimary CO2 acceptor RuBP PEP PEPCO2-fixing enzyme Rubisco PEP carboxylase PEP carboxylaseFirst product of CO2 fixation 3PG (3-carbon) Oxaloacetate (4-carbon) Oxaloacetate (4-carbon)Affinity of carboxylase for CO2 Moderate High HighPhotosynthetic cells of leaf Mesophyll Mesophyll and bundle sheath Mesophyll with large vacuolesPhotorespiration Extensive Minimal MinimalPhotosynthesis and respiration are closely linked throughthe Calvin cycle (Figure 10.20). The partitioning of G3P is particularlyimportant:• Some G3P from the Calvin cycle takes part in the glycolysispathway and is converted into pyruvate in the cytosol. Thispyruvate can be used in cellular respiration for energy, or itscarbon skeletons can be used in anabolic reactions to makelipids, proteins, and other carbohydrates (see Figure 9.14).• Some G3P can enter a pathway that is the reverse of glycolysis(gluconeogenesis; see Section 9.5). In this case, hexosephosphatesand then sucrose are formed and transported tothe nonphotosynthetic tissues of the plant (such as the root).Energy flows from sunlight to reduced carbon in photosynthesis,then to ATP in respiration. Energy can also be stored in thebonds of macromolecules such as polysaccharides, lipids, andproteins. For a plant to grow, energy storage (as body structures)must exceed energy release; that is, overall carbon fixation byphotosynthesis must exceed respiration. This principle is thebasis of the ecological food chain, as we will see in later chapters.Photosynthesis provides most of the energy that we need forlife. Given the uncertainties about the future of photosynthesis(due to changes in CO2 levels and climate change), it wouldbe wise to seek ways to improve photosynthetic efficiency. Figure10.21 shows the various ways in which solar energy is utilizedby plants or lost. In essence, only about 5 percent of thesunlight that reaches Earth is converted into plant growth. Theinefficiencies of photosynthesis involve basic chemistry andphysics (some light energy is not absorbed by photosyntheticpigments) as well as biology (plant anatomy and leaf exposure,photorespiration, and inefficiencies in metabolic pathways).While it is hard to change chemistry and physics, biologistsmight be able to use their knowledge of plants to improve onthe basic biology of photosynthesis. This could result in a moreefficient use of resources and better food production.NucleotidesHexose-PSucroseNucleic acidsFatty acidsProteinsAmino acidsGlycerolPyruvateGLYCOLYSISGLUCONEOGENESISLipids(triglycerides)CO23PGRuMP G3PRuBPCALVINCYCLECITRIC ACIDAcetyl CoA CYCLEα-ketoglutarateNitrogenfrom soilPolysaccharides(e.g., starch)NH4+SUNLIGHT100%Wavelengths of lightthat can be absorbedby photosynthetic pigmentsfixationChemical energy storedin carbohydratesWavelengths of lightnot part of absorptionspectrum of photosyntheticpigments (e.g., green light)Inefficiency of lightreactions convertinglight to chemical energyLight energy not absorbeddue to plant structure(e.g., leaves not properlyoriented to sun)Light energy absorbed byphotosynthetic pigmentsChemical energy availablefor CO2 Inefficiency of CO2fixation pathways50%10%30%5%5%ENERGY LOSS10.21 Energy Losses During Photosynthesis As we face an increasinglyuncertain future for photosynthesis on Earth, understanding its inefficienciesbecomes increasingly important. Photosynthetic pathways preserve at mostabout 5 percent of the sun’s energy input as chemical energy in carbohydrates.10.20 Metabolic Interactions in a Plant Cell The products of theCalvin cycle are used in the reactions of cellular respiration (glycolysis andthe citric acid cycle).10.5 RECAPThe products of photosynthesisare utilized in glycolysis and thecitric acid cycle, as well as inthe synthesis of lipids, proteins,and other large molecules.• How do common intermediateslink the pathways of glycolysis,the citric acid cycle, and photosynthesis?See p. 206 and Figure10.20
10.1 What Is Photosynthesis?• In the process of photosynthesis, plants and other organismstake in CO2, water, and light energy, producing O2 and carbohydrates.SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 10.1• The light reactions of photosynthesis convert light energy intochemical energy. They produce ATP and reduce NADP+ toNADPH. Review Figure 10.3• The light-independent reactions do not use light directlybut instead use ATP and NADPH to reduce CO2, formingcarbohydrates.10.2 How Does Photosynthesis Convert Light Energyinto Chemical Energy?• Light is a form of electromagnetic radiation. It is emitted in particle-like packets called photons but has wavelike properties.• Molecules that absorb light in the visible spectrum are calledpigments. Photosynthetic organisms have several pigments,most notably chlorophylls, but also accessory pigments suchas carotenoids and phycobilins.• Absorption of a photon puts a pigment molecule in an excitedstate that has more energy than its ground state. ReviewFigure 10.5• Each compound has a characteristic absorption spectrum. Anaction spectrum reflects the biological activity of a photosyntheticorganism for a given wavelength of light. ReviewFigure 10.6• The pigments in photosynthetic organisms are arranged intoantenna systems that absorb energy from light and funnel thisenergy to a pair of chlorophyll a molecules in the reaction centerof the photosystem. Chlorophyll can act as a reducingagent, transferring excited electrons to other molecules. ReviewFigure 10.8• Noncyclic electron transport uses photosystems I and II to produceATP, NADPH and O2. Cyclic electron transport uses onlyphotosystem I and produces only ATP. Review Figures 10.10and 10.11• Chemiosmosis is the mechanism of ATP production in photophosphorylation.Review Figure 10.12, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 10.210.3 How Is Chemical Energy Used to SynthesizeCarbohydrates?• The Calvin cycle makes carbohydrates from CO2. The cycle consistsof three processes: fixation of CO2, reduction and carbohydrateproduction, and regeneration of RuBP. SEE ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 10.3• RuBP is the initial CO2 acceptor, and 3PG is the first stable productof CO2 fixation. The enzyme rubisco catalyzes the reactionof CO2 and RuBP to form 3PG. Review Figure 10.14, WEBACTIVITY 10.1• ATP and NADPH formed by the light reactions are used in thereduction of 3PG to form G3P. Review Figure 10.15• Light stimulates enzymes in the Calvin cycle, further integratingthe light-dependent and light-independent pathways.10.4 How Do Plants Adapt to the Inefficiencies ofPhotosynthesis?• Rubisco can catalyze a reaction between O2 and RuBP in additionto the reaction between CO2 and RuBP. At high temperaturesand low CO2 concentrations, the oxygenase function ofrubisco is favored over its carboxylase function.• When rubisco functions as an oxygenase, the result is photorespiration,which significantly reduces the efficiency of photosynthesis.• In C4 plants, CO2 reacts with PEP to form a 4-carbon intermediatein mesophyll cells. The 4-carbon product releases its CO2 torubisco in the bundle sheath cells in the interior of the leaf.Review Figure 10.18, WEB ACTIVITY 10.2• CAM plants operate much like C4 plants, but their initial CO2fixation by PEP carboxylase is temporally separated from theCalvin cycle, rather than spatially separated as in C4 plants.10.5 How Does Photosynthesis Interact with OtherPathways?• Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are linked through theCalvin cycle, the citric acid cycle, and glycolysis. ReviewFigure 10.20• To survive, a plant must photosynthesize more than it respires.• Photosynthesis utilizes only a small portion of the energy ofsunlight. Review Figure 10.21