John William Dawson, later Sir William Dawson, was anoutspoken critic of Charles Darwin and evolutionarytheory. Ironically, Dawson made one of the first contributionsto our understanding of the early evolution ofplants. While surveying the geology of Nova Scotia, thisCanadian scientist found a puzzling fossil fragment on theGaspé Peninsula. It was 1859—the very year in which Darwinpublished The Origin of Species.What Dawson found was the remains of a remarkableplant, which he named Psilophyton, meaning “nakedplant.” The fossilized plant appeared to have no roots andno leaves, and its stem grew both below and above theground. The aboveground part of the stem, whichbranched and ended in spore cases, was about 50 centimeterstall. Could this Devonian fossil plant representone of the stages in the momentous transition of plantsfrom an aquatic existence to the forests that cover the landtoday? Dawson presented Psilophyton and other finds in amajor lecture he delivered in 1870, but his audience wasunreceptive, with his fellow scientists chuckling that Psilophytongrew nowhere but in Dawson’s imagination. Hispublished drawing of the fossil plant was regarded as anamusing curiosity.Decades later, Dawson’s interpretation of Psilophytonwas vindicated by the work of two British botanists whostudied plant fossils. The year 1915 found Robert Kidstonand William Lang in the hills near Rhynie, Scotland, wherethey discovered evidence that a marsh had existed there400 million years ago. In the interveninghundreds of millions of years, that Devonianmarsh had become a flinty, fossil-ladenrock called chert. Although the rock nowlay in a hilly site some 50 kilometers fromthe sea, its original location must have beennear the shore.The most startling feature of the Rhyniechert was the great abundance of fossilsof a small plant with spore cases but neitherroots nor leaves—a plant, in fact, that lookedstrikingly like Dawson’s “imaginary” Psilophyton!Kidston and Lang described their find indetail and gave it the genus name Rhynia inhonor of the site of its discovery.What surprises lurk in a rock?28Making It on Land An artist’s reconstructionof the earliest vascular plant ancestors, basedon the Rhynie chert fossil bed in Scotland. Theplants in this scene are rhyniophytes. Heavilymineralized water from hot springs and geysersmay have been partly responsible for theremarkable preservation of plant fossils in theRhynie bed.28.1 How Did the Land Plants Arise?The question “Where did plants come from?” embraces twoquestions: “What were the ancestors of plants?” and “Where didthose ancestors live?” We consider both questions in this section.The land plants are monophyletic: all land plants descendfrom a single common ancestor and form a branch of the evolutionarytree of life. Although we refer to this clade of mostlyterrestrial species as land plants, some of them actually live inshallow water. One of the key shared derived traits, or synapomorphies,of the land plants is development from an embryo protectedby tissues of the parent plant. For this reason, land plantsare sometimes called embryophytes (phyton, “plant”). Landplants retain the derived features they share with the “green algae”described in Chapter 27: the use of chlorophylls a and bin photosynthesis, and the use of starch as a photosynthetic storageproduct. Both land plants and green algae have cellulose intheir cell walls.There are several ways to define “plant” and still refer to aclade (Figure 28.1; see also Figure 27.1). Throughout this bookand in everyday language, the unmodified common name“plants” usually refers to the land plants. Some biologists, however,use the term “plants” to include land plants plus someclosely related groups of green algae; this monophyletic groupis also known as the streptophytes. The addition of the remainderof the green algae to the streptophytes results in a more inclusiveclade, commonly called the green plants, which encompassesall the groups that possess chlorophyll b. Green plants,streptophytes, and land plants each have been called “the plantkingdom” by different authorities; others take an even broaderview and include red algae and glaucophytes as “plants.” Toavoid confusion in this chapter, we will use modifying terms(“land plants” or “green plants,” for example) to refer to the variousclades shown in Figure 28.1.There are ten major groups of land plantsThe land plants that exist today fall naturally into ten majorclades (Table 28.1). Members of seven of those clades possesswell-developed vascular systems that transport materialsthroughout the plant body. We call these seven groups, collectively,the vascular plants, or tracheophytes, because they allpossess fluid-conducting cells called tracheids. Taken together,the seven groups of vascular plants constitute a clade.The remaining three clades (liverworts, hornworts, andmosses) lack tracheids. These three groups are sometimes collectivelycalled bryophytes, but in this text we reserve that termfor the largest monophyletic group—the mosses—and referto these three clades collectively as nonvascular land plants.IN THIS CHAPTER we will see how plants first invadedland, how land plants evolved, and how plant clades diversified,resulting in plants ever better equipped to face thechallenges of terrestrial environments. The descriptions herewill concentrate on those land plants that lack seeds. Chapter29 considers the seed plants that dominate the terrestrialscene today.Rhynia is just one of several ancient groups of plantsthat lack seeds and other features of more modernplants. The glory days of the seedless plants are longpast, but many of them—most notably the mosses andferns—are still abundant. We rely on these survivingplants, as well as on fossils, to help us understand theevolution of land plants from aquatic algae growing atthe edge of a sea or marsh. Much of the fossilized history,and the great bulk of the mass of seedless plants,was preserved as coal, which today is an economicallyimportant substance that we burn as fuel and to produceelectricity. What a library of botanical history thefossils in the world’s coal beds provide!CHAPTER OUTLINE28.1 How Did the Land Plants Arise?28.2 How Did Plants Colonize and Thrive on Land?28.3 What Features Distinguish the Vascular Plants?28.4 What Are the Major Clades of Seedless Plants?Green Mansions Seedless plants—mosses and ferns—dominate the understory of this pristine rainforest on the islandof Maui, Hawaii. The only seed plants to be seen are the trees,which are almost obscured by mosses and ferns.Note, however, that these three groups do not form a clade. Somenonvascular land plants have conducting cells, but none havetracheids.Where did the land plants come from? To determine whichliving organisms are most closely related to land plants, biologistshave considered several of the synapomorphies of landplants and looked for their origins in various other groups.The land plants arose from a green algal cladeSeveral microscopic structural features, backed by clear-cut evidencefrom molecular studies, indicate that the closest relativesof the land plants are two groups of aquatic green algae, theColeochaetales and the Charales (see Figure 28.1). Both of thesealgal groups retain their eggs in the parental organism, as do landplants. Of these two candidates, Charales is thought to be the sister-group of land plants, based on the following synapomorphies:• Plasmodesmata join the cytoplasm of adjacent cells (see Figure34.6)• Growth is branching and apical (from the tip)590 CHAPTER 28 | PLANTS WITHOUT SEEDS: FROM WATER TO LANDTABLE 28.1Classification of Land PlantsGROUP COMMON NAME CHARACTERISTICSNONVASCULAR LAND PLANTSHepatophyta Liverworts No filamentous stage; gametophyte flatAnthocerophyta Hornworts Embedded archegonia; sporophyte grows basally (from the ground)Bryophyta Mosses Filamentous stage; sporophyte grows apically (from the tip)VASCULAR PLANTSLycopodiophyta Lycophytes: Club mosses and allies Microphylls in spirals; sporangia in leaf axilsMonilophyta Horsetails, whisk ferns, ferns Differentiation between main stem and side branches (overtopping growth)SEED PLANTSGymnospermsCycadophyta Cycads Compound leaves; swimming sperm; seeds on modified leavesGinkgophyta Ginkgo Deciduous; fan-shaped leaves; swimming spermGnetophyta Gnetophytes Vessels in vascular tissue; opposite, simple leavesConiferophyta Conifers Seeds in cones; needlelike or scalelike leavesAngiosperms Flowering plants Endosperm; carpels; gametophytes much reduced; seeds within fruitRed algaeGlaucophytesChlorophytes (most ”green algae”)Chlorophyll b;starch storageChloroplasts(primary endosymbiosis)Branched apical growth; plasmodesmata;similarities of peroxisomes, mitosis,cytokinesis, and chloroplast structureEmbryo; cuticle; multicellularsporophyte; gametangia;thick-walled sporesOther “green algae”Coleochaetales(”green algae”)Charales(”green algae”)Land plants(embryophytes)AncestralorganismPlantaeGreen plantsStreptophytesRetention of egg in theparental organism28.1 What Is a Plant? In its broadest definition, the term “plant”includes the green plants, red algae, and glaucophytes—all the groupsdescended from a common ancestor with primary chloroplasts. Somebiologists restrict the term to the green plants (those with chlorophyll b)or, even more narrowly, to the land plants (embryophytes).• Similar peroxisome contents, mechanics of mitosis and cytokinesis,and chloroplast structureBoth of these algal groups, however, have some features thatare similar to groups of land plants. The Charales, as representedby stoneworts of the genus Chara (Figure 28.2A), exhibitthe branching growth form found among most land plants. Butthe flattened growth form of many members of Coleochaetales,as represented by the genus Coleochaete (Figure 28.2B), is morelike the growth form of basal land plants such as liverworts.28.1 RECAPLand plants are photosynthetic organisms thatdevelop from embryos protected by parental planttissue.• Explain the different possible uses of the term “plant.”See p. 589 and Figure 28.1• What is the key difference between the vascular plantsand the other three clades of land plants? See pp.589–590 and Table 28.1• What evidence supports the phylogenetic relationshipbetween land plants and Charales? See p. 590The green algal ancestors of the land plants lived at the marginsof ponds or marshes, ringing them with a green mat. It was fromsuch a marginal habitat, which was sometimes wet and sometimesdry, that early plants made the transition onto land.How Did Plants Colonize 28.2 and Thrive on Land?Land plants, or their immediate ancestors in those ancient greenmats, first appeared in the terrestrial environment between 400and 500 million years ago. How did they survive in an environmentthat differed so dramatically from the aquatic environmentof their ancestors? While the water essential for life iseverywhere in the aquatic environment, water is difficult to obtainand retain in the terrestrial environment.Adaptations to life on land distinguish land plantsfrom green algaeNo longer bathed in fluid, organisms on land faced potentiallylethal desiccation (drying). Large terrestrial organisms had todevelop ways to transport water to body parts distant from thesource. And whereas water provides aquatic organisms withsupport against gravity, a plant living on land must either havesome other support system or sprawl unsupported on theground. A land plant must also use different mechanisms fordispersing its gametes and progeny than its aquatic relatives,which can simply release them into the water. Survival on landrequired numerous adaptations. The first colonists—the nonvascularland plants—met at least some of these challenges.Most of the characteristics that distinguish land plants fromgreen algae are evolutionary adaptations to life on land:• The cuticle, a waxy covering that retards water loss• Stomata, small closable openings in leaves and stems thatare used to regulate gas exchange (stomata are not presentin liverworts)• Gametangia, multicellular organs that enclose plant gametesand prevent them from drying out• Embryos, young plants contained within a protectivestructure• Certain pigments that afford protection against themutagenic ultraviolet radiation that bathes the terrestrialenvironment• Thick spore walls containing a polymer (called sporopollenin)that protects the spores from desiccation andresists decay• Amutually beneficial association with a fungus that promotesnutrient uptake from the soilThe cuticle may be the most important—and earliest—of thesefeatures. Composed of several unique waxy lipids (see Section3.4) that coat the leaves and stems of land plants, the cuticle hasseveral functions, the most obvious and important of which isto keep water from evaporating from the plant body.As ancient plants colonized land, they modified the terrestrialenvironment by contributing to the formation of soil. Acidsecreted by plants helps break down rock, and the organic compoundsproduced by the breakdown of dead plants contributeto soil structure. Such effects are repeated today as plants growin new areas.28.2 | HOW DID PLANTS COLONIZE AND THRIVE ON LAND? 591(A) Chara vulgaris (stonewort)(B) Coleochaete sp.28.2 The Closest Relatives of Land Plants (A) The land plants probablyevolved from a common ancestor shared with the Charales, a greenalgal group. (B) This species of Coleochaete is a representative of theColeochaetales, the sister group of Charales plus land plants.Nonvascular land plants usually live wherewater is readily availableLiving species of liverworts, mosses, and hornworts are thoughtto be similar in many ways to the earliest land plants. Most ofthese plants grow in dense mats, usually in moist habitats. Eventhe largest of these species are only about half a meter tall, andmost are only a few centimeters tall or long. Why have they notevolved to be taller? The probable answer is that they lack anefficient vascular system for conducting water and mineralsfrom the soil to distant parts of the plant body.The nonvascular land plants lack the leaves, stems, and rootsthat characterize the vascular plants, although they have structuresanalogous to each. Their growth pattern allows water tomove through the mats of plants by capillary action. They haveleaflike structures that readily catch and hold any water thatsplashes onto them. They are small enough that minerals canbe distributed throughout their bodies by diffusion. As in allland plants, layers of maternal tissue protect their embryos fromdesiccation. Nonvascular land plants also have a cuticle, althoughit is often very thin (or even absent in some species) andthus is not highly effective in retarding water loss.Most nonvascular land plants live on the soil or on vascularplants, but some grow on bare rock, dead and fallen tree trunks,and even on buildings. The ability to grow on such marginalsurfaces results from a mutualistic association with the glomeromycetes,a clade of fungi. The earliest association of landplants and fungi dates back at least 460 million years. This mutualismprobably facilitated the absorption of water and minerals,especially phosphorus, from the first soils.Nonvascular land plants are widely distributed over six continentsand even exist (albeit very locally) on the coast of theseventh, Antarctica. They are well adapted to their environments.Most are terrestrial. Although a few species live in freshwater, these aquatic forms are descended from terrestrial ones.None live in the oceans.Land plants and green algae differ not just in structure but alsoin their life cycles. Differences in the life cycles of land plants andthose of their ancestors are partially a function of the relativedependence of these respective plant groups on a water supplyfor reproduction.Life cycles of land plants feature alternationof generationsAuniversal feature of the life cycles of land plants is alternationof generations (Figure 28.3). Recall from Section 27.4 the twohallmarks of alternation of generations:• The life cycle includes both a multicellular diploid stageand a multicellular haploid stage.• Gametes are produced by mitosis, not by meiosis. Meiosisproduces spores that develop into multicellular haploidorganisms.If we begin looking at the land plant life cycle at the single-cellstage—the diploid zygote—then the first phase of the cycle isthe formation, by mitosis and cytokinesis, of a multicellular embryo,which eventually grows into a mature diploid plant. Thismulticellular diploid plant is the sporophyte (“spore plant”).Cells contained within sporangia (singular sporangium) of thesporophyte undergo meiosis to produce haploid, unicellularspores. By mitosis and cytokinesis, a spore forms a haploid plant.This multicellular haploid plant, called the gametophyte (“gameteplant”), produces haploid gametes by mitosis. The fusionof two gametes (syngamy, or fertilization) forms a single diploidcell—the zygote—and the cycle is repeated (Figure 28.4).The sporophyte generation extends from the zygote throughthe adult multicellular diploid plant and sporangium formation;the gametophyte generation extends from the spore throughthe adult multicellular haploid plant to the gametes. The transitionsbetween the generations are accomplished by fertilizationand meiosis. In all land plants, the sporophyte and gametophytediffer genetically: the sporophyte has diploid cells, andthe gametophyte has haploid cells.There is a trend toward reduction of the gametophyte generationin plant evolution. In the nonvascular land plants, thegametophyte is larger, longer-lived, and more self-sufficientthan the sporophyte. In those groups that appeared later in plantevolution, however, the sporophyte generation is the larger,longer-lived, and more self-sufficient one. In the seed plants,this evolutionary trend has led to a condition in which wateris not required for the sperm to reach the egg.The sporophytes of nonvascular land plants aredependent on gametophytesIn nonvascular land plants, the conspicuous green structure visibleto the naked eye is the gametophyte (see Figure 28.4). Thisis in contrast to vascular plants, such as ferns and seed plants,in which the familiar forms are sporophytes. The gametophyteof liverworts, hornworts, and mosses is photosynthetic and592 CHAPTER 28 | PLANTS WITHOUT SEEDS: FROM WATER TO LANDMulticellularsporophyteMulticellulargametophyteDIPLOID (2n)(sporophyte)HAPLOID (n)(gametophyte)Spore GametesZygoteMeiosisMitosisMitosisMitosisFertilization28.3 Alternation of Generations in Plants A multicellular diploidsporophyte generation produces spores by meiosis and alternates with amulticellular haploid gametophyte generation that produces gametes bymitosis.therefore nutritionally independent; the sporophyte may or maynot be photosynthetic, but it is always nutritionally dependenton the gametophyte and remains permanently attached to it.In nonvascular land plants, a sporophyte produces unicellularhaploid spores as products of meiosis within a sporangium.A spore germinates, giving rise to a multicellular haploid gametophytewhose cells contain chloroplasts and are thus photosynthetic.Eventually gametes form within specialized sex organs,the gametangia. The archegonium is a multicellular,flask-shaped female sex organ with a long neck and a swollenbase, which produces a single egg. The antheridium is a malesex organ in which sperm, each bearing two flagella, are producedin large numbers (see the insets in Figure 28.4). Botharchegonia and antheridia are produced on the same individual,so each individual can have both male and female reproductivestructures. Fertilization is often between adjacent individuals,however, which helps maintain genetic diversity in thepopulation.Once released from the antheridium, the sperm must swim orbe splashed by raindrops to a nearby archegonium on the sameor a neighboring plant—a constraint that reflects the aquaticorigins of the nonvascular land plants’ ancestors. The sperm areaided in this task by chemical attractants released by the egg orthe archegonium. Before sperm can enter the archegonium, cer-28.2 | HOW DID PLANTS COLONIZE AND THRIVE ON LAND? 593Fertilization in nonvascular landplants requires water so thatsperm can swim to eggs.The sporophyte is attached toand nutritionally dependent onthe gametophyte.DIPLOID (2n)SporophytegenerationHAPLOID (n)Gametophyte generationEmbryo(2n)UngerminatedsporesGametophyte (n)GerminatingsporeSporophyte (2n)Gametophytes (n)ProtonemaArchegonium (n)Archegonium (n)Antheridium (n)Antheridium (n)Sperm (n)WaterEgg (n)SporangiumBudRhizoidMeiosis Fertilization28.4 A Moss Life Cycle The life cycles of nonvascular land plants,exemplified here by that of a moss, are dependent on an external sourceof liquid water for their fertilization. The visible green structure of suchplants is the gametophyte.GO TO Animated Tutorial 28.1 • Life Cycle of a MossyourBioPortal.comtain cells in the neck of the archegonium must break down, leavinga water-filled canal through which the sperm swim to completetheir journey. Note that all of these events require liquid water.On arrival at the egg, the nucleus of a sperm fuses with theegg nucleus to form a diploid zygote. Mitotic divisions of thezygote produce a multicellular, diploid sporophyte embryo. Thebase of the archegonium grows and surrounds the embryo,which protects the embryo during its early development. Eventually,the developing sporophyte elongates sufficiently to breakout of the archegonium, but it remains connected to the gametophyteby a “foot” that is embedded in the parent tissue andabsorbs water and nutrients from it. The sporophyte then producesa sporangium, within which meiotic divisions producespores and thus the next gametophyte generation.28.2 RECAPNonvascular land plants were the first plants toinhabit a terrestrial environment. The transition toland required numerous evolutionary developments,including the cuticle, gametangia, and protectedembryos.• Describe several adaptations of plants to the terrestrialenvironment. See p. 591• Explain what is meant by alternation of generations.See p. 592 and Figure 28.3• Why do nonvascular land plants require liquid waterfor fertilization? See pp. 592–594• In the nonvascular land plants, how is the sporophytedependent on the gametophyte? See pp. 593–594Further adaptations to the terrestrial environment appeared asplants continued to evolve. One of the most important of theselater adaptations was the appearance of vascular tissues.What Features Distinguish 28.3 the Vascular Plants?The first land plants were nonvascular, lacking both water-conductingand food-conducting tissues. These plants did not leavea very complete fossil record, however, because most nonvascularplant species readily decompose, leaving little or nothingto fossilize.That the nonvascular land plants evolved tens of millionsof years before the earliest vascular plants is supported by extensivephylogenetic and molecular-clock analyses of DNA sequences.The first plants possessing vascular tissue (characterizedby fluid-conducting tracheid cells) arose much later(Figure 28.5).Vascular tissues transport water and dissolved materialsVascular plants differ from the other land plants in crucial ways,one of which is the possession of a well-developed vascular systemconsisting of tissues specialized for the transport of materialsfrom one part of the plant to another. One type of vasculartissue, the xylem, conducts water and minerals from the soil toaerial parts of the plant. Because some of its cell walls containa stiffening substance called lignin, xylem also provides supportagainst gravity in the terrestrial environment. The other type ofvascular tissue, the phloem, conducts the products of photosynthesisfrom sites where they are produced or released to siteswhere they are used or stored. (Xylem and phloem are furtherdiscussed in Chapters 34 and 35.)Familiar vascular plants include the club mosses, ferns,conifers, and angiosperms (flowering plants). Although theyare an extraordinarily large and diverse group, the vascularplants can be said to have been launched by a single evolutionaryevent. Sometime during the Paleozoic era, probably in themid-Silurian (430 Mya), the sporophyte generation of a nowlong-extinct plant produced a new cell type, the tracheid. Thetracheid is the principal water-conducting element of the xylemin all vascular plants except the angiosperms, and even in theangiosperms, tracheids persist along with a more specializedand efficient system of vessels and fibers that are derived fromthem.The evolution of tracheid cells had two important consequences.First, these cells provided a pathway for transport ofwater and mineral nutrients from a source of supply to regionsof need in the plant body. Second, the stiff cell walls of tracheidsprovided something almost completely lacking among nonvascularplants: rigid structural support. Support is important ina terrestrial environment because it allows plants to grow upwardas they compete for sunlight to power photosynthesis. Ataller plant can receive direct sunlight and photosynthesizemore readily than a shorter plant, whose leaves may be shadedby the taller one. Increased height also improves the dispersalof spores. Thus tracheids set the stage for the complete and permanentinvasion of land by plants.The vascular plants featured another evolutionary novelty:a branching, independent sporophyte. Abranching sporophytecan produce more spores than an unbranched body, and itcan develop in complex ways. The sporophyte of a vascularplant is nutritionally independent of the gametophyte at maturity.Among the vascular plants, the sporophyte is the largeand obvious plant that one normally pays attention to in nature.In contrast, the sporophyte of nonvascular land plants isattached to, dependent on, and usually much smaller thanthe gametophyte.The present-day evolutionary descendants of the early vascularplants include the lycophytes, monilophytes, and seedplants (see Figure 28.5; the vascular plant groups are bracketedon the right). Two types of life cycles are seen in the vascularplants: one that involves seeds and another that does not. Aswe discuss in greater detail in the next chapter, a seed consistsof a plant embryo, together with a food source, surroundedby a protective coat. The life cycles of the club mosses,ferns, whisk ferns, and horsetails do not involve seeds. We willdescribe these seedless vascular plant groups in detail after takinga closer look at vascular plant evolution. The major groupsof seed plants are described in Chapter 29.594 CHAPTER 28 | PLANTS WITHOUT SEEDS: FROM WATER TO LANDVascular plants have been evolving foralmost half a billion yearsThe evolution of an effective cuticle and protective layersfor the gametangia (archegonia and antheridia)helped make the first vascular plants successful, as didthe initial absence of herbivores (plant-eating animals)on land. By the late Silurian period (about 425 Mya), vascularplants were being preserved as fossils that we canstudy today. During the Silurian, the largest vascularplants were only a few centimeters tall, yet fossils uncoveredin Wales in 2004 give clear evidence for the earliestknown wildfire, which burned vigorously even in theSilurian atmosphere, which had 14 percent less oxygenthan today’s atmosphere (see Figure 25.6). The smallplants must have been abundant to sustain fire in suchan atmosphere. Their proliferation made the terrestrialenvironment more hospitable to animals. Amphibiansand insects arrived on land soon after land plants becameestablished.Trees of various kinds appeared in the Devonian periodand dominated the landscape of the Carboniferousperiod (359–297 Mya). Forests of lycophytes (club mosses)up to 40 meters tall, along with horsetails and tree ferns,flourished in the tropical swamps of what would becomeNorth America and Europe (Figure 28.6). Plant parts from thoseforests sank in the swamps and were gradually covered by sediment.Over millions of years, as the buried plant material wassubjected to intense pressure and elevated temperatures, it was28.3 | WHAT FEATURES DISTINGUISH THE VASCULAR PLANTS? 595Flowering plantsEuphyllophytes (”true leaves”)Seed plantsTracheids (vascular cells);branching independentsporophyte; true rootsVascularplantsMonilophytesLycophytes(club mosses and relatives)LiverwortsHorsetailsWhisk fernsLeptosporangiate fernsGymnospermsHornwortsMossesCommonancestorof landplantsMegaphylls;overtoppinggrowth formSeedsFlowers, carpels,triploid endospermProtectedembryosPersistently greensporophyteStomataMicrophyllsLand plants (embryophytes)28.5 The Evolution of Plants Three key characteristics that emergedduring plant evolution—protected embryos, vascular tissues, and seeds—are adaptations to life in a terrestrial environment.28.6 Reconstruction of an Ancient Forest This Carboniferous forest oncethrived in what is now Michigan. The “trees” to the left and in the background arelycophytes of the genus Lepidodendron; abundant ferns are visible to the right.The plant in the foreground is a relative of the modern horsetails.transformed into coal. Today that coal provides over half ofour electricity (and contributes to air pollution and global warming).The world’s coal deposits, although huge, are not infinite,and they cannot be renewed because the conditions that createdcoal no longer exist.In the subsequent Permian period, the continents came togetherto form a single gigantic land mass called Pangaea. Thecontinental interior became warmer and drier, but late in theperiod glaciation was extensive. The 200-million-year reign ofthe lycophyte–fern forests came to an end as they were replacedby forests of seed plants (gymnosperms), which were prevalentuntil a different group of seed plants (angiosperms) overtookthe landscape about 65 million years ago.The earliest vascular plants lacked roots and leavesThe earliest known vascular plants belonged to the now-extinctgroup called rhyniophytes. The rhyniophytes were one of a veryfew types of vascular plants in the Silurian period. The landscapeat that time probably consisted of bare ground, withstands of rhyniophytes in low-lying moist areas. Early versionsof the structural features of all the other vascular plant groupsappeared in the rhyniophytes of that time. These shared featuresstrengthen the case for the origin of all vascular plantsfrom a common nonvascular plant ancestor.The beginning of this chapter described the discovery of someimportant fossils in Devonian rocks near Rhynie, Scotland. Thepreservation of these plants was remarkable, considering thatthe rocks were more than 395 million years old. These fossilplants had a simple vascular system of phloem and xylem, butnot all had the tracheids characteristic of today’s vascular plants.These plants also lacked roots. Like most modern ferns andlycophytes, they were apparently anchored in the soil by horizontalportions of stem, called rhizomes, which bore water-absorbingunicellular filaments called rhizoids. These rhizomesalso bore aerial branches, and sporangia—homologous to thesporangia of mosses—were found at the tips of those branches.Their branching pattern was dichotomous; that is, the apex (tip)of the shoot divided to produce two equivalent new branches,each pair diverging at approximately the same angle from theoriginal stem (Figure 28.7). Scattered fragments of such plantshad been found earlier, but never in such profusion or as wellpreserved as those discovered by Kidston and Lang.Although they were apparently ancestral to the other vascularplant groups, the rhyniophytes themselves are long gone.None of their fossils appear anywhere after the Devonian period.The vascular plants branched outThe lycophytes (club mosses and their relatives) first appeared inthe Silurian period. The monilophytes (ferns and fern allies) appearedduring the Devonian period. These two groups, both stillwith us today, arose from rhyniophyte-like ancestors. Importantnew features of the vascular plants are found in these groups,such as true roots, true leaves, and a differentiation between twotypes of spores. The monilophytes and seed plants constitute aclade called the euphyllophytes (eu, “true”; phyllos, “leaf”).An important synapomorphy of the euphyllophytes is overtopping,a growth pattern in which one branch differentiatesfrom and grows beyond the others. Overtopping growth wouldhave given these plants an advantage in the competition forlight for photosynthesis, enabling them to shade their dichotomouslygrowing competitors. And, as we’ll see, the overtoppinggrowth of the euphyllophytes enabled a new type of leafto evolve.Roots may have evolved from branchesThe rhyniophytes had only rhizoids arising from a rhizome withwhich to gather water and minerals. How, then, did subsequentgroups of vascular plants come to have the complex roots wesee today?It is probable that roots had their evolutionary origins as abranch, either of a rhizome or of the aboveground portion of astem. That branch presumably penetrated the soil and branchedfurther. The underground portion could anchor the plant firmly,and even in this primitive condition, it could absorb water andminerals. The discovery of several fossil plants from the Devonianperiod, all having horizontal stems (rhizomes) with both undergroundand aerial branches, supports this hypothesis.Underground and aboveground branches, growing insharply different environments, were subjected to very differentselection pressures during the succeeding millions of years.Thus the two parts of the plant body—the aboveground shootsystem and the underground root system—diverged in structureand evolved distinct internal and external anatomies. Inspite of these differences, scientists believe that the root andshoot systems of vascular plants are homologous—that theywere once part of the same organ.596 CHAPTER 28 | PLANTS WITHOUT SEEDS: FROM WATER TO LANDRhizomeDichotomousbranchingSporangiaRhizoids28.7 An Ancient Vascular PlantRelative The extinct rhyniophyteAglaophyton major lackedroots and leaves. It had a centralcolumn of xylem running throughits stems, but no true tracheidcells. The rhizome is a horizontalunderground stem, not a root.The dichotomously branching aerialstems were less than 50 centimeterstall. Some stems weretopped by sporangia. (See thechapter-opening figure for anartist’s reconstruction of rhyniophytes.)Monilophytes and seed plants have true leavesThus far we have used the term “leaf” rather loosely. In thestrictest sense, a leaf is a flattened photosynthetic structureemerging laterally from a stem or branch and possessing truevascular tissue. Using this precise definition as we take a closerlook at true leaves in the vascular plants, we see that there aretwo different types of leaves, very likely of different evolutionaryorigins.The first leaf type, the microphyll, is usually small and onlyrarely has more than a single vascular strand, at least in existingplants. Lycophytes, of which only a few genera survive,have such simple leaves. Some biologists believe that microphyllshad their evolutionary origins as sterile sporangia (Figure28.8A). The principal characteristic of this type of leaf is avascular strand that departs from the vascular system of thestem in such a way that the structure of the stem’s vascular systemis scarcely disturbed. This was true even in the lycophytetrees of the Carboniferous period, many of which had leavesmany centimeters long.The other leaf type is found in monilophytes and seed plants.This larger, more complex leaf is called a megaphyll. The megaphyllis thought to have arisen from the flattening of a dichotomouslybranching stem system with overtopping growth. Thischange was followed by the development of photosynthetic tissuebetween the members of overtopped groups of branches(Figure 28.8B), which had the advantage of increasing the photosyntheticsurface area of those branches.The first megaphylls, which were very small, appeared inthe Devonian period. We might expect that evolution shouldhave led swiftly to the appearance of more and larger megaphyllsbecause of their greater photosynthetic capacity. However,it took some 50 million years, until the Carboniferous period,for large megaphylls to become common. Why should thishave been so, especially given that other advances in plant structurewere taking place during that time?According to one theory, the high concentration of CO2 inthe atmosphere during the Devonian period reduced selectionfor the tiny pores, called stomata, that allow a leaf to take upCO2 for use in photosynthesis. With more CO2 available, fewerstomata were needed. Today, when stomata are open, they allowwater vapor to escape the leaf and CO2 to enter. In the Devonian,larger leaves would have absorbed heat from sunlight,but they would have been unable to lose heat fast enough byevaporation of water through their limited number of stomata.The resulting overheating would have been lethal. Recentresearch has supported this hypothesis, indicating that largermegaphylls evolved only as CO2 concentrations dropped overmillions of years (Figure 28.9).Heterospory appeared among the vascular plantsIn the lineages of present-day vascular plants that are most similarto their ancestors, the gametophyte and the sporophyte are28.3 | WHAT FEATURES DISTINGUISH THE VASCULAR PLANTS? 597A sporangium evolved into a simple leaf.Flat plates of photosynthetictissue developed betweenbranches.The end branches evolvedinto the veins of leaves.A branching stem systembecame progressivelyreduced and flattened.MegaphyllOvertoppingMicrophyll(A)(B)VasculartissueSporangiaSporangiumTimeTimeLycopodium (club moss)Adiantum (fern)28.8 The Evolution of Leaves(A) Microphylls are thought to haveevolved from sterile sporangia. (B) Themegaphylls of monilophytes and seedplants may have arisen as photosynthetictissue developed betweenbranch pairs that were “left behind” asdominant branches overtopped them.independent, and both are usually photosynthetic. Spores producedby the sporophyte are of a single type and develop intoa single type of gametophyte that bears both female and malereproductive organs. The female organ is a multicellular archego-598 CHAPTER 28 | PLANTS WITHOUT SEEDS: FROM WATER TO LANDCONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE28.9 CO2 Levels and the Evolution of MegaphyllsHigh concentrations of atmospheric CO2 may have acted asa constraint on the evolution of leaf size. C. P. Osborne andcolleagues compared the leaf sizes of fossil plants againstestimates of CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere at thetime the plants were alive.HYPOTHESIS High atmospheric CO2 concentrations duringthe Devonian constrained the evolution of leafsize, with selection pressure maintainingrelatively small leaves.Leaf size increased as levels of CO2 in theatmosphere decreased.METHODRESULTS1. Analyze 300 plant fossils from the Devonian andCarboniferous periods and calculate the sizes oftheir leaves.2. Compare the pattern of change in leaf size withthat of the estimated change in atmospheric CO2concentrations over the same time frame.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: What sort of experiment would youdo to determine the effects of stomataon overheating of fern leaves today?Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.CO2 (parts per million) Leaf area (mm2)400 390 380 370 360 350 340Time (mya)400016003600400020000Devonian Carboniferous…generally followeddeclining levels ofatmospheric CO2.Among these fossils,increased leaf size…The spores of homosporous plants producea single type of gametophyte with both maleand female reproductive organs.Homosporousplants producea single typeof spore.The spores of heterosporousplants produce separate maleand female gametophytes.Heterosporous plants produce twotypes of spores: a larger megasporeand a smaller microspore.Gametophyte(n)DIPLOID (2n)HAPLOID (n)DIPLOID (2n)HAPLOID (n)Archegonium (6)(n)Antheridium (7)(n)Egg (n)Egg (n)Sperm (n)Zygote (2n)Sporangium (2n) Embryo (2n)Spore mother cell (2n)Spore (n)(A) Homospory(B) HeterosporySporophyte(2n)Sperm (n)Zygote (2n)Embryo (2n)Sporophyte(2n)Megaspore (n)Microsporangium(2n)Sporemothercell (2n)Spore mothercell (2n)Microspore (n)Microgametophyte (7)(n)Megagametophyte (6)(n)Megasporangium(2n)Meiosis FertilizationMeiosis Fertilization28.10 Homospory and Heterospory (A) Homosporous plants bear asingle type of spore. Each gametophyte has two types of sex organs,antheridia (male) and archegonia (female). (B) Heterosporous plants beartwo types of spores that develop into distinctly male and female gametophytes.GO TO Web Activities 28.1 and 28.2 • Homosporyand HeterosporyyourBioPortal.comnium containing a single egg. The male organ is an antheridium,producing many sperm. Such plants, which bear a single typeof spore, are said to be homosporous (Figure 28.10A).Asystem with two distinct types of spores evolved somewhatlater. Plants of this type are said to be heterosporous (Figure28.10B). In heterospory, one type of spore—the megaspore—developsinto a specifically female gametophyte (a megagametophyte)that produces only eggs. The other type, the microspore,is smaller and develops into a male gametophyte (a microgametophyte)that produces only sperm. The sporophyte producesmegaspores in small numbers in megasporangia, and microsporesin large numbers in microsporangia. Heterospory affects not onlythe spores and the gametophyte but also the sporophyte plantitself, which must develop two types of sporangia.The most ancient vascular plants were all homosporous, butheterospory evidently evolved several times in the early descendantsof the rhyniophytes. The fact that heterospory evolved repeatedlysuggests that it affords selective advantages. Subsequentevolution in the land plants featured ever greaterspecialization of the heterosporous condition.28.3 RECAPA new type of cell, the tracheid, marked the origin ofthe vascular plants. Later evolutionary events includedthe appearance of roots and leaves.• How do the vascular tissues xylem and phloem servethe vascular plants? See p. 594• Describe the difference between the two leaf types(microphylls and megaphylls). See p. 597 and Figure28.8• Explain the concept of heterospory. See p. 599 andFigure 28.10The liverworts, hornworts, mosses, lycophytes, and monilophyteshave come a long way from the aquatic environment tomeet the challenges of life on dry land. Let’s look at the diversitywithin these groups.What Are the Major Clades 28.4 of Seedless Plants?Three principal clades of living land plants lack tracheids; thesenonvascular land plants are the liverworts, hornworts, andmosses. The structure and growth pattern of the sporophyte differamong the three groups. There are four principal clades ofseedless vascular plants—lycophytes (club mosses and their relatives),horsetails, whisk ferns, and leptosporangiate ferns. Mostplants known as “ferns” are leptosporangiate ferns, althoughthere are also small groups called “ferns” that are more closelyrelated to horsetails and whisk ferns.Liverworts may be the most ancient surviving plant cladeThere are about 9,000 species of liverworts(Hepatophyta, “liver-plants”).Most liverworts have leafy gametophytes(Figure 28.11A). Some have thalloidgametophytes—green, leaflike layers thatlie flat on the ground (Figure 28.11B). The simplestliverwort gametophytes, however, are flat plates of cells,a centimeter or so long, that produce antheridia or archegoniaon their upper surfaces and rhizoids on their lower surfaces.Liverwort sporophytes are shorter than those of mosses andhornworts, rarely exceeding a few millimeters. The liverwortsporophyte has a stalk that connects sporangium and foot. Inmost species, the stalk elongates by expansion of cells throughoutits length. This elongation raises the sporangium aboveground level, allowing the spores to be dispersed more widely.The sporangia of liverworts are simple: a globular sporangiumwall surrounds a mass of spores. In some species of liverworts,spores are not released by the sporophyte until the surroundingsporangium wall rots. In other liverworts, however, the28.4 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR CLADES OF SEEDLESS PLANTS? 599(A) Bazzania trilobata (B) Marchantia sp. (C) Marchantia sp.The banana-like structuresbear archegonia.These cups contain gemmae—small,lens-shaped outgrowths of the plant body,each capable of developing into a new plant.28.11 Liverwort Structures Liverworts display various characteristicstructures. (A) The gametophyte of a leafy liverwort. (B) Gametophytes ofa thalloid liverwort. (C) This thalloid liverwort bears archegonia in thestructures that look like bunches of bananas. It also bears cups containinggemmae.Vascular plantsLiverwortsMossesHornwortsspores are thrown from the sporangium by structures thatshorten and compress a “spring” as they dry out. When thestress becomes sufficient, the compressed spring snaps back toits resting position, throwing spores in all directions.Among the most familiar thalloid liverworts are species ofthe genus Marchantia. Marchantia is easily recognized by thecharacteristic structures on which its male and female gametophytesbear their antheridia and archegonia (Figure 28.11C).Like most liverworts, Marchantia also reproduces asexually bysimple fragmentation of the gametophyte. Marchantia and someother liverworts and mosses also reproduce asexually by meansof gemmae (singular gemma), which are lens-shaped clumps ofcells. In a few liverworts, the gemmae are held in structurescalled gemmae cups, which promote dispersal of the gemmae byraindrops (see Figure 28.11C).Water- and sugar-transport mechanisms firstemerged in the mossesThe most familiar of the nonvascular landplants are the mosses(Bryophyta). Thesehardy little plants, of which there areabout 15,000 species, are found in almostevery terrestrial environment. They areoften found on damp, cool ground, where theyform thick mats (Figure 28.12). The mosses are the sister lineageto the vascular plants plus the hornworts (see Figure 28.5).The mosses, along with the hornworts and vascular plants,share an advance over the liverwort clade in their adaptation tolife on land: they have stomata, which are important for bothwater and gas exchange. Stomata are a shared derived trait ofmosses and all other land plants except liverworts.In mosses, the gametophyte begins its development followingspore germination as a branched, filamentous structure calleda protonema (see Figure 28.4). Although the protonema looks a bitlike a filamentous green alga, this structure is unique to themosses. Some of the filaments contain chloroplasts and are photosynthetic;others, called rhizoids, are nonphotosynthetic andanchor the protonema to the substratum. After a period of lineargrowth, cells close to the tips of the photosynthetic filaments dividerapidly in three dimensions to form buds. The buds eventuallydevelop a distinct tip, or apex, and produce the familiarleafy moss shoot with leaflike structures arranged spirally. Theseleafy shoots produce antheridia or archegonia (see Figure 28.4).Some moss gametophytes are so large they could not transportenough water solely by diffusion. Gametophytes andsporophytes of many mosses contain a type of cell called a hydroid,which dies and leaves a tiny channel through which watercan travel. The hydroid is functionally similar to the tracheid,the characteristic water-conducting cell of the vascular plants,but it lacks lignin and the cell-wall structure found in tracheids.The possession of hydroids and of a limited system for transportof sugar by some mosses (via cells called leptoids) showsthat the term “nonvascular plant” is somewhat misleadingwhen applied to mosses. Despite their simple system of internaltransport, however, the mosses are not vascular plants becausethey lack true xylem and phloem.Mosses of the genus Sphagnum (Figure 28.13A) often grow incool, swampy places, where the plants begin to decompose in thewater after they die. Rapidly growing upper layers of moss compressthe deeper-lying, decomposing layers. Partially decomposedplant matter is called peat. In some parts of the world, people derivethe majority of their fuel from peat bogs (Figure 28.13B).Sphagnum-dominated peatlands cover an area approximately halfthe size of the United States—more than 1 percent of Earth’s surface.Millions of years ago, continued compression of peat composedprimarily of other seedless plants gave rise to coal.Hornworts have distinctive chloroplasts andsporophytes without stalksThe approximately 100 species of hornwortscomprise the group Anthocerophyta(“horn plants”), so named becausetheir sporophytes look like littlehorns (Figure 28.14). Hornworts appear atfirst glance to be liverworts with very simple gametophytes.Their gametophytes are flat plates of cells a fewcells thick.Hornworts have two characteristics that distinguish themfrom liverworts and mosses. First, the cells of hornworts each600 CHAPTER 28 | PLANTS WITHOUT SEEDS: FROM WATER TO LAND(A)(B) Polytrichum sp.SporophytesGametophytesVascular plantsLiverwortsMossesHornwortsVascular plantsLiverwortsMossesHornworts28.12 Mosses Grow in Dense Mats (A) Dense layers of moss carpeta field of solidified volcanic lava in Iceland. (B) A close-up view of mossgrowing on a forest floor in Michigan.contain a single large, platelike chloroplast, whereas the cellsof the other two groups contain numerous small, lens-shapedchloroplasts. Second, of the sporophytes in all three groups,those of the hornworts come closest to being capable of growthwithout a set limit. Liverwort and moss sporophytes have astalk that stops growing as the sporangium matures, so elongationof the sporophyte is strictly limited. The hornwortsporophyte, however, has no stalk. Instead, a basal region ofthe sporangium remains capable of indefinite cell division, continuouslyproducing new spore-bearing tissue above. Thesporophytes of some hornworts growing in mild and continuouslymoist conditions can become as tall as 20 centimeters.Eventually, however, the sporophyte’s growth is limited by thelack of a transport system.Hornworts have evolved a symbiotic relationship that promotestheir growth by providing them with greater access to nitrogen,which is often a limiting resource. Hornworts have internalcavities filled with mucilage; these cavities are oftenpopulated by cyanobacteria that convert atmospheric nitrogengas into a form usable by their host plant.We present the hornworts here as sister to the vascular plants,but this is only one possible interpretation of the current data.The hornworts and vascular plants are united by DNA sequenceanalyses, and they also share a persistently green sporophyte.The exact evolutionary position of the hornworts is still unclear,and in some morphological analyses they are placed as the sistergroup to the mosses plus the vascular plants (the two groupsthat express apical cell division).Some vascular plants have vascular tissue but not seedsThe earliest vascular plants did not have seeds, and several majorclades of seedless vascular plants have survived to the present.These plants have a large, independent sporophyte and asmall gametophyte that is independent of the sporophyte. Thegametophytes of the surviving seedless vascular plants arerarely more than 2 centimeters long and are short-lived, whereastheir sporophytes are often highly visible and long-lived; thesporophyte of a tree fern, for example, may be up to 20 meterstall and live for many years.The most prominent resting stage in the life cycle of theseedless vascular plants is the single-celled spore. Aspore may“rest” for some time before developing further. This featuremakes the life cycle of seedless vascular plants similar to thoseof the fungi, green algae, and nonvascular land plants, but not,as we will see in the next chapter, to that of the seed plants. Likenonvascular land plants, seedless vascular plants must havean aqueous environment for at least one stage of their life cyclebecause fertilization is accomplished by flagellated, swimmingsperm.The leptosporangiate ferns are the most abundant and diversegroup of seedless vascular plants today, but the clubmosses and horsetails were once dominant elements of Earth’svegetation. Afourth group, the whisk ferns, contains only twogenera. Let’s look at the characteristics of these four groupsand at some of the evolutionary advances that appeared inthem.28.4 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR CLADES OF SEEDLESS PLANTS? 601(A)SporophyteGametophyteSphagnum sp.(B)The sporophytes of hornwortscan reach 20 cm in height.Gametophytes are flatplates a few cells thick.Anthoceros sp.28.13 Sphagnum Moss (A) Sphagnum bogs are extremely densegrowths of the moss shown here. These bogs can cover large areas intemperate climates. (B) A farmer mines a bog for peat, a fossil fuelformed from decomposing Sphagnum mosses.28.14 A Hornwort The sporophytes of many hornworts resemblelittle horns.The lycophytes are sister to the other vascular plantsThe club mosses and their relatives, thespike mosses and quillworts, togethercalled lycophytes, are the sister-groupof the remaining vascular plants. Thereare relatively few surviving species of lycophytes—just over 1,200.The lycophytes have roots that branch dichotomously.The arrangement of vascular tissue intheir stems is simpler than in the other vascular plants. Theybear only microphylls, and these simple leaves are arranged spirallyon the stem. Growth in club mosses comes entirely fromapical cell division, and branching in the stems is also dichotomous,by a division of the apical cluster of dividing cells.The sporangia of many club mosses are aggregated in conelikestructures called strobili (singular strobilus; Figure 28.15).The strobilus of a club moss is a cluster of spore-bearing leavesinserted on an axis (linear supporting structure). Other clubmosses lack strobili and bear their sporangia on (or adjacentto) the upper surfaces of leaves called sporophylls. This placementcontrasts with the terminal sporangia of the rhyniophytes.There are both homosporous and heterosporous species of clubmosses.Although they are only a minor element of present-day vegetation,the lycophytes are one of two groups that appear tohave been the dominant vegetation during the Carboniferousperiod. One type of coal (cannel coal) is formed almost entirelyfrom fossilized spores of the tree lycophyte Lepidodendron—which gives us an idea of the abundance of this genus in theforests of that time (see Figure 28.6). Other major elements ofCarboniferous vegetation included horsetails and ferns.Horsetails, whisk ferns, and ferns constitute a cladeOnce thought to be only distantly related,the horsetails, whisk ferns, andferns form a clade, the monilophytes,or “ferns and fern allies.” Within thatclade, the whisk ferns and the horsetailsare both monophyletic; the ferns arenot. However, most ferns do belong to a singleclade, the leptosporangiate ferns. Other smallgroups that are commonly called ferns are actually more closelyrelated to horsetails or whisk ferns. In the monilophytes—asin all seed plants—there is differentiation between the mainstem and side branches. This pattern contrasts with the dichotomousbranching characteristic of the lycophytes and rhyniophytes,in which each split gives rise to two branches of similarsize (see Figure 28.7).HORSETAILS Today there are only about 15 species of horsetails,all in the genus Equisetum. Horsetails have been sometimescalled “scouring rushes” because rough silica deposits found intheir cell walls made them useful for cleaning. They have trueroots that branch irregularly. Horsetails have a large sporophyteand a small gametophyte, both independent.The small leaves of horsetails are reduced megaphylls andform in distinct whorls (circles) around the stem (Figure 28.16).Growth in horsetails originates to a large extent from discs ofdividing cells just above each whorl of leaves, so each segmentof the stem grows from its base. Such basal growth is uncommonin plants, although it is found in the grasses, a major groupof flowering plants, as well as in the hornworts.602 CHAPTER 28 | PLANTS WITHOUT SEEDS: FROM WATER TO LANDLycophytesWhisk fernsMost fernsSeed plantsHorsetailsLycophytesHorsetailsWhisk fernsMost fernsSeed plantsLycopodium obscurum(B)StrobilusMicrosporangium(A)28.15 Club Mosses (A) A strobilus is visible at the tip of this clubmoss. Club mosses have microphylls arranged spirally on their stems.(B) A thin section through a strobilus of a club moss, showing microsporangia.Equisetum pratense Equisetum arvenseSporangiumSporangiophore(B)(A)Dark “dots” on the apicalstructures are sporangia.28.16 Horsetails (A) Horsetails have a distinctive growth pattern inwhich the stem grows in segments above each whorl of leaves. Theseare fertile shoots, with sporangia-bearing structures at the apex.(B) Scanning electron micrograph of horsetail sporangia.WHISK FERNS There once was some disagreement aboutwhether the rhyniophytes are entirely extinct. The confusionarose because of the existence today of about 15 species in twogenera of rootless, spore-bearing plants, Psilotum andTmesipteris, collectively called the whisk ferns. Psilotum (Figure28.17) has minute scales instead of true leaves, but plantsof the genus Tmesipteris have flattened photosynthetic organs—reduced megaphylls—with well-developed vascular tissue. Arethese two genera the living relics of the rhyniophytes, or do theyhave more recent origins?The whisk ferns once were thought to be evolutionarily ancientdescendants of anatomically simple ancestors. That hypothesiswas weakened by an enormous hole in the fossil recordbetween the rhyniophytes, which apparently became extinctmore than 300 million years ago, and Psilotum and Tmesipteris,which are modern plants. DNA sequence data finally settled thequestion in favor of a more recent origin of the whisk ferns fromfernlike ancestors. The whisk ferns are a clade of highly specializedplants that evolved fairly recently from anatomically morecomplex ancestors by loss or reduction of megaphylls and trueroots. Whisk fern gametophytes live below the surface of theground and lack chlorophyll. They depend on fungal partnersfor their nutrition.LEPTOSPORANGIATE FERNS The first leptosporangiate ferns appearedduring the Devonian period; today this group comprisesmore than 12,000 species. The sporangia of leptosporangiateferns are borne on a stalk and have walls only one cell thick. Thename “leptosporangiate” refers to these thin-walled sporangia(lepton, “thin”). Two other small groups that are also called fernsare actually more closely related to horsetails and whisk ferns,even though they are superficially similar to the leptosporangiateferns.The sporophytes of ferns, like those of the seedplants, have true roots, stems, and leaves. Ferns arecharacterized by large leaves with branching vascularstrands (Figure 28.18A). During its development,the fern leaf unfurls from a tightly coiled “fiddlehead”(Figure 28.18B). Some fern leaves becomeclimbing organs and may grow to be as long as 30meters. Afew species have small leaves as a resultof evolutionary reduction, but even these smallleaves have more than one vascular strand, and arethus megaphylls (Figure 28.18C).Psilotum flaccidum28.17 A Whisk Fern DNA sequence data reveals that Psilotum—once considered to be a survivingrhyniophyte—is in fact a much more recent genus that arose from a fernlike ancestor.Whisk ferns are now grouped with the monilophytes.(C) Marsilea sp.Salvinia sp.(A) Dicksonia sp.Blechnum discolor (crown ferns)(B)28.18 Fern Leaves Take Many Forms (A) Tree fernsand crown ferns dominate this forest on Stewart Island,New Zealand. (B) The “fiddlehead” (developing leaf) of acommon forest fern will unfurl and expand, giving rise to acomplex adult leaf such as that of a crown fern. (C) Theleaves of two species of water ferns.28.4 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR CLADES OF SEEDLESS PLANTS? 603EmbryoGametophyteSporangiumSporophyteMature sporophyte(typically 0.3–1 m tall)Mature gametophyte(about 0.5 cm wide)RhizoidsAntheridiumSpermGerminatingsporeEggArchegoniumMeiosis FertilizationDIPLOID (2n)HAPLOID (n)RootsSori (clustersof sporangia)Microsorum sp.THE FERN LIFE CYCLE In all ferns, spore mother cells inside thesporangia undergo meiosis to form haploid spores. Once shed,the spores may be blown great distances by the wind and eventuallygerminate to form independent gametophytes far fromthe parent sporophyte. A case in point is Old World climbingfern (Lygodium microphyllum), which is currently spreading disastrouslythrough the Florida Everglades, choking off thegrowth of other plants. This rapid spread is testimony to the effectivenessof windborne spores. Another example is the remarkablediversity of ferns that have spread through the isolatedHawaiian Islands.Fern gametophytes have the potential to produce both antheridiaand archegonia, although not necessarily at the sametime or on the same gametophyte. Sperm swim through waterto archegonia—often to those on other gametophytes—wherethey unite with an egg. The resulting zygote develops into anew sporophyte embryo. The young sporophyte sprouts a rootand can thus grow independently of the gametophyte. In thealternating generations of a fern, the gametophyte is small, delicate,and short-lived, but the sporophyte can be very large andcan sometimes survive for hundreds of years (Figure 28.19).Because they require liquid water for the transport of the malegametes to the female gametes (as do all other plant groups discussedin this chapter), most ferns inhabit shaded, moist woodlandsand swamps. Tree ferns can reach heights of 20 meters.Tree ferns are not as rigid as woody plants, and they have poorlydeveloped root systems. Thus they do not grow in sites exposeddirectly to strong winds, but rather in ravines or beneath treesin forests. The sporangia of ferns typically are found on the undersurfacesof the leaves, sometimes covering the entire undersurfaceand sometimes only at the edges. In most species, thesporangia are found in clusters called sori (singular sorus).Most ferns are homosporous. However, two groups of aquaticferns, the Marsileaceae and the Salviniaceae (see Figure 28.18C),604 CHAPTER 28 | PLANTS WITHOUT SEEDS: FROM WATER TO LAND28.19 The Life Cycle of aHomosporous Fern The mostconspicuous stage in the fern lifecycle is the mature diploid sporophyte.The inset photograph showssori on the underside of a fern leaf.Each sorus contains many sporeproducingsporangia.GO TO Web Activity 28.3 • The Fern Life CycleyourBioPortal.comare derived from a common ancestor in which heterosporyevolved. The megaspores and microspores of these plants (whichgerminate to produce female and male gametophytes, respectively)are produced in different sporangia (megasporangia andmicrosporangia), and the microspores are always much smallerand greater in number than the megaspores.A few genera of ferns produce a tuberous, fleshy gametophyteinstead of the characteristic flattened, photosyntheticstructure produced by most ferns. These tuberous gametophytesdepend on a mutualistic fungus for nutrition. In somegenera, even the sporophyte embryo must become associatedwith the fungus before its development can proceed. Chapter30 discusses many other important plant–fungus mutualisms.The seedless vascular plants, and especially the ferns, werelong considered an evolutionary cul-de-sac—that is, a groupwith great diversity in the fossil record but less diversity in thepresent. However, recent DNA-based research has suggestedthat the diversification of today’s ferns took place much morerecently than previously thought. The expansion of seed plantsand their dominance of forests actually predates the diversificationof extant ferns, which presumably took advantage of thenew environments created by those forests.28.4 RECAPThree clades of land plants lack true vascular systems(liverworts, mosses, and hornworts). The seedlessvascular plants include the club mosses, horsetails,whisk ferns, and leptosporangiate ferns.• Describe the different branching patterns of lycophytesand monilophytes. See pp. 602–603• Why were whisk ferns once thought to be close relativesof the rhyniophytes? See p. 603• Why do most ferns live in moist, shady areas? See p. 604All of the groups described in this chapter—the nonvascularland plants and the seedless vascular plants—require water at akey stage in their life cycles, because their sperm can reach theireggs only by means of liquid water. In addition, the vascularplant groups we have discussed thus far all disperse by spores.The next chapter describes the seed plants that dominate Earth’svegetation today, and in which the seed affords new sporophytesprotection unavailable to the progeny of seedless plants.28.4 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR CLADES OF SEEDLESS PLANTS? 60528.1 How Did the Land Plants Arise?• Land plants, sometimes referred to as embryophytes, are photosyntheticeukaryotes that develop from embryos protectedby parental tissue. Review Figure 28.1• Streptophytes include the land plants and certain green algae.Green plants include the streptophytes and the remaininggreen algae.• Land plants arose from an aquatic green algal ancestor relatedto today’s Charales.• The vascular plants have well developed water-conducting tissueswith cells including tracheids; the three major groups ofnonvascular land plants do not. Review Table 28.128.2 How Did Plants Colonize and Thrive on Land?• The acquisition of a cuticle, stomata, gametangia, a protectedembryo, protective pigments, thick spore walls with a protectivepolymer, and a mutualistic association with a fungus are alladaptations to terrestrial life.• All land plant life cycles feature alternation of generations, inwhich a multicellular diploid sporophyte alternates with a multicellularhaploid gametophyte. Review Figure 28.3• Spores form in sporangia; gametes form in gametangia. Inseedless land plants, the female and male gametangia are,respectively, an archegonium and an antheridium.• In liverworts, hornworts, and mosses, the sporophyte is smallerthan the gametophyte and depends on it for water and nutrition.Review Figure 28.4, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 28.128.3 What Features Distinguish the Vascular Plants?• A vascular system consisting of xylem and phloem conductswater, minerals, and products of photosynthesis through thebodies of vascular plants.• Among living vascular plant groups, the lycophytes (club mossesand relatives) have only small, simple leaves (microphylls).Larger, more complex leaves (megaphylls) are found in monilophytes(horsetails, ferns, and allies) and seed plants. These lattertwo groups comprise the euphyllophytes. Review Figure 28.5• In vascular plants, the sporophyte is larger than and independentof the gametophyte.• The rhyniophytes, the earliest vascular plants, are known to usonly in fossil form. They lacked roots and leaves but possessedrhizomes and rhizoids. Review Figure 28.7• Roots may have evolved either from rhizomes or from branches.Microphylls probably evolved from sterile sporangia, and megaphyllsmay have resulted from the flattening and reduction ofan overtopping branching stem system. Review Figure 28.8• Many seedless vascular plants are homosporous, but heterospory—the production of distinct megaspores andmicrospores—evolved several times. Megaspores develop intomegagametophytes; microspores develop into microgametophytes.Review Figure 28.10, WEB ACTIVITIES 28.1 and 28.228.4 What Are the Major Clades of Seedless Plants?• The nonvascular land plant clades are the liverworts, the mosses,and the hornworts. The seedless vascular plant groups arethe lycophytes (club mosses and their relatives) and themonilophytes (horsetails, whisk ferns, and leptosporangiateferns). Review Figure 28.5• Mosses, hornworts, and vascular plants all have surface pores(stomata) in their leaves.• The gametophyte of ferns is small, delicate, and short-lived,whereas the sporophyte of ferns is typically much larger andlonger lived. Review Figure 28.19, WEB ACTIVITY 28.3CHAPTER SUMMARY
28.1 How Did the Land Plants Arise?• Land plants, sometimes referred to as embryophytes, are photosyntheticeukaryotes that develop from embryos protectedby parental tissue. Review Figure 28.1• Streptophytes include the land plants and certain green algae.Green plants include the streptophytes and the remaininggreen algae.• Land plants arose from an aquatic green algal ancestor relatedto today’s Charales.• The vascular plants have well developed water-conducting tissueswith cells including tracheids; the three major groups ofnonvascular land plants do not. Review Table 28.128.2 How Did Plants Colonize and Thrive on Land?• The acquisition of a cuticle, stomata, gametangia, a protectedembryo, protective pigments, thick spore walls with a protectivepolymer, and a mutualistic association with a fungus are alladaptations to terrestrial life.• All land plant life cycles feature alternation of generations, inwhich a multicellular diploid sporophyte alternates with a multicellularhaploid gametophyte. Review Figure 28.3• Spores form in sporangia; gametes form in gametangia. Inseedless land plants, the female and male gametangia are,respectively, an archegonium and an antheridium.• In liverworts, hornworts, and mosses, the sporophyte is smallerthan the gametophyte and depends on it for water and nutrition.Review Figure 28.4, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 28.128.3 What Features Distinguish the Vascular Plants?• A vascular system consisting of xylem and phloem conductswater, minerals, and products of photosynthesis through thebodies of vascular plants.• Among living vascular plant groups, the lycophytes (club mossesand relatives) have only small, simple leaves (microphylls).Larger, more complex leaves (megaphylls) are found in monilophytes(horsetails, ferns, and allies) and seed plants. These lattertwo groups comprise the euphyllophytes. Review Figure 28.5• In vascular plants, the sporophyte is larger than and independentof the gametophyte.• The rhyniophytes, the earliest vascular plants, are known to usonly in fossil form. They lacked roots and leaves but possessedrhizomes and rhizoids. Review Figure 28.7• Roots may have evolved either from rhizomes or from branches.Microphylls probably evolved from sterile sporangia, and megaphyllsmay have resulted from the flattening and reduction ofan overtopping branching stem system. Review Figure 28.8• Many seedless vascular plants are homosporous, but heterospory—the production of distinct megaspores andmicrospores—evolved several times. Megaspores develop intomegagametophytes; microspores develop into microgametophytes.Review Figure 28.10, WEB ACTIVITIES 28.1 and 28.228.4 What Are the Major Clades of Seedless Plants?• The nonvascular land plant clades are the liverworts, the mosses,and the hornworts. The seedless vascular plant groups arethe lycophytes (club mosses and their relatives) and themonilophytes (horsetails, whisk ferns, and leptosporangiateferns). Review Figure 28.5• Mosses, hornworts, and vascular plants all have surface pores(stomata) in their leaves.• The gametophyte of ferns is small, delicate, and short-lived,whereas the sporophyte of ferns is typically much larger andlonger lived. Review Figure 28.19, WEB ACTIVITY 28.3
