6James noticed the changes in his grandfather when hewas home from college for the winter holiday. He andgrandpa John had always joked about grandpa John’smissing keys and glasses; the old man, who had lived withJames’ family since his wife died, was forever searchingfor them. Now the memory lapses had become more pronounced.When James introduced his new girlfriend tothe family, he was relieved (as was she) when she waswelcomed with open arms. But an hour later, grandpaJohn just stared at her, unable to remember who she was.By the time James came home for the summer, his grandfatherhad become withdrawn; he could no longer talkabout current events, and often he became confused andlashed out in anger.James’ grandfather had Alzheimer’s disease. This conditionis most common in (but not limited to) the elderly, andas more people today are living to advanced ages, moreand more Alzhiemer’s cases are diagnosed. But the symptomsare not new to human experience or to medicine. Thecondition was first recognized as a disease in 1901. Thatyear, the family of 51-year-old Frau Auguste D. brought herto Dr. Alois Alzheimer at the Frankfurt hospital in Germany.She had severe memory lapses, accused her husband of infidelity,and had difficulty communicating. These symptomsgot worse before she died several years later. WhenAlzheimer autopsied her brain, he saw that the parts of thebrain that are important in thought and speech wereshrunken. Moreover, when he examined these areasthrough the microscope he saw abnormal proteindeposits in and around the brain cells.In the century since Alzheimer’s original case,cell biologists have investigated the nature ofthese abnormal deposits, now known asplaques. It turns out that the key events that produceplaques take place in the plasma membraneof nerve cells in the brain. Plaques areclumps of the protein amyloid beta, which athigh levels is toxic to brain cells. Amyloid beta isa small piece of a larger amyloid precursor protein(APP), which is embedded in the nerve cellplasma membrane; APP is cut twice by twoother membrane proteins, β-secretase andγ-secretase, to produce amyloid beta, which isreleased from the membrane to fall outside ofthe cell. All these proteins are present in a varietyof animal cells and have multiple importantMembranes and memoryDr. Alzheimer’s Patient Frau Auguste D., whodied in 1906, was the first patient described withprogressive dementia by Dr. Alois Alzheimer.What Is the Structure of a 6.1 Biological Membrane?The physical organization and functioning of all biological membranesdepend on their constituents: lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates.You are already familiar with these molecules fromChapter 3; it may be useful to review that chapter now. The lipidsestablish the physical integrity of the membrane and create aneffective barrier to the rapid passage of hydrophilic materialssuch as water and ions. In addition, the phospholipid bilayerserves as a lipid “lake” in which a variety of proteins “float” (Figure6.1). This general design is known as the fluid mosaic model.In the fluid mosaic model for biological membranes, the proteinsare noncovalently embedded in the phospholipid bilayerby their hydrophobic regions (or domains), but their hydrophilicdomains are exposed to the watery conditions on either sideof the bilayer. These membrane proteins have a number of functions,including moving materials through the membrane andreceiving chemical signals from the cell’s external environment.Each membrane has a set of proteins suitable for the specializedfunctions of the cell or organelle it surrounds.The carbohydrates associated with membranes are attachedeither to the lipids or to protein molecules. In plasma membranes,carbohydrates are located on the outside of the cell,where they may interact with substances in the external environment.Like some of the membrane proteins, carbohydratesare crucial in recognizing specific molecules, such as those onthe surfaces of adjacent cells.Although the fluid mosaic model is largely valid for membranestructure, it does not say much about membrane composition.As you read about the different molecules in membranesin the next sections, keep in mind that some membraneshave more protein than lipids, others are lipid-rich, others havesignificant amounts of cholesterol or other sterols, and still othersare rich in carbohydrates.Lipids form the hydrophobic core of the membraneThe lipids in biological membranes are usually phospholipids.Recall from Section 2.2 that some compounds are hydrophilic(“water-loving”) and others are hydrophobic (“water-hating”),and from Section 3.4 that a phospholipid molecule has regionsof both kinds:IN THIS CHAPTER we focus on the structure and functionsof biological membranes. First we describe the compositionand structure of biological membranes. We go onto discuss their functions—how membranes are involvedin intercellular interactions, and how membranes regulatewhich substances enter and leave the cell.roles in the dynamic cell membrane; they may even beessential for normal nervous system development andfunction.So what goes wrong in Alzheimer’s disease? Cells inthe diseased brain might be producing too much amyloidbeta (e.g., because γ-secretase is too active) or producingit at the wrong time (e.g., in old age instead of infancy).One form of the disease is caused by a mutantform of γ-secretase, which has a tendency to cut APP inthe “wrong” place, thereby producing a particularly toxicform of amyloid beta. Because of their role in producingplaques, APP and γ-secretase are potential targets forAlzheimer’s disease therapies.Learning how membranes are made and how theywork has been a key to understanding, and perhapstreating, this increasingly prevalent disease.CHAPTER OUTLINE6.1 What Is the Structure of a Biological Membrane?6.2 How Is the Plasma Membrane Involved in CellAdhesion and Recognition?6.3 What Are the Passive Processes of MembraneTransport?6.4 What are the Active Processes of MembraneTransport?6.5 How Do Large Molecules Enter and Leave a Cell?6.6 What Are Some Other Functions of Membranes?Plaques in the Brain At autopsy, the brain of anAlzheimer’s disease patient accumulates plaques (dark fibersin this micrograph) composed of protein fragments producedby an enzyme in the nerve cell membrane.• Hydrophilic regions: The phosphorus-containing“head” of the phospholipid is electricallycharged and therefore associates with polarwater molecules.• Hydrophobic regions: The long, nonpolar fatty acid“tails” of the phospholipid associate with othernonpolar materials, but they do not dissolve inwater or associate with hydrophilic substances.Because of these properties, one way in which phospholipidscan coexist with water is to form a bilayer,with the fatty acid “tails” of the two layers interactingwith each other and the polar “heads” facing theoutside aqueous environment (Figure 6.2). The thicknessof a biological membrane is about 8 nm (0.008μm), which is twice the length of a typical phospholipid—another indication that the membrane consistsof a lipid bilayer. This thickness is about 8,000 timesthinner than a piece of paper.Carbohydrates are attachedto the outer surface of proteins(forming glycoproteins) or lipids(forming glycolipids).In animal cells, somemembrane proteinsassociate with filamentsin the extracellular matrix.Peripheral membraneproteins do not penetratethe bilayer at all.Some membraneproteins interact with theinterior cytoskeleton.Cholesterol molecules interspersedamong phospholipid tails in thebilayer influence the fluidity offatty acids in the membrane.Some integral proteinscross the entire phospholipidbilayer; others penetrate onlypartially into the bilayer.PhospholipidbilayerOutside of cellInside of cell6.1 The Fluid Mosaic Model The general molecular structure of biologicalmembranes is a continuous phospholipid bilayer which has proteinsembedded in or associated with it.GO TO Web Activity 6.1 • The Fluid-Mosaic ModelyourBioPortal.comThe nonpolar, hydrophobic fattyacid “tails” interact with oneanother in the interior of the bilayer.The charged, or polar,hydrophilic “head” portionsinteract with polar water.Aqueous environmentAqueous environment6.2 A Phospholipid Bilayer The phospholipid bilayer separatestwo aqueous regions. The eight phospholipid molecules shown onthe right represent a small cross section of a membrane bilayer.In the laboratory, it is easy to make artificial bilayers with thesame organization as natural membranes. Small holes in suchbilayers seal themselves spontaneously. This capacity of lipidsto associate with one another and maintain a bilayer organizationhelps biological membranes to fuse during vesicle formation,phagocytosis, and related processes.All biological membranes have a similar structure, but differin the kinds of proteins and lipids they contain. Membranesfrom different cells or organelles may differ greatly in their lipidcomposition. Not only are phospholipids highly variable, but asignificant proportion of the lipid content in an animal cellmembrane may be cholesterol.Phospholipids can differ in terms of fatty acid chain length(number of carbon atoms), degree of unsaturation (doublebonds) in the fatty acids, and the polar (phosphate-containing)groups present. The most common fatty acids with their chainlength and degree of unsaturation are:• Palmitic: C14, no double bonds, saturated• Palmitoleic: C16, one double bond• Stearic: C18, no double bonds, saturated• Oleic: C18, one double bond• Linoleic: C18, two double bonds• Linolenic: C18, three double bondsThe saturated fatty acid chains allow close packing of fattyacids in the bilayer, while the “kinks” in unsaturated fatty acids(see Figure 3.19) make for a less dense, more fluid packing.These less-dense membranes in animal cells can accommodatecholesterol molecules.Up to 25 percent of the lipid content of an animal cell plasmamembrane may be cholesterol. When present, cholesterol is importantfor membrane integrity; the cholesterol in your membranesis not hazardous to your health. A molecule of cholesterolis usually situated next to an unsaturated fatty acid.The phospholipid bilayer stabilizes the entire membranestructure, but leaves it flexible. The fatty acids of the phospholipidsmake the hydrophobic interior of the membrane somewhatfluid—about as fluid as lightweight machine oil. This fluiditypermits some molecules to move laterally within the planeof the membrane. Agiven phospholipid molecule in the plasmamembrane can travel from one end of the cell to the other in alittle more than a second! On the other hand, seldom does aphospholipid molecule in one half of the bilayer spontaneouslyflip over to the other side. For that to happen, the polar part ofthe molecule would have to move through the hydrophobic interiorof the membrane. Since spontaneous phospholipid flipflopsare rare, the inner and outer halves of the bilayer may bequite different in the kinds of phospholipids they contain.The fluidity of a membrane is affected by its lipid compositionand by its temperature. Long-chain, saturated fatty acidspack tightly beside one another, with little room for movement.Cholesterol interacts hydrophobically with the fatty acid chains.Amembrane with these components is less fluid than one withshorter-chain fatty acids, unsaturated fatty acids, or less cholesterol.Adequate membrane fluidity is essential for many of thefunctions we will describe in this chapter. Because moleculesmove more slowly and fluidity decreases at reduced temperatures,membrane functions may decline under cold conditionsin organisms that cannot keep their bodies warm. To addressthis problem, some organisms simply change the lipid compositionof their membranes when they get cold, replacing saturatedwith unsaturated fatty acids and using fatty acids withshorter tails. These changes play a role in the survival of plants,bacteria, and hibernating animals during the winter.Membrane proteins are asymmetrically distributedAll biological membranes contain proteins. Typically, plasmamembranes have one protein molecule for every 25 phospholipidmolecules. This ratio varies depending on membrane function.In the inner membrane of the mitochondrion, which is specializedfor energy processing, there is one protein for every15 lipids. On the other hand, myelin—a membrane that enclosesportions of some neurons (nerve cells) and acts as an electricalinsulator—has only one protein for every 70 lipids.There are two general types of membrane proteins: peripheralproteins and integral proteins.Peripheral membrane proteins lack exposed hydrophobicgroups and are not embedded in the bilayer. Instead, they havepolar or charged regions that interact with exposed parts ofintegral membrane proteins, or with the polar heads of phospholipidmolecules (see Figure 6.1).Integral membrane proteins are at least partly embedded inthe phospholipid bilayer (see Figure 6.1). Like phospholipids,these proteins have both hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions(Figure 6.3).• Hydrophilic domains: Stretches of amino acids with hydrophilicside chains (see Table 3.1) give certain regions of theHydrophilic R groups (sidechains) in exposed partsof the protein interact withaqueous environments.Hydrophobic R groupsinteract with the hydrophobiccore of the membrane, awayfrom water.Hydrophobicinteriorof bilayerOutside of cell(aqueous)Inside of cell(aqueous)6.3 Interactions of Integral Membrane Proteins An integral membraneprotein is held in the membrane by the distribution of the hydrophilicand hydrophobic side chains on its amino acids. The hydrophilicparts of the protein extend into the aqueous cell exterior and the internalcytoplasm. The hydrophobic side chains interact with the hydrophobiclipid core of the membrane.108 CHAPTER 6 | CELL MEMBRANESprotein a polar character. These hydrophilic domainsinteract with water and stick out into theaqueous environment inside or outside the cell.• Hydrophobic domains: Stretches of amino acids withhydrophobic side chains give other regions of theprotein a nonpolar character. These domains interactwith the fatty acids in the interior of the phospholipidbilayer, away from water.Aspecial preparation method for electron microscopy,called freeze-fracturing, reveals proteins that are embeddedin the phospholipid bilayers of cellular membranes(Figure 6.4). When the two lipid leaflets (or layers) thatmake up the bilayer are separated, the proteins can beseen as bumps that protrude from the interior of eachmembrane. The bumps are not observed when artificialbilayers of pure lipid are freeze-fractured.According to the fluid mosaic model, the proteinsand lipids in a membrane are somewhat independentof each other and interact only noncovalently. The polarends of proteins can interact with the polar ends oflipids, and the nonpolar regions of both molecules caninteract hydrophobically.However, some membrane proteins have fatty acidsor other lipid groups covalently attached to them. Proteinsin this subgroup of integral membrane proteinsare referred to as anchored membrane proteins, becausetheir hydrophobic lipid components allow them to insertthemselves into the phospholipid bilayer.Proteins are asymmetrically distributed on the innerand outer surfaces of membranes. An integral proteinthat extends all the way through the phospholipid bilayerand protrudes on both sides is known as a transmembraneprotein. In addition to one or more transmembranedomains that extend through the bilayer, such aprotein may have domains with other specific functionson the inner and outer sides of the membrane. Peripheralmembrane proteins are localized on one side of themembrane or the other. This asymmetrical arrangementof membrane proteins gives the two surfaces of the membranedifferent properties. As we will soon see, these differences havegreat functional significance.Like lipids, some membrane proteins move around relativelyfreely within the phospholipid bilayer. Experiments that involvethe technique of cell fusion illustrate this migration dramatically.When two cells are fused, a single continuous membrane formsand surrounds both cells, and some proteins from each cell distributethemselves uniformly around this membrane (Figure 6.5).Although some proteins are free to migrate in the membrane,others are not, but rather appear to be “anchored” to a specificregion of the membrane. These membrane regions are like a corralof horses on a farm: the horses are free to move around withinthe fenced area, but not outside it. An example is the protein inthe plasma membrane of a muscle cell that recognizes a chemicalsignal from a neuron. This protein is normally found onlyat the specific region where the neuron meets the muscle cell.Proteins inside the cell can restrict the movement of proteinswithin a membrane. The cytoskeleton may have componentsjust below the inner face of the membrane that are attached tomembrane proteins protruding into the cytoplasm. The stabilityof the cytoskeletal components may thus restrict movementof attached membrane proteins.Membranes are constantly changingMembranes in eukaryotic cells are constantly forming, transformingfrom one type to another, fusing with one another, andbreaking down. As we discuss in Chapter 5, fragments of membranemove, in the form of vesicles, from the endoplasmic reticulum(ER) to the Golgi, and from the Golgi to the plasma membrane(see Figure 5.10). Secondary lysosomes form whenprimary lysosomes from the Golgi fuse with phagosomes fromthe plasma membrane (see Figure 5.11).TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFEFrozen tissue is fractured witha diamond or glass knife.Cell frozen in ice1Fracturing causes one halfof the membrane to separatefrom the other along the weakhydrophobic interfaces.26.4 Membrane Proteins Revealed by the Freeze-Fracture TechniqueThis HeLa cell (a human cell) membrane was first frozen to immobilize thelipids and proteins, and then fractured so that the bilayer was split open.Proteins sticking out ofthe fractured membranemust have beenembedded in the bilayer.0.1 μm6.1 | WHAT IS THE STRUCTURE OF A BIOLOGICAL MEMBRANE? 109Because all membranes appear similar under the electron microscope,and because they interconvert readily, we might expectall subcellular membranes to be chemically identical. However,that is not the case, for there are major chemical differencesamong the membranes of even a single cell. Membranes arechanged chemically when they form parts of certain organelles.In the Golgi apparatus, for example, the membranes of the cisface closely resemble those of the endoplasmic reticulum inchemical composition, but those of the trans face are more similarto the plasma membrane.Plasma membrane carbohydrates are recognition sitesIn addition to lipids and proteins, the plasma membrane containscarbohydrates. The carbohydrates are located on the outersurface of the plasma membrane and serve as recognition sitesfor other cells and molecules, as you will see in Section 6.2.Membrane-associated carbohydrates may be covalentlybonded to lipids or to proteins:• A glycolipid consists of a carbohydrate covalently bondedto a lipid. Extending outside the cell surface, the carbohydratemay serve as a recognition signal for interactions betweencells. For example, the carbohydrates on some glycolipidschange when cells become cancerous. This changemay allow white blood cells to target cancer cells fordestruction.• Aglycoprotein consists of a carbohydrate covalentlybonded to a protein. The bound carbohydrate is anoligosaccharide, usually not exceeding 15 monosaccharideunits in length (see Section 3.3). The oligosaccharides ofglycoproteins often function as signaling sites, as do thecarbohydrates attached to glycolipids.The “alphabet” of monosaccharides on the outer surfaces ofmembranes can generate a large diversity of messages. Recallfrom Section 3.3 that sugar molecules consist of three to sevencarbons that are attached at different sites to one another. Theymay form linear or branched oligosaccharides with many differentthree-dimensional shapes. An oligosaccharide of a specificshape on one cell can bind to a complementary shape onan adjacent cell. This binding is the basis of cell–cell adhesion.6.1 RECAPThe fluid mosaic model applies to both the plasmamembrane and the membranes of organelles. An integralmembrane protein has both hydrophilic andhydrophobic domains, which affect its position andfunction in the membrane. Carbohydrates that attachto lipids and proteins on the outside of themembrane serve as recognition sites.• What are some of the features of the fluid mosaicmodel of biological membranes?See p. 106• Explain how the hydrophobic and hydrophilicregions of phospholipids cause a membrane bilayer toform. See Figures 6.1 and 6.2• What differentiates an integral protein from a peripheralprotein? See p. 108 and Figure 6.1• What is the experimental evidence that membraneproteins can diffuse in the plane of the membrane?See pp. 109–110 and Figure 6.5Now that you understand the structure of biological membranes,let’s see how their components function. In the next sectionwe’ll focus on the membrane that surrounds individualcells: the plasma membrane. We’ll look at how the plasma membraneallows individual cells to be grouped together into multicellularsystems of tissues.CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE6.5 Rapid Diffusion of Membrane ProteinsTwo animal cells can be fused together in the laboratory,forming a single large cell (heterokaryon). This phenomenonwas used to test whether membrane proteins can diffuseindependently in the plane of the plasma membrane.HYPOTHESIS Proteins embedded in a membrane candiffuse freely within the membrane.Membrane proteins can diffuse rapidly in theplane of the membrane.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSInitially, the mouse andhuman membrane proteinsare on different sides ofthe heterokaryon.3 After 40 minutes, themouse and humanmembrane proteinsare intermixed.1 The cells are fused togetherto create a heterokaryon.The mouse cellhas a membraneprotein that can belabeled with agreen dye.The human cellhas a membraneprotein that canbe labeled with ared dye.2Mouse cell Human cellMembraneproteinsHow Is the Plasma Membrane Involved 6.2 in Cell Adhesion and Recognition?Some organisms, such as bacteria, are unicellular; that is, the entireorganism is a single cell. Others, such as plants and animals,are multicellular—composed of many cells. Often these cells existin specialized groups with similar functions, called tissues.Your body has about 60 trillion cells, arranged in different kindsof tissues (such as muscle, nerve, and epithelium).Two processes allow cells to arrange themselves in groups:• Cell recognition, in which one cell specifically binds to anothercell of a certain type• Cell adhesion, in which the connection between the twocells is strengthenedBoth processes involve the plasma membrane. They are mosteasily studied if a tissue is separated into its individual cells,which are then allowed to adhere to one another again. Simpleorganisms provide a good model for studying processes thatalso occur in the complex tissues of larger species. Studies ofsponges, for example, have revealed how cells associate withone another.A sponge is a multicellular marine animal with a simplebody plan that consists of only a few distinct tissues (see Section31.5). The cells of a sponge adhere to one another, but canbe separated mechanically by passing the animal several timesthrough a fine wire screen (Figure 6.6). Through this process,what was a single animal becomes hundreds of individual cellssuspended in seawater. Remarkably, if the cell suspension isshaken for a few hours, the cells bump into one another andstick together in the same shape and organization as the originalsponge! The cells recognize and adhere to one another, andre-form the original tissues.There are many different species of sponges. If disaggregatedsponge cells from two different species are placed in the samecontainer and shaken, individual cells will stick only to othercells of the same species. Two different sponges form, just likethe ones at the start of the experiment. This demonstrates notjust adhesion, but species-specific cell recognition.Such tissue-specific and species-specific cell recognition andcell adhesion are essential to the formation and maintenance oftissues and multicellular organisms. Think of your own body.What keeps muscle cells bound to muscle cells and skin to skin?Specific cell adhesion is so obvious a characteristic of complexorganisms that it is easy to overlook. You will see many examplesof specific cell adhesion throughout this book; here, we describeits general principles. As you will see, cell recognition andcell adhesion depend on plasma membrane proteins.Cell recognition and cell adhesion involve proteinsat the cell surfaceThe molecule responsible for cell recognition and adhesion insponges is a huge integral membrane glycoprotein (which is 80percent carbohydrate by molecular weight) that is partly embeddedin the plasma membrane, with the carbohydrate partsticking out and exposed to the environment (and to othersponge cells). As we describe in Section 3.2, a protein not onlyhas a specific shape, but also has specific chemical groups exposedon its surface where they can interact with other substances,including other proteins. Both of these features allowbinding to other specific molecules. The cells of the disaggregatedsponge in Figure 6.6 find one another again through therecognition of exposed chemical groups on their membrane glycoproteins.Adhesion proteins are not restricted to animal cells.In most plant cells, the plasma membrane is covered with athick cell wall, but this structure also has adhesion proteins thatallow cells to bind to one another.In most cases, the binding of cells in a tissue is homotypic; thatis, the same molecule sticks out of both cells, and the exposed surfacesbind to each other. But heterotypic binding (of cells withdifferent proteins) can also occur. In this case, different chemicalgroups on different surface molecules have an affinity for one another.For example, when the mammalian sperm meets the egg,different proteins on the two types of cells have complementarybinding surfaces. Similarly, some algae form male and female reproductivecells (analogous to sperm and eggs) that have flagellato propel them toward each other. Male and female cells canrecognize each other by heterotypic proteins on their flagella.Three types of cell junctions connectadjacent cellsIn a complex multicellular organism, cell recognition proteinsallow specific types of cells to bind to one another. Often, after3 Exposed regionsof membraneglycoproteinsbind to eachother, causingcells to adhere.4 A new spongeforms.The sponge tissue can beseparated into single cellsby passing it through a finemesh screen.Tissue from a red spongecontains similar cells boundto each other.216.6 Cell Recognition and Adhesion In most cases (including theaggregation of animal cells into tissues), protein binding is homotypic.6.2 | HOW IS THE PLASMA MEMBRANE INVOLVED IN CELL ADHESION AND RECOGNITION? 111Desmosomes link adjacentcells tightly but permitmaterials to move aroundthem in the intercellular space.Gap junctions let adjacentcells communicate.IntercellularspaceHydrophilicchannelConnexins(channel proteins)IntercellularspaceCytoplasmicplaqueCelladhesionmoleculesKeratin fiber(cytoskeletonfilaments)PlasmamembranesPlasmamembranesIntercellularspaceJunctionalproteins(interlocking)The proteins of tight junctionsform a “quilted” seal, barring themovement of dissolved materialsthrough the space betweenepithelial cells.(A)(B)(C)PlasmamembranesDesmosomesGap junctionsLumenTight junctionsMoleculespass betweencellsIntercellularspaceApical regionBasolateral regionthe initial binding, both cells contribute material to form additionalmembrane structures that connect them to one another.These specialized structures, called cell junctions, are most evidentin electron micrographs of epithelial tissues, which are layersof cells that line body cavities or cover body surfaces. Thesesurfaces often receive stresses, or must retain contents underpressure, or both, so it is particularly important thattheir cells adhere tightly. We will examine threetypes of cell junctions that enable animal cells to sealintercellular spaces, reinforce attachments to oneanother, and communicate with each other. Tightjunctions, desmosomes, and gap junctions, respectively,perform these three functions.TIGHT JUNCTIONS SEAL TISSUES Tight junctions arespecialized structures that link adjacent epithelialcells, and they result from the mutual binding ofspecific proteins in the plasma membranes of thecells. These proteins are arrayed in bands so thatthey form a series of joints encircling each cell (Figure6.7A). Tight junctions are found in the lining oflumens (cavities) in organs such as the stomach andintestine. They have two major functions:• They prevent substances from moving from the lumenthrough the spaces between cells. For example, the presenceof tight junctions means that substances must passthrough, rather than between, the epithelial cells that form6.7 Junctions Link Animal Cells Together Tight junctions(A) and desmosomes (B) are abundant in epithelial tissues.Gap junctions (C) are also found in some muscle andnerve tissues, in which rapid communication between cellsis important. Although all three junction types are shown inthe cell at the right, all three are not necessarily seen at thesame time in actual cells.GO TO Web Activity 6.2 • Animal Cell JunctionsyourBioPortal.comthe lining of the digestive tract. In another example, thecells lining the bladder have tight junctions so urine cannotleak out into the body cavity. Thus, tight junctions help toestablish cellular control over what enters and leaves thebody.• They define specific functional regions of membranes by restrictingthe migration of membrane proteins and phospholipidsfrom one region of the cell to another. Thus the membraneproteins and phospholipids in the apical (“tip”)region of an intestinal epithelial cell (facing the lumen) aredifferent from those in the basolateral (basal, “bottom”; lateral,“side”) regions of the cell (facing the body cavity orblood capillary outside the lumen).By forcing materials to enter certain cells, and by allowing differentareas of the same cell to have different membrane proteinswith different functions, tight junctions in the digestive tract helpensure the directional movement of materials into the body.DESMOSOMES HOLD CELLS TOGETHER Desmosomes connect adjacentplasma membranes. Desmosomes hold neighboring cellsfirmly together, acting like spot welds or rivets (Figure 6.7B). Eachdesmosome has a dense structure called a plaque on the cytoplasmicside of the plasma membrane. To this plaque are attachedspecial cell adhesion molecules that stretch from the plaquethrough the plasma membrane of one cell, across the intercellularspace, and through the plasma membrane of the adjacent cell,where they bind to the plaque proteins in that adjacent cell.The plaque is also attached to fibers in the cytoplasm. Thesefibers, which are intermediate filaments of the cytoskeleton(see Figure 5.18), are made of a protein called keratin. Theystretch from one cytoplasmic plaque across the cell to anotherplaque on the other side of the cell. Anchored thus on bothsides of the cell, these extremely strong fibers provide greatmechanical stability to epithelial tissues. This stability isneeded for these tissues, which often receive rough wear whileprotecting the integrity of the organism’s body surface, orthe surface of an organ.GAP JUNCTIONS ARE A MEANS OF COMMUNICATION Whereas tightjunctions and desmosomes have mechanical roles, gap junctionsfacilitate communication between cells. Each gap junction ismade up of specialized channel proteins, called connexins, whichinteract to form a structure (called a connexon) that spans theplasma membranes of adjacent cells and the intercellular spacebetween them (Figure 6.7C). Water, dissolved small molecules,and ions can pass from cell to cell through these junctions. Thisallows groups of cells to coordinate their activities. In Chapter7 we discuss cell communication and signaling, and in thatchapter we describe in more detail the roles of gap junctionsand plasmodesmata, which perform a similar role in plants.Cell membranes adhere to the extracellular matrixIn Section 5.4 we describe the extracellular matrix of animalcells, which is composed of collagen protein arranged in fibersin a gelatinous matrix of proteoglycans. The attachment of a cellto the extracellular matrix is important in maintaining the integrityof a tissue. In addition, some cells can detach from theirneighbors, move, and attach to other cells; this is often mediatedby interactions with the extracellular matrix.Atransmembrane protein called integrin often mediates theattachment of epithelial cells to the extracellular matrix (Figure6.8). More than 24 different integrins have been described in humancells. All of them bind to a protein in the extracellular matrixon the outside of the cell, and to actin filaments, which arepart of the cytoskeleton, on the inside of the cell. So, in additionto adhesion, integrin has a role in maintaining cell structure viaits interaction with the cytoskeleton.The binding of integrin to the extracellular matrix is noncovalentand reversible. When a cell moves its location within atissue or organism, the first step is detachment of the cell’s integrinfrom the matrix. The integrin protein changes its threedimensionalstructure and no longer maintains its link to thematrix. These events are important for cell movement withinthe developing embryo, and for the spread of cancer cells.Integrin has binding sites for thecell cytoskeleton and for theextracellular matrix; the cell isbound to the matrix.When integrin’s three-dimensionalstructure changes, it cannot bindto the extracellular matrix andthe cell detaches.Inside of cellActinInside of cellOutside of cellOutside of cellExtracellular matrixIntegrin6.8 Integrins Mediate the Attachment of Animal Cells to theExtracellular Matrix6.2 | HOW IS THE PLASMA MEMBRANE INVOLVED IN CELL ADHESION AND RECOGNITION? 113114 CHAPTER 6 | CELL MEMBRANES6.2 RECAPIn multicellular organisms, cells arrange themselvesin groups by two processes: cell recognition and celladhesion. Both processes are mediated by integralproteins in the plasma membrane. Cell membraneproteins also interact with the extracellular matrix.• Describe the difference between cell recognition andcell adhesion. See p. 111• How do the three types of cell junctions regulate thepassage of materials between cells and through theintercellular space? See pp. 111–113 and Figure 6.7We have just examined how the plasma membrane structure accommodatesthe binding and maintenance of cell adhesion. Weturn now to another major function of membranes: regulatingthe substances that enter or leave a cell or organelle.What Are the Passive Processes of 6.3 Membrane Transport?As you have already learned, biological membranes have manyfunctions, and control of the cell’s internal composition is oneof the most significant. Biological membranes allow some substances,but not others, to pass through them. This characteristicof membranes is called selective permeability. Selective permeabilityallows the membrane to determine what substancesenter or leave a cell or organelle.There are two fundamentally different processes by whichsubstances cross biological membranes:• The processes of passive transport do not require any inputof outside energy to drive them (no metabolic energy).• The processes of active transport require the input of chemicalenergy from an outside source (metabolic energy).This section focuses on the passive processes by which substancescross membranes. The energy for the passive transportof a substance is found in the difference between its concentrationon one side of the membrane and its concentration on theother. Passive transport processes include two types of diffusion:simple diffusion through the phospholipid bilayer, and facilitateddiffusion through channel proteins or by means of carrierproteins.Diffusion is the process of random movementtoward a state of equilibriumNothing in this world is ever absolutely at rest. Everything is inmotion, although the motions may be very small. An importantconsequence of all this random vibration, rotation and translocation(moving from one location to another) of molecules isthat all the components of a solution tend eventually to becomeevenly distributed. For example, if a drop of ink is allowed tofall into a container of water, the pigment molecules of the inkare initially very concentrated. Without human intervention,such as stirring, the pigment molecules move about at random,spreading slowly through the water until eventually the concentrationof pigment—and thus the intensity of color—is exactlythe same in every drop of liquid in the container.A solution in which the solute particles are uniformly distributedis said to be at equilibrium because there will be no futurenet change in their concentration. Equilibrium does notmean that the particles have stopped moving; it just means thatthey are moving in such a way that their overall distributiondoes not change.Diffusion is the process of random movement toward a stateof equilibrium. Although the motion of each individual particleis absolutely random, the net movement of particles is directionaluntil equilibrium is reached. Diffusion is thus a netmovement from regions of greater concentration to regions oflesser concentration (Figure 6.9).In a complex solution (one with many different solutes),the diffusion of each solute is independent of those of the others.How fast a substance diffuses depends on three factors:• The diameter of the molecules or ions: smaller molecules diffusefaster.• The temperature of the solution: higher temperatures lead tofaster diffusion because ions or molecules have more energy,and thus move more rapidly, at higher temperatures.• The concentration gradient in the system—that is, the changein solute concentration with distance in a given direction:the greater the concentration gradient, the more rapidly asubstance diffuses.We’ll see how these factors influence membrane transport inthe detailed discussions that follow.DIFFUSION WITHIN CELLS AND TISSUES Within cells, or whereverdistances are very short, solutes distribute themselves rapidlyby diffusion. Small molecules and ions may move from one endof an organelle to another in a millisecond (10–3 s, or one-thousandthof a second). However, the usefulness of diffusion as atransport mechanism declines drastically as distances becomegreater. In the absence of mechanical stirring, diffusion acrossmore than a centimeter may take an hour or more, and diffusionacross meters may take years! Diffusion would not be adequateto distribute materials over the length of a human body,much less that of a larger organism. But within our cells oracross layers of one or two cells, diffusion is rapid enough todistribute small molecules and ions almost instantaneously.DIFFUSION ACROSS MEMBRANES In a solution without barriers,all the solutes diffuse at rates determined by temperature, theirphysical properties, and their concentration gradients. If a biologicalmembrane divides the solution into separate compartments,then the movement of the different solutes can be affectedby the properties of the membrane. The membrane is saidto be permeable to solutes that can cross it more or less easily, butimpermeable to substances that cannot move across it.6.3 | WHAT ARE THE PASSIVE PROCESSES OF MEMBRANE TRANSPORT? 115Molecules to which the membrane is impermeable remainin separate compartments, and their concentrations may be differenton the two sides of the membrane. Molecules to whichthe membrane is permeable diffuse from one compartment tothe other until their concentrations are equal on both sides ofthe membrane. When the concentrations of a diffusing substanceon the two sides of the permeable membrane are identical,equilibrium is reached. Individual molecules continue topass through the membrane after equilibrium is established, butequal numbers of molecules move in each direction, so at equilibriumthere is no net change in concentration.Simple diffusion takes place through thephospholipid bilayerIn simple diffusion, small molecules pass through the phospholipidbilayer of the membrane. Amolecule that is itself hydrophobic,and is therefore soluble in lipids, enters the membrane readilyand is able to pass through it. The more lipid-soluble themolecule is, the more rapidly it diffuses through the membranebilayer. This statement holds true over a wide range of molecularweights.On the other hand, electrically charged or polar molecules,such as amino acids, sugars, and ions, do not pass readilythrough a membrane for two reasons. First, such charged or polarmolecules are not very soluble in the hydrophobic interiorof the bilayer. Second, such charged and polar substances formmany hydrogen bonds with water and ions in the aqueous environment,be it the cytoplasm or the cell exterior. The multiplicityof these hydrogen bonds prevent the substances frommoving into the hydrophobic interior of the membrane.Consider two molecules: a small protein made up of a fewpolar amino acids, and a cholesterol-based steroid of equivalentsize. If a membrane separates high and low concentrations ofthese substances, the protein, being polar, will diffuse only veryslowly through the membrane, while the nonpolar steroid willdiffuse through it readily.Osmosis is the diffusion of water across membranesWater molecules pass through specialized channels in membranes(see below) by a diffusion process called osmosis. Thiscompletely passive process uses no metabolic energy and can beunderstood in terms of solute concentrations. Recall that a solutedissolves in a solvent and the solute’s constituents are dispersedthroughout the solution. Osmosis depends on the number ofsolute particles present, not on the kinds of particles. We will describeosmosis using red blood cells and plant cells as examples.In these examples, the plasma membranes are considered to bepermeable to water and impermeable to most solutes.Red blood cells are normally suspended in a fluid calledplasma, which contains salts, proteins, and other solutes. Examininga drop of blood under the light microscope reveals thatthese red cells have a characteristic flattened disk shape with adepressed center, sometimes called “biconcave.” If pure wateris added to the drop of blood, drastically reducing the soluteconcentration of the plasma, the red cells quickly swell andburst. Similarly, if slightly wilted lettuce is placed in pure water,it soon becomes crisp; by weighing it before and after, wecan show that it has taken up water. If, on the other hand, redblood cells or crisp lettuce leaves are placed in a relatively concentratedsolution of salt or sugar, the leaves become limp (theywilt), and the red blood cells pucker and shrink.From such observations we know that the difference in soluteconcentration between a cell and its surrounding environmentdetermines whether water will move from the environment intothe cell or out of the cell into the environment. Other thingsbeing equal, if two different solutions are separated by a membranethat allows water, but not solutes, to pass through, watermolecules will move across the membrane toward the solu-Add equal amounts ofthree dyes to still waterin a shallow container.Sample different regionsof the solution andmeasure the amount ofeach colored dye.The number andposition of moleculesof each dye canbe rendered visually.Time = 0 5 minutes later 10 minutes laterConcentration6.9 Diffusion Leads to UniformDistribution of Solutes A simpleexperiment demonstrates thatsolutes move from regions ofgreater concentration to regionsof lesser concentration until equilibriumis reached.tion with a higher solute concentration. In other words, waterwill diffuse from a region of its higher concentration (with alower concentration of solutes) to a region of its lower concentration(with a higher concentration of solutes).Three terms are used to compare the solute concentrationsof two solutions separated by a membrane:• Ahypertonic solution has a higher solute concentrationthan the other solution with which it is being compared(Figure 6.10A).• Isotonic solutions have equal solute concentrations (Figure6.10B).• Ahypotonic solution has a lower solute concentration thanthe other solution with which it is being compared (Figure6.10C).Water moves from a hypotonic solution across a membrane toa hypertonic solution.When we say that “water moves,” bear in mind that we arereferring to the net movement of water. Since it is so abundant,water is constantly moving through protein channels across theplasma membrane into and out of cells. What concerns us hereis whether the overall movement is greater in one direction orthe other.The concentration of solutes in the environment determinesthe direction of osmosis in all animal cells. Ared blood cell takesup water from a solution that is hypotonic to the cell’s contents.The cell bursts because its plasma membrane cannot withstandthe pressure created by the water entry and the resultantswelling. The integrity of red blood cells (and other blood cells)is absolutely dependent on the maintenance of a constant soluteconcentration in the blood plasma: the plasma must be isotonicto the blood cells if the cells are not to burst or shrink. Regulationof the solute concentration of body fluids is thus an importantprocess for organisms without cell walls.In contrast to animal cells, the cells of plants, archaea, bacteria,fungi, and some protists have cell walls that limit theirvolumes and keep them from bursting. Cells with sturdy wallstake up a limited amount of water, and in so doing they buildup internal pressure against the cell wall, which prevents furtherwater from entering. This pressure within the cell is calledturgor pressure. Turgor pressure keeps plants upright (and lettucecrisp) and is the driving force for the enlargement of plantcells. It is a normal and essential component of plant growth.If enough water leaves the cells, turgor pressure drops and theplant wilts. Turgor pressure reaches about 100 pounds persquare inch (0.7 kg/cm2)—several times greater than the pres-116 CHAPTER 6 | CELL MEMBRANESCells lose waterand shrivel.Cell body shrinksand pulls awayfrom the cell wall(wilting).Cells take upwater, swell,and burst.Cell stiffensbut generallyretains its shapebecause cellwall is present.H2O(C) Hypotonic on the outside(dilute solutes outside)(B) Isotonic(equivalent solute concentration)Animal cell(red blood cells)Plant cell(leaf epithelialcells)(A) Hypertonic on the outside(concentrated solutes outside)Insideof cellOutsideof cellH2OH2OH2OH2OH2O6.10 Osmosis Can Modify the Shapes of Cells In a solution that isisotonic with the cytoplasm (center column), a plant or animal cell maintainsa consistent, characteristic shape because there is no net movementof water into or out of the cell. In a solution that is hypotonic to thecytoplasm (right), water enters the cell. An environment that is hypertonicto the cytoplasm (left) draws water out of the cell.6.3 | WHAT ARE THE PASSIVE PROCESSES OF MEMBRANE TRANSPORT? 117sure in automobile tires. This pressure is so great that the cellswould change shape and detach from one another, were it notfor adhesive molecules in the plant cell wall.Diffusion may be aided by channel proteinsAs we saw earlier, polar or charged substances such as water,amino acids, sugars and ions do not readily diffuse across membranes.But they can cross the hydrophobic phospholipid bilayerpassively (that is, without the input of energy) in one oftwo ways, depending on the substance:• Channel proteins are integral membrane proteins that formchannels across the membrane through which certain substancescan pass.• Some substances can bind to membrane proteins called carrierproteins that speed up their diffusion through the phospholipidbilayer.Both of these processes are forms of facilitated diffusion. That is,the substances diffuse according to their concentration gradients,but their diffusion is facilitated by protein channels or carriers.ION CHANNELS The best-studied channel proteins are the ionchannels. As you will see in later chapters, the movement ofions across membranes is important in many biologicalprocesses, ranging from respiration within the mitochondria, tothe electrical activity of the nervous system and the openingof the pores in leaves that allow gas exchange with the environment.Several types of ion channels have been identified, eachof them specific for a particular ion. All of them show the samebasic structure of a hydrophilic pore that allows a particular ionto move through it (Figure 6.11).Just as a fence may have a gate that can be opened or closed,most ion channels are gated: they can be opened or closedto ion passage. A gated channel opens when a stimuluscauses a change in the three-dimensional shape of thechannel. In some cases, this stimulus is the binding of achemical signal, or ligand (see Figure 6.11). Channels controlledin this way are called ligand-gated channels. In contrast,a voltage-gated channel is stimulated to open or closeby a change in the voltage (electrical charge difference)across the membrane.THE MEMBRANE POTENTIAL All living cells maintain an imbalanceof ion concentrations across the plasma membrane,and consequently a small voltage or membrane potentialexists across that membrane. When a gated ionchannel opens, millions of ions can rush through it per second.How fast the ions move, and in which direction (into orout of the cell), depends on two factors, the concentration gradientand the magnitude of the voltage. Let’s consider howthese factors affect the concentration of potassium ions (K+)inside an animal cell:• The concentration gradient: Because of active transport (discussedbelow), the concentration of K+ is usually muchhigher inside the cell than outside, so K+ will tend to diffuseout of the cell through an open potassium channel.• The distribution of electrical charge: As K+ diffuses out of thecell it leaves behind an excess of chloride (Cl–) and othernegatively charged ions. These negatively charged substancescannot readily diffuse through the plasma membraneto follow K+ out of the cell, and this results in acharge difference (negative inside) across the membrane.K+ is attracted to the negative charge inside the cell, creatinga tendency for K+ to stay inside the cell, even though itis more concentrated there than outside.Now, consider what happens when the K+ channel is opened.Two forces are at work: diffusion draws K+ out of the cellthrough the channel, and electrical attraction keeps K+ insidethe cell. The system exists in a state of equilibrium, in which theion’s rate of diffusion out through the channel is balanced bythe rate of movement in through the channel due to electricalattraction. Obviously, the concentrations of K+ on each side ofthe membrane will not be equal, as we would expect if diffusionwere the only force involved. Instead, the attraction of electricalcharges keeps some extra K+ inside the cell. This imbalancein K+ is a major factor in generating a voltage across theplasma membrane called the membrane potential.A polar substance is more concentratedon the outside than the inside of the cell.Binding of a stimulusmolecule causesthe pore to open…3 …and the polar substance candiffuse across the membrane.21Stimulusmolecule(ligand)Hydrophobicinterior of bilayerBindingsiteChannelproteinOutside of cellInside of cellHydrophilic poreClosedchannel6.11 A Gated Channel Protein Opens in Response to aStimulus The channel protein has a pore of polar amino acidsand water. It is anchored in the hydrophobic bilayer interior by itsouter coating of nonpolar R groups of its amino acids. The proteinchanges its three-dimensional shape when a stimulus molecule(ligand) binds to it, opening the pore so that hydrophilic polar substancescan pass through. Other gated channels open in responseto an electrical potential (voltage).The membrane potential is related to the concentration imbalanceof K+ by the Nernst equation:where R is the gas constant, F is the Faraday constant (both familiarto chemistry students), T is the temperature, and z is thecharge on the ion (+1). Solving for 2.3 RT/zF at 20°C (“roomtemperature”), the equation becomes much simpler:where EK is the membrane potential (in millivolts, mV) thatresults from the ratio of K+ concentrations outside the cell [K]oand inside the cell [K]i.What does this equation tell us about cells? It shows that asmall change in K+ concentration, due to the opening of a ligand-gated K+ channel, for example, can have a large effect onthe electrical potential (E) across the membrane. This change inpotential might be enough to cause other proteins in the membrane,such as voltage-gated channels, to change configuration.As we discuss in Chapter 45, this is exactly what happens in thenervous system. Many drugs that act on electrically sensitivetissues work as ligands that open ion channels and thereby affectmembrane potential. And as you will see shortly, membranepotential drives secondary active transport.Actual measurements from animal cells give a total membranepotential between –60 and –70 mV across the membrane,where the inside is negative with respect to the outside (seeFigure 45.5). Cells have a tremendous amount of potential energystored in their membrane potentials. In fact, the brain cellsyou are using to read this book have more potential energy—about 200,000 volts per centimeter—than the high-voltage electriclines powering your reading light, which carry about 2volts per centimeter.THE SPECIFICITY OF ION CHANNELS How does an ion channel allowone ion, but not another, to pass through? It is not simplya matter of charge and size of the ion. For example, a sodiumion (Na+), with a radius of 0.095 nanometers, is smaller than K+(0.130 nm), and both carry the same positive charge. Yet thepotassium channel lets only K+ pass through the membrane,and not the smaller Na+. Nobel Laureate Roderick MacKinnonat The Rockefeller University found an elegant explanation forthis when he deciphered the structure of a potassium channelfrom a bacterium (Figure 6.12).Being charged, both Na+ and K+ are attracted to water molecules.They are surrounded by water “shells” in solution, heldby the attraction of their positive charges to the negativelycharged oxygen atoms on the water molecules (see Figure 2.10).The potassium channel contains highly polar oxygen atoms atits opening. The gap enclosed by these atoms is exactly the rightsize so that when a K+ ion approaches the opening, it is morestrongly attracted to the oxygen atoms there than to those of thewater molecules in its shell. It sheds its water shell and passesthrough the channel. The smaller Na+ ion, on the other hand, iskept a bit more distant from the oxygen atoms at the openingof the channel because extra water molecules can fit between theion (with its shell) and the oxygen atoms at the opening. SoNa+ does not enter the potassium channel. The gate that opensor closes the channel appears to be an interaction between positivelycharged arginine residues on the protein and negativecharges on membrane phospholipids. This is an example of thefunctional interactions between membrane proteins and lipids.AQUAPORINS FOR WATER Water crosses membranes at a muchfaster rate than would be expected for simple diffusion throughthe hydrophobic phospholipid bilayer. One way that water cando this is by “hitchhiking” with some ions, such as Na+, as theypass through ion channels. Up to 12 water molecules may coatan ion as it traverses a channel. But there is an even faster wayto get water across membranes. Plant cells and some animalcells, such as red blood cells and kidney cells, have membranechannels called aquaporins. These channels function as a cellularplumbing system for moving water. Like the K+ channel,the aquaporin channel is highly specific. Water molecules movein single file through the channel, which excludes ions so thatthe electrical properties of the cell are maintained.Aquaporins were first identified by Peter Agre at Duke University,who shared the Nobel Prize with Rod McKinnon (seeabove). Agre noticed a membrane protein that was present inred blood cells, kidney cells, and plant cells but did not knowits function. Acolleague suggested that it might be a water channel,because these cell types show rapid diffusion of wateracross their membranes. Agre inserted the protein into the membraneof an oocyte, which normally does not permit much diffusionof water. He injected the oocyte with mRNA for aquaporin,from which the protein was produced and inserted intoEKoi=⎡⎣⎤⎦⎡⎣⎤⎦58 logKKERTK zFoi=⎡⎣⎤⎦⎡⎣⎤⎦2 3 . log KK118 CHAPTER 6 | CELL MEMBRANESK+ ions fit uniquelyinside the funnel.Hydrated Na+ ions are toobig to fit in the funnel.Inside of cellOutside of cellα-helix of thechannel protein– –6.12 The Potassium Channel The positively charged potassium ionsare attracted by the polar (negatively charged) oxygen atoms in the Rgroups (side chains) of the channel protein, and the ions funnel throughthe channel. This channel is a “custom fit” for K+; other ions do not passthrough.6.3 | WHAT ARE THE PASSIVE PROCESSES OF MEMBRANE TRANSPORT? 119the membrane. Remarkably, the oocyte began swelling immediatelyafter being transferred to a hypotonic solution, indicatingrapid diffusion of water into the cell (Figure 6.13).Carrier proteins aid diffusion by binding substancesAs we described earlier, another kind of facilitated diffusion involvesnot just the opening of a channel, but also the actualbinding of the transported substance to a membrane proteincalled a carrier protein. Like channel proteins, carrier proteinsallow diffusion both into and out of the cell or organelle. In otherwords, carrier proteins operate in both directions. Carrier proteinstransport polar molecules such as sugars and amino acids.Glucose is the major energy source for most mammaliancells, and they require a great deal of it. Their membranes containa carrier protein—the glucose transporter—that facilitatesglucose uptake into the cell. Binding of glucose to a specificthree-dimensional site on one side of the transporter proteincauses the protein to change its shape and release glucose onthe other side of the membrane (Figure 6.14A). Since glucoseis broken down almost as soon as it enters a cell, there is almostalways a strong concentration gradient favoring glucose entry(that is, a higher concentration outside the cell than inside). Thetransporter allows glucose molecules to cross the membraneand enter the cell much faster than they would by simple diffusionthrough the bilayer. This rapid entry is necessary to ensurethat the cell receives enough glucose for its energy needs.Transport by carrier proteins is different from simple diffusion.In both processes, the rate of movement depends on theconcentration gradient across the membrane. However, in carrier-mediated transport, a point is reached at which increasesin the concentration gradient are not accompanied by an increasedrate of diffusion. At this point, the facilitated diffusionsystem is said to be saturated (Figure 6.14B). Because there areonly a limited number of carrier protein molecules per unit ofmembrane area, the rate of diffusion reaches a maximum whenall the carrier molecules are fully loaded with solute molecules.Think of waiting for the elevator on the ground floor of a hotelwith 50 other people. They can’t all get in the elevator (carrier)at once, so the rate of transport (say 10 people at a time)is saturated.6.3 RECAPDiffusion is the movement of ions or molecules froma region of greater concentration to a region oflesser concentration. Water can diffuse through cellmembranes by a process called osmosis. Channelproteins, which can be open or closed, and carrierproteins facilitate diffusion of charged and polarsubstances, including water. The diffusion of ionsacross cell membranes sets up an electrochemicalpotential gradient across the membranes.• What properties of a substance determine whether,and how fast, it will diffuse across a membrane?See p. 114• Describe osmosis and explain the terms hypertonic,hypotonic, and isotonic. See p. 116 and Figure 6.10• How does a channel protein facilitate diffusion?See p. 118 and Figures 6.11 and 6.12The process of diffusion tends to equalize the concentrations ofsubstances outside and inside cells. However, one hallmark ofCONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE6.13 Aquaporin Increases Membrane Permeabilityto WaterA protein was isolated from the membranes of cells in whichwater diffuses rapidly across the membranes. When the proteinwas inserted into oocytes, which do not normally have it, thewater permeability of the oocytes was greatly increased.HYPOTHESIS Aquaporin increases membrane permeabilityto water.Aquaporin increases the rate of waterdiffusion across the cell membrane.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSThis oocyte doesnot have aquaporinsin the cell membrane.This oocyte hasaquaporins insertedexperimentally intothe cell membrane.Water does not diffuseinto the cell so it doesnot swell.Water diffuses into thecell through theaquaporin channelsand it swells.AquaporinmRNA3.5 minutes inhypotonic solutionAquaporin channelGO TO Animated Tutorial 6.1 • Passive TransportyourBioPortal.coma living thing is that it can have an internal composition quitedifferent from that of its environment. To achieve this it mustsometimes move substances in opposite directions from theones in which they would naturally tend to diffuse. That is, substancesmust sometimes be moved against concentration gradientsand/or against the cell’s membrane potential (electricalgradient). This process requires work—the input of energy—and is known as active transport.What are the Active Processes of 6.4 Membrane Transport?In many biological situations, there is a different concentrationof a particular ion or small molecule inside compared with outsidea cell. In these cases, the imbalance is maintained by a proteinin the plasma membrane that moves the substance againstits concentration and/or electrical gradient. This is called activetransport, and because it is acting “against the normal flow,” itrequires the expenditure of energy. Often the energy source isadenosine triphosphate (ATP). In eukaryotes, ATP is producedin the mitochondria and has chemical energy stored in its terminalphosphate bond. This energy is released when ATP is convertedto adenosine diphosphate (ADP) in a hydrolysis reactionthat breaks the terminal phosphate bond. This is one source ofenergy for active transport. (We give the details of how ATP providesenergy to cells in Section 8.2.)The differences between diffusion and active transport aresummarized in Table 6.1.Active transport is directionalSimple and facilitated diffusion follow concentration gradientsand can occur in both directions across a membrane. In contrast,active transport is directional, and moves a substance either intoor out of the cell or organelle, depending on need. There arethree types of active transport, each involving its own type ofmembrane protein (Figure 6.15):• Auniporter moves a single substance in one direction. Forexample, a calcium-binding protein found in the plasma120 CHAPTER 6 | CELL MEMBRANES…releasingthe glucose.The carrier protein returnsto its original shape, readyto bind another glucose.3 …which then changesthe protein’s shape…Glucose binds tothe protein…The carrier protein hasa glucose binding site.All carriersare occupied.Some carriersare occupied.41 25Outside of cellInside of cellLow glucose concentrationHigh glucoseconcentrationGlucose concentrationoutside the cellGlucosecarrier proteinGlucoseRate of diffusioninto the cell(A)(B)6.14 A Carrier Protein Facilitates Diffusion The glucose transporteris a carrier protein that allows glucose to enter the cell at a faster ratethan would be possible by simple diffusion. (A) The transporter binds toglucose, brings it into the membrane interior, then changes shape, releasingglucose into the cell cytoplasm. (B) The graph shows the rate of glucoseentry via a carrier versus the concentration of glucose outside thecell. As the glucose concentration increases, the rate of diffusion increasesuntil the point at which all the available transporters are being used(the system is saturated).TABLE 6.1Membrane Transport MechanismsDIFFUSIONSIMPLE DIFFUSION THROUGH CHANNEL FACILITATED DIFFUSION ACTIVE TRANSPORTCellular energy required? No No No YesDriving force Concentration Concentration Concentration ATP hydrolysis (againstgradient gradient gradient concentration gradient)Membrane protein required? No Yes Yes YesSpecificity No Yes Yes Yes6.4 | WHAT ARE THE ACTIVE PROCESSES OF MEMBRANE TRANSPORT? 121membrane and endoplasmic reticulum of many cells activelytransports Ca2+ to locations where it is more highlyconcentrated, either outside the cell or inside the ER.• Asymporter moves two substances in the same direction.For example, a symporter in the cells that line the intestinemust bind Na+ in addition to an amino acid in order to absorbamino acids from the intestine.• An antiporter moves two substances in opposite directions,one into the cell (or organelle) and the other out of the cell(or organelle). For example, many cells have a sodium–potassium pump that moves Na+ out of the cell and K+into it.Symporters and antiporters are also known as coupled transportersbecause they move two substances at once.Different energy sources distinguish differentactive transport systemsThere are two basic types of active transport:• Primary active transport involves the direct hydrolysis ofATP, which provides the energy required for transport.• Secondary active transport does not use ATP directly. Instead,its energy is supplied by an ion concentration andelectrical gradient established by primary active transport.This transport system uses the energy of ATP indirectly toset up the gradient.In primary active transport, energy released by the hydrolysisof ATP drives the movement of specific ions against their concentrationgradients. For example, we mentioned earlier thatconcentrations of potassium ions (K+) inside a cell are often muchhigher than in the fluid bathing the cell. On the other hand, theconcentration of sodium ions (Na+) is often much higher outsidethe cell. A protein in the plasma membrane pumps Na+ out ofthe cell and K+ into the cell against these concentration and electrochemicalgradients, ensuring that the gradients are maintained(Figure 6.16). This sodium–potassium (Na+–K+) pump isUniporter transportsone substance inone direction.Symporter transportstwo different substancesin the same direction.Antiporter transportstwo different substancesin opposite directions.Outside Transported ionsof cellInsideof cell6.15 Three Types of Proteins for Active Transport Note that ineach of the three cases, transport is directional. Symporters and antiportersare examples of coupled transporters. All three types of transportersare coupled to energy sources in order to move substancesagainst their concentration gradients.Hydrolysis of ATPphosphorylates thepump protein andchanges its shape.3 Na+ and 1 ATP bind tothe protein “pump.”3 The shape changereleases Na+ outsidethe cell and enables K+to bind to the pump.Release of Pi returns the pump to itsoriginal shape, releasing K+ to thecell's interior and once again exposingNa+ binding sites. The cycle repeats.421Outside of cellHigh Na+ concentration,low K+ concentrationInside of cellHigh K+ concentration,low Na+ concentrationATPADPNa+Na+K+K+K+Na+–K+ pumpPiPi PiPi6.16 Primary Active Transport:The Sodium–Potassium PumpIn active transport, energy is used tomove a solute against its concentrationgradient. Here, energy from ATPis used to move Na+ and K+ againsttheir concentration gradients.found in all animal cells. The pump isan integral membrane glycoprotein.It breaks down a molecule of ATP toADP and a free phosphate ion (Pi)and uses the energy released to bringtwo K+ ions into the cell and exportthree Na+ ions. The Na+–K+ pump isthus an antiporter because it movestwo substances in different directions.In secondary active transport, themovement of a substance against itsconcentration gradient is accomplishedusing energy “regained” byletting ions move across the membranewith their electrochemical andconcentration gradients. For example,once the sodium–potassium pumpestablishes a concentration gradient of sodium ions, the passivediffusion of some Na+ back into the cell can provide energy forthe secondary active transport of glucose into the cell (Figure6.17). This occurs when glucose is absorbed into the bloodstreamfrom the digestive tract. Secondary active transport aids in theuptake of amino acids and sugars, which are essential raw materialsfor cell maintenance and growth. Both types of coupledtransport proteins—symporters and antiporters—are used forsecondary active transport.6.4 RECAPActive transport across a membrane is directionaland requires an input of energy to move substancesagainst their concentration gradients. Active transportallows a cell to maintain small molecules andions at concentrations very different from those inthe surrounding environment.• Why is energy required for active transport? See p. 120• Explain the difference between primary active transportand secondary active transport. See p. 121• Why is the sodium–potassium (Na+–K+) pump classifiedas an antiporter? See p. 122 and Figure 6.16We have examined a number of passive and active ways inwhich ions and small molecules can enter and leave cells. Butwhat about large molecules such as proteins? Many proteins areso large that they diffuse very slowly, and their bulk makes itdifficult for them to pass through the phospholipid bilayer. Ittakes a completely different mechanism to move intact largemolecules across membranes.How Do Large Molecules Enter 6.5 and Leave a Cell?Macromolecules such as proteins, polysaccharides, and nucleicacids are simply too large and too charged or polar to passthrough biological membranes. This is actually a fortunate property—think of the consequences if such molecules diffused outof cells. A red blood cell would not retain its hemoglobin! Indeed,as we discuss in Chapter 5, the development of a selectivelypermeable membrane was essential for the functioningof the first cells when life on Earth began. The interior of a cellcan be maintained as a separate compartment with a differentcomposition from that of the exterior environment, which issubject to abrupt changes. On the other hand, cells must sometimestake up or secrete (release to the external environment) intactlarge molecules. In Section 5.3 we describe phagocytosis,the mechanism by which solid particles can be brought into thecell by means of vesicles that pinch off from the plasma membrane.The general terms for the mechanisms by which substancesenter and leave the cell via membrane vesicles are endocytosisand exocytosis.122 CHAPTER 6 | CELL MEMBRANESPrimary active transportThe Na+–K+ pump movesNa+, using the energy ofATP hydrolysis to establisha concentration gradientof Na+.Secondary active transportNa+, moving with theconcentration gradientestablished by the Na+–K+pump, drives the transportof glucose against itsconcentration gradient.PiATPADPNa+Na+GlucoseNa+–K+ pump(antiport)K+K+ +Outside of cellInside of cellHigh Na+ concentration,low K+ concentrationHigh K+ concentration,low Na+ concentration6.17 Secondary Active Transport TheNa+ concentration gradient established byprimary active transport (left) powers thesecondary active transport of glucose(right). A symporter protein couples themovement of glucose across the membraneagainst its concentration gradient tothe passive movement of Na+ into the cell.GO TO Animated Tutorial 6.2 • Active TransportyourBioPortal.com6.5 | HOW DO LARGE MOLECULES ENTER AND LEAVE A CELL? 123Macromolecules and particles enter the cellby endocytosisEndocytosis is a general term for a group of processes that bringsmall molecules, macromolecules, large particles, and evensmall cells into the eukaryotic cell (Figure 6.18A). There are threetypes of endocytosis: phagocytosis, pinocytosis, and receptormediatedendocytosis. In all three, the plasma membrane invaginates(folds inward), forming a small pocket around materialsfrom the environment. The pocket deepens, forming avesicle. This vesicle separates from the plasma membrane andmigrates with its contents to the cell’s interior.• In phagocytosis (“cellular eating”), part of the plasmamembrane engulfs large particles or even entire cells. Unicellularprotists use phagocytosis for feeding, and somewhite blood cells use phagocytosis to defend the body byengulfing foreign cells and substances. The food vacuole orphagosome that forms usually fuses with a lysosome,where its contents are digested (see Figure 5.11).• In pinocytosis (“cellular drinking”), vesicles also form.However, these vesicles are smaller, and the process operatesto bring dissolved substances, including proteins orfluids, into the cell. Like phagocytosis, pinocytosis can berelatively nonspecific regarding what it brings into the cell.For example, pinocytosis goes on constantly in the endothelium,the single layer of cells that separates a tiny bloodcapillary from the surrounding tissue. Pinocytosis allowscells of the endothelium to rapidly acquire fluids and dissolvedsolutes from the blood.• In receptor-mediated endocytosis, molecules at the cell surfacerecognize and trigger the uptake of specific materials.Let’s take a closer look at this last process.Receptor-mediated endocytosis is highly specificReceptor-mediated endocytosis is used by animal cells to capturespecific macromolecules from the cell’s environment. Thisprocess depends on receptor proteins, which are proteins thatcan bind to specific molecules within the cell or in the cell’s externalenvironment. In receptor-mediated endocytosis, the receptorsare integral membrane proteins located at particular regionson the extracellular surface of the plasma membrane.These membrane regions are called coated pits because they formslight depressions in the plasma membrane and their cytoplasmicsurfaces are coated by other proteins, such as clathrin. Theuptake process is similar to that in phagocytosis.When a receptor protein binds to its specific ligand (in thiscase, the macromolecule to be taken into the cell), its coatedpit invaginates and forms a coated vesicle around the boundmacromolecule. The clathrin molecules strengthen and stabilizethe vesicle, which carries the macromolecule away from theplasma membrane and into the cytoplasm (Figure 6.19). Onceinside, the vesicle loses its clathrin coat and may fuse with alysosome, where the engulfed material is digested (by the hydrolysisof polymers to monomers) and the products releasedinto the cytoplasm. Because of its specificity for particularmacromolecules, receptor-mediated endocytosis is an efficientmethod of taking up substances that may exist at low concentrationsin the cell’s environment.Receptor-mediated endocytosis is the method by whichcholesterol is taken up by most mammalian cells. Waterinsolublecholesterol and triglycerides are packaged by livercells into lipoprotein particles. Most of the cholesterol ispackaged into a type of lipoprotein particle called low-densitylipoprotein, or LDL, which is circulated via the bloodstream.When a particular cell requires cholesterol, it producesspecific LDL receptors, which are inserted into theplasma membrane in clathrin-coated pits. Binding of LDLsto the receptor proteins triggers the uptake of the LDLs viareceptor-mediated endocytosis. Within the resulting vesicle,the LDL particles are freed from the receptors. The receptorssegregate to a region that buds off and forms a new vesicle,which is recycled to the plasma membrane. The freedLDL particles remain in the original vesicle, which fuseswith a lysosome. There, the LDLs are digested and the cholesterolmade available for cell use.In healthy individuals, the liver takes up unused LDLs forrecycling. People with the inherited disease familial hypercholesterolemiahave a deficient LDL receptor in their livers. Thisprevents receptor-mediated endocytosis of LDLs, resulting inA vesicle fuses with the plasmamembrane. The contents of thevesicle are released, and itsmembrane becomes part of theplasma membrane.The plasma membranesurrounds a part of theexterior environmentand buds off as a vesicle.(A) Endocytosis(B) ExocytosisPlasma membraneOutside of cellInside of cell Endocytotic vesicleSecretory vesicle6.18 Endocytosis and Exocytosis Endocytosis (A) and exocytosis(B) are used by eukaryotic cells to take up and release large moleculesand particles, and small cells.dangerously high levels of cholesterol in the blood. The cholesterolbuilds up in the arteries that nourish the heart and causes heart attacks.In extreme cases where only the deficient receptor is present,children and teenagers can have severe cardiovascular disease.Exocytosis moves materials out of the cellExocytosis is the process by which materials packaged in vesiclesare secreted from a cell when the vesicle membrane fuseswith the plasma membrane (see Figure 6.18B). This fusingmakes an opening to the outside of the cell. The contents ofthe vesicle are released into the environment, and the vesiclemembrane is smoothly incorporated into the plasma membrane.In Chapter 5 we encounter exocytosis as the last step in theprocessing of material engulfed by phagocytosis—the releaseof undigested materials back to the extracellular environment.Exocytosis is also important in the secretion of many differentsubstances, including digestive enzymes from the pancreas,neurotransmitters from neurons, and materials for the constructionof the plant cell wall. You will encounter these processes inlater chapters.6.5 RECAPEndocytosis and exocytosis are the processes bywhich large particles and molecules are transportedinto and out of the cell. Endocytosis may be mediatedby a receptor protein in the plasma membrane.• Explain the difference between phagocytosis andpinocytosis. See p. 123• Describe an example of receptor-mediated endocytosis.See p. 123 and Figure 6.19We have now examined the structures and some of the functionsof biological membranes. We have seen how macromolecules onthe plasma membrane surface allow cells to recognize and adhereto each other, so that tissues and organs can form. We havealso seen how membranes selectively regulate the traffic of smalland large molecules, and how large particles such as LDLs canbe taken up by cells. These are crucial functions, but they are notthe only functions of biological membranes.What Are Some Other Functions 6.6 of Membranes?The plasma membranes of certain types of cells, such as neuronsand muscle cells, respond to the electric charges carried byions. These membranes are thus electrically excitable, whichgives them important properties. For example, in neurons, theplasma membrane conducts nerve impulses from one end ofthe cell to the other. In muscle cells, electrical excitation resultsin muscle contraction.Other biological activities and properties associated withmembranes are discussed in the chapters that follow. Throughoutevolution, these activities have been essential for the specializationof cells, tissues, and organisms. Three of these activitiesare especially important:• Some organelle membranes help transform energy (Figure6.20A). For example, the inner mitochondrial membranehelps convert the energy of fuel molecules to the energy ofphosphate bonds in ATP. The thylakoid membranes ofchloroplasts participate in the conversion of light energy tothe energy of chemical bonds. These important processes,vital to the life of most eukaryotic organisms, are discussedin detail in Chapters 9 and 10.• Some membrane proteins organize chemical reactions. Often acellular process depends on a series of enzyme-catalyzed124 CHAPTER 6 | CELL MEMBRANESThe protein clathrin coats the cytoplasmic sideof the plasma membrane at a coated pit.The endocytosed contents aresurrounded by a clathrin-coated vesicle.CoatedvesicleCoatedpitCytoplasmOutsideof cellSpecificsubstancebinding toreceptorproteinsClathrinmolecules6.19 Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis The receptor proteins in acoated pit bind specific macromolecules, which are then carried into thecell by a coated vesicle.GO TO Animated Tutorial 6.3 • Endocytosis and ExocytosisyourBioPortal.com6.6 | WHAT ARE SOME OTHER FUNCTIONS OF MEMBRANES? 125reactions, in which the products of one reaction serve as reactantsin the next. For such a series of reactions to occur, allthe necessary molecules must come together. In a solution,reactant and enzyme molecules are randomly distributedand collisions among them are random. Because these collisionsare necessary for chemical reactions to occur, a completeseries of chemical reactions may occur only veryslowly in a solution. However, if the different enzymes arebound to a membrane in sequential order, the product ofone reaction can be released close to the enzyme for thenext reaction. Such an “assembly line” allows reactions toproceed rapidly and efficiently (Figure 6.20B).• Some membrane proteins process information. As we have seen,biological membranes may have integral membrane proteinsor attached carbohydrates that can bind to specificsubstances in the environment. Without entering a cell, aspecific ligand can bind to a receptor and serve as a signalto initiate, modify, or turn off a cell function (Figure 6.20C).In this type of information processing, specificity in bindingis essential.We have seen the informational role of the LDL receptor proteinin the recognition and endocytosis of LDL, with its cargoof cholesterol. Another example is the binding of a hormonesuch as insulin to specific receptors on a target cell. When insulinbinds to receptors on a liver cell, it elicits the uptake of glucose.In Chapter 7 there are many other examples of the role ofmembrane proteins in information processing.ABB CA B CSignal binding induces achange in the receptor protein…1…causing some effectinside the cell.2(C) Information processingSignalbindingsiteSignalmoleculeA pigment attached toa membrane proteinabsorbs energy.21Each protein carries out asingle chemical reaction.1The protein transfers the energy toADP to form ATP, which the cell canuse as an energy source.2 The product of the first reactionmust diffuse by random motion toreach the site of the second reaction.3 The membrane organizesthe two reactions so thatthey occur at the sametime and place.Pi ADP ATPOutside of cellInside of cell(A) Energy transformation(B) Organizing chemical reactions+Outsideenergy source(such as light)Energy-richpigment protein6.20 Other Membrane Functions The compartmentation afforded by a lipid bilayer orprotein membrane was a key event in the emergence of cells. Functions such as energytransformation (A), organization of chemical reactions (B), and signaling (C) probablyevolved later and conferred a selective advantage on cells and organisms that had them.6.1 What Is the Structure of a Biological Membrane?• Biological membranes consist of lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates.The fluid mosaic model of membrane structure describesa phospholipid bilayer in which proteins can move about withinthe plane of the membrane. SEE WEB ACTIVITY 6.1• The two leaflets of a membrane may have different propertiesbecause of their different phospholipid compositions, exposeddomains of integral membrane proteins, and peripheral membraneproteins. Some proteins, called transmembraneproteins, span the membrane. Review Figure 6.1• Carbohydrates, attached to proteins in glycoproteins or tophospholipids in glycolipids, project from the external surfaceof the plasma membrane and function as recognition signals.• Membranes are not static structures, but are constantly forming,exchanging, and breaking down.CHAPTER SUMMARY
6.1 What Is the Structure of a Biological Membrane?• Biological membranes consist of lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates.The fluid mosaic model of membrane structure describesa phospholipid bilayer in which proteins can move about withinthe plane of the membrane. SEE WEB ACTIVITY 6.1• The two leaflets of a membrane may have different propertiesbecause of their different phospholipid compositions, exposeddomains of integral membrane proteins, and peripheral membraneproteins. Some proteins, called transmembraneproteins, span the membrane. Review Figure 6.1• Carbohydrates, attached to proteins in glycoproteins or tophospholipids in glycolipids, project from the external surfaceof the plasma membrane and function as recognition signals.• Membranes are not static structures, but are constantly forming,exchanging, and breaking down.
6.2 How Is the Plasma Membrane Involved in CellAdhesion and Recognition?• In order for cells to assemble into tissues they must recognizeand adhere to one another. Cell recognition and cell adhesiondepend on integral membrane proteins that protrude from thecell surface. Binding can be between the same proteins fromtwo cells (homotypic) or different proteins (heterotypic).Review Figure 6.6• Cell junctions connect adjacent cells. Tight junctions preventthe passage of molecules through the intercellular spacesbetween cells, and they restrict the migration of membraneproteins over the cell surface. Desmosomes cause cells toadhere firmly to one another. Gap junctions provide channelsfor communication between adjacent cells. Review Figure 6.7,WEB ACTIVITY 6.2• Integrins mediate the attachment of animal cells to the extracellularmatrix. Review Figure 6.86.3 What Are the Passive Processes of MembraneTransport?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 6.1• Membranes exhibit selective permeability, regulating whichsubstances pass through them.• A substance can diffuse passively across a membrane by oneof two processes: simple diffusion through the phospholipidbilayer or facilitated diffusion either through a channel or bymeans of a carrier protein.• A solute diffuses across a membrane from a region with agreater concentration of that solute to a region with a lesserconcentration of that solute. Equilibrium is reached when thesolute concentrations on both sides of the membrane show nonet change over time. Review Figure 6.9• In osmosis, water diffuses from a region of higher water concentrationto a region of lower water concentration.• Most cells are in an isotonic environment, where total soluteconcentrations on both sides of the plasma membrane areequal. If the solution surrounding a cell is hypotonic to the cellinterior, more water enters the cell than leaves it. In plant cells,this leads to turgor pressure. In a hypertonic solution, morewater leaves the cell than enters it. Review Figure 6.10• Ion channels are membrane proteins that allow the rapid facilitateddiffusion of ions through membranes. Gated channelscan be opened or closed by certain conditions or chemicals. Theopening or closing of channels, as well as an asymmetric distributionof charged molecules, sets up an electrochemical gradienton different sides of a membrane. Review Figure 6.11• Aquaporins are water channels. Review Figure 6.13• Carrier proteins bind to polar molecules such as sugars andamino acids and transport them across the membrane. Themaximum rate of this type of facilitated diffusion is limited bythe number of carrier (transporter) proteins in the membrane.Review Figure 6.146.4 What Are the Active Processes of MembraneTransport?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 6.2• Active transport requires the use of chemical energy to movesubstances across membranes against their concentration gradients.Active transport proteins may be uniporters, symporters,or antiporters. Review Figure 6.15• In primary active transport, energy from the hydrolysis of ATPis used to move ions into or out of cells. The sodium-potassiumpump is an important example. Review Figure 6.16• Secondary active transport couples the passive movement ofone substance down its concentration gradient to the movementof another substance against its concentration gradient.Energy from ATP is used indirectly to establish the concentrationgradient that results in the movement of the first substance.Review Figure 6.176.5 How Do Large Molecules Enter and Leave a Cell?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 6.3• Endocytosis is the transport of macromolecules, large particles,and small cells into eukaryotic cells via the invagination of theplasma membrane and the formation of vesicles. Phagocytosisand pinocytosis are types of endocytosis. Review Figure 6.18A• In receptor-mediated endocytosis, a specific receptor proteinon the plasma membrane binds to a particular macromolecule.• In exocytosis, materials in vesicles are secreted from the cellwhen the vesicles fuse with the plasma membrane. ReviewFigure 6.18B6.6 What Are Some Other Functions of Membranes?• Membranes function as sites for energy transformations, fororganizing chemical reactions, and for recognition and initialprocessing of extracellular signals. Review Figure 6.20