Many years ago, scientists studying a troop ofmacaques (Macaca fuscata) on the Japaneseisland of Koshima lured the monkeys into theopen by throwing pieces of sweet potato onto the beachfrom a passing boat. The monkeys tried to brush the sandoff the potatoes, but the pieces remained gritty. One day,a young female named Imo took her sweet potatoes tothe water and washed off the sand. Soon her siblings andother juveniles in her playgroup were imitating Imo’s newbehavior. Then their mothers began washing their potatoes.None of the adult males imitated this behavior, butyoung males learned the behavior from their mothers andtheir siblings and continued to wash their potatoes asthey grew older.The scientists were fascinated by the way Imo’s creative,insightful behavior spread throughout the population,so they presented the monkeys with a new challenge:they threw wheat onto the beach. Picking wheatgrains out of the sand was tedious and difficult. Imo, apparentlya prodigy in the macaque world, came up with asolution: she carried handfuls of sand and wheat to thewater and threw them in. The sand sank, but the wheatfloated, enabling her to skim the grain off the surface andeat it. This efficient feeding behavior spread throughoutthe population just as washing sweet potatoes had—firstto other juveniles, then to mothers, and then from mothersto their male and female offspring.The macaques of that troop now routinely wash theirfood. They also play in the ocean, which theynever did before, and they have addedmarine food items to their diet. Clearly, thispopulation of monkeys has a culture: a set ofinvented behaviors shared by members ofthe population and transmitted throughsocial learning.Animals also display elaborate behaviorsthey do not learn. Web spinning by spiders,for example, requires no practice or prior experience.In many spider species, females dieimmediately after they lay their eggs; thehatching spiderlings never see their mother,her web, or webs spun by other spiders. Yetwhen they first construct their own webs,Monkey see, monkey do53Shared Learned Behaviors Become a CultureIn the space of a single generation, a population ofJapanese macaques (Macaca fuscata) learnedand transmitted a set of behaviors that includedwashing food, playing in the water, and eatingmarine food items—a new “culture” of waterrelatedbehaviors.What Are the Origins of 53.1 Behavioral Biology?Humans have studied animal behavior since prehistoric times.Understanding the habits of potential prey, as well as those oftheir predators, was of great value to hunters. Appreciation ofbehavioral traits led to the domestication of animal species. Accountsof dramatic animal behaviors such as seasonal appearancesand disappearances, mating displays, aggression, preycapture, and even less dramatic behaviors such as parental care,communication, and sleep are found throughout recorded history.Yet the scientific study of animal behavior did not truly getunder way until the early 1900s.Conditioning was the focus of behavioristsThe discovery of the conditioned reflex, a simple form of learning,by the Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov in the late 1800swas a seminal event. Pavlov was studying the neural control ofdigestive juice secretion, and he observed that a dog salivatedwhen it smelled food. He also noticed that the dog salivatedwhen the technician who normally fed the dog entered the roomeven when no food was present. Following up this observation,he substituted a sound stimulus for the technician. When thedog was fed, a metronome ticked. After a number of trials, thedog salivated when it heard the metronome even if no food wasoffered. Pavlov showed that other sounds worked as well (includinga bell, which is commonly associated with his work).Salivation in response to the sight, smell, or taste of food is anatural reflex response to a stimulus, but salivation in responseto a sound was a learned response. The pairing of a sound withthe experience of receiving food conditioned the dog’s nervoussystem to generate a response, which Pavlov dubbed the conditionedreflex. The food was referred to as the unconditioned stimulus(US), and the sound as the conditioned stimulus (CS) (Figure53.1). Thus Pavlov showed that a simple behavior controlled bythe nervous system could be modified through experience.Pavlov received a Nobel prize in 1904, and his work stimulatedmuch new research because he had developed an experimentalmodel of learning. All sorts of changes in the relationshipbetween a CS and a US were investigated. A particularlyinteresting variation was developed by the psychologist B. F.Skinner, who showed that any random action of an animal couldbecome a conditioned response to a stimulus if a reward wastemporally associated with the action and the stimulus. Forexample, a rat could be conditioned to press a lever in responseto a stimulus if it got a reward when it behaved as the experi-IN THIS CHAPTER we will describe how the modernstudy of animal behavior emerged from earlier researchfocused on learning and on inherited behavior. We will giveexamples of how methods from genetics and molecular genetics,physiology, neurobiology, ecology, and evolutionhave contributed to our understanding of the behavior ofanimals—including ourselves.they do it perfectly, without the benefit of experience ora model to copy.Web spinning requires thousands of movements performedin just the right sequence. Most of that sequenceis stereotypic—performed the same way every time. Differentspider species spin webs of different designs, usingdifferent sequences of movements. Yet every spiderknows how to spin its species-specific web at birth; thebehavior is part of its genetic inheritance.Most animal behavior stems from an interaction ofgenetic inheritance and learning, and modern studies ofanimal behavior focus on the mechanisms of both. Theevolution of behavior is also a topic of great interest, andresearch on that topic asks how particular behaviors areadaptive in specific environments. In short, behavioralbiology is a highly integrative field that incorporates approachesfrom virtually all of the biological subdisciplinesyou have studied in this book.CHAPTER OUTLINE53.1 What Are the Origins of Behavioral Biology?53.2 How Can Genes Influence Behavior?53.3 How Does Behavior Develop?53.4 How Does Behavior Evolve?53.5 What Physiological Mechanisms UnderlieBehavior?53.6 How Does Social Behavior Evolve?Spiders Are Born Web Designers Each spider performs astereotypic sequence of movements that results in a speciesspecificweb design. Spiders such as this banded garden spider(Argiope trifasciata) are born with this ability, with no needto learn from experience or to model their movements afterthose of a parent.menter desired. Because the animal was conditioned to performan operation on its environment, this experimental protocol wasknown as operant conditioning and was viewed as anothermodel of learning.The experimental approach to behavior initiated by Pavlovand Skinner had powerful effects on the nature of research onanimal behavior. The focus of scientists using this approach wasquite specific:• They focused on laboratory environments rather than naturalenvironments because in the laboratory, the variables intheir conditioning experiments could be precisely controlled.• They focused on only a few species (predominantly the albinorat) as model systems rather than studying diversespecies from nature.• They focused on questions of learning and memory,largely to the exclusion of other types of behavior(e.g., mating, feeding, communication).Thus defined, the field of animal behavior researchbecame known as behaviorism, and it was largelythe domain of psychologists.Fixed action patterns were thefocus of ethologistsAn alternative approach to the study of animal behaviorarose at the same time as behaviorism, butlargely in Europe. Scientists there focused on describingthe characteristics of animals in their natural environment,an approach that became known as ethology (Greek ethos,“character”; logos, “study”). In contrast to the behaviorists, theethologists were interested in a wide variety of species, theirevolutionary relationships, and the ways in which their behaviorswere adapted to their environments. The leaders of theethology movement were Karl von Frisch, who discovered thedance language of bees; Konrad Lorenz, who discovered thatthe strong bond between parent and offspring develops duringa “critical period” following birth; and Niko Tinbergen, whostudied inborn patterns of behavior commonly known as instincts.These three scientists shared the Nobel Prize in 1973 for“their discoveries concerning organization and elicitation of individualand social behavior patterns.”The instinctive behaviors that were the main interest of theethologists were genetically determined patterns. Geneticallydetermined behaviors• are performed without learning• are stereotypic (i.e., performed the same way each time)• cannot be modified by learningThe ethologists called such behaviors fixed action patterns.To demonstrate that a behavior was genetically determined,ethologists performed deprivation experiments in which ananimal was raised in an environment devoid of opportunitiesto learn its species-specific behavior. An example of a naturaldeprivation experiment is the web spinning of the spider featuredat the opening of this chapter. The parents of the youngspider die before it hatches, and in a seasonal environment, ithas no model webs to copy when it spins its first web, yet it createsa perfect, species-specific web the first and every time itspins a web.Fixed action patterns are usually responses to specific stimuli.The ethologists carefully characterized such stimuli, whichthey called releasers. In general, releasers are very simple subsetsof the information available in the environment. For example,Tinbergen studied the begging behavior of gull chicks.Adult gulls have a red dot on their bills. When a parent gullreturns to the nest to feed its chicks, the chicks peck on the red53.1 | WHAT ARE THE ORIGINS OF BEHAVIORAL BIOLOGY? 1115Food is an unconditionedstimulus (US) thatproduces an unconditionedresponse (UR).Sound is a neutral stimulusthat produces no response.Conditioning repeatedly presentsthe US immediately followingpresentation of the neutral stimulus.The neutral stimulus has become aconditioned stimulus (CS) that by itselfproduces the conditioned response (CR).(A) Before conditioning(B) Conditioning+(C) After conditioning53.1 The Conditioned Reflex Ivan Pavlov discovered that when a normalresponse is paired with an artificial stimulus, an animal learns to produce theresponse even when only the artificial stimulus is presented.dot, which stimulates the parent to regurgitate food (Figure53.2A). Experimenters investigated what stimulated the chicksto peck their parents’ bills. Models of gull heads of differentshapes and colors were tested (Figure 53.2B), as were modelsof a beak without a head. The results showed that the red dotwas necessary for the release of chick pecking behavior. In fact,a pencil with a red eraser elicited a more robust pecking responsethan an accurate model of a gull head without a red dot.Ethologists probed the causes of behaviorThe ethologists demonstrated the genetic basis for fixed actionpatterns by interbreeding closely related species. Konrad Lorenzstudied the courtship behaviors of different species of dabblingducks. Some of these species, such as mallards, teals, pintails,and gadwalls, are closely related and can interbreed, but theyrarely do so in nature. Each male duck performs a courtship displayconsisting of a precise series of movements that is typicalof his species (Figure 53.3). Afemale is not likely to accept himunless the entire display is successfully and correctly completed.When Lorenz crossbred these duck species, the hybrid offspringexpressed some elements of each parent’s courtship display,but in novel combinations. Furthermore, Lorenz observedthat hybrids sometimes exhibited display elements that werenot in the repertoire of either parent species but were seen inother dabbling duck species. Lorenz’s interbreeding studiesdemonstrated that the stereotypic motor patterns of thecourtship displays are inherited. The observation that femaleswere not interested in males performing hybrid displays wasevidence that sexual selection (see Section 21.3) had shaped thesegenetically determined behaviors.The ethologists recognized the importance of developmentand motivation in behavior, and they laid the foundation for theapplication of modern biological methods to the study of animalbehavior. Tinbergen outlined the challenges for investigatorsas four questions:• Causation: What is the stimulus for the behavior, and howhas the relationship between stimulus and behavior beenmodified by learning?• Development: How does the behavior change with age, andwhat experiences are necessary for it to be displayed?1116 CHAPTER 53 | ANIMAL BEHAVIORA red dot is more importantthan a realistic profile.Head color and shape have little effect on the abilityof a red dot to stimulate the begging response.Control10062359112598 99Presence of red patch on bill Head shape Head colorPecking responses(percentage of control)(A) (B)53.2 Releasing a Fixed Action Pattern (A) Gull chicksinstinctively peck at the red dot on the parent’s lower bill, abehavior that his induces the parent to regurgitate food intothe chick’s mouth. (B) Tinbergen’s work showed that the reddot on the parent’s beak was the critical component thatreleased the pecking response.1. Tail shake 2. Head flick 3. Tail shake 4. Bill shake 5. Grunt whistle 6. Tail shake7. Head up, tail up 8. Turn toward female 9. Nod swimming 10. Turn the backof the head53.3 Courtship Displays Are Highly Specific The courtship displayof the male mallard (Anas platyrhynchos) contains the precise 10 elementsillustrated here. The displays of closely related dabbling duckspecies contain some of the same elements, but have other elements notdisplayed by mallards.• Function: How does the behavior affect the animal’schances for survival and reproduction?• Evolution: How does the behavior compare with similar behaviorsin related species, and how might it have evolved?The first two questions refer to the proximate causes of behavior:the immediate genetic, physiological, neurological, and developmentalmechanisms that determine how an individual isbehaving at a particular time. The third and fourth questions referto the ultimate causes of behavior: the evolutionary processesthat produced the animal’s capacity and tendency to behave inparticular ways. In the sections that follow, we will describemany experiments on animal behavior. For each one, ask yourselfwhich of Tinbergen’s four questions it addresses andwhether it focuses on proximate or ultimate causes of behavior.53.1 RECAPEarly scientific studies of animal behavior took twoapproaches. Behaviorists focused on the study ofconditioned behavior in a few species of laboratoryanimals and asked questions about learning. Ethologistsstudied genetically determined behavior inmany species in their natural environments andasked evolutionary questions.• Describe the difference between conditioned reflexesand operant conditioning. See pp. 1114–1115 andFigure 53.1• What is the relationship between a releaser and a fixedaction pattern? See p. 1115 and Figure 53.2• Explain the difference between proximate and ultimatecauses of behavior and how Tinbergen’s questionsaddress these two types of causes. See pp.1116–1117The work of the ethologists left no doubt that behavior can begenetically determined, but how? Genes code for proteins. Behaviorsare highly complex traits involving sensory input andintricate patterns of control over responses to that input. Is itreasonable to think that a single gene can have a specific effecton a behavior?53.2 How Can Genes Influence Behavior?Behaviors are complex traits that depend on many genes. Nevertheless,evidence from multiple approaches shows that alterationsin single genes can result in discrete behavioral phenotypeson which natural selection can operate.Breeding experiments can show whether behavioralphenotypes are genetically determinedBehavioral geneticists identify individuals with unusual behavioralphenotypes and conduct breeding experiments to see ifthose traits are inherited. If the inheritance of a trait follows aMendelian inheritance pattern (see Section 12.1), then that traitis likely to be controlled by a small number of genes. A classicexample is the genetics of hive cleaning by honey bees.As we saw at the opening of Chapter 43, a honey bee colonyconsists of a reproductive queen bee and a huge number of nonreproductiveworkers. The worker bees have many tasks to perform.The queen deposits eggs in cells of the honeycomb structurethat the workers construct. The eggs hatch into larvae,which are fed in their cells by workers. When the larvae areready to pupate, the workers cap and seal their cells. If a pupadies before emerging as an adult, workers will normally uncapthe cell and drag the carcass outside the hive. This hygienicbehavior increases the resistance of the hive to a bacterium thatinfects and kills bee larvae. Some hives do not show this behavior;these nonhygienic hives are more susceptible to the spreadof this disease.When a nonhygienic female bee was crossed with a hygienicmale, the offspring were all nonhygienic, indicating that the geneticdeterminant of nonhygienic behavior is dominant. Whenthese nonhygienic F1 offspring were backcrossed to hygienicmales, however, four phenotypes were produced. Two phenotypeswere like those of the parents, either hygienic or nonhygienic,but the other two showed interesting deficits. One phenotypeopened the cells of dead pupae, but did not removethem. The other phenotype did not open cells, but if a cell wasalready open, it would dispose of the dead pupa (Figure 53.4).Thus the complex hygienic behavior has at least two componentsthat are controlled by separate genes. But the physicalidentity of these genes, and how they influence the behavior,could not be revealed by breeding experiments.Knockout experiments can reveal the rolesof specific genesSome modern molecular genetic approaches start with identifiedgenes and eliminate or silence them to see what effects theirelimination has on a behavioral phenotype (see Section 18.4).As you might expect, knocking out genes involved in sensorypathways can have pronounced effects on behavior. One exampleis a gene for a specific olfactory receptor in mice.As we saw in Section 46.2, mice have two olfactory organs:the nasal olfactory epithelium common to all mammals, anda small organ in the nasal passages, called the vomeronasal organ,or VNO (Figure 53.5). Catherine Dulac at Harvard Universitydiscovered that a large number of pheromone receptorswere expressed in that organ. (As described in Section 46.2,pheromones are signaling molecules released into the environment.)Dulac hypothesized that when the receptors in the male’sVNO bound to sex pheromones produced by female mice, theystimulated mating behavior. To test this hypothesis, Dulac createda genetically engineered male mouse in which the gene foran ion channel necessary for VNO receptor signaling wasknocked out. Contrary to the prediction of the hypothesis, theknockout males in fact did pursue and mate with femalesplaced in their cages. However, they also pursued and tried tomate with males placed in their cages. Normally a male mouse53.2 | HOW CAN GENES INFLUENCE BEHAVIOR? 1117reacts aggressively to a strange male, but theknockout male could not discriminate betweenmales and females placed in his cage. Thus properlyfunctioning VNO receptors appear to be essentialnot for sexual attraction, but for genderidentification. It is possible to imagine how selectionworking on this one gene could modify theintensity of male–male aggression and lead tochanges in social behavior.Behaviors are controlled by gene cascadesMale courtship behavior in Drosophila melanogaster,the laboratory fruit fly, is stereotypic, species-specific,and requires no learning—a classic fixed actionpattern. When a male encounters a potentialmate, he follows her, taps her body with his foreleg,extends and vibrates one wing, and licks hergenitals (Figure 53.6A). The development of thiscomplex male behavior is under the control of asingle gene, called fruitless ( fru), just as the developmentof male anatomy is under the control ofanother gene, called doublesex (dsx). In both malesand females, these two genes are part of a gene expressioncascade that results in different dsx andfru gene products in males and females (Figure53.6B). The female version of the Dsx protein controlsthe development of female anatomy, and theexpression of fru in the male nervous system resultsin the organization of the neural circuitrycontrolling male sexual behavior.There are two take-home lessons from this example.First, genes that control aspects of behavior,like other genes, are generally embedded ingene cascades that offer multiple opportunities forsimple genetic changes that will alter the phenotypeof even complex behaviors. Second, certaingenes, such as dsx and fru, influence a whole rangeof genes that contribute to complex behaviors.Modifications in any one of those genes or its ex-1118 CHAPTER 53 | ANIMAL BEHAVIORThese bees are nonhygienic,but will remove dead pupae ifcells are uncapped.These bees are nonhygienic. Theywill uncap cells of dead pupae, butwon’t remove them.Hygienic beesuncap cells andremove the deadpupae.uu is the “uncap” gene.rr is the “remove” gene.UuRrUURRNonhygienic beesuurrHygienic beesUR urUR urUR Ur uR urParental generationGenotype of femalesGenotype of malesGametes (male or female)Genotype of femalesGametes produced by femalesF1 (all nonhygienic)Backcross tohygienic malesF2 generationfemalesGenotypeBehavioruurrHygienicUuRr uuRrNonhygienicUurrur53.4 Genes and Hygienic Behavior Some worker honey bees remove carcasses ofdead pupae from their hive. Two components of this behavior—cell uncapping andremoval of the carcass—are under the control of separate recessive genes, designatedu and r.(A) (B)Nasal cavityOlfactory lobeof brainBrainNasalepitheliumVomeronasalorganVomeronasalnervesNostril53.5 The Mouse Vomeronasal Organ Identifies Gender (A) The mouse VNO islocated adjacent to the nasal passages. It contains pheromone receptors whose inputtravels to a specific region of the olfactory bulb (the accessory olfactory bulb). (B) Inmice, information from the VNO appears to be crucial in identifying gender and thus apotential sexual partner.pression can alter behavior. Thus, even though no behavior iscoded for by a single gene, alterations in single genes can influencebehavior in ways that affect an animal’s fitness.53.2 RECAPBreeding experiments show that behavioral phenotypescan be inherited and modified by natural selection.Although most behaviors are controlled bycomplex cascades of genes, molecular geneticmethods have shown that a single, identifiable genein the cascade can control a complex behavior.• How did breeding experiments on honey beesshow the genetic basis for hygienic behavior?See p. 1117 and Figure 53.4• What is the evidence that the vomeronasal organ inmice is responsible for gender identification?See pp. 1117–1118• Describe some of the different ways a gene cancontrol expression of a complex behavior.See p. 1118 and Figure 53.6How can the genetic cascades that underlie complex behaviorsbe programmed to respond selectively to specific sets ofstimuli? How can their expression be limited to appropriatetimes in an animal’s life? The answers to these questions can byfound by studying how behaviors develop over the life span.53.3 How Does Behavior Develop?The emergence of behavior as an animal develops and maturesdepends on the development of the nervous system as well ason the growth and maturation of other body systems. A birdcannot fly until its wings grow and its muscles and flight feathersmature. But even with anatomical and physiological competence,specific behaviors may not be expressed. Behaviors thatare adaptive at one stage in an animal’s life may not be adaptiveat other stages. Behaviors typical of juvenile animals, suchas begging for food, may disappear and new behavior patternsof a mature individual, such as courtship displays, appear.Hormones can determine behavioral potentialand timingHormones can determine the development of a behavioral potentialat an early age and the expression of that behavior at alater age. An excellent example of this is sexual behavior in rats53.3 | HOW DOES BEHAVIOR DEVELOP? 11191 Sex-determining pre-mRNAs are spliced inone specific way in female flies…2 …and anotherway in males.3 Female sxl andtra mRNAsmake proteinsthat controlsplicing in theexpression ofgenes in thefemale-specifichierarchy.4 Male sxl and tramRNAs havestop codonsthat terminatetranslation.5 The defaultsplicing of dsxmRNAs controlsmale anatomy……and malespecificsplicingof fru, whichresults in malecourtshipbehavior.Female fruit flies are XX… …and males are XY.6Sequences colored black are introns(noncoding DNA).sxl mRNATranscription andmRNA splicingOrienting Tapping Wing vibration Licking AttemptedcopulationCopulationTranscription andsex-lethal (sxl) mRNA splicingtransformer (tra)doublesex (dsx)fruitless (fru)Female SxlproteinFemaleDsx proteinFemale TraproteinMale DsxproteinMale FruproteinFemale FruproteinStop codonNo functionalSxl proteinNo functional Tra protein(A)(B)Female-specific mRNA Gene Male-specific mRNAStop codonDefaultsplicing53.6 The fruitless Gene (A) Male fruit flies display stereotypic,species-specific courtship behavior. (B) Sexual differentiation in Drosophilais controlled by a cascade of genes, including the fru gene, whoseexpression results in male sexual behavior.(Figure 53.7). Normally, adult male and female rats exhibitdifferent patterns of sexual behavior: females adopt a sexuallyreceptive posture, called lordosis, in the presence of males, andmales copulate with receptive females. Neither sex, however,expresses these behaviors until the animals have reached adulthood.Experiments in which newborn and adult rats wereneutered (to remove the influence of sex steroids naturally producedby their gonads) and artificially treated with hormonesled to the following conclusions:• Development of male sexual behavior requires that thebrain of the newborn rat be exposed to testosterone, but developmentof female sexual behavior does not require exposureto estrogen.• Testosterone masculinizes the nervous systems of both geneticmales and genetic females.• Exposure to sex steroids in adulthood is necessary for theexpression of sexual behavior, but testosterone producesmale sexual behavior only in adult rats whose brains weremasculinized when they were newborns, and estrogen producesfemale sexual behavior only in adult rats whosebrains were not masculinized when they were newborns.Thus, the sex steroids that are present at birth determine whichpattern of behavior develops, and the sex steroids that are presentin adulthood determine when that pattern is expressed.Some behaviors can be acquired only at certain timesResponsiveness to simple releasers is sufficient for certain behaviorssuch as begging behavior in gull chicks, but more completeinformation that cannot be genetically programmed is requiredfor other behaviors. An example is parent–offspringrecognition. When animals live in close proximity to other individuals,as in a herd or a nesting colony, it is important for amother and her offspring to learn each other’s identity soon afterbirth so they will be able to find each other in a crowded situation.In many such cases, a parent–offspring bond is formedby imprinting. What characterizes imprinting is that an animallearns a specific set of stimuli during a limited time called a criticalperiod or sensitive period.Konrad Lorenz demonstrated that young goslings imprint ontheir parents between 12 and 16 hours after hatching. By positioninghimself to be present during this critical period, Lorenzsucceeded in imprinting goslings on himself. The imprintedgoslings followed him around as if he were their parent (Figure53.8A).Imprinting requires only a brief exposure, but its effects arestrong and long-lasting. Emperor penguins reproduce duringthe coldest, darkest time of year in Antarctica. The parents walkup to 150 km inland to form a dense colony, where the femalelays her egg. She then walks back to the ocean to feed while her1120 CHAPTER 53 | ANIMAL BEHAVIORTreat with 6sex steroidsObserve: LordosisSpay an adult 6Treat withtestosteroneObserve: Nosexual behaviorTreat with 6sex steroidsObserve: LordosisTreat withtestosteroneObserve: Nosexual behaviorLet her matureSpay a newborn 6Treat with 6sex steroidsObserve: No lordosisTreat withtestosteroneTreat with 6sex steroidsTreat withtestosteroneTreat with 6sex steroidsTreat withtestosteroneTreat with 6sex steroidsTreat withtestosteroneObserve: 7sexualbehavior in presenceof receptive 6Let her matureSpay a newborn6 and treather withtestosterone(A) Female ratsTreatment 1 Treatment 2 Treament 3(B) Male ratsTreatment 1 Treatment 2 Treament 3Observe: No lordosisCastrate an adult 7Observe: Copulationin presence ofreceptive 6Observe: LordosisObserve: No sexualbehavior in presenceof receptive 6Let him matureCastrate anewborn 7Observe: No lordosisObserve: Copulationin presence ofreceptive 6Let him matureCastrate anewborn 7 andtreat him withtestosterone53.7 Hormonal Control of Sexual Behavior Experimental hormonaltreatments of rats demonstrated that the sex steroids present during earlydevelopment determine what sexual behavior patterns develop, but thesex steroids present in adulthood control the expression of those patterns.mate incubates the egg. By the time she returns, the chick hashatched. She then takes over its care and feeding, and the fatherwalks back to the ocean to feed. Generally, he is away so longthat the mother must leave to find food as well to avoid starvation.Thus, after being away for weeks, the father must findhis chick in a crowded, milling colony of chicks, all calling fortheir parents (Figure 53.8B). Yet he can unerringly locate hisown offspring by recognizing its call, which he learned beforehe left to feed.The critical or sensitive period for imprinting may be determinedby a brief developmental or hormonal state. For example,if a mother goat does not nuzzle and lick her newborn within 10minutes after its birth, she will not recognize it as her own offspringlater. For goats, the sensitive period is associated with peakinglevels of the hormone oxytocin in the mother’s circulatory systemat the time she gives birth and is sensing the olfactory cuesemanating from her newborn kid. Afemale goat rendered incapableof smelling before giving birth is unable to differentiatebetween her own kid and other kids after giving birth.Bird song learning involves genetics, imprinting,and hormonal timingMale songbirds use species-specific song to claim and advertisea breeding territory, compete with other males, and declaredominance. They also use song to attract females, who recognizethe song of their species even though they do not sing it.For males of many species, such as the white-crowned sparrow,learning is an essential step in the acquisition of song, but whatthey can learn seems to be influenced by genes, and there is alimited developmental time frame for learning. Ahatchling in naturehears his father and other white-crowned sparrows singing.He also hears the songs of many other bird species. But he doesnot sing until he approaches sexual maturity almost a year later,and when he does, he sings his father’s type of song.Studies of song learning in this species were initiated in the1960s by Peter Marler at the University of California at Berkeley.Marler incubated eggs of white-crowned sparrows andhand-reared the hatchlings in the laboratory. He was thereforeable to expose them to different tape-recorded songs at differenttimes in their development. He discovered that male birdscannot produce their species-specific song as adults unless theyhear it as nestlings in the first 2 months of their lives (Figure53.9). If the nestlings hear tapes of white-crowned sparrow songduring those first 2 months, they begin to sing, but poorly, asthey approach sexual maturity. Through trial and error, the birds53.3 | HOW DOES BEHAVIOR DEVELOP? 1121(B)(A)53.8 Imprinting Helps Parents and Offspring Recognize EachOther (A) Greylag geese that imprinted on Konrad Lorenz as hatchlingsfollowed him everywhere he went. (B) Imprinting allows a male emperorpenguin to find his own chick among many others.Frequency(kilocycles per sec)1Control or wild bird2 3 4 5 6Frequency(kilocycles per sec)Isolated hand-reared bird1 2 3 4 5 6Time (sec)Frequency(kilocycles per sec)Deafened bird0.5 1.0 1.5 2.01 2 3 4 5 6(A)(B)(C)53.9 Sensitive Periods for Song Learning (A) Sonogram showingthe species-specific song of an adult male white-crowned sparrow( Zonotrichia leucophrys). (B) Song of an adult male raised in isolation(never having heard the song as a nestling). (C) Song of an adult malewho heard the song as a nestling but was deafened prior to ever singinghimself. Marler’s experiments showed the bird must first acquire a songmemory by hearing the song as a nestling, and must then be able to hearhimself as he attempts to match his singing to that song memory.match their singing to their stored song memory, and from thenon they sing their species-specific song. To reach this point,the young bird must be able to hear himself sing. If he is deafenedjust before he begins to sing, he will not be able to matchhis stored song memory. If he is deafened after he sings his correctspecies-specific song, however, he will continue to sing likea normal bird. We say that at this point the song behavior patternis crystallized. Thus there are two sensitive periods for songlearning: the first in the nestling stage, when a song memoryis imprinted; the second as the bird approaches sexual maturity,when he learns to match that song memory.In nature, nestling male white-crowned sparrows hear thesongs of many species, so why do they learn only the song oftheir own species? Marler investigated this question in his isolationexperiments by playing tape recordings of other songsto the hatchlings. The young male sparrows did not learn thesongs of other species, even if they heard them many times,but hearing songs of their own species just a few times wassufficient for imprinting. Thus, although male sparrows mustlearn their song, they seem to have a genetic predisposition tolearn their own song and not the songs of other species. Marlercalled this phenomenon “an instinct to learn.” There is animportant reason why male white-crowned sparrows shouldlearn only their species-specific song: female white-crownedsparrows also listen to their fathers’ songs while they arenestlings, and when they mature, they choose mates who singlike their fathers did.Since Marler’s pioneering work, more investigations haverevealed additional complexity in white-crowned sparrowsong learning capacity. First, it was demonstrated that eachpopulation of white-crowns has its own dialect, and that malesfrom one population can learn the dialect of another population.Second, it was observed that in nature, white-crowns areoccasionally heard singing the songs of other species. CouldMarler’s laboratory experiments have missed a critical naturalvariable?Luis Baptista, a curator of birds at the California Academyof Sciences, took up the study of white-crowned sparrows toexplore the effects of social interactions on song learning. Hediscovered that when a hand-reared white-crowned sparrownestling was exposed to the sight and sound of a relatedspecies in an adjacent cage while tapes of his own species’ songplayed in the background, the white-crowned sparrow sangthe song of the other species when he matured. Thus social experiencehas a powerful effect on what the young bird can andwill learn.The timing and expression of bird song are underhormonal controlAs we have seen, both male and female songbirds hear theirspecies-specific song as nestlings, but only the males of mostspecies sing as adults, and they do so only in spring. Hormonesunderlie both the difference in song expression between maleand female songbirds and the timing of song expression.To determine whether the absence of testosterone is the mainreason female songbirds don’t sing, investigators injected adultfemale songbirds with testosterone in spring. In response tothese injections, the females sang their species-specific song justas the males did. Apparently females form a memory of theirspecies-specific song when they are nestlings, and have thephysical capacity to sing, but under normal circumstances theysimply lack the hormonal stimulation.How does testosterone cause a songbird to sing? Aremarkablestudy revealed that each spring, an increase in circulatingtestosterone levels causes certain parts of the male’s brain necessaryfor learning and developing song to grow larger. Individualneurons in those regions of the brain increase in size andgrow longer extensions, and the number of neurons in those regionsincreases. Such research on the neurobiology of bird songrevealed that, contrary to the once widely held belief that newneurons are not produced in the brains of adult vertebrates, hormonescan control behavior by changing brain structure as wellas brain function, both developmentally and in response toenvironmental cues.What triggers the release of testosterone in response to theonset of spring? Takashi Yoshimura conducted a DNA microarrayanalysis of brain samples from another bird species, theJapanese quail, which is a model species for avian genetic analyses.Knowing that photoperiod was the environmental cue, heexamined the responses of 38,000 genes to determine whichgenes were activated by changes in day length. Fourteen hoursafter dawn on the first day with the critical photoperiod that inducessinging behavior, genes in the brain that code for thyroidstimulatinghormone were switched on. This hormone acts onthe pituitary gland, which in turn regulates the production ofother hormones that stimulate the growth of the testes and theproduction of testosterone (see Figure 43.10).53.3 RECAPHormones can control what behavior patterns areprogrammed in the brain long before those behaviorsare expressed. Learning and expression of behaviorscan also be controlled by hormones, andtherefore timed for particular stages in the life cycle.• What hormonal conditions are necessary for the developmentof adult sexual behavior in male andfemale rats? See pp. 1119–1120 and Figure 53.7• What is the adaptive value of imprinting?See pp. 1120–1121• Describe the series of events necessary for a malewhite-crowned sparrow to sing its species-specificsong in spring. See pp. 1121–1122 and Figure 53.9Complex behaviors are the product of interactions of genetic,physiological, and environmental factors. Many genes are involvedin shaping behavior, and therefore there are multiple opportunitiesfor selection to favor behavioral modifications.Questions about how changes in behavior adapt animals to environmentalconditions are the province of an evolution-basedfield called behavioral ecology.1122 CHAPTER 53 | ANIMAL BEHAVIOR53.4 How Does Behavior Evolve?Environmental conditions are highly variable over both time andspace. Animal behaviors are also variable within and betweenspecies. Behavioral ecologists strive to discover the relationshipsbetween behavior and environment with the intent of understandingthe evolutionary mechanisms underlying behavior.Animals must make many behavioral choicesOver an animal’s lifetime, its behavior is largely a sequence ofchoices: where and when to move, where to build a nest, whatto eat, when to fight and when to flee, with whom to associate,with whom to mate. Inability to make choices would make it difficultto survive, and making wrong choices reduces its fitness.Behavioral ecologists seek to discover what information animalsuse to make behavioral choices and how that information relatesto aspects of the environment that influence their fitness.The choice of a place to live, for example, is one that hasmany consequences for an animal. The environment in whichan animal lives is its habitat. In most cases the habitat providesnot only a protected nest site, but also food and access to mates.In many cases the environmental cues animals use to make theirhabitat choices are quite simple. For example, seabirds selectcliffs or offshore rocks for nesting because those sites offer protectionfrom predators. Animals with very specialized food requirementsobviously select habitats where those foods areabundant. The general hypothesis that guides behavioral ecologistsis that the cues animals use to select habitats are reliablepredictors of conditions suitable for future survival and reproduction.For many species, the presence of conspecifics—other membersof the same species—is a reliable indicator of the suitabilityof a particular site for sustaining life. After all, you can’t arguewith success. Consider the planktonic larvae of marineorganisms that drift freely in the water until they initiate a settlingresponse that deposits them on the substratum to whichthey will attach themselves, usually for the rest of their lives.Molecules released into the water by conspecifics can aid larvaein detecting an appropriate substratum, and such moleculesinduce a settling response in many species.Observing conspecifics can provide animals with informationabout the quality of a habitat in other ways. Collared flycatchers(Ficedula albicollis) on their breeding grounds in springare nosy neighbors: they regularly visit the nests of conspecifics.Researchers hypothesized that this behavior allows the flycatchersto assess the quality of the habitat by seeing how well theirneighbors are faring. To test this hypothesis, they created someareas with supersized broods—normally an indication of abundantfood—by taking young birds from some nests and addingthem to nests in another area. The next year, flycatchers preferentiallysettled in the areas where broods had been artificiallyenlarged (Figure 53.10).Behaviors have costs and benefitsBehavioral ecologists often use a cost–benefit approach to investigatethe relationship between behavior, environment, andfitness. A cost–benefit approach assumes that an animal hasonly a limited amount of time and energy, and therefore cannotafford to engage in behaviors that cost more to perform thanthey bring it in benefits. A cost–benefit approach provides aframework that behavioral ecologists can use to make observations,construct hypotheses, and design experiments to investigatewhy behavior patterns evolve as they do.The benefits of a behavior can be measured in terms of theenhancement in fitness an animal accrues by performing the behavior.The cost of a behavior typically has three components:• Energetic cost is the difference between the energy the animalexpends performing the behavior and not performing it.53.4 | HOW DOES BEHAVIOR EVOLVE? 1123CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE53.10 Flycatchers Use Neighbors’ Success to AssessHabitat QualityCollared flycatchers (Ficedula albicollis) regularly “spy”on other flycatchers in their breeding range. Researchershypothesized that the birds were gathering information on thereproductive success of already established pairs to helpthem decide where to settle and breed.HYPOTHESIS Collared flycatchers will nest at higher densitiesin areas where their conspecifics appear tohave reproduced successfully.Collared flycatchers use the brood sizes ofalready settled conspecifics to assess howgood a territory is for breeding.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTS Immigration washigher in plots withsupersized broods……and lower in plotswith undersized broods.BroodsincreasedControlsExperimental treatmentBroodsdecreasedRelative settlement ratesin year t + 1LowHigh1. Transfer nestlings from one territory into nests inanother, thereby creating “supersized” broods(an indication of abundant food) in one area andundersized broods in the other. A third researchterritory is left unaltered to serve as a control.2. A year later, observe settlement rates (i.e.,number of pairs establishing nests) in eachterritory at the start of the breeding season.• Risk cost is the increased chance of being injured orkilled as a result of performing the behavior.• Opportunity cost is the benefit the animal forgoes by notbeing able to perform other behaviors during the sametime interval.Cost–benefit analysis has been used extensively in thestudy of territorial behavior: aggressive behavior used by ananimal to actively deny other animals access to a habitat orresource. Optimal habitats and resources are frequently inshort supply, so conspecifics must compete for them. Manyanimals—usually males—defend all-purpose territories thatprovide a nest site, food, and access to mates. The territoryholder stakes out his boundaries by engaging in aggressiveinteractions with neighbors, and must then patrol thoseboundaries constantly and respond to trespassers. These aggressiveinteractions usually consist of highly stereotypic,species-specific displays such as bird song. Through territorialbehavior, the male obtains the resources he needs for reproductivesuccess, but he also pays a price.Territorial displays require considerable expenditure of energy,they make a male more vulnerable to predation, andthey detract from the time he has for feeding or engaging inparental behavior. Michael Moore and Catherine Marler atArizona State University performed an experiment to estimatethe costs incurred by male Yarrow’s spiny lizards (Sceloporusjarrovii) when defending a territory (Figure 53.11). Theselizards defend territories that include the habitats of severalfemales. Their territorial behavior is normally most intenseduring September and October, when the circulating testosteronelevels of the males are high and the females are mostreceptive to mating. The researchers varied the intensity ofthe lizards’ territorial behavior by implanting testosteronecapsules in some males in summer, when they are not normallyhighly territorial.Testosterone-treated males spent more time patrollingtheir territories, performed more displays, and expendedabout one-third more energy than control males (an energeticcost). As a result, they had less time to feed (an opportunitycost), captured fewer insects, stored less energy, and had ahigher death rate (a risk cost). In summer, when females arenot normally receptive, these high costs of vigorous territorialdefense outweigh the reproductive benefits of territoriality.Thus natural selection has favored seasonal variationin the level of the hormone controlling territorial behavior inthis species.The cost–benefit approach explains the diversity of territorialbehaviors seen in different species. Even if a resource isabsolutely essential to an animal, if it cannot be defended economically,the animal will not engage in territorial behavior.Food is essential for all animals, but if the food is widelydistributed in space or fluctuating in availability, there is nobenefit to balance the high costs of trying to defend it. For ex-1124 CHAPTER 53 | ANIMAL BEHAVIORCONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE53.11 The Costs of Defending a TerritoryBy using testosterone implants to increase territorial behavior,Moore and Marler measured the costs to male Yarrow’s spinylizards (Sceloporus jarrovii) of defending a territory duringthe summer, when they do not normally do so.HYPOTHESIS Yarrow’s spiny lizards do not defend a territoryduring summer because the energetic costs of territorialbehavior in that season outweigh the benefits.For these lizards, the cost of defending territoriesduring summer significantly reduces their survivalrate without increasing their reproductive success.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTS1. During the summer, when female lizards are not sexuallyreceptive, insert testosterone capsules under the skinof some males; leave other males untreated as controls.2. Observe the patterns of territorial behavior andthe survival rate of the two groups of males.Testosterone-treated males spent a higherpercentage of their time engaged in territorialbehaviors than untreated males did.Treated males survived lesswell than untreated males.6 AM0Percentage of lizards active12 noon 2 PM 4 PMTime of day8 AM 10 AM80604020Percentage survivingDays after receiving implant1008060400 10 20 30 40 50Testosterone implantsUntreated controlsGO TO Animated Tutorial 53.1 • The Costs of Defending a TerritoryyourBioPortal.comample, the open ocean where seabirds feed cannot be defended.But safe nest sites on islands or rocky cliffs are in short supply,and they can be defended. Thus the territories of seabirds maybe no larger than the distance the birds can reach while sittingon their nests (Figure 53.12A).In some cases the resource that is defended is the female herself.Elephant seals spend most of their lives at sea, but femalescome to land at traditional beach sites to give birth to their pups.Male elephant seals arrive at these sites ahead of time and stakeout territories through vigorous fighting (Figure 53.12B). Whenthe females arrive on the beaches, they enter the territories ofthe males. As long as the male territory holder can fend off challengers,he will be able to mate with all the females using hispiece of the beach.The most unusual form of male territorial behavior arisesin situations in which neither food, nest sites, nor females aredefended. A lek is an area where males gather for the purposeof engaging in communal displays of their territorial prowessaimed at impressing females and winning the opportunity tomate. Even though space is not limited, each male defends asmall piece of real estate on which he performs a display (Figure53.12C). Those pieces of territory closest to the center of thelek are the prime sites, and males compete intensely for thoselocations. The females stroll into the lek, observe the males, andgenerally mate with the males holding the prime sites. The benefitof this system to the female is that she is inseminated by asuccessful competitor, and therefore her offspring will carry thegenes that contributed to his success. The costs of lekking tomales are high, as they engage in continuous, intense territorialbehavior that precludes eating, drinking, and sleeping until theyare displaced. The benefit is the chance to maximize their fitnessby mating with many females.Cost–benefit analysis can be applied toforaging behaviorCost–benefit analyses have also been used to investigate thefood choices animals make. When an animal forages (searchesfor food), among the decisions it must make are how much timeto spend in each location before giving up and moving on, whatresources at each location are actually edible, and which of thedifferent types of potential food should be eaten and whichshould be left alone. By applying cost–benefit approaches tofeeding behavior, scientists have produced a body of knowledgeknown as optimal foraging theory, which helps them toidentify the fitness value of feeding choices.The primary benefit of foraging is the nutritional value of thefood obtained: the energy, minerals, and vitamins it contains(see Section 51.1). The costs of foraging are similar to those ofother behaviors: energy expended, time lost from other activitiesthat could enhance fitness, and the risk of increased exposureto predators.Animals frequently have to make choices among food itemsthat may differ not only in terms of energy content, but alsoabundance or ease of acquisition and processing. Optimal foragingtheory predicts that in such situations, animals will makechoices that will maximize the rate at which they obtain energy.The more rapidly a foraging animal satisfies its energetic requirements,the lower the opportunity costs and risk costs offoraging.Earl Werner and Donald Hall of Michigan State Universityperformed laboratory experiments with bluegill sunfish to testthis energy maximization hypothesis. In preparation for their experiments,they measured the energy content of water fleas(Daphnia) of different sizes (the different food types), how muchtime bluegill sunfish (the foragers) needed to capture and eat53.4 | HOW DOES BEHAVIOR EVOLVE? 1125(A) Diomedea melanophris(C) Centrocercus urophasianus(B) Mirounga angustirostris 53.12 Animals Defend Territories ofDifferent Sizes (A) The nesting territories ofmany seabirds consist of only as much spaceas they can defend without leaving the nest.(B) Male elephant seals fight vigorously todefend areas of beach where females haulout of the water to give birth to their pups. (C)Male sage grouse gather at a lek in Coloradoto perform displays aimed at impressingfemales and winning the opportunity to mate.those different food types, the energythey spent pursuing and capturing thedifferent food types, and the rates atwhich they encountered the differentfood types under different food densities.Werner and Hall then stocked experimentalenvironments with different densitiesand proportions of large, medium,and small water fleas. They made twopredictions from the energy maximizationhypothesis: first, that in an environmentwith abundant large water fleas, thefish would ignore smaller water fleas;and second, that in an environmentstocked with low densities of all threesizes of water fleas, the fish would eatevery water flea they encountered. Theproportions of large, medium, and smallwater fleas eaten by the fish under differentconditions were close to those predictedby the hypothesis (Figure 53.13).The energy maximization hypothesisconsiders food items in terms of the energythey provide, but animals have nutrientrequirements in addition to energythat can play a role in shaping their foragingbehavior. Essential minerals, forexample, are in short supply in some animals’diets, and those animals may incurlarge energetic costs and risks to obtainthem. Many herbivores and seedeaters, whose food contains low levelsof mineral nutrients relative to theirneeds, obtain those nutrients by eatingsoil at particular sites where mineralrichsoil is exposed (Figure 53.14).Foods may also be chosen for theirmedicinal value. Chimpanzees, for example,have been observed eating thepith of a plant called Vernonia amygdalina.The pith contains very smallquantities of a secondary metabolitecalled vernonioside B1, which is toxic tochimps at high concentrations, but atlow concentrations can kill their intestinalparasites. Chimps that consumethis pith have fewer parasites.1126 CHAPTER 53 | ANIMAL BEHAVIORHYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODINVESTIGATING LIFEBluegills select food items in accordance with the predictions of energymaximization calculations.53.13 Bluegill Sunfish Are Energy MaximizersBased on energy maximization calculations, Werner and Hall predicted (1) that in anenvironment with abundant large food items (i.e., the water flea Daphnia), bluegillsunfish (Lepomis macrochirus) would ignore smaller food items and feed preferentiallyon larger water fleas; and (2) that in an environment where all sizes of Daphnia werescarce, the fish would eat every one they encountered. Such a strategy is in keepingwith the cost–benefit hypothesis of foraging behavior.Bluegill food item selection will match the energy maximization predictionsof cost–benefit analysis.RESULTS The food choices made by bluegills match the predictions of the energymaximization hypothesis.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.When large Daphnia were abundant,fish ate the larger prey preferentially.When food items were scarce, thebluegills ate Daphnia of all sizes, aspredicted.Prey size(Daphnia)Proportions indiet predictedActualproportionsin dietLow density(prey scarce)MediumdensityHigh density(prey abundant)BluegillMediumLargeSmall4. Note the proportions of small, medium, and large Daphnia actually eaten bythe fish under the different conditions and compare these proportions to thepredictions of energy maximization.1. Measure the respective energy content of large, medium, and small waterfleas (Daphnia).2. Use cost–benefit energy maximization calculations to predict the rate at whichbluegill sunfish will consume the different sized water fleas under different levelsof food abundance (i.e., density of water fleas).3. Provide bluegills with Daphnia of different sizes in varying proportions(represented by the different colored bars) and at different densities.Low densityMediumdensityHighdensityGO TO Animated Tutorial 53.2 • ForagingBehavioryourBioPortal.com53.4 RECAPBehavioral ecologists seek to explain relationshipsbetween variation in behavior and variation in environmentalconditions. They seek to discover what informationanimals use to make behavioral choicesand how that information relates to aspects of theenvironment that influence their fitness. Cost–benefitanalysis has been applied to territorial and foragingbehavior.• What might the presence of conspecifics in a habitattell an animal about that habitat? See p. 1123 andFigure 53.10• Describe three types of territorial behavior and thecosts and benefits of each. See pp. 1124–1125 andFigure 53.11• How can cost–benefit analysis be applied to foragingbehavior? See pp. 1125–1126 and Figure 53.13Whereas behavioral ecologists are interested in understandinghow the natural environment influences the fitness value of behavioralchoices—the ultimate causes of those behaviors, in Tinbergen’sterms—other behavioral biologists focus on the physiologicalmechanisms and principles that underlie behavior—theproximate causes.What Physiological Mechanisms 53.5 Underlie Behavior?Control of behavior involves the nervous and endocrine systems.Execution of behavior involves the musculoskeletalsystem as well as other effector mechanisms, such as those thatproduce secretions, color changes, electrical impulses, sound,and even light. We have already considered many of the physiologicalsystems that are involved in these processes, includingendocrine mechanisms, reproductive systems, nervous systems,sensory systems, and feeding mechanisms. The field ofbehavioral physiology, which encompasses aspects of all ofthese systems, is enormous, so here we will dig deeper into justthree different phenomena studied by behavioral physiologists:the timing of behavior, navigation, and communication.Biological rhythms coordinate behavior withenvironmental cyclesEarth turns on its axis once every 24 hours, generating daily cyclesof light and dark, temperature, humidity, and tides. In addition,Earth is tilted on its axis, so the light–dark cycle changesas it revolves around the sun. These daily and seasonal cyclesprofoundly influence the physiology and behavior of animals.Animals tend to be either day-active (diurnal) or night-active(nocturnal), and have appropriate sensory capabilities. Thereforeit is adaptive to organize behavior on a cycle that correspondswith the environmental cycle of light and dark. Similarly,a behavior that is adaptive at one time of year may notbe adaptive at other times. Thus it is important for animals tobe able to time their behavior to appropriate times of the day oryear and to be able to anticipate those times.CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS Experimental animals kept in constantdarkness and at a constant temperature, with food and wateravailable all the time, still demonstrate daily cycles of activitiessuch as sleeping, eating, drinking, and just about anything elsethat can be measured. The persistence of these daily cycles inthe absence of environmental time cues suggests that animalshave an internal clock. Because these daily cycles are not exactly24 hours long, they are known as circadian rhythms (circa,“about,” and dies, “day”).As described in Section 37.5, any biological rhythm can beviewed as a series of cycles, and the length of one of those cyclesis the period of the rhythm. Any point in the cycle is a phaseof that cycle. Hence, when two rhythms completely match, theyare in phase, and if a rhythm is shifted (as in the resetting of aclock) it is phase-advanced or phase-delayed. Because the period ofa circadian rhythm is not exactly 24 hours, it must be phaseadvancedor phase-delayed each day to remain in phase with53.5 | WHAT PHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS UNDERLIE BEHAVIOR? 1127(B)(A)53.14 Herbivores Seek Out Unusual Sources of Minerals (A) Redand-green macaws of the Amazon jungle obtain essential minerals byeating dried clay. (B) Pierid butterflies obtain needed salts by drinkingsecretions from the skin and nostrils of a caiman.the daily cycle of the environment. In other words, the rhythmhas to be entrained to the cycle of light and dark in the animal’senvironment.An animal kept under constant conditions will not be entrainedto the light–dark cycle of the environment, and its circadianclock will run according to its natural period—it willbe free-running. If the period is less than 24 hours, the animalwill begin its activity a little earlier each day (Figure 53.15). Theperiod of the free-running circadian rhythm is under geneticcontrol. Different species may have different average periods,and within a species, mutations can lead to different periodlengths.Under natural conditions, environmental time cues, suchas the onset of light or dark, entrain the free-running rhythm tothe light–dark cycle of the environment. In the laboratory, it ispossible to entrain the circadian rhythms of free-running animalswith short pulses of light or dark administered every 24hours (see the bottom panel of Figure 53.15).In mammals, the master circadian “clock” consists of twoclusters of neurons just above the optic chiasm (the area of thebrain where the optic nerves come together). These structuresare called the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN). If they are destroyed,the animal becomes arrhythmic: it is just as likely to eat,drink, sleep, or wake at any time of day.Martin Ralph (now at University of Toronto) and colleagues,who were then at the University of Virginia, used artificial selectionto produce two strains of hamsters: one with a short circadianperiod and one with a long circadian period. When adulthamsters’ SCN were destroyed, the animals became arrhythmic.After several weeks, the scientists transplanted SCN tissuefrom hamster fetuses into arrhythmic hamsters’ brains. Thelong-period adult hamsters received tissue from short-periodfetuses, and vice versa. This experiment produced two remarkableresults. First, circadian rhythms were restored by the transplantedSCN tissue, demonstrating that the SCN is sufficient togenerate circadian rhythms. This is the only case in which a behaviorhas been restored by a neural transplant. Second, the restoredcircadian rhythms had the period length of the donorstrain, demonstrating that the specific phenotype of the behaviorwas a property of the donor neural tissue.The molecular mechanism of the circadian clock involvesnegative feedback loops. Although there are a number of genesinvolved, we can generalize the mechanism by saying that whencertain clock genes are expressed in SCN cells, the mRNA entersthe cytoplasm, where it is translated. The resulting proteinscombine and the dimer returns to the nucleus as a transcriptionfactor that shuts off the expression of the clock genes. The periodof this cycle is about a day. These findings show that it ispossible to understand circadian rhythms of behavior at all levels,from the molecular rhythm generators to the environmentalstimuli that entrain them to the daily cycle of light and dark.1128 CHAPTER 53 | ANIMAL BEHAVIORDays4235282921141571Hours 0Light Dark DarkDark DarkDark DarkDark DarkDarkLight12 24 36 48On a cycle of 12 h light/12 h dark, themouse is mostly active in the dark andhas a rest–activity cycle of 24 hours.In constant dark, the mouse still expresses adaily cycle of rest and activity, but the periodof the cycle is less than 24 hours. As a result,the mouse starts its activity and ends itsactivity earlier each day.If the mouse isgiven 20 minutesof light at 24-hourintervals, itsrest–activity cycleis entrained to a24-hour period.53.15 Circadian Rhythms AreEntrained by EnvironmentalCues The activity–rest cycleof a laboratory mouse (a nocturnalanimal) responds to thelight–dark cycle under which itis kept. The gray bars indicatetimes when the mouse is runningon an activity wheel. Twodays of activity are recorded oneach horizontal line; the datafor each day are plotted twice—once on the right half of eachline (hours 24–48) and again onthe left half of the line below it(hours 0–24). This double plottingis merely to make the patterneasier to see.GO TO Animated Tutorial 53.3 • Circadian RhythmsyourBioPortal.comCIRCANNUAL RHYTHMS Seasonal changes in the environmentpresent challenges to many species. Most animals reproducemost successfully if they time their reproductive behavior to coincidewith the most favorable time of year for the survival oftheir offspring. Many species require considerable advancepreparation for reproduction. Migratory animals must arriveon their breeding grounds at the right time, and animals thathave specialized structures used in mating displays, such as theantlers of deer, moose, and caribou, must grow their equipmentbefore the breeding season arrives.For many species, a change in day length—the photoperiod—is a reliable indicator of seasonal changes to come. For others,however, change in day length is not a reliable seasonal cue. Hibernators,for example, spend long months in dark burrows underground,but must be physiologically prepared to breed almostas soon as they emerge in the spring. Abird overwinteringnear the equator cannot use changes in photoperiod as a cueto time its migration to its temperate-zone breeding grounds.When held under constant laboratory conditions, such animalsshow endogenous circannual rhythms, built-in neural calendarsthat keep track of the time of year. Unlike circadian rythms, theneural basis for circannual rhythms is unknown.Animals must find their way around their environmentTo locate suitable habitats, find food and mates, and escape frompredators and bad weather, an animal needs to be able to findits way around its environment. Within its local habitat, an animalcan organize its behavior spatially by orienting to landmarks.But what if its destination is a considerable distanceaway?PILOTING: ORIENTATION BY LANDMARKS Most animals find theirway by knowing and remembering the structure of their environment.This form of navigation is called piloting. Gray whales,for example, migrate seasonally between the Bering Sea and thecoastal lagoons of Mexico (Figure 53.16). They find their wayin part by following the west coast of North America. Coastlines,mountain chains, rivers, water currents, and wind patternscan all serve as piloting cues for the whales. But some remarkablecases of long-distance orientation and movementcannot be explained by piloting.HOMING: RETURN TO A SPECIFIC LOCATION The ability to returnto a nest site, burrow, or other specific location is called homing.Homing can be accomplished by piloting in a known environment,but some animals that travel long distances throughunfamiliar territory perform much more sophisticated homing.The ability of pigeons to return to their home loft even after beingtransported to remote sites is well known. How do they findtheir way home? Experiments have shown that pigeons use thesun as a compass, but they can still find their way home whenthe sun is not visible. Other experiments have shown that pigeonsequipped with frosted contact lenses can find their wayhome, suggesting that visual cues are not essential. Most amazinghas been the demonstration that pigeons can detect Earth’smagnetic field and orient to it much as a human orients with acompass. Taken together, the studies of homing by pigeons suggestthat they can use multiple, redundant sources of directionalinformation and can switch among those sources depending onthe circumstances.MIGRATION AND NAVIGATION OVER GREAT DISTANCES For as longas humans have inhabited temperate latitudes, they have beenaware that whole populations of animals, especially birds, disappearand reappear seasonally. Not until the early nineteenthcentury, however, were patterns of migration traced by markingindividual birds with identification bands around their legs.Only when individuals could be unmistakably identified wasit possible to show that the same birds and their offspring returnedto the same breeding grounds year after year, and thatthese same birds could be found during the nonbreeding seasonat locations hundreds or even thousands of kilometers fromtheir breeding grounds.Many homing and migrating species are able to take directroutes to their destinations through environments theyhave never experienced because they use mechanisms of navigationother than piloting. Humans use two major forms ofnavigation:• Distance–direction navigation requires knowing in what directionand how far away the destination is. With a compassto determine direction and a means of measuring distance,humans can navigate.• Bicoordinate navigation, also known as true navigation, requiresknowing the latitude and longitude (the map coordi-53.5 | WHAT PHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS UNDERLIE BEHAVIOR? 1129Summerfeeding rangeWinterrangeBeringSeaPacificOceanAlaska53.16 Piloting Gray whales (Eschrichtius robustus) migrate south inwinter from the Bering Sea to the coast of Baja California by piloting, inpart by following the western coast of North America.nates) of both the current position and the destination, aswell as a compass to determine direction.Other animals, of course, do not carry compasses or GPS receivers,but many of them seem to have a compass sense, whichallows them to use environmental cues to determine direction,and some appear to have a map sense, which allows them to determinetheir position.The behavior of many animals suggests that they are capableof bicoordinate navigation. Gray-headed albatrosses, for example,breed on oceanic islands in the Southern Hemisphere.When a young gray-headed albatross first leaves its parents’nest, it flies widely over the southern oceans for 8 or 9 years beforeit reaches reproductive maturity (Figure 53.17). At thattime, it flies back to the island where it was raised to select amate and build a nest. How can it find a tiny island in an enormousocean after years of wandering? A circadian clock probablygives the albatross information about the time of day andthe additional information from the position of the sun mightallow it to determine its map coordinates—much as sailors didin the days before global positioning satellites.The ability to locate a position by calculating the angles betweencelestial objects such as the sun and stars and the horizonat specific times of day is called celestial navigation. Duringthe day, the sun can serve as a compass for those species thatcan tell the time of day by means of their circadian clocks. Thiscapacity has been demonstrated by “clock-shifting” experiments.Researchers placed pigeons in a circular cage that enabledthem to see the sun and sky, but no other visual cues. Food binswere arranged around the sides of the cage, and the birds weretrained to expect food in the bin at one particular direction—south, for example. After training, no matter what time theywere fed, and even if the cage was rotated between feedings,the birds always went to the bin at the southern end of the cagefor food, even if that bin contained no food (Figure 53.18).Next, the birds were placed in a room with a controlled lightcycle in which the lights were turned on at midnight and off atnoon. After 2 weeks of this treatment, the birds’ circadianrhythms had been phase-advanced by 6 hours. Then the birdswere returned to the circular cage under natural light conditions,with sunrise at 6:00 A.M. At sunrise, if the birds expectedto find food in the south bin, then they should have looked forfood 90 degrees to the right of the direction of the sun. But becausetheir circadian clocks were telling them it was noon, theylooked for food in the direction of the sun—in the east bin. The6-hour shift in their circadian clocks resulted in a 90-degree errorin their orientation, which showed that they were indeedusing the sun as a compass. Similar experiments have shownthat many animal species can orient by means of a time-compensatedsolar compass.Many animals are normally nocturnal; in addition, many diurnalbird species migrate at night and thus cannot use thesun to determine direction. The stars offer two sources of informationabout direction: moving constellations and a fixed point.The positions of constellations (like that of the sun) change becauseEarth is rotating. With a star map and a clock, directioncan be determined using any constellation. But one point thatdoes not change position during the night is the point directlyover the axis on which Earth turns. In the Northern Hemisphere,the star Polaris—the “North Star”—lies in that regionof the sky and reliably indicates north.Stephen Emlen at Cornell University showed that birds canlearn to use the stars for orientation. As the time of year approacheswhen young birds would normally migrate to theirwinter range, young captive birds become more active and orienttheir activity in the direction they would fly. How do theyknow that direction? If these birds are raised in a planetariumwith a natural star pattern, but one that does not rotate, the birdsdo not learn to orient, and their premigratory activity is random.However, if the planetarium sky rotates, and even if it rotatesaround a different point than the North Star, the birds orienttheir premigratory activity as if the fixed point in the skywas north.1130 CHAPTER 53 | ANIMAL BEHAVIORAntarcticaAfricaS.A.AustraliaBreeding site(B) Thalassarche chrysostoma(A)The four colors represent thedifferent paths traveled byfour radiotagged individualsin a single year.53.17 Coming Home (A) Gray-headed albatrosses are born on islandsin the subantarctic oceans. Young birds roam widely over the southernoceans for 8 or 9 years. (B) Once they reach maturity, the birds return tothe island where they were born to mate and raise their own young. Acourting couple is shown here.GO TO Animated Tutorial 53.4 • Time-CompensatedSolar CompassyourBioPortal.comAnimals use multiple modalities to communicateAs individual animals interact, they exchange information;therefore, animal behavior can evolve into systems of informationexchange, or communication. The behaviors of individualsmay become elaborated into communication signals, butonly if the transmission of information benefits both the senderand the receiver. To understand why these conditions must bemet, consider male courtship displays such as that of the mallardshown in Figure 53.3. This display will be favored if it increasesthe sender’s probability of mating and passing on hisgenes, and sexual selection will occur if the display conveys informationto a female (the receiver) about his qualities as a potentialfather for her offspring.Animals communicate using a variety of sensory modalitiesthat vary in the nature of the signal produced, the specificityof the information conveyed, the speed and persistence of thesignal, and its suitability in different environments. Behavioralphysiologists interested in communication must take intoconsideration the sensory and motor characteristics of theirstudy animals as well as the physics of the communication53.5 | WHAT PHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS UNDERLIE BEHAVIOR? 1131Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODINVESTIGATING LIFEPigeons have the ability to determine direction using the position of the sun as a compass.53.18 A Time-Compensated Solar CompassExperiments show that pigeons use the sun to establish directions for navigation and finding food. “Clock-shifting” experimentsdemonstrate that the birds’ circadian clocks factor into their ability to judge direction correctly based on the sun’s position.Pigeons determine compass direction from the position of the sun with respect to their internal circadian clocks.RESULTS1. Place a pigeon in a circular cage from which it can see the sun and sky, but not the horizon or any other visual cue.2. Surround the cage with multiple food bins but place food only in the southernmost bin, thus training the bird to lookfor food in the south. (Rotating the cage but always placing the food in the southernmost bin confirms that the birdis navigating to find south.)SunFood binsCage rotatesWestEach dotrepresents a peckin search of food.The pigeon alwaysseeks food from the binat the south end of thecage, even when thecage has been rotated.NorthSouthEastEmptyfood binFoodbin fullAt sunrise, the phase-advancedpigeon seeks food in the bin atthe east end of the cage—whichwould be south by the sun’sposition at noon.EastA 6-hour shift in the circadian clock results in a 90-degreeerror in the pigeon’s orientation.Food bin full3. Place the trained pigeon in a room with a controlled light cycle for 2 weeks. Turn the lights on at midnight and off atnoon to phase-advance its circadian rhythm by 6 hours (i.e., 6 A.M. feels like noon to the bird).4. Return the pigeon to the circular cage under natural light and observe its food-seeking behavior.modalities they use and the environment in which the communicationtakes place.CHEMICAL SIGNALS Because of the diversity of their molecularstructures, pheromones can communicate very specific, information-rich messages (see Section 46.2). Pheromones are effectiveday and night, and they can cover a broad range of transmissiondistances. Pheromones used in different types ofcommunication vary in their volatility (ease of vaporization)and diffusibility; these chemical properties are functions of thenature and size of the pheromone molecule. Pheromones thatact as alarm signals, for example, are highly volatile and diffusible,so their message spreads rapidly, but disappears rapidly.Territory-marking and trail-marking pheromones have lowvolatilities and diffusibilities and stay effective for a long time,so they can convey directional information. Sex pheromones,such as that of the gypsy moth (see Figure 46.3), are intermediatein these properties, so they can spread a long distance, butdo not disappear rapidly.Pheromones are an effective way to exchange species-specificinformation, and because the recipient must have theproper receptor molecule to detect the pheromone, it is not asignal that is easily intercepted by predators. Pheromonal signalscannot be changed rapidly, but they can convey static, complexinformation. Mammals that mark their territories withpheromones reveal a great deal of information about themselves:species, individual identity, reproductive status, size (indicatedby the height of the marking), and how recently the animalhas been in the area (indicated by the strength of the scent).VISUAL SIGNALS Visual signals offer the advantage of rapid deliveryof information over considerable distances (dependingon the environment and the visual acuity of the receiver); theyalso convey without ambiguity the position of the signaler. Signalcontent can be enhanced by movements (as in a courtshipdisplay) or by different postures. Effective visual signals, however,require sufficient light, and the receiver must be lookingdirectly at the signaler. Thus, visual communication is not particularlyuseful at night or in environments that lack light, suchas caves and ocean depths. Some species have overcome thisconstraint with light-emitting mechanisms. Fireflies, for example,use an enzymatic mechanism to create flashes of light. Byemitting flashes in species-specific patterns, fireflies advertisefor mates at night.Another drawback of visual signals is that they can be interceptedby other species. There are predatory firefly species, forexample, that mimic the flash pattern of females of other species.Amale that approaches the mimicking “female,” becomes a mealrather than a mate. Thus deception can be part of animal communicationsystems, just as it is part of human communication.ACOUSTIC SIGNALS Sound cannot convey complex informationas rapidly as visual signals can. But acoustic signals, unlike visualsignals, can be used at night and in dark environments.They are not hindered by objects that would interfere with visualsignals, so they can be transmitted in complex environmentssuch as forests. They are often better than visual signalsat getting the attention of a receiver because the receiver doesnot have to be looking at the signaler for the message to be received.Sounds are also useful for communicating over long distances.Even though the intensity of a sound decreases with distancefrom the source, loud sounds can transmit informationover much longer distances than visual signals can. The complexsongs of humpback whales, for example, when producedat ocean depths of about 1,000 meters, can be heard hundredsof kilometers away. In this way, humpback whales can locateone another across vast expanses of ocean.The information content of acoustic signals can be increasedby varying their frequency, as we can see in the sonograms of thespecies-specific songs of birds shown in Figure 53.9, and as wepractice in our own speech. However, acoustic signals place thesignaler at risk for detection by predators. This danger can beminimized by adjustments of frequency and signal structure thatdecrease the directional information the receiver can extract fromthe signal. Alarm calls tend to be pure tones (a single frequency)without much temporal structure (starts and stops). It is very difficultto localize such calls. On the other hand, territorial calls tendto cover a broad frequency range and have temporal structure.These calls are easy to localize. The frequencies and structures ofacoustic signals are also adapted to specific habitats. Differentvegetation types, for example, have different sound-absorbingproperties: pure tones at lower frequencies carry better in forests,and more complex calls at higher frequencies carry well in openhabitats.MECHANOSENSORY SIGNALS Animals in close contact with oneanother communicate by touch, especially under conditions inwhich visual communication is difficult. The best-studied useof mechanosensory communication is the dance of honey bees,first described by Karl von Frisch. Honey bees have a spectacularability to navigate and can reliably communicate the locationof food sources as far as 2.5 km away from their hive. Whena forager bee finds food, she returns to the hive and communicatesher discovery to her hive-mates by dancing in the darkhive on the vertical surface of the honeycomb. Other bees followthe dancer and receive her message.If the food source is more than about 100 m away from thehive, the forager performs a waggle dance (Figure 53.19), whichconveys information about both the distance and the directionof the food source. She repeatedly traces out a figure-eight patternas she runs on the honeycomb. She alternates half-circlesto the left and right with vigorous wagging of her abdomen inthe short, straight run between turns. Bees use the sun as theircompass, and the angle of the straight run indicates the directionof the food source relative to the position of the sun projecteddown to the horizon. Even under cloudy conditions, theforager can provide directions to the food source because shecan see polarized light. The honey bee’s internal clock allowsthe dancer to adjust her dance to take into account the sun’smovement during her return flight. The speed of the dance indicatesthe distance to the food source: the farther away it is, thelonger the duration of each waggle run.If the food she has found is less than 80 m from the hive, theforager performs a round dance, running rapidly in a circle and1132 CHAPTER 53 | ANIMAL BEHAVIORreversing her direction after each full circle. The odor on herbody and the round dance combine tactile and chemical cues:the odor indicates the flower to be looked for, and the dance communicatesthe fact that the food source is close to the hive.COMMUNICATION IN MULTIPLE SENSORY MODALITIES Avoidingambiguity is a high priority in any signaling system. Signalspecificity is enhanced if multiple sensory modalities are used.Courtship behavior in fruit flies, for example, involves tactile,chemical, visual, and acoustic signals (see Figure 53.6A). Themale fruit fly orients toward the female and taps her body withhis foreleg (touch). Upon detection of pheromones in her cuticle(chemical), the male begins to vibrate one wing, producinga species-specific “courtship song” (acoustic). The malethen extends his mouthparts to taste the female’s genitalia(chemical and tactile); if she is receptive, he initiates copulation.At any point, if any sensory feedback indicates to eitherthe male or the female that their pairing is inappropriate, thecourtship abruptly ends.53.5 RECAPBiological rhythms allow an animal to anticipatechanges in its environment. In mammals, a circadianclock located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei generatesa rhythm that is entrainable by environmentalinformation. The navigational abilities of animalsrange from simple piloting by landmarks to distanceand-direction and bicoordinate navigation. Behaviorsmay evolve into communication signals if thetransmission of information benefits both the senderand the receiver.• What is meant by a “free-running” rhythm? Describehow it can be entrained to the 24-hour day. Seepp. 1127–1128 and Figure 53.15• Explain the difference between piloting, distance-anddirectionnavigation, and bicoordinate navigation.See pp. 1129–1130• Give an advantage and a disadvantage for each ofthree modalities of communication. See pp.1131–1133We have just seen how a behavioral physiologist might look atthe courtship behavior of a male fruit fly. Abehavioral ecologistwould probably approach this behavior in a different way, askinghow it influences the fitness of both the male fly and hismate. Given that interactions between individual animals, especiallythose involved in mating and the care of offspring, areso directly tied to fitness, it is not surprising that they are an importantfocus of behavioral studies.53.6 How Does Social Behavior Evolve?The evolution of social behavior became a field of study in itsown right in 1975, with the publication of E. O. Wilson’s landmarkbook, Sociobiology. We begin our consideration of this enormousfield with simple interactions that involve a single maleand a single female, but already we see diversity. Species differin their mating systems, which vary from monogamous topromiscuous; in the amount of parental care they give theiryoung; and in the degree to which the male contributes to raisingthe young. Beyond these relatively simple mating systems,there are associations of larger numbers of reproductive individualsin polygynous mating systems, in which a male has morethan one mate, or polyandrous mating systems, in which a femalehas more than one mate. Even more complex interactionsexist in which extended families participate in raising young,and finally there are societies such as honey bee colonies inwhich large numbers of nonreproductive individuals assist asingle reproductive individual. Sociobiology proposes that theevolution of all these variations can be understood by askinghow social behavior contributes to the fitness of the individualsinvolved.53.6 | HOW DOES SOCIAL BEHAVIOR EVOLVE? 1133Food sourceHivePattern of waggle dance Pattern of waggle danceHoneycombUpFood sourceUp45°45°(A) (B)53.19 The Waggle Dance of the Honey Bee (A) A honey bee runsstraight up on the vertical surface of the honeycomb in the dark hivewhile wagging her abdomen to tell her hivemates that there is a foodsource in the direction of the sun. (B) When her waggle runs are at anangle from the vertical, the other bees know that the same angle separatesthe direction of the food source from the direction of the sun.GO TO Web Activity 53.1 • Honey Bee Dance CommunicationyourBioPortal.comMating systems maximize the fitness of both partnersAt the start of Chapter 7, we learned about the mating behaviorof two species of voles. Prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster) aremonogamous, forming strong pair bonds that can last for life, andboth parents participate in rearing the young. In contrast, montanevoles (M. montanus) are promiscuous: males mate with manyfemales, and the young are raised by the females alone. Behavioralphysiologists have explained the proximate mechanismsbehind these stark behavioral differences in terms of the releaseof neurohormones and the distribution of the receptors forthose hormones in the brains of the two species. The ultimatequestion—and the one asked here—is why two such differentmating systems evolved in two species that are so closely related.We begin with the premise that there is an asymmetry in thecontributions of male and female animals to their offspring atthe time of fertilization. As we learned in Section 44.1, femalesproduce a limited number of eggs, and each egg is generouslystocked with resources. Males produce an almost infinite numberof sperm, which contain next to no resources. So the energeticand opportunity costs of reproduction are greater for thefemale than for the male. In mammals, this asymmetry increasesthroughout gestation as the female bears most of the costs. Bythe time of birth or hatching, the female’s investment in theyoung is much greater than the male’s investment, and the mainway for the female to maximize her fitness is to make sure heryoung are healthy and survive to pass on her genes.The male has different options for maximizing his fitness. Hecan simply move on after inseminating the female and seek additionalmates as a means of maximizing his reproductive success—as in the case of the meadow vole. Or he can stay with thefemale he inseminated, protect her, and help care for theiryoung—as in the case of the prairie vole. Which strategy maximizeshis fitness depends on a number of factors that are influencedby the species’ environment, such as the likelihood thata female and her offspring will survive without a male’s help,and a male’s likelihood of finding another fertile female. Thussociobiologists seek to quantify these factors in nature as ameans of explaining observed differences in mating systems.POLYGYNY Polygynous mating systems, in which a male hasmore than one mate, involve a different asymmetry. In situationsin which a male can sequester a group of females from othermales, he can increase his fitness by increasing the number of femalesin his group. As we saw in Section 53.4, male elephantseals accomplish this by protecting an area of beach where femalesgive birth. Male baboons do so by herding females. Malered-winged blackbirds may acquire more than one mate by defendinghigh-quality nesting territories, building more than onenest in their territories, and attracting females to those nests.Since sex ratios in all these species are close to 50-50, a largedifferential in male fitness is established: some males have highreproductive success while many males have none. Thus selectionfavors males that are successful in competing with othermales to obtain and protect access to many females. In general,bigger, stronger males are the winners, and sexual dimorphismin body size evolves. The elephant seal is an extreme example:males may weigh more than three times as much as females.When species with polygynous mating systems are compared,there is a strong correlation between the number of females amale controls and the degree of sexual dimorphism.Why do females participate in these polygynous mating systems?Why doesn’t a female seek out a nice, kind, noncompetitivemale? In some cases she has no choice. If a female elephantseal wants to have her pup on a safe beach, she must enter theterritory of a male. If a female red-winged blackbird wants tonest in an optimal territory, she will have to share the attentionsof the territory’s owner with other females. However, evenif the female has a choice of mates, she is likely to maximizeher fitness by mating with a male who is strong and dominantenough to control a number of females. Why? If her mate is adominant male, her male offspring are likely to have their father’straits, become dominant males, and give her more grandchildren.The ultimate result of females selecting males for theirprowess and dominance in male–male competition is the lekmating system (see Figure 53.12C), in which the only thing a maleoffers a female is the display of his dominance over other males.POLYANDRY Amating system in which one female mates withmultiple males is called polyandry. This type of mating systemis relatively rare, but it is seen in some birds and a few mammalspecies in which paternal care for the young can have a largeeffect on fitness. That is the case the golden lion tamarins (Leontopithecusrosalia), primates native to the Brazilian tropical forests(Figure 53.20). In comparison to other primates, tamarins aretiny—under 1 kg—so they face high predation pressure. Femalesusually give birth to twins and thus newborns constitutea higher percentage of maternal weight than those of otherprimates. They also grow faster, so nursing costs are high. Forall these reasons, young tamarins cared for by their motheralone are unlikely to survive.1134 CHAPTER 53 | ANIMAL BEHAVIORLeontopithecus rosalia53.20 Polyandry in a Small Primate The endangered golden liontamarins of Brazil are small primates whose unique life history has givenrise to polyandry in some groups, with males playing a major role in rearingthe young.What can a male tamarin do to help guarantee his reproductivesuccess? Watching out for predators is one obvious contribution;gathering food for the female and her young is another.Like other primate parents, tamarins carry their young mostof the time, but most other primates have single offspring. Whentamarin mothers are carrying twins, they spend 92 percent ofthe time resting, in comparison to only 58 percent of the timewhen they are not carrying young. Resting is not compatiblewith foraging and filling the mother’s high energy requirements.When a male is present, however, he carries the youngabout one-third of the time, so the mother has much more timefor foraging and feeding.If one male is helpful in protecting and raising young, thentwo should be even more helpful. Some females can attract asecond mate by being sexually receptive to him. Neither malecan be sure that any eventual offspring are his, so it is in the bestinterest of both to help in their rearing. Of the social groups observedin field studies, only 22 percent had one male and onefemale, whereas 61 percent had multiple males and one female.Fitness can include more than producing offspringAs humans, we readily understand the concept of extendedfamily—brothers, sisters, aunts, uncles, nieces, nephews. Extendedfamilies are a common form of social organization inother species as well, and members of these families may cooperatein territory defense, predator avoidance, foraging, andrearing of young. If behavior is favored when it increases thefitness of the individual performing it, then how can we explainthe evolution of social behaviors that do not lead to theperformer having more offspring and may even appear to bealtruistic—benefiting another individual at a cost to theperformer?An individual’s fitness is increased by having offspring becausethose offspring carry the parent’s genes into the next generation.Fitness gained by producing offspring is referred to asindividual fitness. However, an individual’s genes are carriedinto the next generation by more than his or her own offspring.In diploid organisms, two offspring of the same parents share,on average, 50 percent of the same alleles, and an individual islikely to share 25 percent of its alleles with its sibling’s offspring.Therefore, by helping parents and other relatives raise their offspring,an individual increases the transmission of those sharedalleles to the next generation. Inclusive fitness is the fitness derivedfrom an individual’s own reproductive success plus thatderived through the reproductive success of its relatives.The maximization of inclusive fitness is the mechanism behindkin selection: selection for behaviors that increase the reproductivesuccess of relatives even when they come at a costto the performer. An example is the phenomenon of helping atthe nest, which was extensively studied in Florida scrub jaysby Glen Woolfenden. Scrub jay pairs mate for life and establishlarge territories, which they defend aggressively. The matingpair may be assisted in rearing their young by 3 to 5 helpers(Figure 53.21). The helpers guard against predators, feed theyoung, clean the nest, and fly with fledglings. Why are thesebirds helping others rather than rearing their own young?Through a long-term study, Woolfenden was able to establish anumber of important facts:• The helpers are prior offspring of the mating pair and areusually 1 to 3 years old.• Young birds that attempt to breed have almost zero reproductivesuccess.• Mating pairs with helpers have approximately 3 times thereproductive success of those without helpers.These results support the conclusion that helper scrub jays aremaximizing their inclusive fitness by helping their parents raisesiblings until they are old and mature enough to have a reasonableprobability of successfully raising their own offspring.The concept of kin selection was formalized by W. D. Hamiltonin what has become known as Hamilton’s rule. He arguedthat, for an apparent altruistic behavior to be adaptive, the fitnessbenefit of that act to the recipient times the degree of relatednessbetween the performer and the recipient had to begreater than the cost to the performer. This relationship wasclearly stated years before by the eminent geneticist J. B. S. Haldane,who said during an argument about altruism that hewould not be willing to risk his life to save his brother—but for2 brothers or 8 cousins, he would consider it.53.6 | HOW DOES SOCIAL BEHAVIOR EVOLVE? 113553.21 Helpers at the NestYoung Florida scrub jays(Aphelocoma coerulescens)often forego reproduction intheir first few years of adulthoodto help their parentsraise their siblings. Theseyoung birds help their parentsfeed the nestlings,defend the territory, and protectthe nest from predators.Eusociality is the extreme result of kin selectionSpecies such as honey bees whose social groups include nonreproductiveworkers are called eusocial species. Prime examplesare wasps, bees, and ants—members of the large insect orderHymenoptera. In a honey bee colony, the single reproductive female—the queen—occasionally produces a few male offspring,but most of the thousands of other individuals in the colony—her offspring—are sterile female workers. The key to understandingthe evolution of eusociality in hymenopterans is theirsex determination mechanism, called haplodiploidy becausediploid individuals are female and haploid individuals aremale. The queen carries a lifetime supply of sperm obtainedduring her single mating flight, and she controls whether hereggs are fertilized or not. An unfertilized egg develops into amale, a fertilized egg develops into a female.If a queen copulates with only one male, all the sperm she receivesare identical because a haploid male has only one set ofchromosomes, all of which are transmitted to every sperm cell.Therefore, the queen’s daughters share all of their father’s genesand, on average, half of their mother’s genes. As a result, theworkers in the hive—all sisters—share, on average, 75 percent oftheir alleles. Were they to reproduce, they would share only 50percent of their alleles with their own female offspring. Thus theycan potentially increase their inclusive fitness more by caring fortheir sisters than by producing and caring for their own offspring.Haplodiploidy is not essential for eusociality to evolve. Thissocial system may also arise if it is costly or dangerous to establishnew colonies. Nearly all eusocial animals construct elaboratenests or burrow systems within which their offspring arereared. Such a structure represents an enormous investment ofresources. Naked mole-rats—the most eusocial mammals—livein elaborate underground tunnel systems that can extend foras much as 5 kilometers in cumulative length (Figure 53.22). Acolony includes 70 to 80 individuals but only one reproductivefemale and a few reproductive males. The other colony membersare sterile workers that dig and maintain the tunnels,guard against intruders, harvest food (tubers), and use their fecesto feed the queen and her offspring. Individuals attemptingto found new colonies have a high risk of failing or beingcaptured by predators. When chances of individual reproductivesuccess are practically zero, an individual can best maximizeits inclusive fitness by staying with and helping to maintainingthe colony.1136 CHAPTER 53 | ANIMAL BEHAVIORHeterocephalus glaber53.22 A Eusocial Mammal Naked mole-rats live in a large colony withonly one reproductive female and a few reproductive males. They live in anelaborate tunnel system excavated by the colony over time.The more pigeons in the flock, thesooner the hawk is spotted……and the lower thehawk’s attack success.12040608020406080Number of pigeons in flockHawk’s attack success (%) ( )Hawk’s distance (meters)when spotted by pigeons ( )2–10 11–50 >50Goshawk(A)Wood (B) Spermophilus beldingipigeon53.23 Group Living ProvidesProtection from PredatorsAnimals that live in groups canspread the cost of looking out forpredators. (A) The larger the numberof pigeons in a flock, the greater thechances that one of the pigeons willspot a hawk before it attacks, andthe lower the chances that the hawkwill capture one of the pigeons. (B)A young male Belding’s groundsquirrel gives an alarm call uponspotting a predator. Although thisbehavior increases his individual riskof becoming its prey, he increasesthe survival chances of many of hisclose relatives.Group living has benefits and costsApart from their direct influences on reproductive success, socialsystems can contribute to survival in many ways, but theycan also involve costs. Thus the cost–benefit approach of behavioralecology is relevant to understanding the evolution of socialbehavior.An obvious example of a benefit of group living is improvedforaging efficiency. By hunting in packs, African wild dogs (seeFigure 59.17) employ cooperative strategies that enable them tobring down larger prey than could a single dog. The larger thepack, the greater the hunting success rate. Once the prey is killed,the presence of conspecifics also reduces the risk that the wilddogs will lose their prey to larger scavengers, such as hyenas.Living in a group can also reduce the risk of the members’ becomingprey themselves. Many small birds forage in flocks. Totest the hypothesis that flocking provides protection against predators,one investigator released a trained goshawk near wild woodpigeons in England. The hawk was most successful when it attackedsolitary pigeons. Its success in capturing a pigeon in a flockdecreased as the number of pigeons in the flock increased (Figure53.23A). The larger the flock, the sooner some individual in theflock spotted the hawk and flew away. This escape behavior stimulatedother individuals in the flock to take flight as well.Alarm calling is another means of reducing predation risk, butthe caller incurs a risk cost by calling attention to itself. Belding’sground squirrels live in large colonies in open meadows. Whenone squirrel announces the presence of a predator with loud, sharpbarks, all the nearby squirrels dive into their burrows (Figure53.23B). Paul Sherman showed that callers double their risk of beingpreyed on—so why do they do it? Sherman’s and others’ researchhas shown that this altruistic behavior is a product of kinselection. In this polygynous species, males establish large territoriesin the spring that include the territories of several females,whom they inseminate. The females then drive the males off.Female offspring settle near their mothers, so neighboring femalesin a colony tend to be sisters, and they defend each other’s young.Sherman showed that males are less likely to give alarm calls thanfemales, and that females are more likely to give alarm callswhen related individuals are nearby.Social behavior has many costs as well as benefits. Foragingin a group may reduce the amount of food available to eachindividual, and the foraging individuals may interfere with oneanother’s foraging activities. Individuals living in groups mayface more competition for mates, as well as for food, than solitaryindividuals would. Alarge group may actually attract theattention of predators. And living at high population densitiescan increase the risk of disease transmission. The study of diseasetransmission in wild animal populations is a relatively newfield, but such studies have made it apparent that species livingin social groups are more prone to outbreaks of disease thanare solitary species.53.6 RECAPSocial behavior can be understood by asking how itcontributes to the fitness of the individuals involved.Asymmetry between the sexes in parental investmentis a key factor in the evolution of mating systems.According to the theory of kin selection, an individualcan increase its fitness by helping relatedindividuals with whom it shares alleles. In extremecases, kin selection has given rise to eusociality.• What environmental conditions can lead to monogamy,polygamy, or polyandry? See pp. 1134–1135• Explain how an individual can increase its fitness byhelping its relatives. See p. 1135• Why is eusociality so common among hymenopterans?See p. 1136• What are some of the costs and benefits of groupliving? See p. 1137 and Figure 53.23Knowledge of the behavior of particular species—how they usethe environment, how they obtain food, how they organize theiractivities spatially and temporally—is essential for understandinghow species interact in nature. These interactions are one focusof the science of ecology, the subject of Part Ten of this book.53.6 | HOW DOES SOCIAL BEHAVIOR EVOLVE? 113753.1 What Are the Origins of Behavioral Biology?• Ivan Pavlov’s discovery of conditioned reflexes and B. F.Skinner’s research on operant conditioning as a model forlearning led to an approach called behaviorism that mainly carriedout laboratory experiments on rats and a few other animalmodels. Review Figure 53.1• Ethology focuses on both the proximate causes of behavior—what is the immediate cause of the behavior, and how does thebehavior develop?— and on the ultimate causes—how doesthe behavior affect the animal’s fitness, and how does it comparewith similar behaviors in related species?• A major focus of the ethologists was fixed action patterns andtheir releasers. They performed deprivation experiments aswell as breeding experiments to demonstrate that certainbehaviors are genetically determined.53.2 How Can Genes Influence Behavior?• Breeding experiments can reveal whether a behavioral phenotypeis inherited. Gene knockout experiments can reveal theroles of specific genes underlying a behavioral phenotype.Review Figures 53.4 and 53.5• Most behaviors are complex traits involving many genes thatfunction in cascades and offer many points for a change in asingle gene to influence behavior. Review Figure 53.6CHAPTER SUMMARY
53.1 What Are the Origins of Behavioral Biology?• Ivan Pavlov’s discovery of conditioned reflexes and B. F.Skinner’s research on operant conditioning as a model forlearning led to an approach called behaviorism that mainly carriedout laboratory experiments on rats and a few other animalmodels. Review Figure 53.1• Ethology focuses on both the proximate causes of behavior—what is the immediate cause of the behavior, and how does thebehavior develop?— and on the ultimate causes—how doesthe behavior affect the animal’s fitness, and how does it comparewith similar behaviors in related species?• A major focus of the ethologists was fixed action patterns andtheir releasers. They performed deprivation experiments aswell as breeding experiments to demonstrate that certainbehaviors are genetically determined.53.2 How Can Genes Influence Behavior?• Breeding experiments can reveal whether a behavioral phenotypeis inherited. Gene knockout experiments can reveal theroles of specific genes underlying a behavioral phenotype.Review Figures 53.4 and 53.5• Most behaviors are complex traits involving many genes thatfunction in cascades and offer many points for a change in asingle gene to influence behavior. Review Figure 53.6
53.3 How Does Behavior Develop?• Hormones can determine the pattern of behavior that developsand the timing of its expression. Review Figure 53.7• Imprinting is a process by which an animal learns a specific setof stimuli during a limited critical or sensitive period. That criticalperiod may be determined by hormones.• The development and expression of song in white-crownedsparrows involves a genetic predisposition to learn the speciesspecificsong, a critical period for imprinting of a song memory,and hormonally controlled timing of song expression. Socialinteractions may also play a role. Review Figure 53.953.4 How Does Behavior Evolve?• An animal’s behavior is a series of choices that influence its fitness.To make these choices, animals use environmental cuesthat are reliable predictors of the potential effects of their choiceson their fitness. Review Figure 53.10• The cost–benefit approach can be used to investigate the fitnessvalue of specific behaviors. The cost of a behavior typicallyhas three components: energetic cost, risk cost, and opportunitycost. Review Figure 53.11, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 53.1• According to optimal foraging theory, animals should practicefeeding behaviors that maximize their energetic gain at theleast cost. Review Figure 53.13, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 53.253.5 What Physiological Mechanisms Underlie Behavior?• Circadian rhythms control the daily cycle of behavior. Withoutenvironmental time cues, circadian rhythms free-run with aperiod that is genetically programmed. They are normallyentrained to the light–dark cycle by environmental cues.Review Figure 53.15, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 53.3• Circannual rhythms are endogenous yearly cycles whose neuralbasis is still unknown.• Three forms of navigation used by animals to find their way inthe environment are piloting (orienting to landmarks), distance–direction navigation, and bicoordinate navigation. Navigationmechanisms include celestial navigation and a time-compensatedsolar compass. Review Figures 53.16–53.18, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 53.4• The behaviors of individuals may become communication signalsif the transmission of information benefits both the senderand the receiver.• Chemical communication signals (pheromones) can be highlyspecific and have different time courses depending on theirvolatility and diffusibility. Visual signals can convey complexmessages rapidly, but the recipient must be looking at thesender. Acoustic signals travel well over distances, do notrequire a focused recipient, and can be modified to reveal orconceal directional information. Tactile signals are used by animalsin close proximity and can convey complex messages.Review Figure 53.19, WEB ACTIVITY 53.153.6 How Does Social Behavior Evolve?• The evolution of mating systems can be understood by lookingat the fitness costs and benefits incurred by each partner in thespecies’ environment. Polygynous mating systems, in whichone male controls and mates with many females, can result ingreat variation in male reproductive success. Polyandry—afemale mating with multiple males—can evolve in circumstancesin which a male can make a substantial contribution tothe survival of his offspring.• The fitness an individual gains by producing offspring (individualfitness) plus the fitness it gains by increasing the reproductivesuccess of relatives with whom it shares alleles is calledinclusive fitness. Kin selection may favor altruistic behaviortoward relatives, despite its cost to the performer, if it increasesthe performer’s inclusive fitness.• As a result of haplodiploidy, the sex determination mechanismof the Hymenoptera, nonreproductive workers share more alleleswith one another than females share with their own offspring.Haplodiploidy has probably facilitated the evolution ofeusociality in this group through kin selection. Eusociality hasalso risen in diploid species in which chances of individualreproductive success are extremely low.• Group living confers benefits such as greater foraging efficiency,protection from predators, but it also has costs, such as increasedcompetition for food and ease of transmission of diseases.SEE WEB ACTIVITY 53.2 for a concept review of this chapter.