Jurassic Park, in both its literary and film incarnations,features a fictional theme park populated with livedinosaurs. In the story, scientists isolate DNA fromdinosaur blood extracted from the digestive tracts of fossilinsects. The insects supposedly sucked the reptiles’ bloodright before being preserved in amber (fossilized tree resin).This DNA, according to the novel, could be manipulated toproduce living individuals of long-extinct organisms such asvelociraptors and the ever-memorable Tyrannosaurus rex.The late Michael Crichton got the idea for his novel froman actual scientific paper in which the authors claimed tohave detected reptilian DNA sequences in a fossil insect.Unfortunately, upon additional study, the “preserved” DNAturned out to be a contaminant from modern organisms.Despite the facts that (1) the preservation of intact DNAover millions of years is highly improbable, and (2) DNAalone cannot generate a new organism, the huge successof Crichton’s book brought DNA to the attention of millions.But even before Jurassic Park, the DNA double helixwas a familiar secular icon.The double helix first appeared in 1953, in a short paperby James Watson and Francis Crick in the journal Nature. Anillustration of the molecule’s structure drawn by Crick’swife, Odile, accompanied the article, and its simplicity andelegance caught the imagination of the general public aswell as the intellect of scientists. As Watson later put it, “Astructure this pretty just had to exist.”The double-helical structure of deoxyribonucleic acid isperhaps the most widely recognized symbol of modern science,and “DNA” has become part of everydayspeech. One sees advertisements for a companywhose customers get “into the DNA of business.”A digital media software system is called the “DNAServer.” A perfume called DNA bills itself as “the essenceof life.”Salvador Dali was the first well-known artist touse the DNA double helix in his whimsical creations in1958. Today, sculptures representing the DNA double helixabound, and it is not only DNA’s appearance that stirsour imagination. The DNA nucleotide sequence itself, the“code for life,” has inspired unique works of art thatincorporate real DNA molecules. A portrait of Sir JohnSulston, a Nobel prize-winning geneticist, is made of tinybacterial colonies, each containing a piece of Sulston’sDNA. The Brazilian artist Eduardo Kac translated a sentencefrom the Bible into Morse code, and from MorseA structure for our times13Reviving the Velociraptor Scientists and artists have beencreating inanimate reconstructions of dinosaurs for more than100 years. Michael Crichton’s novel Jurassic Park was basedon the fictional premise that DNA retrieved from fossils couldproduce living dinosaurs, such as this velociraptor.What Is the Evidence that the Gene 13.1 is DNA?By the early twentieth century, geneticists had associated thepresence of genes with chromosomes. Research began to focuson exactly which chemical component of chromosomes comprisedthis genetic material.By the 1920s, scientists knew that chromosomes were madeup of DNA and proteins. At this time a new dye was developedby Robert Feulgen that could bind specifically to DNA and thatstained cell nuclei red in direct proportion to the amount ofDNA present in the cell. This technique provided circumstantialevidence that DNA was the genetic material:• It was in the right place. DNA was confirmed to be an importantcomponent of the nucleus and the chromosomes,which were known to carry genes.• It varied among species. When cells from different specieswere stained with the dye and their color intensity measured,each species appeared to have its own specificamount of nuclear DNA.• It was present in the right amounts. The amount of DNA in somaticcells (body cells not specialized for reproduction) wastwice that in reproductive cells (eggs or sperm)—as mightbe expected for diploid and haploid cells, respectively.But circumstantial evidence is not a scientific demonstration ofcause and effect. After all, proteins are also present in cell nuclei.Science relies on experiments to test hypotheses. The convincingdemonstration that DNA is the genetic material came fromtwo sets of experiments, one on bacteria and the other on viruses.DNA from one type of bacterium genetically transformsanother typeThe history of biology is filled with incidents in which researchon one specific topic has—with or without answering the questionoriginally asked—contributed richly to another, apparentlyunrelated area. Such a case of serendipity is seen in the work ofFrederick Griffith, an English physician.In the 1920s, Griffith was studying the bacterium Streptococcuspneumoniae, or pneumococcus, one of the agents thatcause pneumonia in humans. He was trying to develop a vaccineagainst this devastating illness (antibiotics had not yet beendiscovered). Griffith was working with two strains of pneumococcus:• Cells of the S strain produced colonies that looked smooth(S). Covered by a polysaccharide capsule, these cells werecode into a DNA sequence. The sequence was synthesizedand incorporated into bacteria. Viewers could turnon an ultraviolet lamp to create mutations in the DNA(and thus in the biblical verse it encoded).For many people, DNA has come to symbolize thepromise and perils of our rapidly expanding knowledgeof genetics. Although DNA sequences alone cannot generatea new organism, biotechnologies using DNA canmodify existing organisms into essentially new organisms.As we will see in Chapter 18, such use of this iconicmolecule has generated both excitement and concernabout potential risks.CHAPTER OUTLINE13.1 What Is the Evidence that the Gene Is DNA?13.2 What Is the Structure of DNA?13.3 How Is DNA Replicated?13.4 How Are Errors in DNA Repaired?13.5 How Does the Polymerase Chain ReactionAmplify DNA?In the Nature of Things The double helix of DNA hasbecome an iconic symbol of modern science and culture.Artists and designers make use of the widely recognizedshape in many ways.IN THIS CHAPTER we will describe the key experimentsthat led to the identification of DNA as the genetic material.We will then describe the structure of the DNA moleculeand how this structure determines its function. We willdescribe the processes by which DNA is replicated, repaired,and maintained. Finally, we present an important practicalapplication arising from our knowledge of DNA replication:the polymerase chain reaction.protected from attack by a host’s immune system. When Scells were injected into mice, they reproduced and causedpneumonia (the strain was virulent).• Cells of the R strain produced colonies that looked rough(R), lacked the protective capsule, and were not virulent.Griffith inoculated some mice with heat-killed S-type pneumococcuscells. These heat-killed bacteria did not produce infection.However, when Griffith inoculated other mice with a mixtureof living R bacteria and heat-killed S bacteria, to hisastonishment, the mice died of pneumonia (Figure 13.1). Whenhe examined blood from the hearts of these mice, he found itfull of living bacteria—many of them with characteristics of thevirulent S strain! Griffith concluded that in the presence of thedead S-type pneumococcus cells, some of the living R-type cellshad been transformed into virulent S cells. The fact that theseS-type cells reproduced to make more S-type cells showed thatthe change from R-type to S-type was genetic.Did this transformation of the bacteria depend on somethingthat happened in the mouse’s body? No. It was shown that simplyincubating living R and heat-killed S bacteria together in atest tube yielded the same transformation. Years later, anothergroup of scientists discovered that a cell-free extract of heat-killedS cells could also transform R cells. (A cell-free extract containsall the contents of ruptured cells, but no intact cells.) This resultdemonstrated that some substance—called at the time a chemicaltransforming principle—from the dead S pneumococcus cellscould cause a heritable change in the affected R cells. This wasan extraordinary discovery: treatment with a chemical substancecould permanently change an inherited characteristic. Now itremained to identify the chemical structure of this substance.268 CHAPTER 13 | DNA AND ITS ROLE IN HEREDITYGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODINVESTIGATING LIFEA chemical substance from one cell is capable of genetically transforming another cell.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: How would you show that heat-killed R strain bacteria can transform living S strain bacteria?13.1 Genetic TransformationGriffith’s experiments demonstrated that something in the virulent S strain of pneumococcus could transform nonvirulent R strainbacteria into a lethal form, even when the S strain bacteria had been killed by high temperatures.Material in dead bacterial cells can genetically transform living bacterial cells.Kill the virulent S strainbacteria by heating.Mix dead S strain cells with living,nonvirulent R strain bacteria.InjectionLivingS strain(virulent)LivingR strain(nonvirulent)Mouse healthy Mouse healthyLiving S strain cellsfound in heartLiving S strain cellsfound in heartNo bacterial cellsfound in heartNo bacterial cellsfound in heartRESULTS Mouse dies Mouse dies1 2 3 41 2 3 4The transforming principle is DNAIdentifying the transforming principle was a crucialstep in the history of biology. Work on identifyingthe transforming principle was completedby Oswald Avery and his colleagues atwhat is now The Rockefeller University.They treated samples known to contain thepneumococcal transforming principle in a varietyof ways to destroy different types of molecules—proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates,and lipids—and tested the treated samples to seeif they had retained the transforming activity. Theanswer was always the same: if the DNA in thesample was destroyed, transforming activity waslost, but there was no loss of activity when proteins,carbohydrates, or lipids were destroyed(Figure 13.2). As a final step, Avery and his colleaguesColin MacLeod and Maclyn McCarty isolatedvirtually pure DNAfrom a sample containingpneumococcal-transforming principle, andshowed that it caused bacterial transformation.We now know that the gene for the enzyme thatcatalyzes the synthesis of the polysaccharide capsule,which makes the bacteria look “smooth,”was transferred during transformation.Genetic transformation occurs in nature, althoughonly in certain species of bacteria suchas Pneumococcus. It does not occur, for example,in E. coli. Cells can pick up DNA fragmentsreleased into the environment by dead and rupturedcells. Only a small part of the genome istaken up by the transformed cells. Once the newDNA enters the cell, a transforming event verysimilar to recombination occurs (see Figure12.26), and new genes can be incorporated intothe host chromosome.The work of Avery’s group was a milestone inestablishing that DNA is the genetic material inbacterial cells. However, when it was first publishedin 1944, it had little impact, for two reasons.First, most scientists did not believe thatDNA was chemically complex enough to be thegenetic material, especially given the muchgreater chemical complexity of proteins. Second,and perhaps more important, bacterial geneticswas a new field of study—it was not yet clear thatbacteria even had genes.Viral replication experiments confirmedthat DNA is the genetic materialThe questions about bacteria and other simpleorganisms were soon resolved, as researchersidentified genes and mutations. Bacteria andviruses seemed to undergo genetic processes13.1 | WHAT IS THE EVIDENCE THAT THE GENE IS DNA? 269CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE13.2 Genetic Transformation by DNAExperiments by Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty showed that DNA from thevirulent S strain of pneumococcus was responsible for the transformation inGriffith’s experiments (see Figure 13.1).HYPOTHESIS The chemical nature of the transforming substance frompneumococcus is DNA.Because only DNase destroyed the transformingsubstance, the transforming substance is DNA.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, andrelevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODHeat-kill virulent S strain bacteria,homogenize, and filter.1Treat samples withenzymes thatdestroy RNA,proteins, or DNA.2Add the treatedsamples to culturesof R strain bacteria.3S strain(killed)R strain(nonvirulent)S strain(virulent)filtrateCultures treated with RNaseor protease contain transformedS strain bacteria…4…but the culture treatedwith DNase does not.5Virulent S strain and R strain bacteria R strain bacteriaonlyRESULTSRNase(destroysRNA)Protease(destroysproteins)DNase(destroysDNA)Ds NA.edulturescteria.rainvirulent)Ssimilar to those in fruit flies and pea plants. Experiments withthese relatively simple organisms were designed to discover thenature of the genetic material.In 1952, Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase of the CarnegieLaboratory of Genetics published a paper that had a muchgreater immediate impact than Avery’s 1944 paper. The Hershey–Chase experiment, which sought to determine whetherDNAor protein was the genetic material, was carried out witha virus that infects bacteria. This virus, called bacteriophageT2, consists of little more than a DNA core packed inside a proteincoat (Figure 13.3). Thus the virus is made of the two materialsthat were, at the time, the leading candidates for the geneticmaterial.When bacteriophage T2 attacks a bacterium, part (but notall) of the virus enters the bacterial cell. About 20 minutes later,the cell bursts, releasing dozens of particles that are virtuallyidentical to the infecting virus particle. Clearly the virus is somehowable to replicate itself inside the bacterium. Hershey andChase deduced that the entry of some viral component affectsthe genetic program of the host bacterial cell, transformingit into a bacteriophage factory. They set out to determinewhich part of the virus—protein or DNA—enters the bacterialcell. To trace the two components of the virus over its life cycle,Hershey and Chase labeled each component with a specificradioisotope:• Proteins contain some sulfur (in the amino acids cysteine andmethionine). Sulfur is not present in DNA, and has a radioactiveisotope, 35S. Hershey and Chase grew bacteriophageT2 in a bacterial culture in the presence of 35S, so theproteins of the resulting viruses were labeled with (contained)the radioisotope.• DNA contains phosphorus (in the deoxyribose-phosphatebackbone—see Figure 4.2). Phosphorus is not present inmost proteins, and it also has a radioisotope, 32P. The researchersgrew another batch of T2 in a bacterial culture inthe presence of 32P, thus labeling the viral DNA with 32P.Using these radioactively labeled viruses, Hershey andChase performed their revealing experiments (Figure 13.4). Inone experiment, they allowed 32P-labeled bacteriophage to infectbacteria; in the other, the bacteria were infected by 35S-labeledbacteriophage. After a few minutes, they agitated eachmixture of infected bacteria vigorously in a kitchen blender,which stripped away the parts of the virus that had not penetratedthe bacteria, without bursting the bacteria. Then they separatedthe bacteria from the rest of the material in a centrifuge.Spinning solutions or suspensions at high speed in a centrifugecauses the solutes and/or particles to separate and forma gradient according to their densities. The lighter remains of theviruses (those parts that had not penetrated the bacteria) werecaptured in the “supernatant” fluid, while the heavier bacterialcells segregated into a “pellet” in the bottom of the centrifugetube. The scientists found that the supernatant fluid containedmost of the 35S (and thus the viral protein), while most of the 32P(and thus the viral DNA) had stayed with the bacteria. These resultssuggested that it was DNA that had been transferred intothe bacteria, and that DNA was the compound responsible forredirecting the genetic program of the bacterial cell.Hershey and Chase performed similar but longer-term experiments,allowing the progeny (offspring) generation ofviruses to grow. The resulting viruses contained almost no 35Sand none of the parental viral protein. They did, however, containabout one-third of the original 32P—and thus, presumably,one-third of the original DNA. Because DNA was carriedover in the viruses from generation to generation but proteinwas not, the logical conclusion was that the hereditary informationwas contained in the DNA.Eukaryotic cells can also be genetically transformedby DNAWith the publication of the evidence for DNA as the genetic materialin bacteria and viruses, the question arose as to whetherDNAwas also the genetic material in complex eukaryotes. Somedubious experimental results were reported. For example, a270 CHAPTER 13 | DNA AND ITS ROLE IN HEREDITY1 Bacteriophage T2attaches to the surfaceof a bacterium andinjects its geneticmaterial.2 Viral genes take overthe host’s machinery,which synthesizesnew viruses.3 The bacteriumbursts, releasingabout 200 viruses.DNAGeneticmaterialBacteriophage T2Proteincoat13.3 Bacteriophage T2: Reproduction Cycle Bacteriophage T2 is parasitic on E. coli, dependingon the bacterium to produce new viruses. The external structures of bacteriophage T2 consist entirelyof protein, and the DNA is contained within the protein coat. When the virus infects an E. coli cell, itsgenetic material is injected into the host bacterium.white duck was injected with DNAfrom a brown duck and the recipientwas reported to turn brown. In anotherexample, flatworms were fed DNAfrom worms that had learned a simpletask, and the recipient worms were reportedto immediately get smarter.However, no one could duplicate theseresults. This episode underscores a centralaspect of experimental biology:that published research should be repeatedwith the same results before theconclusions can be considered valid.It would be impossible for a largemolecule such as DNA to avoid hydrolysisinto nucleotides in the digestivesystem, let alone get into all thecells of the body, after being ingestedby an animal. However, genetic transformationof eukaryotic cells by DNA(called transfection) can be demonstrated.The key is to use a geneticmarker, a gene whose presence in therecipient cell confers an observablephenotype. In the experiments withpneumococcus, these phenotypes werethe smooth polysaccharide capsuleand virulence. In eukaryotes, researchersusually use a nutritional or antibioticresistance marker gene that permitsthe growth of transformed recipientcells but not of nontransformedcells. For example, thymidine kinase isan enzyme needed to make use ofthymidine in the synthesis of deoxythymidinetriphosphate (dTTP),one of the four deoxyribonucleosidetriphosphates used in the synthesis ofDNA. Mammalian cells that lack thegene for thymidine kinase cannot growin a medium that contains thymidineas the only source for dTTP synthesis.When DNA containing the markergene encoding thymidine kinase isadded to a culture of mammalian cellslacking this gene, some cells will growin the thymidine medium, demonstratingthat they have been transfectedwith the gene (Figure 13.5). Any cellcan be transfected in this way, even anegg cell. In this case, a whole new geneticallytransformed organism can result;such an organism is referred toas transgenic. Transformation in eukaryotesis the final line of evidencefor DNA as the genetic material.13.1 | WHAT IS THE EVIDENCE THAT THE GENE IS DNA? 271RESULTSGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevantlinks for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESIS Either component of a bacteriophage—DNA or protein—might be thehereditary material that enters a bacterial cell to direct the assembly ofnew viruses.METHODINVESTIGATING LIFE13.4 The Hershey–Chase ExperimentWhen bacterial cells were infected with radioactively labeled T2 bacteriophage, onlylabeled DNA was found in the bacteria. After centrifuging the culture to make the bacteriaform a pellet, the labeled protein remained in the supernatant. This showed that DNA, notprotein, is the genetic material.CO NCLUSION DNA, not protein, enters bacterial cells and directs the assembly ofnew viruses.TSLabel phage. S is an elementin proteins, but not in DNA.Label phage. P is an element 1bin DNA, but not in proteins.1aMost of the 32Pis in the pelletwith the bacteria.5aDNA with 32P Protein coat with 35SBacteria BacteriaExperiment 1 Experiment 2PelletSupernatantfluidMost of the 35Sis in the supernatantfluid with the viruses.5bInfect bacteria withlabeled viruses.2Agitate in a blenderto detach virusesfrom bacterial cells.3Centrifuge to forcethe bacterial cellsto the bottom ofthe tube, forming apellet. Supernatantfluid contains theviruses.413.1 RECAPExperiments on bacteria and on viruses demonstratedthat DNA is the genetic material.• At the time of Griffith’s experiments in the 1920s,what circumstantial evidence suggested to scientiststhat DNA might be the genetic material? See p. 267• Why were the experiments of Avery, MacLeod, andMcCarty definitive evidence that DNA was the geneticmaterial? See p. 269 and Figure 13.2• What attributes of bacteriophage T2 were key to theHershey–Chase experiments demonstrating that DNAis the genetic material? See p. 270 and Figure 13.4As soon as scientists became convinced that the genetic materialwas DNA, they began efforts to learn its precise threedimensionalchemical structure. The chemical makeup ofDNA, as a polymer made up of nucleotide monomers, hadbeen known for several decades. In determining the structureof DNA, scientists hoped to find the answers to two questions:(1) how is DNA replicated between cell divisions, and(2) how does it direct the synthesis of specific proteins? Theywere eventually able to answer both questions.13.2 What Is the Structure of DNA?The structure of DNA was deciphered only after many typesof experimental evidence were considered together in a theoreticalframework. The most crucial evidence was obtained usingX-ray crystallography. Some chemical substances, whenthey are isolated and purified, can be made to form crystals.The positions of atoms in a crystallized substance can be inferredfrom the diffraction pattern of X rays passing throughthe substance (Figure 13.6A). The structure of DNA would nothave been characterized without the crystallographs preparedin the early 1950s by the English chemist Rosalind Franklin(Figure 13.6B). Franklin’s work, in turn, depended on the successof the English biophysicist Maurice Wilkins, who preparedsamples containing very uniformly oriented DNA fibers. TheseDNA samples were far better for diffraction than previousones, and the crystallographs Franklin prepared from themsuggested a spiral or helical molecule.The chemical composition of DNA was knownThe chemical composition of DNA also provided importantclues to its structure. Biochemists knew that DNA was a polymerof nucleotides. Each nucleotide consists of a molecule ofthe sugar deoxyribose, a phosphate group, and a nitrogencontainingbase (see Figures 4.1 and 4.2). The only differencesamong the four nucleotides of DNA are their nitrogenousbases: the purines adenine (A) and guanine (G), and the pyrimidinescytosine (C) and thymine (T).272 CHAPTER 13 | DNA AND ITS ROLE IN HEREDITYGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations,discussions, and relevant links for allINVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESIS DNA can transform eukaryotic cells.CONCLUSION The cells were transformed by DNA.METHODINVESTIGATING LIFE13.5 Transfection in Eukaryotic CellsThe use of a marker gene shows that mammalian cells can begenetically transformed by DNA. Usually, the marker gene iscarried by a larger molecule (a virus or a small chromosome).RESULTSIsolate mammaliancells that lack thegene for thymidinekinase. (They cannotuse thymidine in thegrowth medium.)1Add DNAwith themarker genefor thymidinekinase.2aCells with thethymidine kinasegene grow inthymidine.3aCells without the thymidinekinase gene cannot usethe thymidine in the growthmedium and do not grow.3b2b Add controlDNA withoutthe genefor thymidinekinase.In 1950, biochemist Erwin Chargaff at Columbia Universityreported some observations of major importance. He and hiscolleagues found that DNA from many different species—andfrom different sources within a single organism—exhibits certainregularities. In almost all DNA, the following rule holds:The amount of adenine equals the amount of thymine (A = T),and the amount of guanine equals the amount of cytosine(G = C) (Figure 13.7). As a result, the total abundance of purines(A + G) equals the total abundance of pyrimidines (T + C). Thestructure of DNA could not have been worked out without thisobservation, now known as Chargaff’s rule, yet its significancewas overlooked for at least three years.Watson and Crick described the double helixThe solution to the structure of DNA was finally achievedthrough model building: the assembly of three-dimensional representationsof possible molecular structures using known relativemolecular dimensions and known bond angles. This techniquewas originally applied to molecular structural studies bythe American biochemist Linus Pauling. The English physicistFrancis Crick and the American geneticist James D. Watson (Figure13.8A), who were both then at the Cavendish Laboratory ofCambridge University, used model building to solve the structureof DNA.Watson and Crick attempted to combine all that had beenlearned so far about DNA structure into a single coherentmodel. Rosalind Franklin’s crystallography results (see Figure13.6) convinced Watson and Crick that the DNA molecule mustbe helical (cylindrically spiral). Density measurements and previousmodel building results suggested that there are twopolynucleotide chains in the molecule. Modeling studies alsoshowed that the strands run in opposite directions, that is, theyare antiparallel; that two strands would not fit together in themodel if they were parallel.How are the nucleotides oriented in these chains? Watsonand Crick suggested that:• The nucleotide bases are on the interior of the two strands,with a sugar-phosphate backbone on the outside:• To satisfy Chargaff’s rule (purines = pyrimidines), a purineon one strand is always paired with a pyrimidine on theopposite strand. These base pairs (A-T and G-C) have thesame width down the double helix, a uniformity shown byx-ray diffraction.CAnotTG CATGnotPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPBBBBB BBBBBBBBBBB13.2 | WHAT IS THE STRUCTURE OF DNA? 273These spotsare causedby diffractedX rays.PhotographicplateDNA sampleBeam of X raysX ray source Lead screen(A) (B)In DNA, A + G… …is always equalto T + C.==TCPurines = PyrimidinesGA13.6 X-Ray Crystallography Helped Reveal the Structure of DNA(A) The positions of atoms in a crystallized chemical substance can beinferred by the pattern of diffraction of X rays passed through it. The patternof DNA is both highly regular and repetitive. (B) Rosalind Franklin’scrystallography helped scientists to visualize the helical structure of theDNA molecule.13.7 Chargaff’s Rule In DNA, the total abundance of purines is equalto the total abundance of pyrimidines.In late February of 1953, Crick and Watson built a model outof tin that established the general structure of DNA. This structureexplained all the known chemical properties of DNA, andit opened the door to understanding its biological functions.There have been minor amendments to that first publishedstructure, but its principal features remain unchanged.Four key features define DNA structureFour features summarize the molecular architecture of the DNAmolecule (see Figure 13.8B):• It is a double-stranded helix of uniform diameter.• It is right-handed. (Hold your right hand with the thumbpointing up. Imagine the curve of the helix following thedirection of your fingers as it winds upward and you havethe idea.)• It is antiparallel (the two strands run in opposite directions).• The outer edges of the nitrogenous bases are exposed in themajor and minor grooves. These grooves exist because thebackbones of the two strands are closer together on oneside of the double helix (forming the minor groove) thanon the other side (forming the major groove).THE HELIX The sugar–phosphate “backbones” of the polynucleotidechains coil around the outside of the helix, and the nitrogenousbases point toward the center. The two chains areheld together by hydrogen bonding between specifically pairedbases (Figure 13.9). Consistent with Chargaff’s rule,• Adenine (A) pairs with thymine (T) by forming two hydrogenbonds.• Guanine (G) pairs with cytosine (C) by forming three hydrogenbonds.Every base pair consists of one purine (A or G) and one pyrimidine(T or C). This pattern is known as complementary base pairing.Because the A-T and G-C pairs are of equal length, they fitinto a fixed distance between the two chains (like rungs on aladder), and the diameter of the helix is thus uniform. The basepairs are flat, and their stacking in the center of the molecule isstabilized by hydrophobic interactions (see Section 2.2), contributingto the overall stability of the double helix.ANTIPARALLEL STRANDS What does it mean to say that the twoDNAstrands are antiparallel? The direction of each strand is determinedby examining the bonds between the alternatingphosphate and sugar groups that make up the backbone ofeach strand. Look closely at the five-carbon sugar (deoxyribose)274 CHAPTER 13 | DNA AND ITS ROLE IN HEREDITYThe blue bands representthe two sugar–phosphatebackbones,which run inoppositedirections:5′3′3′5′(A)(B) PhosphorusHydrogenOxygenCarbon insugar–phosphatebackboneMajorgrooveMinorgrooveBases3.4 nm3′5′AAT ATTTTAAAAGGG CCCCCG13.8 DNA Is a Double Helix (A) Francis Crick (left) andJames Watson (right) proposed that the DNA molecule has adouble-helical structure. (B) Biochemists can now pinpoint theposition of every atom in a DNA molecule. To see that the essentialfeatures of the original Watson–Crick model have been verified,follow with your eyes the double-helical chains of sugar–phosphate groups and note the horizontal rungs of the bases.molecule in Figure 13.9. The numberfollowed by a prime (′) designates theposition of a carbon atom in thesugar. In the sugar–phosphate backboneof DNA, the phosphate groupsare connected to the 3′ carbon of onedeoxyribose molecule and the 5′ carbonof the next, linking successivesugars together.Thus the two ends of a polynucleotidechain differ. At one end of achain is a free (not connected to anothernucleotide) 5′ phosphate group(—OPO3–); this is called the 5′ end. Atthe other end is a free 3′ hydroxylgroup (—OH); this is called the 3′ end.In a DNA double helix, the 5′ end ofone strand is paired with the 3′ end ofthe other strand, and vice versa. Inother words, if you drew an arrow foreach strand running from 5′ to 3′,the arrows would point in oppositedirections.BASE EXPOSURE IN THE GROOVES Look back at Figure 13.8B andnote the major and minor grooves in the helix. From thesegrooves, the exposed outer edges of the flat, hydrogen-bondedbase pairs are accessible for additional hydrogen bonding. Asseen in Figure 13.9, two hydrogen bonds join each A-T basepair, while three hydrogen bonds join each G-C base pair. Hydrogen-bonding opportunities also exist at an unpaired C=Ogroup in T and an “N” in A. The G-C base pair offers additionalhydrogen bonding possibilities as well. Thus the surfaces of theA-T and G-C base pairs are chemically distinct, allowing othermolecules, such as proteins, to recognize specific base pairsequences and bind to them. Access to the exposed base-pairsequences in the major and minor grooves is the key to protein–DNA interactions, which are necessary for the replicationand expression of the genetic information in DNA.The double-helical structure of DNA is essentialto its functionThe genetic material performs four important functions, andthe DNA structure proposed by Watson and Crick was elegantlysuited to three of them.• The genetic material stores an organism’s genetic information.With its millions of nucleotides, the base sequence of aDNAmolecule can encode and store an enormous amountof information. Variations in DNA sequences can accountfor species and individual differences. DNA fits this rolenicely.• The genetic material is susceptible to mutations (permanentchanges) in the information it encodes. For DNA, mutationsmight be simple changes in the linear sequence of basepairs.• The genetic material is precisely replicated in the cell division cycle.Replication could be accomplished by complementarybase pairing, Awith T and G with C. In the original publicationof their findings in 1953, Watson and Crick coylypointed out, “It has not escaped our notice that the specificpairing we have postulated immediately suggests a possiblecopying mechanism for the genetic material.”• The genetic material (the coded information in DNA) is expressedas the phenotype. This function is not obvious in the structureof DNA. However, as we will see in the next chapter, thenucleotide sequence of DNA is copied into RNA, whichuses the coded information to specify a linear sequence ofamino acids—a protein. The folded forms of proteins determinemany of the phenotypes of an organism.13.2 | WHAT IS THE STRUCTURE OF DNA? 275The phosphate groupattaches to the 5′ carbon.T-A pairs have twohydrogen bonds.The strands both run in a 5′-to-3′direction—they are antiparallel.C-G pairs have threehydrogen bonds.Pairs of complementary bases formhydrogen bonds that hold the twostrands of the DNA double helix together.The next nucleotide’sphosphate groupattaches to the 3′ carbon.The base attachesto the 1′ carbon.H2CH HOHOHOHH HHOC CC C5′4′2′1′3′OHOH3′ end3′ end5′ end5′ endTTAAGGGCCC13.9 Base Pairing in DNA Is Complementary The purines (A andG) pair with the pyrimidines (T and C, respectively) to form base pairs thatare equal in size and resemble the rungs on a ladder whose sides areformed by the sugar–phosphate backbones. The deoxyribose sugar(left) is where the 3′ and 5′ carbons are located. The two strands areantiparallel.13.2 RECAPDNA is a double helix made up of two antiparallelpolynucleotide chains. The two chains are joined byhydrogen bonds between the nucleotide bases, whichpair specifically: A with T, and G with C. Chemicalgroups on the bases that are exposed in the groovesof the helix are available for hydrogen bonding withother molecules, such as proteins. These moleculescan recognize specific sequences of nucleotide bases.• Describe the evidence that Watson and Crick used tocome up with the double helix model for DNA.See p. 273• How does the double-helical structure of DNA relateto its function? See p. 275Once the structure of DNA was understood, it was possible toinvestigate how DNA replicates itself. Let’s examine the experimentsthat taught us how this elegant process works.13.3 How Is DNA Replicated?The mechanism of DNA replication that suggested itself to Watsonand Crick was soon confirmed. First, experiments showedthat DNA could be replicated in a test tube containing simplesubstrates and an enzyme. Then a truly classic experimentshowed that each of the two strands of the double helix canserve as a template for a new strand of DNA.Three modes of DNA replication appeared possibleThe prediction that the DNA molecule contains the informationneeded for its own replication was confirmed by the work ofArthur Kornberg, then at Washington University in St. Louis.He showed that new DNA molecules with the same base compositionas the original molecules could be synthesized in a testtube containing the following substances:• The substrates were the deoxyribonucleoside triphosphatesdATP, dCTP, dGTP, and dTTP.• ADNA polymerase enzyme catalyzed the reaction.• DNAserved as a template to guide the incomingnucleotides.• The reaction also contained salts and a pH buffer, to createan appropriate chemical environment for the DNA polymeraseto function.Recall that a nucleoside is a nitrogen base attached to a sugar.The four deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs) each consistof a nitrogen base attached to deoxyribose, which in turnis attached to three phosphate groups. When a dNTP is addedto a DNA strand during DNA synthesis, the two terminal phosphatesare removed, resulting in a monophosphate nucleotide.The next challenge was to determine which of three possiblereplication patterns occurs during DNA replication:• Semiconservative replication, in which each parent strandserves as a template for a new strand, and the two newDNAmolecules each have one old and one new strand(Figure 13.10A)• Conservative replication, in which the original double helixserves as a template for, but does not contribute to, anew double helix (Figure 13.10B)• Dispersive replication, in which fragments of the originalDNAmolecule serve as templates for assembling two newmolecules, each containing old and new parts, perhaps atrandom (Figure 13.10C)Watson and Crick’s original paper suggested that DNA replicationwas semiconservative, but Kornberg’s experiment didnot provide a basis for choosing among these three models.An elegant experiment demonstrated that DNA replicationis semiconservativeThe work of Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl convincedthe scientific community that DNA is reproduced by semiconservativereplication. Working at the California Institute of Technology,Meselson and Stahl devised a simple way to distinguishbetween old parent strands of DNA and newly copied ones:density labeling.276 CHAPTER 13 | DNA AND ITS ROLE IN HEREDITYGO TO Animated Tutorial 13.1 • DNA Replication, Part 1:Replication of a Chromosome and DNA PolymerizationyourBioPortal.comSemiconservative replication would produce moleculeswith both old and new DNA, but each molecule wouldcontain one complete old strand and one new one.Conservative replication would preserve the originalmolecule and generate an entirely new molecule.Dispersive replication would produce two moleculeswith old and new DNA interspersed along each strand.Original DNAAfter one roundof replication(C)(B)(A)13.10 Three Models for DNA Replication In each model, the originalDNA is shown in blue and the newly synthesized DNA is in red.The key to their experiment was the use of a “heavy” isotopeof nitrogen. Heavy nitrogen (15N) is a rare, nonradioactive isotopethat makes molecules containing it denser than chemicallyidentical molecules containing the common isotope, 14N. Meselson,Stahl, and Jerome Vinograd grew two cultures of the bacteriumEscherichia coli for many generations:• One culture was grown in a medium whose nitrogen source(ammonium chloride, NH4Cl) was made with 15N instead of14N. As a result, all the DNA in the bacteria was “heavy.”• Another culture was grown in a medium containing 14N,and all the DNA in these bacteria was “light.”When DNAextracts from the two cultures were combined andcentrifuged, two separate bands formed, showing that thismethod could be used to distinguish between DNA samplesof slightly different densities.Next, the researchers grew another E. coli culture on 15Nmedium, then transferred it to normal 14N medium and allowedthe bacteria to continue growing (Figure 13.11). Under the conditionsthey used, E. coli cells replicate their DNA and divide13.3 | HOW IS DNA REPLICATED? 277METHODINTERPRETATIONGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFEThis pattern could only have been observed if each DNA molecule contains a template strand fromthe parental DNA; thus DNA replication is semiconservative.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: If you continued this experiment for two more generations (as Meselson and Stahl actually did),what would be the composition (in terms of density) of the fourth generation DNA?13.11 The Meselson–Stahl ExperimentA centrifuge was used to separate DNA molecules labeled with isotopes of different densities. This experiment revealed a patternthat supports the semiconservative model of DNA replication.DNA replicates semiconservatively.Grow bacteria in15 N (heavy) medium.Transfer some bacteriato 14 N (light) medium;bacterial growth continues.Samples are taken after 0minutes, 20 minutes (afterone round of replication),and 40 minutes (two roundsof replication).Before the bacteria reproducefor the first time in the lightmedium (at 0 minutes), allDNA (parental) is heavy.After two generations, halfthe DNA was intermediateand half was light; therewas no heavy DNA.ParentstrandNew15 N strand 14 NSample at0 minutesSample after20 minutesSample after40 minutesParent(all heavy)Firstgeneration(all intermediate)Secondgeneration(half intermediate, half light)14 N/14 N (light) DNA14 N/15 N (intermediate) DNA15 N/ 15 N (heavy) DNARESULTSGO TO Animated Tutorial 13.2 • The Meselson–Stahl ExperimentyourBioPortal.comevery 20 minutes. Meselson and Stahl collected some of the bacteriaafter each division and extracted DNA from the samples.They found that the density gradient was different in each bacterialgeneration:• At the time of the transfer to the 14N medium, the DNAwas uniformly labeled with 15N, and hence formed a singleband corresponding with dense DNA.• After one generation in the 14N medium, when the DNAhad been duplicated once, all the DNA was of intermediatedensity.• After two generations, there were two equally large DNAbands: one of low density and one of intermediate density.• In samples from subsequent generations, the proportion oflow-density DNA increased steadily.The results of this experiment can be explained only by thesemiconservative model of DNA replication. In the first roundof DNA replication in the 14N medium, the strands of the doublehelix—both heavy with 15N—separated. Each strand thenacted as the template for a second strand, which contained only14N and hence was less dense. Each double helix then consistedof one 15N strand and one 14N strand, and was of intermediatedensity. In the second replication, the 14N-containing strands directedthe synthesis of partners with 14N, creating low-densityDNA, and the 15N strands formed new 14N partners.The crucial observation demonstrating the semiconservativemodel was that intermediate-density DNA (15N–14N) appearedin the first generation and continued to appear in subsequentgenerations. With the other models, the results would have beenquite different (see Figure 13.10):• If conservative replication had occurred, the first generationwould have had both high-density DNA (15N–15N)and low-density DNA (14N–14N), but no intermediatedensityDNA.• If dispersive replication had occurred, the density of thenew DNA would have been intermediate, but DNA ofthis density would not continue to appear in subsequentgenerations.Some scientists consider the Meselson–Stahl experiment tobe one of the most elegant experiments ever performed by biologists,and it is an excellent example of the scientific method.It began with three hypotheses—the three models of DNA replication—and was designed so that the results could differentiatebetween them.278 CHAPTER 13 | DNA AND ITS ROLE IN HEREDITYNucleotides are addedto the 3′ end.Bonds linking thephosphate groups arebroken, releasing energyto drive the reaction.C pairs with G.The enzyme DNApolymerase III adds thenext deoxyribonucleotideto the —OH group at the3′ end of the growing strandand releases pyrophosphate.5′ endOHOHOHOHOH3′ end3′ end3′ end5′ end3′ end5′ end 3′ endPhosphateSugarBasePyrophosphate ionGrowing strand5′ endTemplate strand Growing strandPhosphate ions5′ endTTAAGGG GCCTTAAGGCCCCC CDNA polymerase III13.12 Each New DNA Strand Grows from Its 5’ End to Its 3’ End The DNAstrand at the right (blue) is the template for the synthesis of the complementarystrand that is growing at the left (pink). Here dCTP (circled) is being added.There are two steps in DNA replicationSemiconservative DNA replication in the cellinvolves a number of different enzymes andother proteins. It takes place in two generalsteps:• The DNA double helix is unwound toseparate the two template strands andmake them available for new basepairing.• As new nucleotides form complementarybase pairs with template DNA, they arecovalently linked together by phosphodiesterbonds, forming a polymer whosebase sequence is complementary to thebases in the template strand.Akey observation is that nucleotides are addedto the growing new strand at the 3′ end—the endat which the DNA strand has a free hydroxyl(—OH) group on the 3′ carbon of its terminaldeoxyribose (Figure 13.12). One of the threephosphate groups in a dNTP is attached tothe 5′ position of the sugar. The bonds linkingthe other two phosphate groups to thedNTP are broken, resulting in a monophosphatenucleotide, and releasing energy for thereaction.DNA polymerases add nucleotides tothe growing chainDNAis replicated through the interaction ofthe template strand with a huge protein complexcalled the replication complex, which containsat least four proteins, including DNApolymerase. All chromosomes have at leastone region called the origin of replication (ori),to which the replication complex binds.Binding occurs when proteins in the complexrecognize a specific DNA sequence withinthe origin of replication.DNA REPLICATION BEGINS WITH A PRIMER A DNA polymeraseelongates a polynucleotide strand by covalently linking newnucleotides to a previously existing strand. However, it cannotstart this process without a short “starter” strand, called aprimer. In DNA replication, the primer is usually a short singlestrand of RNA (Figure 13.13) but in some organisms it isDNA. This RNA primer strand is complementary to the DNAtemplate, and is synthesized one nucleotide at a time by an enzymecalled a primase. The DNA polymerase then adds nucleotidesto the 3′ end of the primer and continues until thereplication of that section of DNA has been completed. Thenthe RNA primer is degraded, DNA is added in its place, andthe resulting DNA fragments are connected by the action ofother enzymes. When DNA replication is complete, each newstrand consists only of DNA.DNA POLYMERASES ARE LARGE DNA polymerases are muchlarger than their substrates, the dNTPs, and the template DNA,which is very thin (Figure 13.14A). Molecular models of theenzyme–substrate–template complex from bacteria show thatthe enzyme is shaped like an open right hand with a palm, athumb, and fingers (Figure 13.14B). The palm holds the activesite of the enzyme and brings together each substrate and thetemplate. The finger regions rotate inward and have preciseshapes that can recognize the different shapes of the four nucleotidebases.13.3 | HOW IS DNA REPLICATED? 2791 Primase binds to thetemplate strand andsynthesizes an RNAprimer.2 When the primer iscomplete, primase isreleased. DNApolymerase bindsand synthesizes newDNA.New strandTemplate strandRNA primerRNA primer5′ 5′3′PrimasePrimase5′5′3′5′3′DNA polymerase3′5′13.13 DNA Forms with a Primer DNA polymerases require a primer—a “starter” strand ofDNA or RNA to which they can add new nucleotides.CELLS CONTAIN SEVERAL DIFFERENT DNA POLYMERASES Most cellscontain more than one kind of DNA polymerase, but only one ofthem is responsible for chromosomal DNA replication. The othersare involved in primer removal and DNArepair. Fifteen DNApolymerases have been identified in humans; the ones catalyzingmost replication are DNA polymerases δ (delta) and ε (epsilon).In the bacterium E. coli there are five DNA polymerases; the oneresponsible for replication is DNA polymerase III.Many other proteins assist withDNA polymerizationVarious other proteins play roles in other replicationtasks; some of these are shown in Figure 13.15.The first event at the origin of replication is thelocalized unwinding and separation (denaturation)of the DNA strands. As we saw in Chapter 4, thereare several forces that hold the two strands together,including hydrogen bonding and the hydrophobicinteractions of the bases. An enzymecalled DNA helicase uses energy from ATP hydrolysisto unwind and separate the strands, and spe-280 CHAPTER 13 | DNA AND ITS ROLE IN HEREDITY(A)(B)“Thumb”“Fingers”RNA primerTemplate strandNew strandDNA polymeraseDNA polymerase5′3′3′5′DNA13.14 DNA Polymerase Binds to the Template Strand (A) The DNA polymerase enzyme (blue)is much larger than the DNA molecule (red and white). (B) DNA polymerase is shaped like a hand,and in this side-on view, its “fingers” can be seen curling around the DNA. These “fingers” can recognizethe distinctive shapes of the four bases.DNA polymeraseelongates both strands.DNA helicase unwindsthe double helix.Primase synthesizesa primer.Single-strand binding proteins keepthe template strands separated.Parent DNALeading strandLagging strandLeading strandtemplateOkazakifragmentRNAprimerLagging strandtemplateDNA polymerase3′5′ 5′3′3′3′3′5′5′5′13.15 Many Proteins Collaborate in the ReplicationComplex Several proteins in addition to DNA polymerase areinvolved in DNA replication. The two molecules of DNA polymeraseshown here are actually part of the same complex.GO TO Web Activity 13.1 • The Replication ComplexyourBioPortal.com13.3 | HOW IS DNA REPLICATED? 281cial proteins called single-strand binding proteins bind to the unwoundstrands to keep them from reassociating into a doublehelix. This process makes each of the two template strands availablefor complementary base pairing.THE TWO DNA STRANDS GROW DIFFERENTLY As Figure 13.15shows, the DNA at the replication fork—the site(s) where DNAunwinds to expose the bases so that they can act as templates—opens up like a zipper in one direction. Study Figure 13.16 andtry to imagine what is happening over a short period of time.Remember that the two DNA strands are antiparallel; that is,the 3′ end of one strand is paired with the 5′ end of the other.• One newly replicating strand (the leading strand) is orientedso that it can grow continuously at its 3′ end as the forkopens up.• The other new strand (the lagging strand) is oriented so thatas the fork opens up, its exposed 3′ end gets farther and fartheraway from the fork, and an unreplicated gap isformed. This gap would get bigger and bigger if there werenot a special mechanism to overcome this problem.Synthesis of the lagging strand requires the synthesis of relativelysmall, discontinuous stretches of sequence (100 to 200nucleotides in eukaryotes; 1,000 to 2,000 nucleotides in prokaryotes).These discontinuous stretches are synthesized just as theleading strand is, by the addition of new nucleotides one at atime to the 3′ end of the new strand, but the synthesis of thisnew strand moves in the direction opposite to that in which thereplication fork is moving. These stretches of new DNA arecalled Okazaki fragments (after their discoverer, the Japanese biochemistReiji Okazaki). While the leading strand grows continuously“forward,” the lagging strand grows in shorter, “backward”stretches with gaps between them.Asingle primer is needed for synthesis of the leading strand,but each Okazaki fragment requires its own primer to be synthesizedby the primase. In bacteria, DNA polymerase III thensynthesizes an Okazaki fragment by adding nucleotides to oneprimer until it reaches the primer of the previous fragment. Atthis point, DNA polymerase I (discovered by Arthur Kornberg)removes the old primer and replaces it with DNA. Left behindis a tiny nick—the final phosphodiester linkage between the adjacentOkazaki fragments is missing. The enzyme DNA ligase catalyzesthe formation of that bond, linking the fragments andmaking the lagging strand whole (Figure 13.17).Working together, DNA helicase, the two DNA polymerases,primase, DNA ligase, and the other proteins of the replicationcomplex do the job of DNA synthesis with a speed and accuracythat are almost unimaginable. In E. coli, the replication complexmakes new DNA at a rate in excess of 1,000 base pairs persecond, committing errors in fewer than one base in a million.Synthesis of the leadingstrand is continuous.The lagging strand is synthesizedas Okazaki fragments.The replicationfork grows.3′5′5′5′3′3′5′5′3′3′5′3′ 5′3′5′3′5′3′ 5′5′3′Okazaki fragments13.16 The Two New Strands Form in DifferentWays As the parent DNA unwinds, both new strandsare synthesized in the 5′-to-3′ direction, although theirtemplate strands are antiparallel. The leading strandgrows continuously forward, but the lagging strandgrows in short discontinuous stretches called Okazakifragments. Eukaryotic Okazaki fragments are hundredsof nucleotides long, with gaps between them.GO TO Animated Tutorial 13.3 • DNAReplication, Part 2: Coordination of Leadingand Lagging Strand SynthesisyourBioPortal.comA SLIDING CLAMP INCREASES THE RATE OF DNA REPLICATION Howdo DNA polymerases work so fast? We saw in Section 8.3 thatan enzyme catalyzes a chemical reaction:substrate binds to enzyme →one product is formed →enzyme is released →cycle repeatsDNA replication would not proceed as rapidly as it does if itwent through such a cycle for each nucleotide. Instead, DNApolymerases are processive—that is, they catalyze many polymerizationseach time they bind to a DNA molecule:substrates bind to one enzyme →many products are formed→enzyme is released →cycle repeatsThe newly replicated strand is stabilized by a sliding DNA clamp,which is shaped like a screw cap on a bottle (Figure 13.18). Thisprotein has multiple identical subunits assembled into a doughnutshape. The doughnut’s “hole” is just large enough to en-282 CHAPTER 13 | DNA AND ITS ROLE IN HEREDITY1 Primase formsan RNA primer.3 DNA polymerase Ihydrolyzes the primerand replaces it with DNA.2 DNA polymerase III addsnucleotides to the newOkazaki fragment only atthe 3′ end, continuing until itencounters the primer on theprevious Okazaki fragment.4 DNA ligase then catalyzes theformation of the phosphodiesterlinkage that finally joins the twoOkazaki fragments.Lagging strand RNA primer RNAprimerLagging strandtemplate3′5′ 3′5′Okazaki fragmentDNA polymerase IIIDNA polymerase IGap3′3′3′5′5′5′Primase3′5′ 3′5′DNA ligase(open)DNA ligase(closed)3′5′ 3′5′13.17 The Lagging Strand Story In bacteria, DNA polymerase I andDNA ligase cooperate with DNA polymerase III to complete the complextask of synthesizing the lagging strand.1 A clamp bindsto the DNA.2 DNA polymerasebinds to the clamp–DNA complex.3 The clamp keeps the polymerase stablybound to DNA so that many nucleotidescan be added for each binding event.3′3′3′5′5′ 5′3′3′3′5′5′ 5′3′3′3′5′5′ 5′3′3′3′5′5′5′Sliding DNA clampDNA polymerase13.18 A Sliding DNA Clamp Increases the Efficiency of DNAPolymerization The clamp increases the efficiency of polymerizationby keeping the enzyme bound to the substrate, so the enzyme does nothave to repeatedly bind to template and substrate.circle the DNA double helix, along with a single layer of water moleculesfor lubrication. The clamp binds to the DNA polymerase–DNAcomplex, keeping the enzyme and the DNA associated tightly witheach other. If the clamp is absent, DNA polymerase dissociates fromDNAafter 20–100 polymerizations. With the clamp, it can polymerizeup to 50,000 nucleotides before it detaches.PCNA IS THE MAESTRO OF THE REPLICATION FORK In mammals, the slidingclamp was first recognized in rapidly dividing cells and is calledproliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). PCNAdoes more than just keepthe DNApolymerase bound to the DNA; it also helps to orient the polymerasefor binding to the substrates. Furthermore, PCNA has bindingsites for many other proteins, including chromosome structural proteins,DNAligase, DNA methylation enzymes (see Section 16.4) and enzymesinvolved in DNA repair (see below). It also removes the prereplicationcomplex from ori, ensuring that replication only happens once per cellcycle. For all that it does, PCNA has been called the “maestro of the replicationfork.”DNA IS THREADED THROUGH A REPLICATION COMPLEX Until recently,DNA replication was always depicted to look like a locomotive (thereplication complex) moving along a railroad track (the DNA). Whilethis does occur in some organisms, most commonly in eukaryotes thereplication complex seems to be stationary, attached to chromatin structures,and it is the DNA that moves, essentially threading through thecomplex as single strands and emerging as double strands).SMALL CIRCULAR CHROMOSOMES REPLICATE FROM A SINGLE ORIGIN Smallcircular chromosomes, such as those of bacteria (consisting of 1–4 millionbase pairs), have a single origin of replication. Two replication forksform at this ori, and as the DNA moves through the replication complex,the replication forks extend around the circle (Figure 13.19A). Twointerlocking circular DNA molecules are formed, and they are separatedby an enzyme called DNA topoisomerase. As we mentionedabove, DNA polymerases are very fast. In E. coli, replication can beas fast as 1,000 bases per second, and it takes 20–40 minutes to replicatethe bacterium’s 4.7 million base pairs.LARGE LINEAR CHROMOSOMES HAVE MANYORIGINS Human DNA polymerases areslower than those of E. coli, and can replicateDNA at a rate of about 50 bases persecond. Human chromosomes are muchlarger than those of bacteria (about 80million base pairs) and linear. Large linearchromosomes such as those of humanscontain hundreds of origins ofreplication. Numerous replication complexesbind to these sites at the same timeand catalyze simultaneous replication.Thus there are many replication forks ineukaryotic DNA (Figure 13.19B).Telomeres are not fully replicatedand are prone to repairAs we have just seen, replication of thelagging strand occurs by the addition ofOkazaki fragments to RNA primers.When the terminal RNA primer is removed,no DNA can be synthesized toreplace it because there is no 3′ end to extend(Figure 13.20A). So the new chromosomehas a bit of single-strandedDNAat each end. This situation activatesa mechanism for cutting off the singlestrandedregion, along with some of the13.3 | HOW IS DNA REPLICATED? 2831 The origin of replication(ori ) binds to thereplication complex.2 DNA is spooledthrough thecomplex, andcomes outreplicated.2 DNA is replicated fromseveral origins simultaneously.3 Replicationcontinues.4 The two newDNAs areinterlocked.3 Topoisomeraseis not needed toseparate linearchromosomes.1 There are many originsof DNA replication.5 An enzyme, DNAtopoisomerase,separates thetwo DNAs fromeach other.+ReplicationcomplexOrigin of replicationter(A) Circular chromosome (B) Linear chromosomeTemplatestrandNew strandReplicationforksori++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++++13.19 Replication of Small Circular andLarge Linear Chromosomes(A) Small circular chromosomes, typical ofprokaryotes, have a single origin (ori) andterminus (ter) of replication. (B) Larger linearchromosomes, typical of nuclear DNA ineukaryotes, have many origins of replication.intact double-stranded DNA. Thus the chromosome becomesslightly shorter with each cell division.There is another, more serious problem at the ends of chromosomes,and that is simply that they are ends! In Section 11.2we described checkpoints in the cell cycle for the integrity ofDNA. At one of the checkpoints, the DNA is examined for DNAbreaks (due to radiation, etc.) and DNA repair is initiated ifbreaks are found. This involves joining the breaks via a combinationof DNA synthesis and DNA ligase activity. This systemmight recognize the ends of chromosomes as breaks and jointwo chromosomes together. This would create havoc with genomicintegrity.In many eukaryotes, there are repetitive sequences at the endsof chromosomes called telomeres. In humans, the telomere sequenceis TTAGGG, and it is repeated about 2,500 times. Theserepeats bind special proteins that prevent the DNA repair systemfrom recognizing the ends as breaks. In addition, the repeats mayform loops that have a similar protective role. So the telomere actslike the plastic tip of shoelaces to prevent fraying.Each human chromosome can lose 50–200 base pairs oftelomeric DNA after each round of DNA replication and cell division.After 20–30 divisions, the chromosomes are unable toparticipate in cell division, and the cell dies. This phenomenonexplains, in part, why many cell lineages do not last the entirelifetime of the organism: their telomeres are lost. Yet continuouslydividing cells, such as bone marrow stem cells and gamete-producing cells, maintain their telomeric DNA. An enzyme,appropriately called telomerase, catalyzes the addition ofany lost telomeric sequences in these cells (Figure 13.20B).Telomerase contains an RNA sequence that acts as a templatefor the telomeric DNA repeat sequence.Telomerase is expressed in more than 90 percent of humancancers, and may be an important factor in the ability of cancercells to divide continuously. Since most normal cells do nothave this ability, telomerase is an attractive target for drugsdesigned to attack tumors specifically.There is also interest in telomerase and aging. When a geneexpressing high levels of telomerase is added to human cells inculture, their telomeres do not shorten. Instead of living 20–30cell generations and then dying, the cells become immortal. Itremains to be seen how this finding relates to the aging of awhole organism.13.3 RECAPMeselson and Stahl showed that DNA replication issemiconservative: each parent DNA strand serves asa template for a new strand. A complex of proteins,most notably DNA polymerases, is involved in replication.New DNA is polymerized in one direction only,and since the two strands are antiparallel, one strandis made continuously and the other is synthesized inshort Okazaki fragments that are eventually joined.• How did the Meselson–Stahl experiment differentiatebetween the three models for DNA replication? See pp.276–278 and Figures 13.10 and 13.11• What are the five enzymes needed for DNA replicationand what are their roles? See pp. 279–283 and Figures13.13–13.17• How is the leading strand of DNA replicated continuouslywhile the lagging strand must be replicated infragments? See p. 281and Figure 13.16The complex process of DNA replication is amazingly accurate,but it is not perfect. What happens when things go wrong?13.20 Telomeres and Telomerase (A) Removal of the RNA primer atthe 3′ end of the template for the lagging strand leaves a region of DNA—the telomere—unreplicated. (B) In continuously dividing cells, the enzymetelomerase binds to the 3′ end and extends the lagging strand of DNA,so the chromosome does not get shorter. (C) Bright fluorescent stainingmarks the telomeric regions on these blue-stained human chromosomes.Removal of the RNA primer leads tothe shortening of the chromosomeafter each round of replication.Chromosome shortening eventuallyleads to cell death.An RNA sequence intelomerase acts as atemplate for DNA. Thisenzyme adds the telomericsequence to the 3′ end ofthe chromosome.The original length of thechromosomal DNA has beenrestored. Note the gap wherethe primer for DNA replicationhas been removed.3′3′5′5′Parent DNANewstrands(A)3′3′TelomereTelomerase3′3′RNA template(C)(B)GapTelomeres13.4 How Are Errors in DNA Repaired?DNAmust be accurately replicated and faithfully maintained.The price of failure can be great; the accurate transmission ofgenetic information is essential for the functioning and even thelife of a single cell or multicellular organism. Yet the replicationof DNA is not perfectly accurate, and the DNA of nondividingcells is subject to damage by natural chemical alterations andby environmental agents. In the face of these threats, how haslife gone on so long?DNA repair mechanisms help to preserve life. DNA polymerasesinitially make significant numbers of mistakes in assemblingpolynucleotide strands. Without DNA repair, the observederror rate of one for every 105 bases replicated wouldresult in about 60,000 mutations every time a human cell divided.Fortunately, our cells can repair damaged nucleotidesand DNA replication errors, so that very few errors end up inthe replicated DNA. Cells have at least three DNA repair mechanismsat their disposal:• A proofreading mechanism corrects errors in replication asDNApolymerase makes them.• Amismatch repair mechanism scans DNA immediately after ithas been replicated and corrects any base-pairing mismatches.• An excision repair mechanism removes abnormal bases thathave formed because of chemical damage and replacesthem with functional bases.Most DNApolymerases perform a proofreading function eachtime they introduce a new nucleotide into a growing DNAstrand (Figure 13.21A). When a DNA polymerase recognizes amispairing of bases, it removes the improperly introduced nucleotideand tries again. (Other proteins in the replication complexalso play roles in proofreading.) The error rate for thisprocess is only about 1 in 10,000 repaired base pairs, and it lowersthe overall error rate for replication to about one error inevery 1010 bases replicated.After the DNA has been replicated, a second set of proteinssurveys the newly replicated molecule and looks for mismatchedbase pairs that were missed in proofreading (Figure13.4 | HOW ARE ERRORS IN DNA REPAIRED? 285(A) DNA proofreading(B) Mismatch repair(C) Excision repair3 DNA polymerase I adds thecorrect bases by 5′-to-3′replication of the short strand.4 In the last step,DNA ligase repairsthe remaining nick.1 2 3During DNA replication, anincorrect base may beadded to the growing chain.1 2 The proteins of the replication 3complex immediately excisethe incorrect base.DNA polymerase addsthe correct base andreplication proceeds.During DNA replication, abase was mispaired andmissed in proofreading.The mismatch repair proteinsexcise the mismatched baseand some adjacent bases.DNA polymerase Iadds the correctbases.1 A base in DNA is damaged, 2making it nonfunctional.The excision repair proteinsexcise the damaged baseand some adjacent bases.DNA polymerase IIIDNApolymerase I13.21 DNA Repair Mechanisms The proteins of the replication complex function in DNArepair mechanisms, reducing the rate of errors in the replicated DNA. Another mechanism (excisionrepair) repairs damage to existing DNA molecules.13.21B). For example, this mismatch repair mechanism might detectan A-C base pair instead of an A-T pair. But how does therepair mechanism “know” whether the A-C pair should be repairedby removing the C and replacing it with T or by removingthe Aand replacing it with G?The mismatch repair mechanism can detect the “wrong” basebecause a DNA strand is chemically modified some time afterreplication. In prokaryotes, methyl groups (—CH3) are addedto some adenines. In eukaryotes, cytosine bases are methylated.Immediately after replication, methylation has not yet occurredon the newly replicated strand, so the new strand is “marked”(distinguished by being unmethylated) as the one in which errorsshould be corrected.When mismatch repair fails, DNA sequences are altered. Oneform of colon cancer arises in part from a failure of mismatchrepair.DNAmolecules can also be damaged during the life of a cell(for example, when it is in G1). High-energy radiation, chemicalsfrom the environment, and random spontaneous chemicalreactions can all damage DNA. Excision repair mechanismsdeal with these kinds of damage (Figure 13.21C). Individualswho suffer from a condition known as xeroderma pigmentosumlack an excision repair mechanism that normally correctsthe damage caused by ultraviolet radiation. They can developskin cancers after even a brief exposure to sunlight.13.4 RECAPDNA replication is not perfect; in addition, DNA may benaturally altered or damaged. Repair mechanisms existthat detect and repair mismatched or damaged DNA.• Explain the roles of DNA proofreading, mismatch repair,and excision repair. See Figure 13.21Understanding how DNA is replicated and repaired has allowedscientists to develop techniques for studying genes. We’lllook at just one of those techniques next.How Does the Polymerase Chain 13.5 Reaction Amplify DNA?The principles underlying DNA replication in cells have beenused to develop an important laboratory technique that has beenvital in analyzing genes and genomes. This technique allows researchersto make multiple copies of short DNA sequences.The polymerase chain reaction makes multiple copiesof DNA sequencesIn order to study DNA and perform genetic manipulations, itis necessary to make multiple copies of a DNA sequence. Thisis necessary because the amount of DNA isolated from a biologicalsample is often too small to work with. The polymerasechain reaction (PCR) technique essentially automates this replicationprocess by copying a short region of DNA many times ina test tube. This process is referred to as DNA amplification.The PCR reaction mixture contains:• a sample of double stranded DNA from a biological sample,to act as the template,• two short, artificially synthesized primers that are complementaryto the ends of the sequence to be amplified,• the four dNTPs (dATP, dTTP, dCTP and dGTP),• a DNA polymerase that can tolerate high temperatureswithout becoming degraded, and• salts and a buffer to maintain a near-neutral pH.The PCR amplification is a cyclic process in which a sequenceof steps is repeated over and over again (Figure 13.22):• The first step involves heating the reaction to near boilingpoint, to separate (denature) the two strands of the DNAtemplate.• The reaction is then cooled to allow the primers to bind (oranneal) to the template strands.• Next, the reaction is warmed to an optimum temperaturefor the DNA polymerase to catalyze the production of thecomplementary new strands.Asingle cycle takes a few minutes to produce two copies of thetarget DNA sequence, leaving the new DNA in the doublestrandedstate. Repeating the cycle many times leads to an exponentialincrease in the number of copies of the DNA sequence.The PCR technique requires that the base sequences at the 3′end of each strand of the target DNA sequence be known, sothat complementary primers, usually 15–30 bases long, can bemade in the laboratory. Because of the uniqueness of DNA sequences,a pair of primers this length will usually bind to onlya single region of DNA in an organism’s genome. This specificity,despite the incredible diversity of DNA sequences, is akey to the power of PCR.One initial problem with PCR was its temperature requirements.To denature the DNA, it must be heated to more than90°C—a temperature that destroys most DNA polymerases. ThePCR technique would not be practical if new polymerase hadto be added after denaturation in each cycle.This problem was solved by nature: in the hot springs at YellowstoneNational Park, as well as in other high-temperaturelocations, there lives a bacterium called, appropriately, Thermusaquaticus (“hot water”). The means by which this organism survivestemperatures of up to 95°C was investigated by ThomasBrock and his colleagues at the University of Wisconsin, Madison.They discovered that T. aquaticus has an entire metabolicmachinery that is heat-resistant, including a DNA polymerasethat does not denature at these high temperatures.Scientists pondering the problem of copying DNA by PCRread Brock’s basic research articles and got a clever idea: whynot use T. aquaticus DNA polymerase in the PCR technique? It286 CHAPTER 13 | DNA AND ITS ROLE IN HEREDITYcould withstand the 90°C denaturation temperature and wouldnot have to be added during each cycle. The idea worked, andit earned biochemist Kary Mullis a Nobel prize. PCR has hadan enormous impact on genetic research. Some of its most strikingapplications will be described in Chapters 15–18. Theseapplications range from amplifying DNA in order to identifyan individual person or organism, to detection of diseases.13.5 RECAPKnowledge of the mechanisms of DNA replicationled to the development of a technique for makingmultiple copies of DNA sequences.• What is the role of primers in PCR? See pp. 286 andFigure 13.2213.5 | HOW DOES THE POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION AMPLIFY DNA? 287TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE13.22 The Polymerase Chain ReactionThe steps in this cyclic process are repeated many times to produce multiple identical copies of a DNA fragment. This makes enoughDNA for chemical analysis and genetic manipulations.A DNA moleculewith a targetsequence to becopied is heatedto 90°C todenature it.1 When the mixturecools, artificiallysynthesized primersbond to the singlestrandedDNA.2 dNTPs and heat-resistantDNA polymerase synthesizetwo new strands of DNA.3 The process is repeated,doubling the amount ofDNA.4 By repeating the process, manycopies of the original DNA canbe produced in a short time.5Primer New DNA3′5′ 3′5′TargetsequenceNew DNA13.1 What Is the Evidence that the Gene Is DNA?• Griffith’s experiments in the 1920s demonstrated that somesubstance in cells—then called a transforming principle—cancause heritable changes in other cells. Review Figure 13.1• The location and quantity of DNA in the cell suggested thatDNA might be the genetic material. Avery, MacLeod, andMcCarty isolated the transforming principle from bacteria andidentified it as DNA. Review Figure 13.2• The Hershey–Chase experiment established conclusively thatDNA (and not protein) is the genetic material, by tracing theDNA of radioactively labeled viruses, with which they infectedbacterial cells. Review Figure 13.4• Genetic transformation of eukaryotic cells is called transfection.Transformation and transfection can be studied with the aid ofa marker gene that confers a known and observable phenotype.Review Figure 13.513.2 What Is the Structure of DNA?• Chargaff’s rule states that the amount of adenine in DNA isequal to the amount of thymine, and that the amount ofguanine is equal to the amount of cytosine; thus the totalCHAPTER SUMMARY
13.1 What Is the Evidence that the Gene Is DNA?• Griffith’s experiments in the 1920s demonstrated that somesubstance in cells—then called a transforming principle—cancause heritable changes in other cells. Review Figure 13.1• The location and quantity of DNA in the cell suggested thatDNA might be the genetic material. Avery, MacLeod, andMcCarty isolated the transforming principle from bacteria andidentified it as DNA. Review Figure 13.2• The Hershey–Chase experiment established conclusively thatDNA (and not protein) is the genetic material, by tracing theDNA of radioactively labeled viruses, with which they infectedbacterial cells. Review Figure 13.4• Genetic transformation of eukaryotic cells is called transfection.Transformation and transfection can be studied with the aid ofa marker gene that confers a known and observable phenotype.Review Figure 13.513.2 What Is the Structure of DNA?• Chargaff’s rule states that the amount of adenine in DNA isequal to the amount of thymine, and that the amount ofguanine is equal to the amount of cytosine; thus the total
abundance of purines (A + G) equals the total abundance ofpyrimidines (T + C).• X-ray crystallography showed that the DNA molecule is helical.Watson and Crick proposed that DNA is a double-stranded helixin which the strands are antiparallel. Review Figure 13.8• Complementary base pairing between A and T and between Gand C accounts for Chargaff’s rule. The bases are held togetherby hydrogen bonding. Review Figure 13.913.3 How Is DNA Replicated?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 13.1• Meselson and Stahl showed the replication of DNA to be semiconservative.Each parent strand acts as a template for the synthesisof a new strand; thus the two replicated DNA moleculeseach contain one parent strand and one newly synthesizedstrand. Review Figure 13.11, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 13.2• In DNA replication, the enzyme DNA polymerase catalyzes theaddition of nucleotides to the 3′ end of each strand. Whichnucleotides are added is determined by complementary basepairing with the template strand. Review Figure 13.12• The replication complex is a huge protein complex that attachesto the chromosome at the origin of replication (ori).• Replication proceeds from the origin of replication on bothstrands in the 5′-to-3′ direction, forming a replication fork.• Primase catalyzes the synthesis of a short RNA primer to whichnucleotides are added by DNA polymerase. Review Figure 13.13• Many proteins assist in DNA replication. DNA helicase separatesthe strands, and single-strand binding proteins keep the strandsfrom reassociating. Review Figure 13.13, WEB ACTIVITY 13.1• The leading strand is synthesized continuously and the laggingstrand in pieces called Okazaki fragments. The fragments arejoined together by DNA ligase. Review Figures 13.16 and13.17, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 13.3• The speed with which DNA polymerization proceeds is attributedto the processive nature of DNA polymerases, which cancatalyze many polymerizations at a time. A sliding DNA clamphelps ensure the stability of this process. Review Figure 13.18• In prokaryotes, two interlocking circular DNA molecules areformed; they are separated by an enzyme called DNA topoisomerase.Review Figure 13.19• In eukaryotes, DNA replication leaves a short, unreplicatedsequence, the telomere, at the 3′ end of the chromosome.Unless the enzyme telomerase is present, the sequence isremoved. After multiple cell cycles, the telomeres shorten, leadingto chromosome instability and cell death. Review Figure13.2013.4 How Are Errors in DNA repaired?• DNA polymerases make about one error in 105 bases replicated.DNA is also subject to natural alterations and chemical damage.DNA can be repaired by three different mechanisms: proofreading,mismatch repair, and excision repair. Review Figure13.2113.5 How Does the Polymerase Chain ReactionAmplify DNA?• The polymerase chain reaction technique uses DNA polymeraseto make multiple copies of DNA in the laboratory.Review Figure 13.22