30More than 300 million Africans in 25 countries aresuffering because their crops have been invadedby witchweed (Striga), a parasitic floweringplant. Witchweed has attacked more than two-thirdsof the sorghum, corn, and millet crops in sub-SaharanAfrica. Reduced crop yields cost an estimated U.S. $7 billioneach year.A team of Canadian scientists set out to find a biologicalsolution to the Striga problem. Their strategy was tolook for an organism that would destroy witchweed in thefields. They succeeded in isolating a strain of a fungus—the mold Fusarium oxysporum—that has several outstandingproperties. First, it grows on Striga and kills a high percentageof these parasitic plants. Second, the fungus doesnot attack the crop plants that Striga parasitizes. And finally,F. oxysporum is not toxic to humans. In subsequentfieldwork, the scientists established specific techniquesfor applying F. oxysporum to witchweed. Farmers whoapply the fungus to their crops are rewarded by greatlyincreased crop yields as Striga is held in check.It may be possible to repeat the Striga story—the useof a fungus to wipe out a particular type of floweringplant—in a very different context. A different strain ofF. oxysporum preferentially attacks coca plants, the sourceof cocaine. A controversial proposal to use F. oxysporumto wipe out the coca plantations in Andean South Americaand other parts of the world has been proposed; however,the specificity of the fungus to infect only coca is notclear. Establishing the degree of host specificity is crucial,because some naturally occurringstrains of F. oxysporum attack importantcrops in various parts of the world. Introducingthis plant pathogen on a widespreadbasis could have unintendedconsequences for many non-targetplant species.Fungi can also be used to battle animalpests. Research teams reported in2005 that two fungi, Beauveria bassianaand Metarhizium anisopliae, killedmalaria-carrying mosquitoes when appliedto mosquito netting. Certain fungiare already used against other insectpests, notably termites and aphids. InA fungus battles witchweedPathogenic Fungus, Parasitic PlantThe fungus Fusarium oxysporum is a potentpathogen of witchweed (Striga), a parasiticplant that attacks crops. The fungal sporesare shown in blue; fungal filaments are intan. Both colors were added to enhance thisscanning electron micrograph.30.1 What Is a Fungus?Modern fungi are believed to have evolved from a unicellularprotist ancestor that had a flagellum. The probable commonancestor of the animals was also a flagellated microbial eukaryotethat may have been similar to the existing choanoflagellates(see Figure 27.27). Current evidence suggests that today’schoanoflagellates, fungi, and animals share a commonancestor not shared by other eukaryotes, and thus the threelineages are often grouped together as the opisthokonts.Synapomorphies that distinguish the fungi among theopisthokonts include absorptive heterotrophy and the presenceof chitin in their cell walls (Figure 30.1). Molecular sequencesof many genes also support these relationships amongthe opisthokonts. Thus, fungi represent one of four large, independentevolutionary origins of multicellular organisms(plants, brown algae, and animals are the other three).The fungi live by absorptive heterotrophy: they secrete digestiveenzymes outside their bodies to break down large foodmolecules in the environment, then absorb the breakdownproducts through the plasma membranes of their cells. Absorptiveheterotrophy is successful in virtually every conceivableenvironment. Many fungi are saprobes, which absorb nutrientsfrom dead organic matter. Others are parasites, whichabsorb nutrients from living hosts (such as the ant shown atthe opening of this chapter). Still others are mutualists livingin intimate associations with other organisms that benefit bothpartners.We will discuss six major groups of fungi (Table 30.1): microsporidia,chytrids, zygospore fungi (Zygomycota), arbuscularmycorrhizal fungi (Glomeromycota), sac fungi (Ascomycota),and club fungi (Basidiomycota). The chytrids andzygospore fungi are not thought to represent monophyleticgroups, but instead consist of several distantly related lineagesthat retain some ancestral features. Nonetheless, these groupingsrepresent convenient categories for a general introductionto the fungi. The clades that are thought to be monophyleticwithin these two paraphyletic groupings are listed inTable 30.1. Major fungal groups were originally defined bytheir methods and structures for sexual reproduction and also,to a lesser extent, by other morphological differences. More recently,evidence from DNAanalyses has established the placementof microsporidia among the fungi, the paraphyly ofchytrids and zygospore fungi, the independence of arbuscularmycorrhizal fungi from the other fungal groups, and themonophyly of sac fungi and club fungi (Figure 30.2). Thechytrids are almost all aquatic, but the other groups are mostlyterrestrial.IN THIS CHAPTER we will see that fungi differ fromother eukaryotes in some very interesting ways. We willexplore the diversity of body forms, reproductive structures,and life cycles that have evolved among six major groupsof fungi. We will also examine the mutually beneficial associationsof certain fungi with other organisms.research conducted thus far, no insect pests have yetbeen known to develop resistance to fungi (as they canto DDT and other pesticides).Of course, fungi don’t need human help to find organismsto grow on. Fungal spores ingested by suitable animalhosts such as ants can germinate in the host’s gutand develop into internal parasites. Absorbingnutrients from their unwitting hosts, some ingestedfungi may eventually kill the host, producing new sporesto infect new hosts as they do so.Fungi interact with other organisms in many differentways, some of which are beneficial and some harmful tothe other organisms. As we begin our study, recall thatthe fungi are more closely related to animals than toplants. That means molds and mushrooms are moreclosely related to you than they are to the plants discussedin Chapter 29.CHAPTER OUTLINE30.1 What Is a Fungus?30.2 How Do Fungi Interact with Other Organisms?30.3 What Variations Exist among Fungal Life Cycles?30.4 How Have Fungi Evolved and Diversified?An Alien Meal The tropical fungus whose fruiting body isgrowing on the stalk projecting from this ant’s carcass developedinternally in the host, from a spore ingested by the ant.Unicellular fungi are known as yeastsMost fungi are multicellular, but single-celled species are foundin most of the fungal groups. Unicellular forms of zygosporefungi, sac fungi, and club fungi are called yeasts (Figure 30.3).Some fungi that have yeast stages also include a filamentousstage. Yeasts live in liquid or moist environments and absorbnutrients directly across their cell surfaces. The term “yeast”does not refer to a single taxonomic group of organisms butrather to a lifestyle that has evolved multiple times. The easewith which many yeast species are cultured, combined withtheir rapid growth rates, has made them ideal model organismsfor study in the laboratory. They present many of the same advantagesto laboratory investigators as do many bacteria, butsince they are eukaryotes, they have genomic structure and cellsthat are much more like those of humans and other eukaryotes.628 CHAPTER 30 | FUNGI: RECYCLERS, PATHOGENS, PARASITES, AND PLANT PARTNERSFungiAnimalsChoanoflagellatesOpisthokontsFlagellum, if present,is single and posteriorAbsorptive heterotrophy;chitin in cell wallsCommonancestor30.1 Fungi in Evolutionary Context Absorptive heterotrophy and thepresence of chitin in their cell walls distinguish the fungi from otheropisthokonts.Dashed lines indicate probableparaphyly of the group.MicrosporidiaChytridsZygospore fungi(Zygomycota)Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi(Glomeromycota)Sac fungi(Ascomycota)Club fungi(Basidiomycota)CommonancestorDikaryaPlasmogamyprecedeskaryogamyGene sequencessupport monophylyDikaryon stage;septate hyphae30.2 Phylogeny of the Fungi Microsporidia are reduced, parasiticfungi whose relationships among the fungi are uncertain. They may bethe sister group of most other fungi or more closely related to particulargroups of chytrids or zygospore fungi. The dashed lines indicate thatchytrids and zygospore fungi are thought to be paraphyletic; the relationshipsof the lineages within these two informal groups (see Table 30.1) arenot yet well resolved. The sac fungi and club fungi together form theclade Dikarya.TABLE 30.1Classification of the FungiGROUP COMMON NAME FEATURESMicrosporidia Microsporidia Intracellular parasites of animals; greatly reduced, among smallesteukayotes known; polar tube used to infect hostsChytrids (paraphyletic) a Chytrids Mostly aquatic and microscopic; zoospores have flagellaChytridiomycotaNeocallimastigomycotaBlastocladiomycotaZygomycota (paraphyletic)a Zygospore fungi Reproductive structure is a unicellular zygospore with many diploidEntomophthoromycotina nuclei in a zygosporangium; no regularly occurring septa;Kickxellomycotina usually no fleshy fruiting bodyMucoromycotinaZoopagomycotinaGlomeromycota Arbuscular Form arbuscular mycorrhizae on plant roots; only asexual reproductionmycorrhizal fungi is knownAscomycota Sac fungi Sexual reproductive saclike structure known as an ascus, whichcontains haploid ascospores; perforated septa; dikaryonBasidiomycota Club fungi Sexual reproductive structure is a basidium, a swollen cell at thetip of a specialized hypha that supports haploid basidiospores;perforated septa; dikaryonaThe formally named groups within the chytrids and Zygomycota are each thought to be monophyletic, but their relationships to one another(and to Microsporidia) are not yet well resolved.GO TO Web Activity 30.1 • Fungal PhylogenyyourBioPortal.comThe body of a multicellular fungus is composedof hyphaeThe body of a multicellular fungus is called a mycelium (pluralmycelia). A mycelium is composed of a mass of individualtubular filaments called hyphae (singular hypha; Figure 30.4A,B).The cell walls of the hyphae are greatly strengthened by microscopicfibrils of chitin, a nitrogen-containing polysaccharide.In some species of fungi, the hyphae are subdivided into celllikecompartments by incomplete cross-walls called septa (singularseptum); these hyphae are referred to as septate. Septado not completely close off compartments in the hyphae. Gapsin the septa known as pores allow organelles—sometimes evennuclei—to move in a controlled way between compartments(Figure 30.4C). In other species of fungi, the hyphae lack septabut may contain hundreds of nuclei; these hyphae are referredto as coenocytic. The coenocytic condition results from repeatednuclear divisions without cytokinesis.Certain modified hyphae, called rhizoids, anchor some fungito their substratum (the dead organism or other matter onwhich they feed). These rhizoids are not homologous to the rhizoidsof plants, and they are not specialized to absorb nutrientsand water. Parasitic fungi, however, may possess modified hyphaethat take up nutrients from their host.The total hyphal growth of a fungal mycelium (not thegrowth of an individual hypha) may exceed 1 kilometer a day!The hyphae may be widely dispersed to forage for nutrientsover a large area, or they may clump together in a cottony massto exploit a rich nutrient source. In some members of certainfungal groups, when sexual spores are produced, portions ofthe mycelium become reorganized into a reproductive fruitingbody, such as a mushroom. The mycelial mass is often far largerthan the mushroom alone. The mycelium of one individual fungusin Michigan covers 15 hectares underground and weighsSaccharomyces cerevisiae 10 μm30.3 Yeasts Are Unicellular Fungi Unicellular species ofthe zygospore fungi, sac fungi, and club fungi are known asyeasts. Many yeasts reproduce by budding—mitosis followedby asymmetrical cell division—as those shown here are doing.Pores in septaallow movement oforganelles and othermaterials betweencompartments inseptate mycelia.The hyphae ofcoenocytic myceliahave no septa.Fruiting body(mushroom)The main (vegetative) portionof the mycelium is typicallymuch more extensive than thefruiting body (only a smallportion is shown in this figure).(A)(C)NucleiSepta Cell wallXylem of wood Fungal hyphae10 μm(B)30.4 Mycelia Are Made Up of Hyphae (A) The fruiting body of a clubfungus is transient, but the filamentous, nutrient-absorbing mycelium canbe long-lived and cover large areas. (B) The minute individual hyphae offungal mycelia can penetrate small spaces. In this artificially coloredmicrograph, hyphae (yellow structures) of a dry-rot fungus are penetratingthe xylem cavities and other woody tissues of a log. (C) The hyphae ofseptate fungal species are divided into organelle-containing compartmentsby porous septa, while coenocytic hyphae have no septa.30.1 | WHAT IS A FUNGUS? 629more than a blue whale. Aboveground, this individual is evidentonly as isolated clumps of mushrooms.Fungi are in intimate contact with their environmentThe filamentous hyphae of a fungus give it a unique relationshipwith its physical environment. The fungal mycelium hasan enormous surface area-to-volume ratio compared with thatof most large multicellular organisms. This large ratio is a marvelousadaptation for absorptive heterotrophy. Throughout themycelium (except in fruiting structures), all of the hyphae arevery close to their environmental food source.The downside of the great surface area-to-volume ratio ofthe mycelium is its tendency to lose water rapidly in a dry environment.Thus fungi are most common in moist environments.You have probably observed the tendency of molds,toadstools, and other fungi to appear in damp places.Another characteristic of some fungi is a tolerance forhighly hypertonic environments (those with a solute concentrationhigher than their own; see Section 6.3). Many fungi aremore resilient than bacteria in hypertonic surroundings. Jellyin the refrigerator, for example, will not become a growthmedium for bacteria because it is too hypertonic to those organisms,but it may eventually harbor mold colonies. Thispresence of fungi in the refrigerator illustrates yet another traitof many fungi: tolerance of temperature extremes. Many fungitolerate temperatures as low as –6°C, and some tolerate temperaturesabove 50°C.Fungi reproduce both sexually and asexuallyBoth asexual and sexual reproduction occur among the fungi(Figure 30.5). Asexual reproduction takes several forms:• The production of (usually) haploid spores within structurescalled sporangia• The production of haploid spores (not enclosed in sporangia)at the tips of hyphae; such spores are called conidia(Greek konis, “dust”)• Cell division by unicellular fungi—either a relatively equaldivision of one cell into two (fission) or an asymmetrical divisionin which a smaller daughter cell is produced (budding)• Simple breakage of the myceliumAsexual reproduction in fungi can be spectacular in terms ofspore quantity. A2.5-centimeter colony of Penicillium, the moldthat produces the antibiotic penicillin, can produce as many as400 million conidia. The air we breathe contains as many as10,000 fungal spores per cubic meter.Sexual reproduction is rare (or even unknown) in somegroups of fungi but common in others. Sexual reproduction maynot occur, or it may occur so rarely that biologists have neverobserved it. Species in which no sexual stage has been observedwere once placed in a separate taxonomic group, because thesexual life cycle was considered necessary for classifying fungi.Now, however, these species can be related to other species offungi through analysis of their DNA sequences.When it does occur, sexual reproduction in many fungi featuresan interesting twist. There is often no morphological distinctionbetween female and male structures, or between femaleand male individuals. Rather, there is a genetically determineddistinction between two or more mating types. Individuals of thesame mating type cannot mate with one another, but they canmate with individuals of another mating type within the samespecies, thus preventing self-fertilization. Individuals of differentmating types differ genetically but are often visually andbehaviorally indistinguishable. Many protists also have matingtype systems.Fungi reproduce sexually when hyphae (or, in one fungalgroup, motile cells) of different mating types meet and fuse. Inmany fungi, the zygote nuclei formed by sexual reproductionare the only diploid nuclei in the life cycle. These nuclei undergomeiosis, producing haploid nuclei that become incorporatedinto spores. Haploid fungal spores, whether produced sexuallyin this manner or asexually, germinate, and their nuclei dividemitotically to produce haploid hyphae.We will discuss reproduction in fungi in more detail in Section30.3.630 CHAPTER 30 | FUNGI: RECYCLERS, PATHOGENS, PARASITES, AND PLANT PARTNERSDIPLOID(2n)DIKARYOTIC(n + n)HAPLOID (n)MeiosisMitosisMitosisMitosisFertilizationSpore-producingstructure (n)Spores (n)Sporangium (n)Spores (n)MitosisMitosisSporangium (n)Spores (n)Mycelium (n)Mating type +Mating type –Plasmogamy(fusion of cytoplasm)Dikaryoticmycelium (n + n)Karyogamy(fusion of nuclei)Zygote (2n)SEXUAL REPRODUCTIONASEXUAL REPRODUCTION30.5 Asexual and Sexual Reproduction in a Fungal Life CycleEnvironmental conditions may determine which mode of reproductiontakes place at a given time. In the sexual phase, many fungi are characterizednot by male and female individuals but by genetically distinct matingtypes (top of figure).30.1 RECAPThe rapid growth and large surface area-to-volumeratio of fungal hyphae allow fungi to practice absorptiveheterotrophy efficiently in moist environments.Both asexual and sexual reproduction occurin fungi; sexual reproduction occurs between differentmating types.• Describe the relationship between fungal structureand absorptive heterotrophy. See p. 627• Explain the concept of mating types. How is this differentfrom male and female sexes? See p. 630Fungi are important components of healthy ecosystems. Fungiinteract with other organisms in many ways, some of which areharmful and some beneficial to other organisms.How Do Fungi Interact with 30.2 Other Organisms?Without the fungi, our planet would be very different. PictureEarth with only a few stunted plants and watery environmentschoked with the remains of dead organisms. Fungi do much ofEarth’s garbage disposal. Fungi that absorb nutrients from deadorganisms not only help clean up the landscape and form soil butalso play a key role in recycling mineral elements. Furthermore,the colonization of the terrestrial environment was made possiblein large part by associations fungi formed with other organisms.Saprobic fungi are critical to the planetary carbon cycleSaprobic fungi (those that consume nonliving organic matter),along with bacteria, are the major decomposers on Earth, contributingto decay and thus to recycling the elements used byliving things. In forests, for example, the mycelia of fungi absorbnutrients from fallen trees, thus decomposing their wood.Fungi are the principal decomposers of cellulose and lignin, themain components of plant cell walls (most bacteria cannot breakdown these materials). Other fungi produce enzymes that decomposekeratin and thus break down animal structures suchas hair and nails.Were it not for the fungal decomposers, Earth’s carbon cyclewould fail: great quantities of carbon atoms would remaintrapped forever on forest floors and elsewhere (see Chapter58). Instead, those carbon atoms are returned to the atmospherein the form of respiratory CO2, available for photosynthesisby plants.In fact, there was a time when populations of saprobic fungideclined significantly. During the Carboniferous period, plantsin the vast tropical swamps died and began to form peat (seeSection 28.4). Peat formation led to acidification of the swamps;that acidity, in turn, drastically reduced the fungal population.The result? With the decomposers largely absent, large quantitiesof peat remained on the swamp floor and over time wereconverted into coal.In contrast to their decline during the Carboniferous, fungidid very well at the end of the Permian, a quarter of a billionyears ago, when the aggregation of continents produced volcaniceruptions that triggered a planetwide extinction event ofmany other organisms (see Chapter 25). The fossil record showsthat even though 96 percent of all species became extinct, fungiflourished, demonstrating both their hardiness and their role inrecycling the elements in the dead bodies of plants and animals.Many saprobic fungi can be grown on artificial media, and itis relatively easy to perform experiments to determine their exactnutritional requirements. Sugars are the favored source of carbonfor saprobic fungi. Most fungi obtain nitrogen from proteins orthe products of protein breakdown. Many fungi can use nitrate(NO3–) or ammonium (NH4+) ions as their sole source of nitrogen.No known fungus can get its nitrogen directly from inorganicnitrogen gas as can some bacteria and plant–bacteria associations(that is, fungi cannot “fix” nitrogen; see Section 36.4). Nutritionalstudies also reveal that most fungi are unable to synthesize certainvitamins and must absorb them from their environment.However, fungi can synthesize some vitamins that animals cannot.Like all organisms, fungi also require some mineral elements.What happens when a fungus faces a dwindling food supply?A common strategy is to reproduce rapidly and abundantly.When conditions are good, fungi produce great quantitiesof spores, but the rate of spore production is commonly evenhigher when nutrient supplies go down. The spores may thenremain dormant until conditions improve, or may be dispersedto areas where nutrient supplies are higher.Not only are fungal spores abundant in number, but they areextremely tiny and easily spread by wind or water (Figure 30.6).This virtually assures that the individual that produced them30.2 | HOW DO FUNGI INTERACT WITH OTHER ORGANISMS? 631Lycoperdon pyriforme30.6 Spores Galore Puffballs (a type of club fungus) disperse trillionsof spores in great bursts. Few of the spores travel very far, however;some 99 percent of them fall within 100 meters of the parent puffball.2 μmFungal sporesgerminate on thesurface of the leaf.Some hyphae penetratecells within the leaf.Elongating hyphae passthrough stomata into theinterior of the leaf.The haustoriumpenetrates the cellwall but not theStoma plasma membrane.SporeGrass cellsChains ofconidiaHyphae of fungal myceliumPlasmamembrane(B)(A)632 CHAPTER 30 | FUNGI: RECYCLERS, PATHOGENS, PARASITES, AND PLANT PARTNERS30.7 Attacks on a Leaf (A) The thin, light-colored structures inthe micrograph are hyphae of the parasitic fungus Blumeria graminisgrowing on the dark surface of the leaf of a grass. (B) Haustoriaare fungal hyphae that push into the living cells of plants, fromwhich they absorb nutrients.will have many progeny, which may be scattered over great distances.No wonder we find fungi just about everywhere.Fungi may engage in parasitic andpredatory interactionsWhereas saprobic fungi obtain their energy, carbon, and nitrogendirectly from dead organic matter, other species of fungi obtaintheir nutrition from parasitic—and even predatory—interactions.PARASITIC FUNGI Biologists distinguish between two classes ofparasitic fungi, based on the degree of dependence on their hostspecies. Facultative parasites can attack living organisms but canalso grow by themselves, including on artificial media. Obligateparasites can grow only on their specific living host, usually aplant species. Because their growth depends on a living host, obligateparasites have specialized nutritional requirements.The filamentous structure of fungal hyphae is especially wellsuited to a life of absorbing nutrients from plants. The slenderhyphae of a parasitic fungus can invade a plant through stomata,through wounds, or in some cases, by direct penetration of epidermalcell walls (Figure 30.7A). Once inside the plant, the hyphaebranch out to expand the mycelium. Some hyphae produce haustoria,branching projections that push through cell walls into livingplant cells, absorbing the nutrients within those cells. The haustoriado not break through the plant cell plasma membranes insidethe cell walls; they simply invaginate into the membranes, withthe plasma membrane fitting them like a glove (Figure 30.7B).Fruiting structures may form, either within the plant body or onits surface in a symbiotic relationship that is usually not lethal tothe plant. Some parasitic fungi, however, are pathogenic, sickeningor even killing the hosts from which they derive nutrition.PATHOGENIC FUNGI Although most human diseases are causedby bacteria or viruses, fungal pathogens are a major cause ofdeath among people with compromised immune systems. Mostpeople with AIDS die of fungal diseases, such as the pneumoniacaused by Pneumocystis jirovecii or incurable diarrhea causedby other fungi. Candida albicans and certain other yeasts alsocause severe diseases, such as esophagitis (which impairs swallowing),in individuals with AIDS and in individuals taking immunosuppressivedrugs. Fungal diseases are a growing internationalhealth problem, requiring vigorous research. Ourlimited understanding of the basic biology of these fungi stillhampers our ability to treat the diseases they cause. Variousfungi cause other, less threatening human diseases, such as ringwormand athlete’s foot.The worldwide decline of amphibian species has been linkedto the spread of a chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis.Genetic analyses indicate that the fungus populations attackingamphibian populations around the world are genetically almostidentical, which suggests a recent introduction of the fungusacross the globe. This chytrid appears to be endemic to southernAfrica, and its spread around the world may have initiatedin the 1930s with exports of the African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis),which was once widely used in human pregnancy tests.Fungi are by far the most important plant pathogens, causingcrop losses amounting to billions of dollars. Bacteria andviruses are less important as plant pathogens. Major fungal diseasesof crop plants include black stem rust of wheat and otherdiseases of wheat, corn, and oats. The agent of black stem rustis Puccinia graminis, which has a complicated life cycle that involvestwo plant hosts (wheat and barberry). In an epidemicin 1935, P. graminis was responsible for the loss of about onefourthof the entire wheat crop in Canada and the United States.However, as we saw at the beginning of this chapter, pathogenicfungi that kill certain weed species can be a boon to agriculture.PREDATORY FUNGI Some fungi have adaptations that enable themto function as active predators, trapping nearby microscopic protistsor animals. The most common predatory strategy seen infungi is to secrete sticky substances from the hyphae so that passingorganisms stick tightly to them. The hyphae then quicklyinvade the prey, growing and branching within it, spreadingthrough its body, absorbing nutrients, and eventually killing it.Amore dramatic adaptation for predation is the constrictingring formed by some species of Arthrobotrys, Dactylaria, andDactylella (Figure 30.8). All of these fungi grow in soil. When nematodes(tiny roundworms) are present in the soil, these fungiform three-celled rings with a diameter that just fits a nematode.Anematode crawling through one of these rings stimulates thefungus, causing the cells of the ring to swell and trap the worm.Fungal hyphae quickly invade and digest the unlucky victim.Some fungi engage in relationships beneficialto both partnersCertain kinds of relationships between fungi and other organismshave nutritional consequences for both partners. Two of theserelationships are highly specific and are symbiotic (the partnerslive in close, permanent contact with one another) as well as mutualistic(the relationship benefits both partners; see Chapter 56).Lichens are associations of a fungus with a cyanobacterium, aunicellular photosynthetic alga, or both. Mycorrhizae (singular mycorrhiza)are associations between fungi and the roots of plants. Inthese associations, the fungus obtains organic compounds from itsphotosynthetic partner and provides it with minerals and waterin return, so that the partner’s nutrition is also promoted. In fact,many plants grow very poorly without their fungal partners.LICHENS A lichen is not a single organism but rather a meshworkof two radically different organisms: a fungus and a photosyntheticmicroorganism. Together the organisms constitutinga lichen can survive some of the harshest environments onEarth. The biota of Antarctica, for example, features more thana hundred times as many species of lichens as of plants.In spite of their hardiness, lichens are highly sensitive to air pollutionbecause they are unable to excrete any toxic substances theyabsorb. This sensitivity means that lichens are good biologicalindicators of air pollution levels. It also explains why they are notcommonly found in heavily industrialized regions or large cities.The fungal components of most lichens are sac fungi (Ascomycota),which also include various cup fungi, yeasts, andmolds such as the Fusarium mentioned at the beginning of thechapter. The photosynthetic component of a lichen is mostoften a unicellular green alga, but it can be a cyanobacterium,or can include both. Relatively little experimental work hasfocused on lichens, perhaps because they grow so slowly—typically less than 1 centimeter in a year.There are nearly 30,000 described “species” of lichens, eachof which is assigned the name of its fungal component. Thesefungal components may constitute as many as 20 percent of allfungal species. Some of these fungi are able to grow independentlywithout a photosynthetic partner, but most have neverbeen observed in nature other than in a lichen association.Lichens are found in all sorts of exposed habitats: on treebark, on open soil, and on bare rock. Reindeer moss (not a mossat all, but the lichen Cladonia subtenuis) covers vast areas in Arctic,sub-Arctic, and boreal regions, where it is an important partof the diets of reindeer and other large mammals. Lichens comein various forms and colors. Crustose (crustlike) lichens look likecolored powder dusted over their substratum (Figure 30.9A);foliose (leafy) and fruticose (shrubby) lichens may have complexforms (Figure 30.9B,C).Nematode20 μmFungal hyphae30.8 Some Fungi Are Predators A nematode is trapped by hyphalrings of the soil-dwelling fungus Arthrobotrys dactyloides.(A) Aspicilia sp. Caloplaca sp. (B) Parmotrema sp. (C) Teloschistes exilis30.9 Lichen Body Forms Lichens fall into three principal classesbased on their body form. (A) Two crustose lichens are growing on thesurface of exposed rock. (B) Foliose lichens have a leafy appearance.(C) The brown and orange growth is of “shrubby” fruticose lichens.633The most widely held interpretation of the lichen relationshipis that it is a mutually beneficial symbiosis (a mutualism).The hyphae of the fungal mycelium are tightly pressed againstthe algal or cyanobacterial cells and sometimes even invadethem without breaching the plasma membrane (as we describedearlier for haustoria in parasitic fungi of plants; see Figure 30.7).The bacterial or algal cells not only survive these indignities butcontinue their growth and photosynthesis. In fact, the algal cellsin a lichen “leak” photosynthetic products at a greater rate thando similar cells growing on their own, and photosynthetic cellsfrom lichens grow more rapidly on their own than when associatedwith a fungus. On this basis, we could consider lichenfungi to be parasitic on their photosynthetic partners. In manyplaces where lichens grow, however, the photosynthetic cellswould not grow at all on their own.Lichens can reproduce simply by fragmentation of the vegetativebody (the thallus), or by means of specialized structurescalled soredia (singular soredium). Soredia consist of one or afew photosynthetic cells bound by fungal hyphae. The sorediabecome detached from the lichen, are dispersed by air currents,and upon arriving at a favorable location, develop into a newlichen thallus. Alternatively, the fungal partner may go throughits sexual cycle, producing haploid spores. When these sporesare discharged, however, they disperse alone, unaccompaniedby the photosynthetic partner.Visible in a cross section of a typical foliose lichen are a tightupper region of fungal hyphae, a layer of photosyntheticcyanobacteria or algae, a looser hyphal layer, and finally hyphalrhizoids that attach the entire structure to its substratum (Figure30.10). The meshwork of fungal hyphae takes up some nutrientsneeded by the photosynthetic cells and provides a suitably moistenvironment for them by holding water tenaciously.The fungi derive fixed carbon from the photosyntheticproducts of the algal or cyanobacterial cells.Lichens are often the first colonists on new areasof bare rock. They get most of the nutrients they needfrom the air and rainwater, augmented by mineralsabsorbed from dust. Alichen begins to grow shortlyafter a rain, as it begins to dry. As it grows, the lichenacidifies its environment slightly, and this aciditycontributes to the slow breakdown of rocks, an earlystep in soil formation. After further drying, thelichen’s photosynthesis ceases. The water contentof the lichen may drop to less than 10 percent of itsdry weight, at which point it becomes highly insensitiveto extremes of temperature.MYCORRHIZAE Many vascular plants depend on asymbiotic association with fungi. Unassisted, the roothairs of such plants often do not take up enough wateror minerals to sustain growth. However, theirroots usually do become infected with fungi, formingan association called a mycorrhiza. Mycorrhizae areof two types, based on whether or not the fungal hyphaepenetrate the plant cell walls.In ectomycorrhizae, the fungus wraps around theroot, and its mass is often as great as that of the rootitself (Figure 30.11A). The fungal hyphae wrap around individualcells in the root but do not penetrate the cell walls. An extensiveweb of hyphae penetrates the soil in the area around the root,so that up to 25 percent of the soil volume near the root may befungal hyphae. The hyphae attached to the root increase the surfacearea for the absorption of water and minerals, and the massof the mycorrhiza in the soil, like a sponge, holds water efficientlyin the neighborhood of the root. Infected roots characteristicallyare short, swollen, and club-shaped, and they lack root hairs.The fungal hyphae of arbuscular mycorrhizae enter the rootand penetrate the cell wall of the root cells, forming arbuscular(treelike) structures inside the cell wall but outside theplasma membrane. These structures, like the haustoria of par-634 CHAPTER 30 A soredium consists of one ora few photosynthetic cellssurrounded by fungal hyphae.Soredia detach from the parent lichen andtravel in air currents, founding new lichenswhen they settle in a suitable environment.Upper layer ofhyphaeLoose layer ofhyphaeLower level ofhyphal rhizoidsPhotosyntheticcell layer30.10 Lichen Anatomy Cross section showing the layers of a folioselichen and the release of soredia.HyphaePlantcellHyphae of the fungus Pisolithustinctorius cover a eucalyptus root.(A) (B)5 μm200 μm30.11 Mycorrhizal Associations (A) Ectomycorrhizal fungi wrap themselves arounda plant root, increasing the area available for absorption of water and minerals. (B)Hyphae of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi infect the root internally and penetrate the rootcell walls, branching within the cells and forming treelike (arbuscular) structures thatprovide the plant with nutrients. Hyphae fill much of the cell outside the nucleus andinvaginate the plasma membrane without puncturing it.asitic fungi and the contact regions of fungi and algal cells inlichens, become the primary site of exchange between plant andfungus (Figure 30.11B). As in the ectomycorrhizae, the fungusforms a vast web of hyphae leading from the root surface intothe surrounding soil.The mycorrhizal association is important to both partners.The fungus obtains needed organic compounds, such as sugarsand amino acids, from the plant. In return, the fungus, becauseof its very high surface area-to-volume ratio and its ability topenetrate the fine structure of the soil, greatly increases theplant’s ability to absorb water and minerals (especially phosphorus).The fungus may also provide the plant with certaingrowth hormones and may protect it against attack by diseasecausingmicroorganisms. Plants that have active arbuscular mycorrhizaetypically are a deeper green and may resist droughtand temperature extremes better than plants of the same speciesthat have little mycorrhizal development. Attempts to introducesome plant species to new areas have failed until a bit of soilfrom the native area (presumably containing the fungus necessaryto establish mycorrhizae) was provided. Trees withoutectomycorrhizae will not grow well in the absence of abundantnutrients and water, so the health of our forests depends on thepresence of ectomycorrhizal fungi.The partnership between plant and fungus results in a plantthat is better adapted for life on land. It has been suggestedthat the evolution of mycorrhizae was the single most importantstep in the colonization of the terrestrial environment by livingthings. Fossils of mycorrhizal structures 460 million years oldhave been found. Some liverworts, which are representatives ofone of the oldest lineages of terrestrial plants (see Section 28.4),form mycorrhizal associations with fungi.Certain plants that live in nitrogen-poor habitats, such ascranberry bushes and orchids, invariably have mycorrhizae. Orchidseeds will not germinate in nature unless they are alreadyinfected by the fungus that will form their mycorrhizae. Plantsthat lack chlorophyll always have mycorrhizae, which they oftenshare with the roots of green, photosynthetic plants. In effect,these plants without chlorophyll are feeding on nearbygreen plants, using the fungus as a bridge.Biologists had long suspected that roots secrete a chemicalsignal that enables fungi to find and invade them to form arbuscularmycorrhizae. This was proved to be correct in 2005when researchers succeeded in isolating the signaling compound.Might the compound also be used by parasitic plants toattack their host plants? Indeed it is. Striga, discussed at thebeginning of this chapter, turns out to be one of the parasiticplants that use exactly this signal. Thus, in attracting its helperfungus, a plant may also attract a dangerous parasite. The Strigastory is continued at the end of Chapter 36.Endophytic fungi protect some plants from pathogens,herbivores, and stressIn a tropical rainforest, 10,000 or more fungal spores land on asingle leaf each day. Some are plant pathogens, some do notattack the plant at all, and some invade the plant in a beneficialway. Fungi that live within aboveground parts of plantswithout causing obvious deleterious symptoms are called endophyticfungi. Recent research has shown that endophytic fungiare abundant in plants in all terrestrial environments.Grasses with endophytic fungi are more resistant topathogens and to insect and mammalian herbivores than aregrasses lacking endophytes. The fungi produce alkaloids (nitrogen-containing compounds) that are toxic to animals. The alkaloidsdo not harm the host plant; in fact, some plants producealkaloids (such as nicotine) themselves. The fungal alkaloidsalso increase the ability of host plants to resist stress of varioustypes, including drought (water shortage) and salty soils. Suchresistance is useful in agriculture.The role, if any, of endophytic fungi in most broad-leafedplants is unclear, however. They may convey protection againstpathogens or simply occupy space within leaves, without conferringany benefit but also without doing harm. The benefit, infact, might be all for the fungus.30.2 RECAPFungi interact with other organisms in many ways,both harmful and beneficial. Lichens are mutualisticassociations of a fungus with an alga and/or acyanobacterium. Mycorrhizae are associations offungi and the roots of plants; they are essential forthe survival of most plant species.• What is the role of fungi in Earth’s carbon cycle? Seep. 631• Describe the nature and benefits of the lichen association.See pp. 633–635• Why do plants grow better in the presence of mycorrhizalfungi? See p. 635One of the most important criteria for assigning fungi to taxonomicgroups, before molecular techniques clarified phylogeneticrelationships among fungi, was the nature of their life cycles.What Variations Exist among 30.3 Fungal Life Cycles?Different fungal groups have different life cycles. Some chytridsfeature alternation of generations, a type of life cycle found inall plants and some protists. The life cycles of sac fungi and clubfungi feature a unique stage called a dikaryon, in which a singlehypha has two genetically distinct nuclei. In this section weexamine the diverse life cycles of major groups of fungi.Alternation of generations is seen amongsome aquatic chytridsThe alternation between multicellular haploid (n) and multicellulardiploid (2n) generations that evolved in plants and certainprotist groups (see Section 28.2) is seen in some chytrids as well(Figure 30.12A). Alternation of generations is not usual for thelife cycles of other fungal groups. The basal chytrids, which are30.3 | WHAT VARIATIONS EXIST AMONG FUNGAL LIFE CYCLES? 635636 CHAPTER 30 | FUNGI: RECYCLERS, PATHOGENS, PARASITES, AND PLANT PARTNERSThis unicellular stage,with multiple diploid nuclei,gives the zygospore fungitheir name.DIPLOID(2n)DIPLOID (2n)HAPLOID (n)HAPLOID (n)Gametangia (n)ZygosporangiumHypha of +mating typeHypha of –mating typeMeiosisMeiosisSporangiumSporesSpores(B) Zygospore fungi (Zygomycota)(A) ChytridsFertilizationFertilizationMultinucleatezygospore withinRhizopus stolonifer zygosporangiumKaryogamyPlasmogamyFemalegamete(n)Malegamete(n)Zygote(2n)Multicellulardiploid chytrid(2n)Multicellularhaploid chytrid(n)Haploid zoospores (n)SporangiumThe life cycle of some aquaticchytrids features alternationof generations.SporangiophoreThe sporangium of zygospore fungicontains haploid nuclei that areincorporated into spores.FemalegametangiumMalegametangium30 μm40 μm30.12 Sexual Life Cycles Vary among DifferentGroups of Fungi (A) The chytrids are the only fungithat posses flagella at any stage of the life cycle. Theirflagellated gametes and zoospores link them to the animals.(B) A multinucleate zygospore is unique to thezygospore fungi. (C,D) The dikaryon stage is definitive ofthe sac fungi (C) and the club fungi (D). Mycorrhizal fungiare only known to reproduce asexually and are notdepicted here.30.3 | WHAT VARIATIONS EXIST AMONG FUNGAL LIFE CYCLES? 637DIPLOID(2n)DIPLOID(2n)DIKARYOTIC(n + n)DIKARYOTIC(n + n)HAPLOID (n)HAPLOID(n)(C) Sac fungi (Ascomycota)(D) Club fungi (Basidiomycota)Dikaryoticmycelium (n + n)Haploidhyphae (n)Dikaryoticasci (n + n)Germinatingascospores (n)Ascospores (n)MatingstructureMating type a ( )Mating type A ( )Ascoma (fruiting structure)MeiosisMeiosisFertilizationKaryogamyPlasmogamyPlasmogamyGills linedwithbasidiaBasidioma(fruitingstructure)Developingbasidium ( n + n)Dikaryoticmycelium (n + n)Mycelialhyphae– Mating type+ Mating typeNucleiKaryogamyBasidiumGillsFertilizationFusednucleiFused nucleiBasidiumBasidiosporesAscusAscosporesAscusMitosisThe products of meiosis in sac fungi areborne in a microscopic sac called an ascus.The fleshy fruiting bodies consist of bothdikaryotic and haploid hyphae.In club fungi, the products of meiosisare borne exposed on pedestals calledbasidia. Fruiting bodies consist solely ofdikaryotic hyphae, and the dikaryotic phasecan last a long time.40 μm50 μmaquatic, possess flagellated gametes and flagellated spores. Flagellahave been lost in the terrestrial fungi.What are the consequences of alternation of generations inthe chytrids? It is possible that the multicellular haploid organismsserve as a “filter” for harmful mutations. A haploid individualwith such a mutation would die, and the mutant allelewould not be passed to progeny. In chytrids with alternation ofgenerations, the multicellular diploid stage includes a resistantstructure capable of withstanding freezing or drying.Terrestrial fungi have separate fusion ofcytoplasms and nucleiAlthough the terrestrial fungi grow in moist places, their gametenuclei are not motile and are not released into the environment.Instead, the cytoplasms of two individuals of differentmating types fuse (plasmogamy) before their nucleifuse (karyogamy). Therefore, liquid water is not required forfertilization.Zygospore fungi reproduce sexually when adjacent hyphaeof two different mating types release pheromones, which causethem to grow toward each other. These hyphae produce gametangia,which fuse to form a zygosporangium (Figure30.12B). Sometime later, the gamete nuclei now containedwithin the zygosporangium fuse to form a unicellular multinucleatezygospore, which is the basis of the name of the zygosporefungi. The zygosporangium develops a thick, multilayeredwall that protects the zygospore. The highly resistantzygospore may remain dormant for months before its nucleiundergo meiosis and a sporangiophore sprouts, bearing a sporangium.The sporangium contains the products of meiosis:haploid nuclei that are incorporated into spores. These sporesdisperse and germinate to form a new generation of haploidhyphae.The dikaryotic condition is a synapomorphyof sac fungi and club fungiCertain hyphae of terrestrial sac fungi and club fungi have a nuclearconfiguration other than the familiar haploid or diploidstates (Figures 30.12C,D). In these fungi, sexual reproductionbegins in two distinctive steps: karyogamy (fusion of nuclei) occurslong after plasmogamy (fusion of cytoplasm), so that twogenetically different haploid nuclei coexist and divide within the samehypha. Such a hypha is called a dikaryon (“two nuclei”). Becausethe two nuclei differ genetically, such a hypha is also called aheterokaryon (“different nuclei”) and is indicated as n + n. Thisdikaryon is a synapomorphy of these two groups, which areplaced together in the clade called Dikarya.Eventually, specialized fruiting structures form, within whichthe pairs of genetically dissimilar nuclei—one from each parent—fuse, giving rise to zygotes long after the original “mating.”The diploid zygote nucleus undergoes meiosis, producingfour haploid nuclei. The mitotic descendants of those nucleibecome spores, which germinate to give rise to the next generation—usually of hyphae.A life cycle with a dikaryon stage has several unusual features.First, there are no gamete cells, only gamete nuclei. Second,the only true diploid structure is the zygote, although for a longperiod the genes of both parents are present in the dikaryon andcan be expressed. In effect, the hypha is neither diploid (2n)nor haploid (n); rather, it is dikaryotic (n + n). A harmful recessivemutation in one nucleus may be compensated for by a normalallele on the same chromosome in the other nucleus, and dikaryotichyphae often have characteristics that are different from theirn or 2n products. The dikaryotic condition is perhaps the mostdistinctive of the genetic peculiarities of the fungi.The dikaryotic condition is short-lived in most sac fungibut often lasts for months or even years in club fungi. Club fungihave an elegant mechanism that ensures that the dikaryotic conditionis maintained as new cells are formed. One consequenceof a sustained dikaryotic condition is an increased opportunityfor fusions of hyphae of two different mating types beforefruiting bodies are formed.30.3 RECAPSome chytrid fungi exhibit alternation of generationsbetween haploid and diploid multicellular states. Thelife cycle of zygospore fungi includes a resistantsporestage with many diploid nuclei. The sac fungiand club fungi share a derived dikaryotic condition,in which two genetically different haploid nucleicoexist in the same cell.• What is the role of the zygospore in the life cycle ofzygospore fungi? See p. 638• Explain the phenomenon of dikaryosis in terms ofplasmogamy and karyogamy. See p. 638In examining the most important properties of the fungi as aclade, we have often drawn examples from specific groups.Now let’s look in more detail at the diversity and evolution offungi.How Have Fungi Evolved and 30.4 Diversified?In this section we examine representative species from each ofthe major groups of fungi (see Table 30.1). Recall that the informalgroups called chytrids and zygospore fungi are notclades, but the various lineages within these informal groupsshown in Table 30.1 are each thought to be monophyletic. Inaddition, Microsporidia, Glomeromycota (arbuscular mycorrhizalfungi), Ascomycota (sac fungi), and Basidiomycota (clubfungi) are all clades, and the latter two groups form a monophyleticgroup called Dikarya.638 CHAPTER 30 | FUNGI: RECYCLERS, PATHOGENS, PARASITES, AND PLANT PARTNERSGO TO Animated Tutorial 30.1 • Life Cycle of a ZygomyceteyourBioPortal.comGO TO Web Activity 30.2 • Life Cycle of a Dikaryotic FungusyourBioPortal.comMicrosporidia are highly reduced, parasitic fungiMicrosporidia are unicellular fungiwith walls that contain chitin. Theyare among the smallest eukaryotesknown, with infective spores that areonly 1–40 μm in diameter. About 1,500species have been described, but many morespecies are thought to exist. Their relationshipsamong the eukaryotes have puzzled biologists for many decades.Microsporidia lack true mitochondria, although they havereduced structures known as mitosomes that are derived frommitochondria. Unlike mitochondria, however, mitosomes containno DNA; the mitochondrial genome has been completelytransferred to the nucleus. Because microsporidia lack mitochondria,biologists initially suspected that they represent anearly lineage of eukaryotes that branched before the endosymbioticevent from which mitochondria evolved. The presence ofthe mitosome, however, indicates that this hypothesis is incorrect.DNA sequence analysis has confirmed that microsporidiaare in fact highly reduced, parasitic fungi, although the exactplacement of microsporidia among the fungal lineages is stillbeing investigated.Microsporidia are obligate intracellular parasites of animals,especially of insects, crustaceans, and fishes. Some species areknown to infect mammals, including humans. Most infectionsby microsporidia cause chronic diseases in the hosts, with effectsthat include weight loss, reduced fertility, and shortened life span.The host cell is penetrated by a polar tube of the microsporidianspore, and the contents of the spore are injected into the host (Figure30.13). The sporoplasm then replicates within the host celland produces new infective spores. The life cycle of some speciesis complex and involves multiple hosts, whereas other species infecta single host. In some insects, the parasitic microsporida aretransmitted vertically (i.e., from parent to offspring).Chytrids are the only fungi with flagellaChytrids include several distinct lineagesof aquatic microorganisms once classifiedwith the protists. However,morphological evidence (cell walls thatconsist primarily of chitin) and molecularevidence support their classification asbasal fungi. In this book we use the term“chytrid” to refer to all three of the formally named clades shownas chytrids in Table 30.1, but some mycologists use this term torefer to one particular clade, the Chytridiomycota. There arefewer than 1,000 described species among the three taxonomicgroups of chytrids.Like the animals (and many other eukaryotes), most chytridspossess flagellated gametes. The retention of this character reflectsthe aquatic environment in which fungi first evolved. Chytridsare the only fungi that have flagella at any life cycle stage.Chytrids may be parasitic (on organisms such as algae, mosquitolarvae, and nematodes) or saprobic. Some have complexmutualistic relationships in the compound stomachs of foregutfermentinganimals such as cattle and deer. Many chytrids livein freshwater habitats or in moist soil, but some are marine.Some chytrids are unicellular, others have rhizoids (Figure30.14), and still others have coenocytic hyphae. Chytrids reproduceboth sexually and asexually, but they do not have adikaryon stage.Allomyces, a well-studied genus of chytrids, is a member ofthe group of chytrids (Blastocladiomycota; see Table 30.1) thatdisplays alternation of generations. Both female and male gameteshave flagella. The motile female gamete produces apheromone, a chemical signal that attracts the swimming malegamete. The two gametes fuse, and then their nuclei fuse toform a diploid zygote that germinates to form a diploidmycelium. This is the diploid generation. Mitosis and cytokine-30.4 | HOW HAVE FUNGI EVOLVED AND DIVERSIFIED? 639ChytridsMicrosporidiaGlomeromycotaZygomycotaDikaryaChytridsMicrosporidiaGlomeromycotaZygomycotaDikaryaThe polar tube injects thecontents of the microsporidianspore into its host.Here the polar tube isstill coiled within themicrosporidian cell.Tubulinosema ratisbonensis 20 μm30.13 Spores of Microsporidia Inject Host Cells The polar tubesof microsporidia spores transfer their contents into the host’s cells. Thisspecies infects many animals, including humans.Chytriomyces hyalinus 25 μm30.14 A Chytrid Branched rhizoids emerge from the sporangium of amature chytrid.sis in the zygote give rise to a small, multicellular, diploid organism,which produces numerous diploid flagellated zoospores.These diploid zoospores disperse and germinate to form morediploid organisms. Eventually, the diploid organisms producea second kind of zoosporangium, a thick-walled resting sporangium,that can survive unfavorable conditions such as dryweather or freezing. Nuclei in the resting sporangium undergomeiosis, giving rise to haploid zoospores that are released intothe water and begin the haploid stage of the life cycle.The haploid mycelium is similar to that of the diploidmycelium, but it matures to produce female and male gametangia(gamete cases; see Figure 30.12A). Note that meiosis occurredin the earlier diploid generation and not immediately before gameteformation, as it does in animals. This life cycle with meiosisin spore formation is similar to the alternation of generationsseen in plants.Zygospore fungi are terrestrial saprobes, parasites,and mutualistsZygospore fungi (Zygomycota) includefour major lineages of terrestrial fungithat live on soil as saprobes, as parasitesof insects and spiders, or as mutualistsof other fungi and invertebrate animals.They produce no cells with flagella, andonly one diploid cell—the zygote—appears in the entire life cycle.Their hyphae are coenocytic. The mycelium spreads overits substratum, growing forward by means of vegetative hyphae.Most species do not form a fleshy fruiting structure;rather, the hyphae spread in an apparently random fashion,with occasional stalked sporangiophores reaching up into theair (Figure 30.15). These reproductive structures may bear oneor many sporangia.More than a thousand species of zygospore fungi have beendescribed. One species you may have seen is Rhizopus stolonifer,the black bread mold. Rhizopus produces many stalked sporangiophores,each bearing a single sporangium containing hundredsof minute spores (see Figure 30.12B). As in other filamentousfungi, the spore-forming structure is separated from therest of the hypha by a wall.Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi form symbioseswith plantsArbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (Glomeromycota) are terrestrialfungi that associate with plant roots in a close symbiotic relationship(see Figure 30.11B). As we noted earlier in this chapter,these associations are important for most species of plants,which benefit from absorption of water and mineral nutrientsthrough the large surface area of the fungal mycelium. Many ofthe fungi found in soils are arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. Fewerthan 200 species have been described, but 80 to 90 percent of allplants have associations with them. Molecular systematic studieshave suggested that arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi are thesister group to Dikarya (sac fungi and club fungi), although thisposition is still subject to some debate.The hyphae of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi are coenocytic.These fungi use glucose from their plant partners as their primaryenergy source, converting the glucose to other, fungusspecificsugars that cannot return to the plant. Arbuscular mycorrhizalfungi reproduce asexually; there is not yet any directevidence that they reproduce sexually.The next two fungal clades that we’ll discuss, the sac fungiand the club fungi, are related groups with many similarities,including a dikaryon stage and septate hyphae. The two cladesdiffer in sexual reproductive structure; in the sac fungi the sexualspores are borne inside a sac, whereas in the club fungi theyare borne on a pedestal.The sexual reproductive structure of sac fungiis the ascusThe sac fungi (Ascomycota) are a largeand diverse group of fungi found inmarine, freshwater, and terrestrialhabitats. There are approximately 64,000known species, nearly half of which are thefungal partners in lichens. The hyphae of sacfungi are segmented by more or less regularly spaced septa.A pore in each septum permits extensive movement of cytoplasmand organelles (including nuclei) from one segment tothe next.Sac fungi are distinguished by the production of sacs calledasci (singular ascus), which after meiosis and cytoplasmic cleavagecontain sexually produced haploid ascospores (see Figure30.12C). The ascus is the characteristic sexual reproductive structureof the sac fungi. The sac fungi contain many diverse groups640 CHAPTER 30 | FUNGI: RECYCLERS, PATHOGENS, PARASITES, AND PLANT PARTNERSZygomycotaGlomeromycotaAscomycotaBasidiomycotaZygomycotaGlomeromycotaAscomycotaBasidiomycotaSporangiophoresPilobolus crystallinusSporangia250 μm30.15 Zygospore Fungi Produce Sporangiophores These transparentstructures are sporangiophores (spore-bearing hyphae) growing ondecomposing animal dung. Sporangiophores grow toward the light andend in tiny sporangia, which the filamentous sporangiophores can ejectas far as 2 meters. Animals ingest those sporangia that land on grassand then disseminate the spores in their feces.and in the past were divided on the basis of whether or not theasci are contained within a specialized fruiting structure knownas an ascoma (plural ascomata), and on the morphology of thisfruiting structure. DNA sequence analyses have resulted in arevision of these traditional groupings, however.Some species of sac fungi are unicellular yeasts. Perhapsthe best known of the 800 or so species of yeasts in this groupis baker’s, or brewer’s, yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae; see Figure30.3). These yeasts are among the most important domesticatedfungi. S. cerevisiae metabolizes glucose obtained from itsenvironment to ethanol and carbon dioxide by fermentation.It forms carbon dioxide bubbles in bread dough and givesbaked bread its light texture. Although they are baked away inbread making (which produces the pleasant aroma of bakingbread), the ethanol and carbon dioxide are both retained whenyeast ferments grain into beer. Other yeasts live on fruits suchas figs and grapes and play an important role in the making ofwine. Many other yeasts are associated with insects; in the gutsof some insects, yeasts provide enzymes for digestion of refractorymaterials, especially cellulose.Sac fungus yeasts reproduce asexually by budding. Sexualreproduction takes place when two adjacent haploid cells ofopposite mating types fuse. In some species, the resulting zygotebuds to form a diploid cell population. In others, the zygotenucleus undergoes meiosis immediately; when this happens,the entire cell becomes an ascus. Depending on whetherthe products of meiosis then undergo mitosis, a yeast ascuscontains either eight or four ascospores. The ascospores germinateto become haploid cells. The sac fungus yeasts have lostthe dikaryon stage.Most sac fungi are filamentous species, such as the cup fungi(Figure 30.16), in which the ascomata are cup-shaped and canbe as large as several centimeters across (although most aremuch smaller). The inner surfaces of the cups, which are coveredwith a mixture of specialized hyphae and asci, producehuge numbers of spores. The edible ascomata of some species,including morels and truffles, are regarded by humans as gourmetdelicacies (and can sell at prices higher than gold). The undergroundascomata of truffles have a strong odor that attractsmammals such as pigs, which then eat and disperse the fungus.The sac fungi also include many of the filamentous fungiknown as molds. Many of these species are parasites of floweringplants. Chestnut blight and Dutch elm disease are bothcaused by filamentous molds. Between its introduction to theUnited States in the 1890s and 1940, the chestnut blight fungusdestroyed the American chestnut as a commercial species. Beforethe blight, this species accounted for more than half thetrees in the forests of the eastern United States. Another familiarstory is that of the American elm. Sometime before 1930, theDutch elm disease fungus (first discovered in the Netherlandsbut native to Asia) was introduced into the United States on infectedelm logs from Europe. Spreading rapidly—sometimes byway of connected root systems—the fungus destroyed greatnumbers of American elm trees.Other plant pathogens among the sac fungi include the powderymildews that infect cereal grains, lilacs, and roses, amongmany other plants. Mildews can be a serious problem to farmersand gardeners, and a great deal of research has focused onways to control these agricultural pests.Brown molds of the genus Aspergillus are important in somehuman diets. A. tamarii acts on soybeans in the production ofsoy sauce, and A. oryzae is used in brewing the Japanese alcoholicbeverage sake. Some species of Aspergillus that grow ongrains and on nuts such as peanuts and pecans produce extremelycarcinogenic (cancer-inducing) compounds called aflatoxins.In the United States and most other industrialized countries,moldy grain infected with Aspergillus is thrown out. InAfrica, where food is scarcer, the grain gets eaten, moldy or not,and causes severe health problems, including high levels of certaincancers.Penicillium is a genus of green molds, of which some speciesproduce the antibiotic penicillin, presumably for defense againstcompeting bacteria. Two species, P. camembertii and P. roquefortii,are the organisms responsible for the characteristic strongflavors of Camembert and Roquefort cheeses, respectively.The filmentous sac fungi reproduce asexually by means ofconidia that form at the tips of specializedhyphae (Figure 30.17). Small chains of conidiaare produced by the millions and cansurvive for weeks in nature. The conidia arewhat give molds their characteristic colors.Fusarium oxysporum, the plant pathogenmentioned at the beginning of this chapter,is a filamentous sac fungus with noknown sexual stage. It produces conidia inabundance.The sexual reproductive cycle of filamentoussac fungi includes the formationof a dikaryon, although this stage is relativelybrief compared with that in clubfungi. Many filamentous sac fungi formmating structures of two different matingtypes (types A and a; see Figure 30.12C). Anucleus from one of the mating structures(specialized hyphae) on type a enters the30.4 | HOW HAVE FUNGI EVOLVED AND DIVERSIFIED? 641(A) Sarcoscypha coccinea (B) Morchella sp.30.16 Cup Fungi (A) These brilliant red cups arethe ascomata of a cup fungus. (B) Morels, whichhave a spongelike ascoma and a subtle flavor, areconsidered a culinary delicacy by humans.hypha of type A (or vice versa). Ascogenous (ascus-forming) hyphaedevelop from the now dikaryotic hypha. The mating typea and A nuclei divide simultaneously with the host nuclei, andeventually asci form at the tips of the ascogenous hyphae. Onlywith the formation of asci do the nuclei finally fuse within thecell that now is defined as the ascus. Both nuclear fusion andthe subsequent meiosis to produce the haploid ascospores takeplace within individual asci. The meiotic products are incorporatedinto ascospores that are ultimately released (sometimesshot off forcefully) by the ascus to begin the new haploid generation.The sexual reproductive structure of club fungiis a basidiumClub fungi (Basidiomycota) producesome of the most spectacular fruitingstructures found anywhere among thefungi. These fruiting structures, called basidiomata(singular, basidioma), include puffballs(see Figure 30.6), some of which may bemore than half a meter in diameter, mushrooms of all kinds, andthe bracket fungi often encountered on trees and fallen logs ina damp forest. About 30,000 species of club fungi have been described.These include about 4,000 species of mushrooms, includingthe familiar Agaricus bisporus you may enjoy on yourpizza, as well as poisonous species such as some members ofthe genus Amanita (Figure 30.18A). Bracket fungi (Figure30.18B) do great damage both to cut lumber and timber stands;they also play an important role in returning carbon to the carboncycle. Some of the most damaging plant pathogens are clubfungi, including the rust fungi and the smut fungi that parasitizecereal grains. In contrast, other club fungi contribute tothe survival of plants as fungal partners in ectomycorrhizae.The hyphae of club fungi characteristically have septa withsmall, distinctive pores. The basidium (plural basidia), a swollencell at the tip of a specialized hypha, is the characteristic sexualreproductive structure of the club fungi. In mushroom-formingclub fungi, the basidia form on specialized structures knownas gills or pores. The basidium is the site of nuclear fusion andmeiosis and thus plays the same role in the club fungi as the ascusdoes in the sac fungi and the zygosporangium does in thezygospore fungi.As seen in Figure 30.12D, after nuclei fuse in the basidium,the resulting diploid nucleus undergoes meiosis, and the fourresulting haploid nuclei are incorporated into haploid basidiospores,which form on tiny stalks on the outside of the basidium.A single basidioma of the common bracket fungus Ganodermaapplanatum can produce as many as 4.5 trillion basidiosporesin one growing season. Basidiospores typically are forcibly dischargedfrom their basidia and then germinate, giving rise tohyphae with haploid nuclei. As these hyphae grow, haploidhyphae of different mating types meet and fuse, forming dikaryotichyphae, each cell of which contains two nuclei, one fromeach parent hypha. The dikaryotic mycelium grows and eventually,when triggered by rain or another environmental cue,produces a basidioma. The dikaryon stage may persist foryears—some club fungi live for decades or even centuries. Thispattern contrasts with the life cycle of the sac fungi, in whichthe dikaryon is found only in the stages leading up to formationof the asci.30.4 RECAPThe ancestor of all fungi was probably aquatic likethe chytrids, but fungi have diversified to become importantcomponents of terrestrial ecosystems. Sacfungi and club fungi (which together form the cladeDikarya) contain the largest number of species.• Explain how the microsporidia infect the cells of theiranimal hosts. See p. 639 and Figure 30.13• What feature of the chytrids suggests an aquaticancestor to the fungi? See p. 639• What distinguishes the fruiting bodies of sac fungifrom those of club fungi? See pp. 640–642 andFigures 30.12C,DWhether living on their own or in symbiotic associations, fungihave spread successfully over much of Earth since their originfrom a protist ancestor. That ancestor also gave rise to thechoanoflagellates and the animals, as we describe in Chapter 31.642 CHAPTER 30 | FUNGI: RECYCLERS, PATHOGENS, PARASITES, AND PLANT PARTNERSConidiaHyphaeLeafErysiphe sp. 1 μm30.17 Conidia Chains of conidia are developing at the tips of specializedhyphae arising from this powdery mildew growing on a leaf.ZygomycotaGlomeromycotaAscomycotaBasidiomycota30.4 | HOW HAVE FUNGI EVOLVED AND DIVERSIFIED? 64330.18 Club Fungus (A) Amanita muscaria (B) Laetiporus sulphureusFruiting Structures Thebasidiomata of the club fungiare probably the most familiarof all fungal structures.(A) These highly poisonousmushrooms were producedby a fungus in the genusAmanita, which forms ectomycorrhizalrelationships withtrees. (B) This edible bracketfungus is an agent of decayon dead wood.30.1 What Is a Fungus?• Fungi are opisthokonts with absorptive heterotrophy and withchitin in their cell walls. Fungi have various nutritional modes:some are saprobes, others are parasites, and some are mutualists.Yeasts are unicellular fungi. SEE WEB ACTIVITY 30.1• The body of a multicellular fungus is a mycelium—a meshworkof hyphae that may be septate (having septa) or coenocytic.Review Figure 30.4• Fungi are tolerant of hypertonic environments, and many aretolerant of low or high temperatures.• Many species of fungi reproduce both sexually and asexually.Sexual reproduction occurs between individuals of differentmating types.30.2 How Do Fungi Interact with Other Organisms?• Saprobic fungi, as decomposers, make crucial contributions tothe recycling of elements, especially carbon. Certain fungi haverelationships with other organisms that are both symbiotic andmutualistic.• Many fungi are parasitic plant pathogens, harvesting nutrientsfrom plant cells by means of haustoria. Review Figure 30.7• Some fungi associate with cyanobacteria and/or green algae toform lichens, which live on many exposed surfaces of rocks,trees, and soil. Review Figure 30.10• Mycorrhizae are mutualistic associations of fungi with plantroots. They improve a plant’s ability to take up nutrients andwater. Review Figure 30.11• Endophytic fungi live within plants and can provide protectionto their hosts from herbivores.30.3 What Variations Exist among Fungal Life Cycles?• Some chytrids have a life cycle that includes alternation of generations.Review Figure 30.12A• In the sexual reproduction of terrestrial fungi, hyphae fuse,allowing “gamete” nuclei to be transferred. Plasmogamy(fusion of cytoplasm) precedes karyogamy (fusion of nuclei).• Zygospore fungi have a resistant-spore stage with many diploidnuclei, known as a zygospore. Review Figure 30.12B,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 30.1• In sac fungi and club fungi, a dikaryon is formed. The dikaryotic(n + n) condition is unique to the fungi. Review Figures30.12C,D, WEB ACTIVITY 30.230.4 How Have Fungi Evolved and Diversified?• The relationships of microsporidia, chytrids, and zygosporefungi are not well resolved, but these groups diversified early infungal evolution. The mycorrhizal fungi, sac fungi, and clubfungi form a monophyletic group, and the latter two groupsform the clade Dikarya. Review Figure 30.2 and Table 30.1• Microsporidia are reduced, intracellular parasitic species offungi that infect several animal groups, especially insects,crustaceans, and fishes.• The three distinct lineages of chytrids have flagellated gametes.Review Figure 30.12A• The four distinct lineages of zygospore fungi have coenocytichyphae and a zygospore in their life cycle. Their fruiting structuresare simple stalked sporangiophores. Review Figure30.12B• Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi form symbiotic associations withplant roots. These mycorrhizae increase water and mineraluptake by the plants and provide a carbon source to the fungi.They are only known to reproduce asexually. Their hyphae arecoenocytic.• Sac fungi have septate hyphae; their sexual reproductivestructures are asci. Many sac fungi are partners in lichen andendophytic associations. Filimentous sac fungi produce fleshyfruiting bodies called ascomata. The dikaryon stage in the sacfungus life cycle is relatively brief. Review Figure 30.12C• Club fungi have septate hyphae. Many of the species are plantpathogens, although mushroom-forming species are morefamiliar to most people. Their fruiting bodies are called basidiomata,and their sexual reproductive structures are basidia.The dikaryon stage may last for years. Review Figure 30.12DCHAPTER SUMMARY
30.1 What Is a Fungus?• Fungi are opisthokonts with absorptive heterotrophy and withchitin in their cell walls. Fungi have various nutritional modes:some are saprobes, others are parasites, and some are mutualists.Yeasts are unicellular fungi. SEE WEB ACTIVITY 30.1• The body of a multicellular fungus is a mycelium—a meshworkof hyphae that may be septate (having septa) or coenocytic.Review Figure 30.4• Fungi are tolerant of hypertonic environments, and many aretolerant of low or high temperatures.• Many species of fungi reproduce both sexually and asexually.Sexual reproduction occurs between individuals of differentmating types.30.2 How Do Fungi Interact with Other Organisms?• Saprobic fungi, as decomposers, make crucial contributions tothe recycling of elements, especially carbon. Certain fungi haverelationships with other organisms that are both symbiotic andmutualistic.• Many fungi are parasitic plant pathogens, harvesting nutrientsfrom plant cells by means of haustoria. Review Figure 30.7• Some fungi associate with cyanobacteria and/or green algae toform lichens, which live on many exposed surfaces of rocks,trees, and soil. Review Figure 30.10• Mycorrhizae are mutualistic associations of fungi with plantroots. They improve a plant’s ability to take up nutrients andwater. Review Figure 30.11• Endophytic fungi live within plants and can provide protectionto their hosts from herbivores.30.3 What Variations Exist among Fungal Life Cycles?• Some chytrids have a life cycle that includes alternation of generations.Review Figure 30.12A• In the sexual reproduction of terrestrial fungi, hyphae fuse,allowing “gamete” nuclei to be transferred. Plasmogamy(fusion of cytoplasm) precedes karyogamy (fusion of nuclei).• Zygospore fungi have a resistant-spore stage with many diploidnuclei, known as a zygospore. Review Figure 30.12B,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 30.1• In sac fungi and club fungi, a dikaryon is formed. The dikaryotic(n + n) condition is unique to the fungi. Review Figures30.12C,D, WEB ACTIVITY 30.230.4 How Have Fungi Evolved and Diversified?• The relationships of microsporidia, chytrids, and zygosporefungi are not well resolved, but these groups diversified early infungal evolution. The mycorrhizal fungi, sac fungi, and clubfungi form a monophyletic group, and the latter two groupsform the clade Dikarya. Review Figure 30.2 and Table 30.1• Microsporidia are reduced, intracellular parasitic species offungi that infect several animal groups, especially insects,crustaceans, and fishes.• The three distinct lineages of chytrids have flagellated gametes.Review Figure 30.12A• The four distinct lineages of zygospore fungi have coenocytichyphae and a zygospore in their life cycle. Their fruiting structuresare simple stalked sporangiophores. Review Figure30.12B• Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi form symbiotic associations withplant roots. These mycorrhizae increase water and mineraluptake by the plants and provide a carbon source to the fungi.They are only known to reproduce asexually. Their hyphae arecoenocytic.• Sac fungi have septate hyphae; their sexual reproductivestructures are asci. Many sac fungi are partners in lichen andendophytic associations. Filimentous sac fungi produce fleshyfruiting bodies called ascomata. The dikaryon stage in the sacfungus life cycle is relatively brief. Review Figure 30.12C• Club fungi have septate hyphae. Many of the species are plantpathogens, although mushroom-forming species are morefamiliar to most people. Their fruiting bodies are called basidiomata,and their sexual reproductive structures are basidia.The dikaryon stage may last for years. Review Figure 30.12D