In 1883, the zoologist Franz Schulze noticed somethingunusual in his Austrian laboratory: transparent, flattenedorganisms were crawling on the sides of his saltwateraquarium. Collected accidentally along with thesponges that were Schulze’s primary interest, these organismswere unlike any previously described animals—especially since they continually changed shape as theymoved.Schulze’s examination of the new organisms revealedthat they were animals. But structurally they were amongthe simplest animals that he—or anyone else—had everobserved, with only four types of cells. He named the newspecies Trichoplax adhaerens, which means “sticky hairyplate,” and argued that the new species had no close relationshipswith other major animal groups. For decades,however, most biologists dismissed Schulze’s findings,insisting that the transparent organisms must be larvalforms of other, well-known, animals.In the 1960s, new and more detailed studies confirmedSchultze’s findings and the distinctive nature of Trichoplax.Even then, this odd animal continued to be knownalmost exclusively from aquariums. Only in the pastdecade have biologists been able to locate and studynatural field populations of Trichoplax adhaerens. A fewadditional closely related species have been discovered,and they are collectively known as placozoans (Greek,“flat animals”).The more biologists have studied Trichoplax, the odderthis animal appears. It has the smallest genome of any animalstudied to date. The mature stages lack body symmetryand have no mouth, gut, or nervous system. IsTrichoplax a relict representative of a group of animalsthat appeared early in animal evolution? Indeed,some recent phylogenetic analyses supportthe possibility that Trichoplax is a representative ofthe most divergent group of animals.Although biologists agree on which groups of organismsare animals, the root of the animal tree is asubject of considerable investigation and debate.Traditionally, the first split is thought to have beenbetween the sponges and all other animals, andmost evidence still favors that view. Some gene sequenceanalyses, however, suggest that the majorgroups of sponges are not even each other’s closestrelatives, and that the glass sponges alone split withall the remaining animals (including other sponges)Getting back to our roots31Are Placozoans at the Base of Animal Phylogeny?Is the simplicity of placozoans an ancestral feature, or didthese organisms descend from ancestors with morecomplex body plans? Answering that question requiresan understanding of animal phylogeny.What Characteristics Distinguish 31.1 the Animals?How do we recognize an organism as an animal? That mayseem obvious for many familiar animals, but less so for groupslike sponges, which were once thought to be plants. Some of thegeneral aspects that we associate with animals include:• Multicellularity. In contrast to the Bacteria, Archaea, and mostprotists (see Chapters 26 and 27), all animals are multicellular.Animal life cycles feature complex patterns of developmentfrom a single-celled zygote into a multicellular adult.• Heterotrophic metabolism. In contrast to most plants (seeChapters 28 and 29), all animals are heterotrophs. Animalsare able to synthesize very few organic molecules from inorganicchemicals, so they must take in nutrients from theirenvironment (either through their own actions, or in somecases with the aid of symbiotic species).• Internal digestion. Although the fungi are also heterotrophs(see Chapter 30), animals digest their food differently.Whereas fungi rely on external digestion, most animals useinternal processes to break down materials from their environmentinto the organic molecules they need most. Mostanimals ingest food into an internal gut that is continuouswith the outside environment and in which digestion takesplace.• Movement. In contrast to the majority of plants and fungi,most animals can move. Animals must move to find food orbring food to them. Muscle tissue is unique to animals, andmany animal body plans are specialized for movement.Although these general features help us recognize animals, noneis diagnostic for all animals. Some animals do not move, at leastduring certain life stages, and some plants and fungi do havelimited movement. Some animals lack a gut. Many multicellularorganisms are not animals. So what is the evidence thatgroups all animals together in a single clade?Animal monophyly is supported by gene sequencesand morphologyThe most convincing evidence that all the organisms consideredto be animals share a common ancestor comes from phylogeneticanalyses of their gene sequences. Relatively few completeanimal genomes are available, but many more genomesare being sequenced each year. Analyses of these genomes, aswell as many individual gene sequences, have shown that allanimals are indeed monophyletic; a currently well-supportedphylogenetic tree of the animals is shown in Figure 31.1.IN THIS CHAPTER we will review the evidence that hasled biologists to conclude that the animals are monophyleticand will then present the best-supported current hypothesesof animal phylogeny. We will describe how the diverse animalforms are derived from a small array of body plans. Wewill discuss various animal strategies for obtaining food anddescribe the amazingly varied life cycles of animals—howthey are born, grow, disperse, and reproduce. Finally, we willdescribe members of several basal clades of animals.at the base of the animal tree. Other genomic investigationshave suggested that the ctenophores—comb jellies—may be the sister group to all other animals.Ctenophores are beautiful, transparent organismswhose sticky tentacles capture planktonic prey.Newly acquired insights into how animal genomesare structured and have evolved play an ever more importantrole in understanding the relationships amongthe major animal groups. This chapter explores the earliestbranches on the animal tree, and how a few fundamental“body plans” have been modified to yield the remarkablevariety of animal forms described in this andthe following two chapters.CHAPTER OUTLINE31.1 What Characteristics Distinguish the Animals?31.2 What Are the Features of Animal Body Plans?31.3 How Do Animals Get Their Food?31.4 How Do Life Cycles Differ among Animals?31.5 What Are the Major Groups of Animals?Alternative Candidates Some studies place either sponges(left) or ctenophores (upper right) rather than placozoans asthe sister group of all other multicellular animals. Most evidencefavors sponges as the most divergent animal group.Although animals were considered to belong to a single cladelong before gene sequencing became possible, surprisingly fewmorphological features are shared across all species of animals.These morphological synapomorphies include:• Unique types of junctions between their cells (tight junctions,desmosomes, and gap junctions; see Figure 6.7).• Acommon set of extracellular matrix molecules, includingcollagen and proteoglycans (see Figure 5.25).Although some animals in a few groups lack one or another ofthese characteristics, it is believed that these traits were possessedby the ancestor of all animals and subsequently lost in thosegroups. Similarities in the organization and function of Hox andother developmental genes (see Chapter 20) provide additionalevidence of developmental mechanisms shared by a commonanimal ancestor. The Hox genes specify body pattern and axisformation, leading to developmental similarities across animals.The common ancestor of animals was probably a colonialflagellated protist similar to existing colonial choanoflagellates(see Figure 27.27). The most reasonable current scenariopostulates a choanoflagellate lineage in which certain cells inthe colony began to be specialized—some for movement, othersfor nutrition, others for reproduction, and so on. Once thisfunctional specialization had begun, cells could have continuedto differentiate. Coordination among groups of cells could haveimproved by means of specific regulatory and signaling moleculesthat guided differentiation and migration of cells in developingembryos. Such coordinated groups of cells eventuallyevolved into the larger and more complex organisms that wecall animals.More than a million living animal species have been namedand described, and millions of additional animal species awaitdiscovery. Clues to the evolutionary relationships among animalgroups can be found in fossils, in patterns of embryonic development,in the morphology and physiology of living animals,in the structure of animal proteins, and in gene sequences.31.1 | WHAT CHARACTERISTICS DISTINGUISH THE ANIMALS? 647DEUTEROSTOMES(Chapter 33)CtenophoresCnidariansArrow wormsLophotrochozoansCalcareous spongesDemospongesGlass spongesCommonancestorBilateral symmetry along ananterior-posterior axis;three embryonic cell layers EcdysozoansPROTOSTOMES(Chapter 32)Exoskeleton moltingRadialsymmetryDistinct organ systemsNotochordDiploblasticanimals(Chapter 31)Sponges(Chapter 31)Bilaterians(triploblastic)EumetazoansChordatesEchinodermsHemichordatesRadial symmetryBlastoporedevelopsinto mouthBlastopore developsinto anusPlacozoansSilicaceousspiculesChoanocytes;spiculesUnique celljunctions;collagen andproteoglycansin extracellularmatrixTwo embryoniccell layers31.1 The Phylogeny of Animals This tree presents the best supportedcurrent hypotheses of evolutionary relationships among major groupsof animals. The traits highlighted by red circles will be explained as youread this chapter; you should review this figure closely after you completeyour reading.GO TO Web Activity 31.1 • Sponge and Diploblast ClassificationyourBioPortal.comIncreasingly, studies of higher-level relationshipshave come to depend on genomic sequence comparisons,as genomes are ultimately the source ofall inherited trait information.A few basic developmental patternsdifferentiate major animal groupsDifferences in patterns of embryonic developmenthave until recently provided many of the most importantclues to animal phylogeny. Analyses of genesequences, however, are now showing that some developmentalpatterns are more evolutionarily variablethan previously thought. We describe here thebasic developmental patterns that vary among themajor animal clades.The first few cell divisions of a zygote are knownas cleavage. In general, the number of cells in the embryo doubleswith each cleavage. As described in Section 44.1, severaldifferent cleavage patterns exist among animals.Cleavage patterns are influenced by the configuration of theyolk, the nutritive material that nourishes the growing embryo.In reptiles, for example, the presence of a large body of acellularyolk within the fertilized egg creates an incomplete cleavagepattern in which the dividing cells form an embryo on top ofthe yolk mass (see Figure 44.3B). In echinoderms such as seaurchins, limited yolk is evenly distributed throughout the eggcytoplasm, so cleavage is complete, with the fertilized egg dividingin an even pattern known as radial cleavage. Radial cleavageis thought to be the ancestral condition for the animals otherthan sponges, as it is widely distributed in the other major lineages.Spiral cleavage—a complicated permutation of radialcleavage—is found among many lophotrochozoans, includingearthworms and clams. Lophotrochozoans with spiral cleavageare thus sometimes known as spiralians. The early branches ofthe ecdysozoans (molting animals, such as insects and nematodes)have radial cleavage, although most ecdysozoans havean idiosyncratic cleavage pattern that is neither radial nor spiralin organization (see Figure 44.3C).Distinct layers of cells form during the early development ofmost animals. These cell layers differentiate into specific organsand organ systems as development continues. The embryos ofdiploblastic animals have two cell layers: an outer ectoderm andan inner endoderm. Embryos of triploblastic animals have, in additionto ectoderm and endoderm, a third distinct cell layer,mesoderm, between the ectoderm and the endoderm. The existenceof three cell layers in embryos is a synapomorphy oftriploblastic animals, whereas the diploblastic animals (placozoans,ctenophores, and cnidarians) exhibit the ancestral condition.Some biologists consider sponges to be diploblastic, butsince they do not have clearly differentiated tissue types or embryoniccell layers, the term is not usually applied to them.During early development in many animals, in a processknown as gastrulation, a hollow ball one cell thick indents toform a cup-shaped structure. The opening of the cavity formedby this indentation is called the blastopore (Figure 31.2). Theprocess of gastrulation is covered in detail in Section 44.2; thepoint to remember here is that the overall pattern of gastrulationimmediately after formation of the blastopore divides thetriploblastic animals into two major groups:• In the protostomes (Greek, “mouth first”), the mouth arisesfrom the blastopore, and the anus forms later.• In the deuterostomes (“mouth second”), the blastopore becomesthe anus, and the mouth forms later.Although the developmental patterns of animals are more variedthan suggested by this simple dichotomy, sequencing dataindicate that the protostomes and deuterostomes represent distinctanimal clades. Together, these two groups are known asthe bilaterians (named for their usual bilateral symmetry), andthey account for the vast majority of animal species.31.1 RECAPThe animals are thought to be monophyletic becausethey share several derived traits, especiallyamong their gene sequences. Major developmentaldifferences also provide evidence of evolutionaryrelationships, although phylogenetic analyses ofgene sequences have shown that the evolutionaryhistory of these features is more complex than wasonce thought.• What general features of animals distinguish thisgroup from other living organisms? See p. 646• Describe the difference between diploblastic andtriploblastic embryos, and between protostomes anddeuterostomes. See p. 648(A) (B)BlastoporeExtracellular matrixMigrating cells31.2 Gastrulation Illuminates Evolutionary Relationships (A) Theblastopore is clear in this scanning electron micrograph of a sea urchingastrula. Because sea urchins (echinoderms) are deuterostomes, thisblastopore will eventually become the anal end of the animal’s gut. (B) Inthis cross section through a later-stage sea urchin gastrula, the cells arebeginning to look different from one another. The molecules of the extracellularmatrix guide cell movement.648 CHAPTER 31We devote Chapter 32 to the protostomes and Chapter 33 to thedeuterostomes. Later in this chapter, we describe several groupsof animals that diverged before the origin of the bilaterians. Webegin our exploration of animal diversity by discussing generalfeatures of animal body plans.What Are the Features of 31.2 Animal Body Plans?The general structure of an animal, the arrangement of its organsystems, and the integrated functioning of its parts are referredto as its body plan. As Chapter 20 describes, the regulatoryand signaling genes that govern the development of bodysymmetry, body cavities, segmentation, and appendages arewidely shared among the different animal groups. Thus wemight expect animals to share body plans. Although animalbody plans vary tremendously, they can be seen as variationson four key features:• The symmetry of the body• The structure of the body cavity• The segmentation of the body• External appendages that are used for sensing, chewing, locomotion,mating, and other functionsEach of these features affects how an animal moves and interactswith its environment.Most animals are symmetricalThe overall shape of an animal can be described by its symmetry.An animal is said to be symmetrical if it can be divided alongat least one plane into similar halves. Animals that have noplane of symmetry are said to be asymmetrical. Placozoans andmany sponges are asymmetrical, but most other animals havesome kind of symmetry, which is governed by the expressionof regulatory genes during development.The simplest form of symmetry is spherical symmetry, inwhich body parts radiate out from a central point. An infinitenumber of planes passing through the central point can dividea spherically symmetrical organism into similar halves. Sphericalsymmetry is widespread among unicellular protists, butmost animals possess other forms of symmetry.In organisms with radial symmetry, body parts are arrangedaround one main axis at the body’s center (Figure 31.3A).Ctenophores are radially symmetrical, as are many cnidarians andechinoderms. Aperfectly radially symmetrical animal can be dividedinto similar halves by any plane that contains the mainaxis. However, most radially symmetrical animals—includingthe adults of echinoderms such as sea stars and sand dollars—are slightly modified so that fewer planes can divide them intoidentical halves. Some radially symmetrical animals are sessile(sedentary) or drift with water currents. Others move slowlybut can move equally well in any direction.Bilateral symmetry is characteristic of animals that have a distinctfront end, which typically precedes the rest of the bodyas the animal moves. A bilaterally symmetrical animal can bedivided into mirror-image (left and right) halves by a singleplane that passes through the midline of its body (Figure 31.3B).This plane runs from the front, or anterior, end of the body, toits rear, or posterior, end.A plane at right angles to the midline divides the body intotwo dissimilar sides. The back of a bilaterally symmetrical animalis its dorsal surface; the underside is its ventral surface.Bilateral symmetry is strongly correlated with cephalization,which is the concentration of sensory organs and nervous tissuesin a head at the anterior end of the animal. Cephalizationhas been evolutionarily favored because the anterior end of abilaterally symmetrical animal typically encounters new environmentsfirst.The structure of the body cavity influences movementAnimals can be divided into three types—acoelomate, pseudocoelomate,and coelomate—based on the presence and structure of aninternal, fluid-filled body cavity. The structure of an animal’sbody cavity strongly influences the ways in which it can move.Acoelomate animals such as flatworms lack an enclosed,fluid-filled body cavity. Instead, the space between the gut (derivedfrom endoderm) and the muscular body wall (derivedfrom mesoderm) is filled with masses of cells called mesenchyme(Figure 31.4A). These animals typically move by beating cilia.Body cavities come in two types. Some lie between mesodermand endoderm, and others are enclosed completely withinmesoderm.• Pseudocoelomate animals have a body cavity called apseudocoel, a fluid-filled space in which many of the internal31.2 | WHAT ARE THE FEATURES OF ANIMAL BODY PLANS? 649Any plane along the mainbody axis of this sea anemone(a cnidarian) divides the animalinto similar halves.A single plane throughthe anterior-posteriormidline divides the animalinto mirror-image halves.(A) Radial symmetry(B) Bilateral symmetryDorsal (back)Main axisVentral (belly)Anterior(head)Posterior(tail)31.3 Body Symmetry Most animals are either radially or bilaterallysymmetrical.organs are suspended. Apseudocoel is enclosed by muscles(mesoderm) only on its outside; there is no inner layer ofmesoderm surrounding the internal organs (Figure 31.4B).• Coelomate animals have a coelom, a body cavity that developswithin the mesoderm. It is lined with a layer of musculartissue called the peritoneum, which also surrounds the internalorgans. The coelom is thus enclosed on both the insideand the outside by mesoderm (Figure 31.4C). A coelomateanimal has better control over the movement of the fluids inits body cavity than a pseudocoelomate animal does.The body cavities of many animals function as hydrostaticskeletons. Fluids are relatively incompressible, so when themuscles surrounding them contract, fluids shift to another partof the cavity. If the body tissues around the cavity are flexible,fluids squeezed out of one region can cause some other regionto expand. The moving fluids can thus move specific body parts.(You can see how a hydrostatic skeleton works by watching asnail emerge from its shell.) An animal with both circular muscles(encircling the body cavity) and longitudinal muscles (runningalong the length of the body) has even greater control overits movement.In terrestrial environments, the hydrostatic function of fluidfilledbody cavities applies mostly to relatively small, soft-bodiedorganisms. Most larger animals (as well as many smallerones) have hard skeletons that provide protection and facilitatemovement. Muscles are attached to those firm structures, whichmay be inside the animal or on its outer surface (in the form ofa shell or cuticle).Segmentation improves control of movementMany animal bodies are divided into segments. Segmentationfacilitates specialization of different body regions. It also allowsan animal to alter the shape of its body in complex ways and tocontrol its movements precisely. If an animal’s body is segmented,muscles in each individual segment can change theshape of that segment independently of the others. In only a fewsegmented animals is the body cavity separated into discretecompartments, but even partly separated compartments allowbetter control of movement. As we see in Chapters 32 and 33,segmentation occurs in several groups of protostomes anddeuterostomes.In some animals, segments are not apparent externally (aswith the segmented vertebrae of vertebrates). In other animals,such as annelids, similar body segments are repeated manytimes (Figure 31.5A). And in yet other animals, including mostarthropods, segments are visible but differ strikingly (Figure31.5B). As described in Chapter 32, the dramatic evolutionaryradiation of the arthropods (including the insects, spiders, centipedes,and crustaceans) was based on changes in a segmentedbody plan that features muscles attached to the inner surface ofan external skeleton, including a variety of external appendagesthat move these animals.Appendages have many usesGetting around under their own power is important to manyanimals. It allows them to obtain food, to avoid predators, andto find mates. Even some sedentary species, such as seaanemones, have larval stages that use cilia to swim, thus increasingthe animal’s chances of finding a suitable habitat.Appendages that project externally from the body greatly enhancean animal’s ability to move around. Many echinoderms,including sea urchins and sea stars, have myriad tube feet thatallow them to move slowly across the substratum. Highly con-650 CHAPTER 31 | ANIMAL ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF BODY PLANSAcoelomates do not haveenclosed body cavities.The coelom and the internal organsare surrounded by mesoderm.The pseudocoel is linedwith mesoderm, but nomesoderm surroundsthe internal organs.(A) Acoelomate (flatworm)(C) Coelomate (earthworm)Gut (endoderm)EctodermGut (endoderm)Internal organPeritoneum(mesoderm)Coelom (cavity)Muscle(mesoderm)EctodermMesenchymeMuscle layer(mesoderm)Ectoderm(B) Pseudocoelomate (roundworm)Gut (endoderm)Pseudocoel (cavity)Muscle(mesoderm)Internalorgans31.4 Animal Body Cavities (A) Acoelomates do not have enclosedbody cavities. (B) Pseudocoelomates have a body cavity bounded byendoderm and mesoderm. (C) Coelomates have a peritoneum surroundingthe internal organs in a region bounded by mesoderm.GO TO Web Activity 31.2 • Animal Body CavitiesyourBioPortal.com31.3 | HOW DO ANIMALS GET THEIR FOOD? 651trolled, rapid movement is greatly enhanced in animals whoseappendages have become modified into specialized limbs. In thearthropods and the vertebrates, the presence of jointed limbs hasbeen a prominent factor in their evolutionary success (see Figure31.5B). In four independent instances—among the arthropodinsects and among the vertebrate pterosaurs, birds, andbats—body plans emerged in which limbs were modified intowings, allowing these animals to take to the air.Appendages also include many structures that are not usedfor locomotion. Many animals have antennae, which are specializedappendages used for sensing the environment. Otherappendages (such as claws and mouth parts of many arthropods)are adaptations for capturing prey or chewing food. Insome species, appendages are used for reproductive purposes,such as sperm transfer or egg incubation.31.2 RECAPThe body plans of animals are variations on patternsof symmetry, body cavities, segmentation, and appendages.All four can affect movement and locomotion,which are important aspects of the animalway of life.• Describe the main types of symmetry found in animals.How can an animal’s symmetry influence theway it moves? See p. 649 and Figure 31.3• Explain several ways in which body cavities and segmentationimprove control over movement. See pp.649–650Many of the modifications to animal body plans affect ways offinding, capturing, and processing food. Evolutionary changesin symmetry, body cavities, appendages, and segmentation haveplayed key roles in enabling animals to obtain food from theirenvironment, as well as helping them avoid becoming foodfor other animals.31.3 How Do Animals Get Their Food?As noted in Section 31.1, animals are heterotrophs, or “other feeders.”Although many animals rely on photosynthetic endosymbiontsfor nutrition (see Figures 5.14C and 27.8), most animalsmust actively obtain an outside source of nutrition, otherwiseknown as food. The need to locate food has favored the evolutionof sensory structures that can provide animals with detailedinformation about their environment, as well as nervous systemsthat can receive, process, and coordinate that information.To acquire food, most animals must expend energy, either tomove through the environment to where food is located or tomove the environment and the food it contains to them. Animalsthat can move from one place to another are motile; animalsthat stay in one place are sessile.The principal feeding strategies that animals use fall into fivebroad categories:• Filter feeders capture small organisms delivered to them bytheir environment.• Herbivores eat plants or parts of plants.• Predators capture and eat other animals that typically arerelatively large.• Parasites live in or on other, generally much larger, organismsfrom which they obtain energy and nutrients.• Detritivores actively feed on dead organic material.Each of these strategies can be found in many different animalgroups, and none of them is limited to a single group. InAbdominal segmentsare modified for digestionand reproduction.(B) Hadrurus arizonensis(A) Hermodice carunculataThe fireworm is amarine worm thatdisplays an evenlysegmented body plan.Protective bristlesTail segments aremodified for huntingand defense.Anterior segmentshave fused andbear appendagesfor locomotion andfeeding.31.5 Segmentation The bodycavities of many animals are segmented.(A) All of the segments ofthis marine fireworm, an annelid,are similar. Its appendages aretipped with bristles (setae) that areused for locomotion and (in thisspecies) for protection—the setaecontain a noxious toxin. (B) Segmentationallows the evolution ofdifferentiation among the segments.The segments of this scorpion,an arthropod, differ in theirform, function, and theappendages they bear.addition, individuals of some species may employ more thanone feeding strategy, and some animals employ different feedingstrategies at different points in their life cycle. The constantand ongoing need to obtain food, the variety of nutrient sourcesavailable in any given environment, and the necessity of competingwith other animals to obtain food means that a varietyof feeding strategies can be found among all the major animalgroups.Filter feeders capture small preyAir and water often contain small organisms and organic moleculesthat are potential food for animals. Moving air and watermay carry those items to an animal that positions itself in agood location. These filter feeders then use some kind of strainingdevice to filter the food from the environment. Many sessileaquatic animals rely on water currents to bring prey to them(Figure 31.6A).Motile filter feeders bring the nutrient-containing mediumto them. Flamingos, for example, uses their serrated beak to filtersmall organisms out of the muddy mixture they pick up asthey wade through shallow water (Figure 31.6B). Blue whales—the largest animals that have ever lived—are filter feeders thatstrain tiny crustaceans from the water column as they swim.Some sessile filter feeders expend energy to move water pasttheir food-capturing devices. Sponges, for example, bring waterinto their body by beating the flagella of their specialized feedingcells, called choanocytes (Figure 31.7). These flagellated feedingcells of sponges are similar in structure to protists knownas choanoflagellates, which provides evidence for the close relationshipof choanoflagellates to animals (see Section 27.5).Herbivores eat plantsAnimals that eat plants are called herbivores. An individualplant has many different structures—leaves, wood, sap, flowers,fruits, nectar, and seeds—that animals can consume. Notsurprisingly, then, many different kinds of herbivores may feedon a single kind of plant, consuming different parts of the plantor eating the same part in different ways. An individual animalthat is captured by a predator is likely to die, but herbivores oftenfeed on plants without killing them.Animals do not need to expend energy subduing and killingplants. However, they do need to digest them, and animals mustexpend energy to detoxify plants’ defensive chemicals. Digestioncan pose challenges to terrestrial herbivores because thedominant land plants tend to have several different kinds of tissues,many of which are tough or fibrous. Herbivorous animalstypically have long, complex guts to accomplish the tasks involvedin digesting plants (see Section 51.2).Predators capture and subdue large preyPredators possess features that enable them to capture and subduerelatively large animals (referred to as their prey). Manyvertebrate predators have sensitive sensory organs that enablethem to locate prey, as well as sharp teeth or claws that allowthem to capture and subdue large prey (Figure 31.8). Predatorsmay stalk and pursue their prey, or wait (often camouflaged)for their prey to come to them.Another weapon of predators (as well as of prey) is toxins.We are all aware of the dangers of encountering the toxins of avenomous snake. Toxins often have both a defensive role as wellas a role in the capture and sometimes the digestion of prey.Cnidarians (jellyfishes and their relatives) are one of many animalgroups that use toxins to capture and subdue prey. Thecnidarians’ tentacles are covered with specialized cells that con-652 CHAPTER 31 | ANIMAL ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF BODY PLANS(A) Spirobranchus sp.(B) Phoenicopterus ruber31.6 Filter-Feeding Strategies (A) Sessile marine filter feeders suchas this “Christmas tree worm,” a polychaete, allow the ocean currents tobring their food—plankton—to them. (B) The greater flamingo of SouthAmerica is a motile filter feeder, using its appendages (legs) to stir up mudas it wades through ocean lagoons and salty lakes. The bird then uses itsbeak (close-up) to strain small organisms out of the muddy mixture.tain stinging organelles called nematocysts, which inject toxinsinto the prey (Figure 31.9).Omnivores are animals, such as raccoons and humans, thateat both plants and other animals. The diet of some omnivoresdiffers at different life stages; many songbirds, for example, eatfruit or seeds as adults but feed insects to their young.Parasites live in or on other organismsParasites are animals that live in or on another organism—called a host—and obtain their nutrients from that host. Someparasites consume parts of the host itself (such as ticks that suckbody fluids); others highjack nutrients the host would otherwiseconsume (such as tapeworms that may live in our intestines).Most animal parasites are much smaller than their hosts,and many parasites can consume parts of their host withoutkilling it. To reside within a host, a parasite must first overcomethe host’s defenses. Parasites often have complex life cycles thatrely on multiple hosts, as we detail in Section 31.4.31.3 | HOW DO ANIMALS GET THEIR FOOD? 653OsculumSpiculesChoanocytePoreAtriumSpiculeWater andfood particlesin via poresWater outvia osculum(A) Flagellum (B) Choanoeca sp.31.7 Even Sessile Filter Feeders Expend Energy (A) A sponge moves food-containingwater through its body by beating the flagella of its choanocytes—specialized feeding cells.Water enters through small pores and passes into water canals or an open atrium, where thechoanocytes capture food particles from the water. Spicules are supportive, skeletal structures.(B) The similarity of this choanoflagellate protist (see Section 27.5) to sponge choanocytes visualizesa clear evolutionary link between a protist lineage and the animals.(A) Canis lupus(B) Haliaeetus leucocephalus31.8 Tooth and Claw (A) The teeth of the predatory gray wolf areadapted for killing prey and shearing meat. (B) The appendages (legs andwings) of the bald eagle, along with its strong beak, are adaptations tothe life of a predatory hunter.Parasites that live inside their hosts are called endoparasites,and they are often morphologically very simple. They can oftenfunction without a digestive system because they absorbfood directly from the host’s gut or bodily tissues. Many flatwormsare endoparasites of humans and other mammals, as describedin Chapter 32.Parasites that live outside their hosts are called ectoparasites,and they are generally more complex morphologically than endoparasites.Ectoparasites have digestive tracts and mouthpartsthat enable them to pierce the host’s tissues or suck on theirbody fluids. Fleas and ticks are widely known ectoparasiticarthropods that many humans have unfortunately experienced.Detritivores live off the remains of other organismsDetritivores feed on decomposing organic matter, or detritus.In so doing, they perform an important ecosystem function byreturning nutrients to the environment in a state that can beused by other organisms. Detrivores are common in any soilwith high organic content, as well as on the ocean floors. Wellknowndetrivores include earthworms and other annelids, millipedes,and many insects and crustaceans.Charles Darwin became fascinated with the action of earthworms,and wrote a book called The Formation of Vegetable MouldThrough the Action of Worms. He was particularly impressed bythe importance of earthworms in soil formation. Darwin conductedmany interesting experiments to establish how quicklyearthworms break down organic matter and build up rich soils.31.3 RECAPAnimals have many ways of acquiring food. Filterfeeders strain food particles from the water or air.Herbivores have digestive adaptations that allowthem to eat plants, whereas predators are physicallyadapted to capture and subdue other animals (prey)and consume them. Parasites obtain their nutritionfrom a host organism. Detritivores consume decayingorganic matter and make important nutrientsavailable for use by other organisms.• What adaptations are necessary for animals that eatplants? What adaptations are needed for a predatorylifestyle? See pp. 652–653• Looking at the brief overview of some of the diversefeeding modes of animals presented here, and usingwhatever you already know about different animals,how useful do you think feeding behavior would beas a criterion for grouping animals into phylogeneticcategories?As an animal grows from a single cell into a larger, more complexadult, its body structure, its diet, and the environment inwhich it lives may all change. In the next section we describesome animal life cycles and discuss why they are so varied.How Do Life Cycles Differ 31.4 among Animals?The life cycle of an animal encompasses its embryonic development,birth, growth to maturity, reproduction, and death. Duringits life an individual animal ingests food, grows, interactswith other individuals of the same and other species, and reproduces.In some groups of animals, newborns bear many similaritiesto adults (a pattern called direct development). Newborns of mostspecies, however, differ dramatically from adults. Consider, forexample a larva (plural larvae), the immature life stage that someorganisms take early in their life cycle before assuming an adultform. Some of the most striking life cycle changes are foundamong insects such as beetles, flies, moths, butterflies, and bees,which undergo radical changes (called metamorphosis) betweentheir larval and adult stages (Figure 31.10). In these animals,one stage may be specialized for feeding and the other for reproduction.Adults of most moth species, for example, do noteat. In some animals species, individuals eat during all life cyclestages, but what they eat changes with the stage. For exam-654 CHAPTER 31 | ANIMAL ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF BODY PLANSOnce discharged, stylets andspines on the nematocystanchor it to the prey.Portugueseman-of-war(Physaliaphysalis)UncoilednematocysttubeBaseof tubeStylet Spines(barb)EvertedshaftEmptynematocystcapsuleCnidocytesNucleusCnidocyte Nematocyst31.9 Nematocysts Are Potent Weapons The tentacles of the Portuguese man-of-war, a cnidarian,are rife with specialized cells that contain stinging organelles called nematocysts, which inject toxin intoprey. The Portuguese man-of-war is a colonial organism, composed of many physiologically integratedindividuals with specialized functions.ple, butterfly larvae, known as caterpillars, eat leaves and flowers,whereas most adult butterflies eat only nectar. Having differentlife cycle stages that are specialized for different activitiesmay increase the efficiency with which an animal performsparticular tasks.Most animal life cycles have at least one dispersal stageAt some time during its life, an animal moves, or is moved, sofew animals die exactly where they were born. Movement oforganisms from a parent organism or from an existing populationis called dispersal.Animals that are sessile as adults typically disperse as eggsor larvae. Most sessile marine animals discharge their small eggsand sperm into the water, where fertilization takes place. Alarvasoon hatches and floats freely in the plankton, where it filterssmall prey from the water.Many animals that live on the seafloor, including polychaeteworms and mollusks, have a radially symmetrical larval formknown as a trochophore (Figure 31.11A); others, such as crustaceans,have a bilaterally symmetrical larval form called a nauplius(Figure 31.11B). Both types of larvae feed for some timein the plankton before settling on a substratum and transforminginto adults.Although the main dispersal phase of many animals occursearly in the life cycle, some species that are motile as adults dispersewhen they are mature. A caterpillar, for example, mayspend its entire larval stage feeding on a single plant, but afterit metamorphoses into a flying adult—a butterfly—it may flyto and lay eggs on other plants located far from the one whereit spent its caterpillar days. In some species, individuals disperseduring several different life cycle stages.No life cycle can maximize all benefitsThe common saying “a jack-of-all-trades is master of none” suggestswhy there are constraints on the evolution of life cycles.The characteristics an animal has in any one life cycle stage mayimprove its performance in one activity but reduce its performancein another—a situation known as a trade-off. An animal thatis good at filtering small food particles from the water, for example,probably cannot capture large prey. Similarly, energy devotedto building protective structures such as shells cannotbe used for growth.Some major trade-offs can be seen in animal reproduction.Some animals produce large numbers of small eggs, each with31.4 | HOW DO LIFE CYCLES DIFFER AMONG ANIMALS? 655(A)(C)(B)31.10 A Life Cycle with Metamorphosis (A) The larval stage (caterpillar)of the monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus) is specialized for feeding.(B) The pupa is the stage during which the transformation to theadult form occurs. (C) The adult butterfly is specialized for dispersal andreproduction.Bandof ciliaIntestineAnusMouthStomachMediancompound eyeAntennaMandibleAntennule(B) Nauplius(A) Trochophore31.11 Planktonic Larval Forms of Marine Animals (A) The trochophore (“wheel-bearer”) is adistinctive larval form found in several marine animal clades with spiral cleavage, most notably thepolychaete worms and the mollusks. (B) This nauplius larva will mature into a crustacean with asegmented body and jointed appendages.a small energy store (Figure 31.12A). Other animals produce asmall number of large eggs, each with a large energy store (Figure31.12B). With a fixed amount of available energy, a femaleanimal can produce many small eggs or a few large eggs, butshe cannot produce many large eggs. Thus there is a trade-offbetween the number of offspring produced and the energy resourceseach offspring receives from its mother.The larger the energy store in an egg, the longer an offspringcan develop before it must either find its own food or be fed byits parents. Birds of all species lay relatively small numbers ofrelatively large eggs, but incubation periods vary. In somespecies, eggs hatch when the young are stillhelpless (Figure 31.13A). Such altricial youngmust be fed and cared for until they can feedthemselves; parents can provide for only asmall number of altricial offspring. In contrast,some bird species incubate their eggslonger, and the hatchlings are developed to apoint that they are able to forage for themselvesalmost immediately (Figure 31.13B).The young of such species are called precocial.Parasite life cycles evolve to facilitatedispersal and overcome host defensesAnimals that live as internal parasites arebathed in the nutritious tissues of their hostor in the digested food that fills their host’s digestivetract. Thus they may not need to exertmuch energy to obtain food, but to survivethey must overcome the host’s defenses. Furthermore,either they or their offspring mustdisperse to new hosts while their host is stillliving, because they die when their host dies.The fertilized eggs of some parasites are voided with thehost’s feces and later ingested directly by other host individuals.Most parasite species, however, have complex life cycles involvingone or more intermediate hosts and several larval stages(Figure 31.14). Some intermediate hosts transport individualparasites directly between other hosts. Others house and supportthe parasite until another host ingests it. Complex life cyclesmay thus facilitate the transfer of individual parasitesamong hosts.Colonial organisms are composed of geneticallyidentical, physiologically integrated individualsMost people tend to view the distinction between individualsand populations as clear-cut. However, in several groups of animals,asexual reproduction without fission can lead to colonies656 CHAPTER 31 | ANIMAL ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF BODY PLANS(A) Rana sylvatica (B) Pygoscelis papua31.12 Many Small or Few Large Allocation of energy to eggs requires trade-offs. (A) Thiswood frog has divided her reproductive energy among a large number of small eggs. (B) Thisgentoo penguin invested all of her reproductive energy in one large egg.(A) Parus caeruleus(B) Branta canadensis31.13 Helpless or Independent(A) The altricial young of the blue titare essentially helpless when theyhatch. Their parents feed and care forthem for several weeks. (B) Canadagoose hatchlings are precocial, readyto swim and feed independentlyalmost immediately after hatching.of organisms composed of many physiologicallyintegrated individuals, which at first appearancemay look much like a single integrated organism.The individuals in a colony are clonalcopies of one another, so they are genetically homogeneous.Coloniality has arisen several timesamong animal groups, with widely varying levelsof integration and specialization among theindividuals. In some species, colonies are composedof loosely connected but integrated individualsthat all function alike (Figure 31.15). Inother colonial species, the individuals may becomespecialized for different functions, just asdifferent cell types in multicellular organismshave different functions. The Portuguese manof-war (see Figure 31.9) is an example of such acolonial animal, as it is composed of many individualsof four specialized body forms, all integratedand functioning together. The individualsin the colony are themselves multicellular,however, unlike the cells of a single multicellularorganism.31.4 | HOW DO LIFE CYCLES DIFFER AMONG ANIMALS? 657The fish is eaten bya mammalian host; thetapeworm matures inthe mammal’s gut.The perch is eatenby a larger fish (thirdintermediate host).The larvahatches.The embryodevelops in water.The zygote, which has developedin a host mammal’s gut, is passedwith its feces.843The larva moves to themuscles of the perch(second intermediate host).21The free-swimming firstlarval stage is ingestedby a copepod (firstintermediate host).The tapeworm developsinto the second larval stageand is passed on when aperch eats the copepod.765MaturetapewormFinal hosts(fish-eatingmammals)First larval stage(free-swimming)Secondlarval stageThird larval stageSTART31.14 Reaching a New Host by a Complex RouteThe broad fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium latum)must pass through the bodies of a copepod (a type ofcrustacean) and at least one fish before it can reinfectits primary host, a mammal. Such complex life cyclesassist the parasite’s colonization of new host individuals,but they also provide opportunities for humans tobreak the cycle with hygienic measures.The individual animals......secrete a gelatinousmatrix that brings thecolony together.Diaperoecia californica31.15 Colonial Animals This colonial bryozoan consists of many asexually reproducing,genetically homogeneous, physiologically interacting individuals. The colony looks much likea single individual with many parts, but in fact it is many individuals acting together.31.4 RECAPMany animals have a larval stage that clearly differsfrom the adult in morphology. In some animals, thelarval form is a dispersal stage; in other species, theadults are more likely to disperse than are larvae. Inseveral groups of organisms, asexual reproductionwithout fission leads to coloniality.• How do trade-offs constrain the evolution of lifecycles? See pp. 655–656• Do you understand the differences between a singlemulticellular organism and coloniality? See p. 657 andFigure 31.15What Are the Major Groups 31.5 of Animals?Variations in body symmetry, body cavity structure, life cycles,patterns of development, and survival strategies differentiatemillions of animal species. In the remainder of this chapterand in Chapters 32 and 33, we become acquainted with themajor animal groups and learn how the general characteristicsdescribed in this chapter apply to each of them.Table 31.1 summarizes the living members of the major animalgroups. Bilateria is a large monophyletic group embracingall animals other than sponges, placozoans, ctenophores, andcnidarians. Some major traits that support the monophyly of bilaterians(in addition to genomic analyses) are the presence ofthree distinct cell layers in embryos (triploblasty) and the presenceof at least seven Hox genes (see Chapters 19 and 20). Althoughbilateral symmetry is often viewed as a synapomorphyof bilaterians (and the trait gives the group its name), somegroups of cnidarians are also bilaterally symmetrical. Recentstudies have shown that the genetic basis of bilateral symmetryis the same in bilaterians and cnidarians that have bilateralsymmetry, so this feature was likely present in the ancestor ofthese two groups.Bilaterian animals comprise the two major categories mentionedearlier in this chapter, the protostomes and the deuterostomes(see Figure 31.1). These two groups have been evolvingseparately for more than 500 million years—since the earlyCambrian or the late Precambrian. We describe the protostomesin Chapter 32 and the deuterostomes in Chapter 33.The remainder of this chapter describes those animal groupsthat are not bilaterians. The simplest animals, the sponges, haveno distinct tissue types. Placozoans have four cell types andweakly differentiated tissue layers. All other animals groups,including the bilatarians, are known as eumetazoans. The eumetazoanshave obvious body symmetry, a gut, a nervous system,and tissues organized into distinct organs (although therehave been secondary losses of some of these structures in someeumetazoans). Sponges and placozoans lack all of these features.Sponges are loosely organized animalsSponges are the simplest animals.Although they have some specializedcells, they have no distinct embryoniccell layers and no trueorgans. Early naturalists thoughtsponges were plants because they weresessile and lacked body symmetry.Sponges have hard skeletal elements called spicules, whichmay be small and simple or large and complex. There are threemajor groups of sponges, which separated soon after the split betweensponges and the rest of the animals. Members of twogroups (glass sponges and demosponges) have skeletons composedof silicaceous spicules made of hydrated silicon dioxide (Figure31.16A,B). These spicules are remarkable in having greater flexibilityand toughness than synthetic glass rods of similar length.Members of the third group, the calcareous sponges, take their name658 CHAPTER 31 | ANIMAL ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF BODY PLANS(A) Xestospongia testudinaria (B) Euplectella aspergillum(C) Leucilla nuttingi31.16 Sponge Diversity (A) The great majority of sponge species are demosponges,such as these Pacific barrel sponges. The system of pores and water canals “typical” of thesponge body plan is apparent. (B) The supporting structures of both demosponges andglass sponges are silicaceous spicules, seen here in the skeleton of a glass sponge. (C) Theskeletons of calcareous sponges are made of calcium carbonate.SpongesEumetazoansPlacozoansfrom their calcium carbonate skeletons (Figure 31.16C). There issome question about the monophyly of sponges. Analyses of somegene sequences suggest that calcareous sponges are actually moreclosely related to the eumetazoans than to the other groups ofsponges. However, genomic analyses that combine informationfrom many genes do support the monophyly of sponges.The body plan of sponges of all three groups—even largeones, which may reach a meter or more in length—is an aggregationof cells built around a water canal system. Water, alongwith any food particles it contains, enters the sponge by way ofsmall pores and passes into the water canals or a central atrium,where choanocytes capture food particles (see Figure 31.7).Askeleton of simple or branching spicules, and often a complexnetwork of elastic fibers, supports the body of mostsponges. Sponges also have an extracellular matrix, composedof collagen, adhesive glycoproteins, and other molecules, thatholds the cells together. Most species are filter feeders; a fewspecies are carnivores that trap prey on hook-shaped spiculesthat protrude from the body surface.Most of the 9,000 species of sponges are marine animals; onlyabout 50 species live in fresh water. Sponges come in a wide varietyof sizes and shapes that are adapted to different movementpatterns of water. Sponges living in intertidal or shallow subtidalenvironments with strong wave action are firmly attached tothe substratum. Most sponges that live in slowly flowing waterare flattened and are oriented at right angles to the direction ofcurrent flow. They intercept water and the prey it contains as itflows past them.31.5 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR GROUPS OF ANIMALS? 659TABLE 31.1Summary of Living Members of the Major Animal GroupsAPPROXIMATE NUMBER APPROXIMATE NUMBEROF LIVING SPECIES OF LIVING SPECIESDESCRIBED MAJOR GROUPS DESCRIBED MAJOR GROUPSSponges 9,000 Demosponges, glass sponges,calcareous spongesPlacozoans 2Ctenophores 150Cnidarians 11,000 Anthozoans: Corals, seaanemonesHydrozoans: Hydras and hydroidsScyphozoans: JellyfishesPROTOSTOMESArrow worms 100LophotrochozoansBryozoans 4,500Flatworms 25,000 Free-living flatworms; flukes andtapeworms (all parasitic);monogeneans (ectoparasitesof fishes)Rotifers 1,800Ribbon worms 1,000Phoronids 20Brachiopods 335Annelids 16,500 Polychaetes (all marine)Clitellates: Earthworms,freshwater worms, leechesMollusks 100,000 MonoplacophoransChitonsBivalves: Clams, oysters, musselsGastropods: Snails, slugs, limpetsCephalopods: Squids, octopuses,nautiloidsEcdysozoansKinorhynchs 150Loriciferans 100Priapulids 16Horsehair worms 320Nematodes 25,000Onychophorans 150Tardigrades 800Arthropods:Crustaceans 52,000 Crabs, shrimps, lobsters,barnacles, copepodsHexapods 1,000,000 Insects and relativesMyriapods 14,000 Millipedes, centipedesChelicerates 98,000 Horseshoe crabs, arachnids(scorpions, harvestmen,spiders, mites, ticks)DEUTEROSTOMESEchinoderms 7,000 Crinoids (sea lilies andfeather stars); brittle stars;sea stars; sea daisies; seaurchins; sea cucumbersHemichordates 100 Acorn worms andpterobranchsUrochordates 3,000 Ascidians (sea squirts)Cephalochordates 30 LanceletsVertebrates 62,000 Hagfish; lampreysCartilaginous fishesRay-finned fishesCoelacanths; lungfishesAmphibiansReptiles (including birds)MammalsSponges reproduce both sexually and asexually. In mostspecies, a single individual produces both eggs and sperm,but individuals do not self-fertilize. Water currents carry spermfrom one individual to another. Asexual reproduction is by buddingand fragmentation.Placozoans are abundant but rarely observedAs discussed in the opening of thischapter, placozoans are structurallyvery simple animals withonly a few distinct cell types (see thephotograph on p. 645). Individuals in the mature, asymmetricallife stage are usually observed adhering to surfaces (such as theglass of aquariums, where they were first discovered, or to rocksand other hard substrates in nature). Their structural simplicity—they have no mouth, gut, or nervous system—initially led biologiststo suspect they might be the sister group of all other animals.Most phylogenetic analyses have not supported thishypothesis, however, and some aspects of the placozoans’ structuralsimplicity may be secondarily derived. They are generallyconsidered to have a diploblastic body plan, with upper andlower epithelial (surface) layers that sandwich a layer of contractilefiber cells.Recent studies have found that placozoans have a pelagic(open-ocean) stage that is capable of swimming (Figure 31.17),but the life history of placozoans is incompletely known. Moststudies have focused on the larger adherent stages that are usuallyfound in aquariums, where they appear after being inadvertentlycollected with other marine organisms. The transparentnature and small size of placozoans make them very difficultto observe in nature. Nonetheless, it is known that placozoanscan reproduce both asexually as well as sexually, although thedetails of their sexual reproduction are mostly unknown. As wenoted in the opening story, placozoans have mostly been studiedin aquariums, although we now know that pelagic-stageplacozoans are abundant in warm seas around the world.Ctenophores are radially symmetrical and diploblasticCtenophores, also known as comb jellies,lack most of the Hox genes found in allother eumetazoans. Ctenophores havea radially symmetrical, diploblastic bodyplan. The two cell layers are separated by aninert, gelatinous extracellular matrix calledmesoglea. Ctenophores have a complete gut: foodenters through a mouth, and wastes are eliminatedthrough two anal pores.Ctenophores move by beating cilia rather than muscular contractions.Most of the 150 known species have eight comblikerows of cilia-bearing plates, called ctenes (Figure 31.18). Thefeeding tentacles of ctenophores are covered with cells that dischargeadhesive material when they contact prey. After capturingits prey, a ctenophore retracts its tentacles to bring the foodto its mouth. In some species, the entire surface of the body iscoated with sticky mucus that captures prey. Most ctenophores660 CHAPTER 31 | ANIMAL ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF BODY PLANSSpongesEumetazoansPlacozoansPrey adhere to the sticky cellsthat cover the tentacles.TentacleMouthPharynxGutTentaclesheathCtenesMouth(B) Mnemiopsis sp.(A)Bilaterians(protostomes anddeuterostomes)CtenophoresCnidariansSpongesPlacozoans31.17 A Swimming Stage in the Life of a Placozoan Placozoansare tiny and transparent, and thus difficult to observe in nature. Recentstudies have found a small, weakly swimming pelagic stage of placozoanto be abundant in many warm tropical and subtropical seas.31.18 Comb Jellies Feed withTentacles (A) The body plan ofa typical ctenophore. The long,sticky tentacles sweep throughthe water, efficiently harvestingsmall prey. (B) This comb jelly,photographed in Sydney Harbor,Australia, has short tentacles.31.5 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR GROUPS OF ANIMALS? 661As the positions ofthe mouth andtentacles indicate,the medusa is“upside-down”from the polyp—or vice versa.Polyps producemedusae throughasexual buddingof the mature polyp.Medusae producepolyps throughsexual reproduction.Medusa(“jellyfish”)PolypFertilizedeggYoung medusa(oral surface)PlanulalarvaMature polypMouth/anusTentaclesTentaclesMouth/anusEgg SpermFertilizationHAPLOIDDIPLOID67Meiosis31.19 The Cnidarian Life CycleTypically Has Two Stages The lifecycle of a scyphozoan (jellyfish) exemplifiesthe typical cnidarian body forms: thesessile, asexual polyp; and the motile,sexual medusa. Some species of cnidarianshave life cycles that lack polyps ormedusae.eat small planktonic organisms, although some eat otherctenophores. They are common in open seas and can becomeabundant in protected bodies of water, where large populationsof ctenophores can damage local ecosystems.Ctenophore life cycles are uncomplicated. Gametes are releasedinto the body cavity and then discharged through themouth or the anal pores. Fertilization takes place in open seawater.In nearly all species, the fertilized egg develops directlyinto a miniature ctenophore that gradually grows into an adult.Cnidarians are specialized carnivoresThe cnidarians (jellyfishes, sea anemones,corals, and hydrozoans) may be thesister group of the ctenophores, althoughsome biologists think they aremore closely related to the bilaterians. Themouth of a cnidarian is connected to a blindsac called the gastrovascular cavity (a cnidarianthus does not have a complete gut). The gastrovascular cavityfunctions in digestion, circulation, and gas exchange, and italso acts as a hydrostatic skeleton. The single opening serves asboth mouth and anus.The life cycle of many cnidarians has two distinct stages, onesessile and the other motile (Figure 31.19), although one or theother of these stages is absent in some groups. In the sessilepolyp stage, a cylindrical stalk is attached to the substratum. Themotile medusa (plural medusae) is a free-swimming stageshaped like a bell or an umbrella. It typically floats with itsmouth and feeding tentacles facing downward. Mature polypsproduce medusae by asexual budding. Medusae then reproducesexually, producing eggs or sperm by meiosis and releasingthe gametes into the water. Afertilized egg develops into afree-swimming, ciliated larva called a planula, which eventuallysettles to the bottom and develops into a polyp.Cnidarians have epithelial cells with muscle fibers whosecontractions enable the animals to move, as well as simple nervenets that integrate their body activities. They also have specializedstructural molecules (collagen, actin, and myosin). Theyare specialized carnivores, using the toxin in their nematocyststo capture relatively large and complex prey (see Figure 31.9).Some cnidarians, including many corals and anemones, gainadditional nutrition from photosynthetic endosymbionts thatlive in their tissues. Cnidarians, like ctenophores, are largelymade up of inert mesoglea. They have low metabolic rates andcan survive in environments where they encounter prey onlyinfrequently.Of the roughly 11,000 living cnidarian species, all but a fewlive in the oceans (Figure 31.20). The smallest cnidarians canhardly be seen without a microscope. The largest known jellyfishis 2.5 meters in diameter, and some colonial siphonophoresBilaterians(protostomes anddeuterostomes)CtenophoresCnidariansSpongesPlacozoansGO TO Animated Tutorial 31.1 • Life Cycle of a CnidarianyourBioPortal.com(which include the Portuguese man-ofwar;see Figure 31.9) can reach lengthsin excess of 30 meters. Here we describethree clades of cnidarians that havemany species: anthozoans, scyphozoans,and hydrozoans.ANTHOZOANS Members of the anthozoanclade include sea anemones, seapens, and corals. Sea anemones (seeFigure 31.20A), all of which are solitary,are widespread in both warm and coldocean waters. Sea pens (see Figure31.20B), by contrast, are colonial. Eachcolony consists of two or more differentkinds of polyps. The primary polyp hasa lower portion anchored in the bottomsediment and a branched upper portionthat projects above the substratum.Along the upper portion, the primarypolyp produces smaller secondarypolyps by budding. Some of these secondarypolyps differentiate into feedingpolyps; in some species, other secondarypolyps differentiate to circulate waterthrough the colony.The common names of coral groups—brain corals, staghorn corals, and organpipe corals, among others—often describetheir appearance (Figure 31.21A). Coralsare sessile and colonial. The polyps of662 CHAPTER 31 | ANIMAL ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF BODY PLANS(D) Polyorchis penicillatus(C) Gonionemus vertens(A) Anthopleura elegantissima (B) Pteroeides sp. 31.20 Diversity among Cnidarians(A) The nematocyst-studded tentaclesof this sea anemone from BritishColumbia are poised to capture largeprey carried to the animal by watermovement. (B) The sea pen is a colonialcnidarian that lives in soft bottom sedimentsand projects polyps above thesubstratum. (C) This jellyfish illustratesthe complexity of a scyphozoanmedusa. (D) The internal structure ofthe medusa of a North Atlantic colonialhydrozoan is visible here.(A) Diploria labyrinthiformis31.21 Corals (A) The descriptive commonname of this Caribbean coral is “brain coral.” (B)Many different coral species form this reef in theRed Sea between Egypt and the ArabianPeninsula.31.5 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR GROUPS OF ANIMALS? 663Medusae developasexually within anenlarged polyp.Larvae settle on the substratumand grow into polyps.The polyps of thehydrozoan Obelia areinterconnected and sharea gastrovascular cavity.Eggs produced by medusaeare fertilized in the open waterby sperm produced by othermedusae.MedusaOralsurfaceGonadFertilizedeggPlanulalarvaEggSpermFertilizationDIPLOID HAPLOID6 7Meiosis31.22 Hydrozoans Often Have Colonial PolypsThe polyps in a hydrozoan colony may differentiate toperform specialized tasks. In the species whose life cycleis diagrammed here, the medusa is the sexual reproductivestage, producing eggs and sperm in organs calledgonads.most species form a skeleton by secreting a matrix of organicmolecules on which they deposit calcium carbonate, whichforms the eventual skeleton of the coral colony. As the colonygrows, old polyps die but their calcium carbonate skeletonsremain. Living corals form a layer on top of a growing bank ofskeletal remains, eventually forming chains of islands and reefs(Figure 31.21B). The Great Barrier Reef along the northeasterncoast of Australia is a system of coral formations more than2,000 kilometers long—about the distance from New York Cityto St. Louis. A single coral reef in the Red Sea has been calculatedto contain more material than all the buildings in the majorcities of North America combined.Corals flourish in clear, nutrient-poor tropical waters. Theygrow well in such environments because unicellular photosyntheticdinoflagellates live endosymbiotically within their cells.These dinoflagellates provide the corals with products of photosynthesis;the corals, in turn, provide the dinoflagellates withnutrients and a place to live. This endosymbiotic relationshipexplains why reef-forming corals are restricted to clear surfacewaters, where light levels are high enough to support photosynthesis.Coral reefs throughout the world are threatened both byglobal warming, which is raising the temperatures of shallowtropical ocean waters, and by polluted runoff from developmenton adjacent shorelines. Warming can lead to the loss of coral endosymbionts(coral bleaching; see Figure 27.8A), and an overabundanceof nitrogen in runoff gives an advantage to algae,which overgrow and eventually smother the corals.SCYPHOZOANS The several hundred species ofscyphozoans are all marine. The mesoglea of theirmedusae is thick and firm, giving rise to theircommon name—jellyfishes or sea jellies. Themedusa rather than the polyp dominates the life cycleof scyphozoans. An individual medusa is male orfemale, releasing eggs or sperm into the open sea. Thefertilized egg develops into a small planula larva thatquickly settles on a substratum and develops into a smallpolyp. This polyp feeds and grows and may produce additionalpolyps by budding. After a period of growth, the polyp beginsto bud off small medusae, which feed, grow, and transform intoadult medusae (see Figures 31.19 and 31.20C).HYDROZOANS Hydrozoans have diverse life cycles. The polyptypically dominates the life cycle, but some species have onlymedusae and others have only polyps. Most hydrozoans arecolonial (see Figure 31.20D). Asingle larval planula eventuallygives rise to a colony of many polyps, all interconnected andsharing a continuous gastrovascular cavity (Figure 31.22).Within such a colony, some polyps have tentacles with manynematocysts; they capture prey for the colony. Other individualslack tentacles and are unable to feed but are specialized forthe asexual production of medusae. Still others are fingerlikeand defend the colony with their nematocysts.31.5 RECAPBilaterian animals are in one of two major clades,protostomes or deuterostomes. The non-bilateriananimals—the sponges, placozoans, ctenophores,and cnidarians—have diverse life cycles, feedingstrategies, and growth forms.• Why are sponges are considered to be animals, eventhough they lack the complex body structures foundamong most other animal groups? See pp. 658–659and Figure 31.7• Describe some major features of the following groups:sponges, placozoans, ctenophores, and cnidarians.See pp. 658–663 and Figures 31.16–31.19
31.1 What Characteristics Distinguish the Animals?• Animals share a set of derived traits not found in other groupsof organisms. These traits include similarities in the sequencesof many of their genes, the structure of their cell junctions, andthe components of their extracellular matrix.• Patterns of embryonic development provide clues to the evolutionaryrelationships among animals. Diploblastic animalsdevelop two embryonic cell layers; triploblastic animals developthree cell layers.• Differences in their patterns of early development characterizetwo major clades of triploblastic animals, the protostomes andthe deuterostomes.31.2 What Are the Features of Animal Body Plans?• Animal body plans can be described in terms of symmetry,body cavity structure, segmentation, and type of appendages.• A few animals have no symmetry, but most animals have eitherradial symmetry or bilateral symmetry. Review Figure 31.3• Most animals with radial symmetry move slowly or not at all,whereas most animals with bilateral symmetry are able to movemore rapidly. Many bilaterally symmetrical animals exhibitcephalization, with sensory and nervous tissues in an anteriorhead.• On the basis of their body cavity structure, animals can bedescribed as acoelomates, pseudocoelomates, or coelomates.Review Figure 31.4• Segmentation, which takes many forms, improves control ofmovement, especially if the animal also has appendages.31.3 How Do Animals Get Their Food?• Motile animals can move to find food; sessile animals stay inone place and capture food by filter feeding or through interactionwith endosymbionts.• Filter feeders strain small organisms and organic moleculesfrom their environment.• Predators have morphological features such as sharp teeth,beaks, and claws that enable them to capture and subdue animalprey.• Herbivores consume plants, usually without killing them.• Parasites live in or on other organisms and obtain nutritionfrom these host individuals.• Detritivores consume decaying organic matter and returnnutrients to the ecosystem.31.4 How Do Life Cycles Differ among Animals?• The stages of an animal’s life cycle may be specialized for differentactivities. An immature stage that is dramatically differentfrom the adult stage is called a larva.• Most animal life cycles have at least one dispersal stage, so thatthe animal does not die in the same place where it was born. Manysessile marine animals can be grouped by the presence of one oftwo distinct larval dispersal stages: trochophore or nauplius.• Parasites have complex life cycles that may involve one or morehosts and several larval stages. Review Figure 31.14• A characteristic of an animal or a life cycle stage may improvethe animal’s performance in one activity but reduce its performancein another, a situation known as a trade-off.• Colonial organisms are composed of groups of geneticallyhomogeneous individuals produced through clonal reproductionwithout subsequent fission.31.5 What Are the Major Groups of Animals?• All animals other than sponges, placozoans, ctenophores,and cnidarians belong to a large monophyletic group calledthe Bilateria. Eumetazoans, which have tissues organized intodistinct organs, include all animals other than sponges andplacozoans.• Sponges are simple animals that lack differentiated cell layersand true organs. They have skeletons made up of silicaceous orcalcareous spicules. They create water currents and capturefood with flagellated feeding cells called choanocytes.Choanocytes are an evolutionary link between the animals andthe choanoflagellate protists. Review Figure 31.7• Placozoans have only a few cell types and lack true organs,although their simplicity may be secondarily derived. They areabundant in warm seas of the world, but their transparent formand small size make them difficult to observe.• Ctenophores and many cnidarians are radially symmetrical,although some cnidarians are bilaterally symmetrical. Themature adherent stage of placozoans is asymmetrical.• The two cell layers of ctenophores are separated by an inertextracellular matrix called mesoglea.• Ctenophores move by beating fused plates of cilia calledctenes. Review Figure 31.18• The life cycle of most cnidarians has two distinct stages: a sessilepolyp stage and a motile medusa. A fertilized egg developsinto a free-swimming larval planula, which settles to the bottomand develops into a polyp. Review Figures 31.19 and31.22, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 31.1