8 PART THREE CELLS AND ENERGYUnited Nations officials first noticed the problemduring the 1950s when massive food relief effortswere made to alleviate famines in Asia and Africa.The conventional wisdom was that donated food shouldprovide a balanced diet, and that an important componentof the diet (one of the “four major food groups”) wasdairy products. Reports started coming in of people developingbloating, nausea, and diarrhea after consuming donateddairy products.At first, this problem was attributed to contaminationby bacteria during shipping, or to errors in the preparationof powdered milk products by the recipients. It neveroccurred to the donors that the scientific principles of nutritionthat they had so carefully developed did not applyto people everywhere. But it soon became apparent thatthe donors in Europe and other wealthy countries, whowere usually of European descent, were atypical of humanityin their ability to hydrolyze the disaccharide lactose,the major milk sugar, to its constituent monosaccharides,glucose and galactose. Their small intestines make aprotein called lactase (β-galactosidase) that acts to speedup the hydrolysis reaction millions-fold. Such catalyticproteins are called enzymes, and their names often endwith the suffix “ase.” Most people around the world areborn with the ability to make the enzyme lactase, butsoon after infancy they lose it. People of European descentare unusual in that they do not lose their lactaseproduction after infancy.When many non-European adults consume lactose itdoes not get hydrolyzed in their small intestine, becausethey do not produce lactase. Disaccharides such as lactoseare not absorbed into the blood stream by cells lining thesmall intestine. So the lactose remains intact and travelsonward to the colon (large intestine). Among the billionsof bacteria in the colon, there are species that make lactase.But as a side product, these bacteria produce thegases that cause all the discomfort. The condition of discomfortafter eating lactose is called lactose intolerance.Why does lactase production go down after infancy inmost humans? The explanation lies with diet: an infant firstconsumes mother’s milk, which contains abundant lactose.This stimulates the intestinal cells to make lactase.But many humans—and other mammals—consume littleor no milk after weaning, and the ability to make lactase inthe small intestine is not needed. So most mammals haveevolved to produce lactase only during infancy. Lactose intoleranceis not a problem in many human societies becausethe people simply don’t consume dairy products—Lactase deficiencyA Precursor to Trouble Many adults do not produce theenzyme lactase in their small intestines. When they consumedairy products, these people have ill effects.What Physical Principles Underlie 8.1 Biological Energy Transformations?Metabolic reactions and catalysts are essential to the biochemicaltransformation of energy by living things. Whether it is aplant using light energy to produce carbohydrates or a cat transformingfood energy so it can leap to a countertop (where ithopes to find food so it can obtain more energy), the transformationof energy is a hallmark of life.Physicists define energy as the capacity to do work. Work occurswhen a force operates on an object over a distance. In biochemistry,it is more useful to consider energy as the capacity forchange. In biochemical reactions these energy changes are usuallyassociated with changes in the chemical composition andproperties of molecules. No cell creates energy; all living thingsmust obtain energy from the environment. Indeed one of thefundamental laws of physics is that energy can neither be creatednor destroyed. However, energy can be transformed fromone form into another, and living cells carry out many suchtransformations. For example, green plant cells convert light energyinto chemical energy; the jumping cat transforms chemicalenergy into movement. Energy transformations are linkedto the chemical transformations that occur in cells—the breakingand creating of chemical bonds, the movement of substancesacross membranes, cell reproduction, and so forth.There are two basic types of energy and of metabolismEnergy comes in many forms: chemical, electrical, heat, light,and mechanical. But all forms of energy can be considered asone of two basic types:• Potential energy is the energy of state or position—that is,stored energy. It can be stored in many forms: in chemicalbonds, as a concentration gradient, or even as an electriccharge imbalance (as in the membrane potential; see Section6.3). Think of a crouching cat, holding still as it preparesto pounce.• Kinetic energy is the energy of movement—that is, the typeof energy that does work, that makes things change. Thinkof the cat leaping as some of the potential energy stored inits muscles is converted into the kinetic energy of musclecontractions.Potential energy can be converted into kinetic energy and viceversa, and the form that the energy takes can also be converted.The potential energy in the cat’s muscles is in covalent bonds(chemical energy), while the kinetic energy of the pouncingcat is mechanical (Figure 8.1). You can think of many other suchIN THIS CHAPTER we begin our study of biochemicaltransformations, focusing on the role of energy. We firstdescribe the physical principles that underlie energy transformationsand how these principles apply to biology. Then,we go on to show how the energy carrier ATP plays an importantrole in the cell. Finally, we follow up on the lactasestory by describing the nature, activities, and regulation ofenzymes, which speed up biochemical transformations andare essential for life.unless they are given them by well-meaning donors!They get their carbohydrates from other sources.Then why are many people of European descent stillable to make lactase as adults? It turns out that they carrya mutation (a change in their DNA sequence) that eliminatesthe shutdown in lactase production after weaning.This mutation became predominant in European (andsome east African) populations after those people beganto keep grazing animals and to use their milk.Lactase activity is an example of an enzyme-catalyzedbiochemical transformation. The hydrolysis of lactose isthe beginning of its transformation to simpler molecules—ultimately CO2—and this transformation releasesenergy.CHAPTER OUTLINE8.1 What Physical Principles Underlie Biological EnergyTransformations?8.2 What Is the Role of ATP in Biochemical Energetics?8.3 What Are Enzymes?8.4 How Do Enzymes Work?8.5 How Are Enzyme Activities Regulated?Maasai Herders The Maasai are unusual among Africans inthat they consume milk throughout their lives. They can do thisbecause they produce lactase after weaning.conversions: while reading this book, for example, light energyis converted into chemical energy in your eyes, and then is convertedinto electric energy in the nerve cells that carry messagesto your brain. When you decide to turn a page, the electricaland chemical energy of nerve and muscle are converted into kineticenergy.In any living organism, chemical reactions are occurring continuously.Metabolism is defined as the totality of these reactions.While particular cells carry out many reactions at anygiven instant, scientists usually focus on a few reactions at atime. Two broad categories of metabolic reactions occur in allcells of all organisms:• Anabolic reactions (anabolism) link simple molecules toform more complex molecules (for example, the synthesisof a protein from amino acids). Anabolic reactions requirean input of energy and capture it in the chemical bonds thatare formed.• Catabolic reactions (catabolism) break down complex moleculesinto simpler ones and release the energy stored inchemical bonds. For example, when the polysaccharidestarch is hydrolyzed to simpler molecules, energy is released.Catabolic and anabolic reactions are often linked. The energy releasedin catabolic reactions is often used to drive anabolic reactions—that is, to do biological work. For example, the energyreleased by the breakdown of glucose (catabolism) is used todrive anabolic reactions such as the synthesis of nucleic acidsand proteins.Catabolic reactions also provide energy for movement: musclecontraction is driven by the catabolism (hydrolysis) of ATP(see Section 8.2). In this case, the potential energy released bycatabolism is converted to kinetic energy.The laws of thermodynamics (thermo, “energy”; dynamics,“change”) were derived from studies of the fundamental physicalproperties of energy, and the ways it interacts with matter.The laws apply to all matter and all energy transformations inthe universe. Their application to living systems helps us to understandhow organisms and cells harvest and transform energyto sustain life.The first law of thermodynamics:Energy is neither created nor destroyedThe first law of thermodynamics states that in any conversionof energy, it is neither created nor destroyed. Another way ofsaying this is: in any conversion of energy, the total energy beforeand after the conversion is the same (Figure 8.2A). As youwill see in the next two chapters, the potential energy presentin the chemical bonds of carbohydrates and lipids can be convertedto potential energy in the form of ATP. This can then beconverted into kinetic energy to do mechanical work (such asin muscle contractions), or used to do biochemical work (suchas protein synthesis).The second law of thermodynamics:Disorder tends to increaseAlthough energy cannot be created or destroyed, the secondlaw of thermodynamics states that when energy is convertedfrom one form to another, some of that energy becomes unavailablefor doing work (Figure 8.2B). In other words, no physicalprocess or chemical reaction is 100 percent efficient; some of thereleased energy is lost to a form associated with disorder. Thinkof disorder as a kind of randomness due to the thermal motionof particles; this energy is of such a low value and so dispersedthat it is unusable. Entropy is a measure of the disorderin a system.It takes energy to impose order on a system. Unless energyis applied to a system, it will be randomly arranged or disordered.The second law applies to all energy transformations,but we will focus here on chemical reactions in living systems.NOT ALL ENERGY CAN BE USED In any system, the total energyincludes the usable energy that can do work and the unusableenergy that is lost to disorder:total energy = usable energy + unusable energyIn biological systems, the total energy is called enthalpy (H). Theusable energy that can do work is called free energy (G). Freeenergy is what cells require for all the chemical reactions neededfor growth, cell division, and maintenance. The unusable en-150 CHAPTER 8 | ENERGY, ENZYMES, AND METABOLISMPotential chemical energy isstored in the muscles of the cat.Potential chemical energyis converted into kineticmechanical energy whenthe cat leaps.8.1 Energy Conversions and Work A leaping cat illustrates both theconversion between potential and kinetic energy and the conversion ofenergy from one form (chemical) to another (mechanical).ergy is represented by entropy (S) multiplied by the absolutetemperature (T). Thus we can rewrite the word equation abovemore precisely as:H = G + TSBecause we are interested in usable energy, we rearrange thisexpression:G = H – TSAlthough we cannot measure G, H, or S absolutely, we can determinethe change in each at a constant temperature. Such energychanges are measured in calories (cal) or joules (J).* Achangein energy is represented by the Greek letter delta (Δ). The changein free energy (ΔG) of any chemical reaction is equal to the differencein free energy between the products and the reactants:ΔGreaction = Gproducts – GreactantsSuch a change can be either positive or negative; that is, the freeenergy of the products can be more or less than the free energyof the reactants. If the products have more free energy thanthe reactants, then there must have been some input of energyinto the reaction. (Remember that energy cannot be created, sosome energy must have been added from an external source.)At a constant temperature, ΔG is defined in terms of the changein total energy (ΔH) and the change in entropy (ΔS):ΔG = ΔH – TΔSThis equation tells us whether free energy is released or consumedby a chemical reaction:• If ΔG is negative (ΔG < 0), free energy is released.• If ΔG is positive (ΔG > 0), free energy is required (consumed).If the necessary free energy is not available, the reaction doesnot occur. The sign and magnitude of ΔG depend on the twofactors on the right of the equation:• ΔH: In a chemical reaction, ΔH is the total amount of energyadded to the system (ΔH > 0) or released (ΔH < 0).• ΔS: Depending on the sign and magnitude of ΔS, the entireterm, TΔS, may be negative or positive, large or small. Inother words, in living systems at a constant temperature(no change in T), the magnitude and sign of ΔG can dependa lot on changes in entropy.If a chemical reaction increases entropy, its products are moredisordered or random than its reactants. If there are more productsthan reactants, as in the hydrolysis of a protein to its aminoacids, the products have considerable freedom to move around.The disorder in a solution of amino acids will be large comparedwith that in the protein, in which peptide bonds and other forcesprevent free movement. So in hydrolysis, the change in entropy(ΔS) will be positive. Conversely, if there are fewer products andthey are more restrained in their movements than the reac-8.1 | WHAT PHYSICAL PRINCIPLES UNDERLIE BIOLOGICAL ENERGY TRANSFORMATIONS? 151Energybefore(A)EnergybeforeUsable energy after(free energy)Energytransformation(B)Unusable energy afterFree energyEnergyafterThe First Law of ThermodynamicsThe total amount of energy before atransformation equals the totalamount after a transformation. Nonew energy is created, and noenergy is lost.The Second Law of ThermodynamicsAlthough a transformation does notchange the total amount of energy within aclosed system (one that is not exchangingmatter or energy with the surroundings),after any transformation the amount ofenergy available to do work is always lessthan the original amount of energy.Another statement of the second law is that in a closedsystem, with repeated energy transformations, free energydecreases and unusable energy (disorder) increases—aphenomenon known as the increase in entropy.Unusable energy after8.2 The Laws of Thermodynamics(A) The first lawstates that energy cannot be createdor destroyed. (B) The secondlaw states that after energytransformations, some energybecomes unavailable to do work.*A calorie is the amount of heat energy needed to raise the temperatureof 1 gram of pure water from 14.5°C to 15.5°C. In theSI system, energy is measured in joules. 1 J = 0.239 cal; conversely,1 cal = 4.184 J. Thus, for example, 486 cal = 2,033 J, or2.033 kJ. Although defined here in terms of heat, the calorie andthe joule are measures of any form of energy—mechanical, electrical,or chemical. When you compare data on energy, alwayscompare joules with joules and calories with calories.tants (as for amino acids being joined in a protein), ΔS will benegative.DISORDER TENDS TO INCREASE The second law of thermodynamicsalso predicts that, as a result of energy transformations,disorder tends to increase; some energy is always lost to randomthermal motion (entropy). Chemical changes, physicalchanges, and biological processes all tend to increase entropy(see Figure 8.2B), and this tendency gives direction to theseprocesses. It explains why some reactions proceed in one directionrather than another.How does the second law apply to organisms? Consider thehuman body, with its highly organized tissues and organs composedof large, complex molecules. This level of complexity appearsto be in conflict with the second law but is not for two reasons.First, the construction of complexity also generatesdisorder. Constructing 1 kg of a human body requires the metabolismof about 10 kg of highly ordered biological materials,which are converted into CO2, H2O, and other simple moleculesthat move independently and randomly. So metabolism createsfar more disorder (more energy is lost to entropy) than theamount of order (total energy; enthalpy) stored in 1 kg of flesh.Second, life requires a constant input of energy to maintain order.Without this energy, the complex structures of living systemswould break down. Because energy is used to generateand maintain order, there is no conflict with the second law ofthermodynamics.Having seen that the laws of thermodynamics apply to livingthings, we will now turn to a consideration of how theselaws apply to biochemical reactions.Chemical reactions release or consume energySince anabolic reactions link simple molecules to form morecomplex molecules, they tend to increase complexity (order)in the cell. On the other hand, catabolic reactions break downcomplex molecules into simpler ones, so they tend to decreasecomplexity (generate disorder).• Catabolic reactions may break down an ordered reactantinto smaller, more randomly distributed products. Reactionsthat release free energy (–ΔG) are called exergonicreactions (Figure 8.3A). For example:complex molecules →free energy + small molecules• Anabolic reactions may make a single product (a highlyordered substance) out of many smaller reactants (lessordered). Reactions that require or consume free energy(+ΔG) are called endergonic reactions (Figure 8.3B).For example:free energy + small molecules →complex moleculesIn principle, chemical reactions are reversible and can runboth forward and backward. For example, if compound A canbe converted into compound B (A→B), then B, in principle, canbe converted into A(B →A), although the concentrations of A andB determine which of these directions will be favored. Think of theoverall reaction as resulting from competition between forwardand reverse reactions (A~B). Increasing the concentration ofA speeds up the forward reaction, and increasing the concentrationof B favors the reverse reaction.At some concentration of A and B, the forward and reversereactions take place at the same rate. At this concentration, nofurther net change in the system is observable, although individualmolecules are still forming and breakingapart. This balance between forward and reversereactions is known as chemical equilibrium. Chemicalequilibrium is a state of no net change, and astate in which ΔG = 0.152 CHAPTER 8 | ENERGY, ENZYMES, AND METABOLISMIn an exergonic reaction, energy isreleased as the reactants form lowerenergyproducts. ΔG is negative.Energy must be added for an endergonic reaction,in which reactants are converted to products witha higher energy level. ΔG is positive.(A) Exergonic reaction(B) Endergonic reactionReactantsAmount ofenergyreleasedProductsTime course of reactionFree energyTime course of reactionFree energyProductsAmount ofenergyrequiredReactantsTime course of reactionTime course of reaction8.3 Exergonic and Endergonic Reactions (A) In anexergonic reaction, the reactants behave like a ball rollingdown a hill, and energy is released. (B) A ball will not rolluphill by itself. Driving an endergonic reaction, like movinga ball uphill, requires the addition of free energy.Chemical equilibrium and free energy are relatedEvery chemical reaction proceeds to a certain extent, but notnecessarily to completion (all reactants converted into products).Each reaction has a specific equilibrium point, which is relatedto the free energy released by the reaction under specified conditions.To understand the principle of equilibrium, considerthe following example.Most cells contain glucose 1-phosphate, which is convertedinto glucose 6-phosphate.glucose 1-phosphate ~glucose 6-phosphateImagine that we start out with an aqueous solution of glucose1-phosphate that has a concentration of 0.02 M. (Mstands formolar concentration; see Section 2.4). The solution is maintainedunder constant environmental conditions (25°C andpH 7). As the reaction proceeds to equilibrium, the concentrationof the product, glucose 6-phosphate, rises from 0 to 0.019M, while the concentration of the reactant, glucose 1-phosphate,falls to 0.001 M. At this point, equilibrium is reached (Figure8.4). At equilibrium, the reverse reaction, from glucose 6-phosphateto glucose 1-phosphate, progresses at the same rate asthe forward reaction.At equilibrium, then, this reaction has a product-to-reactantratio of 19:1 (0.019/0.001), so the forward reaction has gone 95percent of the way to completion (“to the right,” as writtenabove). This result is obtained every time the experiment is rununder the same conditions.The change in free energy (ΔG) for any reaction is related directlyto its point of equilibrium. The further toward completionthe point of equilibrium lies, the more free energy is released.In an exergonic reaction, such as the conversion ofglucose 1-phosphate to glucose 6-phosphate, ΔG is a negativenumber (in this example, ΔG = –1.7 kcal/mol, or –7.1 kJ/mol).A large, positive ΔG for a reaction means that it proceedshardly at all to the right (A→B). If the concentration of B is initiallyhigh relative to that of A, such a reaction runs “to the left”(A← B), and nearly all B is converted into A. A ΔG value nearzero is characteristic of a readily reversible reaction: reactantsand products have almost the same free energies.In Chapters 9 and 10 we examine the metabolic reactions thatharvest energy from food and light. In turn, this energy is usedto synthesize carbohydrates, lipids and proteins. All of thechemical reactions carried out by living organisms are governedby the principles of thermodynamics and equilibrium.8.1 RECAPTwo laws of thermodynamics govern energy transformationsin biological systems. A biochemical reactioncan release or consume energy, and it maynot run to completion, but instead end up at a pointof equilibrium.• What is the difference between potential energy andkinetic energy? Between anabolism and catabolism?See pp. 149–150• What are the laws of thermodynamics? How do theyrelate to biology? See pp. 150–152 and Figure 8.2• What is the difference between endergonic and exergonicreactions and what is the importance of ΔG?See p. 152 and Figure 8.3The principles of thermodynamics that we have been discussingapply to all energy transformations in the universe, so theyare very powerful and useful. Next, we’ll apply them to reactionsin cells that involve the currency of biological energy, ATP.What Is the Role of ATP in 8.2 Biochemical Energetics?Cells rely on adenosine triphosphate (ATP) for the capture andtransfer of the free energy they need to do chemical work. ATPoperates as a kind of “energy currency.” Just as it is more effective,efficient, and convenient for you to trade money for alunch than to trade your actual labor, it is useful for cells to havea single currency for transferring energy between different reactionsand cell processes. So some of the free energy that isreleased by exergonic reactions is captured in the formation ofATP from adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate(HPO42–, which is commonly abbreviated to Pi). The ATPcan then be hydrolyzed at other sites in the cell to release freeenergy to drive endergonic reactions. (In some reactions, guanosinetriphosphate [GTP] is used as the energy transfer moleculeinstead of ATP, but we will focus on ATP here.)ATP has another important role in the cell beyond its use asan energy currency: it is a nucleotide that can be converted intoa building block for nucleic acids (see Chapter 4). The structureof ATP is similar to those of other nucleotides, but two things8.2 | WHAT IS THE ROLE OF ATP IN BIOCHEMICAL ENERGETICS? 153345216P345216PInitial condition:100% Glucose 1-phosphate(0.02 M concentration)At equilibrium:95% Glucose 6-phosphate (0.019 M concentration)5% Glucose 1-phosphate (0.001 M concentration)Reaction toequilibriumCCCCCCCCCCCC8.4 Chemical ReactionsRun to Equilibrium Nomatter what quantities ofglucose 1-phosphate andglucose 6-phosphate aredissolved in water, whenequilibrium is attained, therewill always be 95 percentglucose 6-phosphate and 5percent glucose 1-phosphate.about ATP make it especially useful to cells. First, ATP releasesa relatively large amount of energy when hydrolyzed to ADPand Pi. Second, ATP can phosphorylate (donate a phosphategroup to) many different molecules, which gain some of the energythat was stored in the ATP. We will examine these twoproperties in the discussion that follows.ATP hydrolysis releases energyAn ATP molecule consists of the nitrogenous base adeninebonded to ribose (a sugar), which is attached to a sequence ofthree phosphate groups (Figure 8.5A). The hydrolysis of a moleculeof ATP yields free energy, as well as ADP and the inorganicphosphate ion (Pi). Thus:ATP + H2O →ADP + Pi + free energyThe important property of this reaction is that it is exergonic,releasing free energy. Under standard laboratory conditions, thechange in free energy for this reaction (ΔG) is about –7.3kcal/mol (–30 kJ/mol). However, under cellular conditions, thevalue can be as much as –14 kcal/mol. We give both values herebecause you will encounter both values, and you should beaware of their origins. Both are correct, but in different conditions.Two characteristics of ATP account for the free energy releasedby the loss of one or two of its phosphate groups:• The free energy of the P— O bond between phosphategroups (called a phosphoric acid anhydride bond) is muchhigher than the energy of the O—H bond that forms afterhydrolysis. So some usable energy is released by hydrolysis.• Because phosphate groups are negatively charged and sorepel each other, it takes energy to get phosphates nearenough to each other to make the covalent bond that linksthem together (e.g., to add a phosphate to ADP to makeATP). Some of this energy is conserved when the thirdphosphate is attached.Amolecule of ATP can be hydrolyzed either to ADP and Pi,or to adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and a pyrophosphateion (P2O74–; commonly abbreviated to PPi). Cells use the energyreleased by ATP hydrolysis to fuel endergonic reactions (suchas the biosynthesis of complex molecules), for active transport,and for movement. Another interesting example of the use ofATP involves converting its chemical energy into light energy.BIOLUMINESCENCE The production of light by living organismsis referred to as bioluminesence (Figure 8.5B). It is an exampleof an endergonic reaction driven by ATP hydrolysis that involvesan interconversion of energy forms (chemical to light).The chemical that becomes luminescent is called luciferin (afterthe light-bearing fallen angel, Lucifer):luciferase luciferin + O2 + ATP———→oxyluciferin + AMP + PPi + lightThis reaction and the enzyme that catalyzes it (luciferase) occurin a wide variety of organisms in addition to the familiar firefly.These include a variety of marine organisms, microorganisms,worms, and mushrooms. The light is generally used toavoid predators or for signaling to mates.Soft-drink companies use the firefly proteins luciferin andluciferase to detect bacterial contamination. Where there areO Adenine—ribose –O POO–P O POO–OOO–~ ~Adenine—ribose OOO–P O P HOOO–P O–OO–~ OH +ATPADP Pi+ H2O154 CHAPTER 8 | ENERGY, ENZYMES, AND METABOLISM–O P O CH2OO–P O POO–OOO–HH HOH OHNH2HHHNNNC NCCCCOC CAdenineRiboseAdenosineAMP (Adenosine monophosphate)ADP (Adenosine diphosphate)(Adenosine triphosphate)(A)(B) Luciola cruciataPhosphate groupsHydrolysis of ATP toADP breaks this bond,releasing energy.ATP8.5 ATP (A) ATP is richer in energy than its relatives ADP and AMP. (B)Fireflies use ATP to initiate the oxidation of luciferin. This process convertschemical energy into light energy, emitting rhythmic flashes that signal theinsect’s readiness to mate.living cells there is ATP, and when the firefly proteins encounterATP and oxygen, they give off light. Thus, a sample of sodathat lights up in the test is contaminated with bacteria and isdiscarded.ATP couples exergonic and endergonic reactionsAs we have just seen, the hydrolysis of ATP is exergonic andyields ADP, Pi, and free energy. The reverse reaction, the formationof ATP from ADP and Pi, is endergonic and consumes asmuch free energy as is released by the hydrolysis of ATP:ADP + Pi + free energy →ATP + H2OMany different exergonic reactions in the cell can provide theenergy to convert ADP into ATP. For eukaryotes and manyprokaryotes, the most important of these reactions is cellularrespiration, in which some of the energy released from fuel moleculesis captured in ATP. The formation and hydrolysis of ATPconstitute what might be called an “energy-coupling cycle,” inwhich ADP picks up energy from exergonic reactions to becomeATP, which then donates energy to endergonic reactions. ATPis the common component of these reactions and is the agent ofcoupling, as illustrated in Figure 8.6.Coupling of exergonic and endergonic reactions is very commonin metabolism. Free energy is captured and retained inthe P—O bonds of ATP. ATP then diffuses to another site in thecell, where its hydrolysis releases the free energy to drive an endergonicreaction. For example, the formation of glucose 6-phosphatefrom glucose (Figure 8.7), which has a positive ΔG (is endergonic),will not proceed without the input of free energy fromATP hydrolysis, which has a negative ΔG (is exergonic). Theoverall ΔG for the coupled reactions (when the two ΔGs areadded together) is negative. Hence the reactions proceed exergonicallywhen they are coupled, and glucose 6-phosphateis synthesized. As you will see in Chapter 9, thisis the initial reaction in the catabolism of glucose.An active cell requires the production of millions ofmolecules of ATP per second to drive its biochemicalmachinery. An ATP molecule is typically consumedwithin a second of its formation. At rest, an averageperson produces and hydrolyzes about 40 kg of ATPper day—as much as some people weigh. This meansthat each ATP molecule undergoes about 10,000 cyclesof synthesis and hydrolysis every day!8.2 RECAPATP is the “energy currency” of cells. Someof the free energy released by exergonic reactionscan be captured in the form of ATP.This energy can then be released by ATPhydrolysis and used to drive endergonic reactions.• How does ATP store energy? See p. 153• What are coupled reactions? See p. 155 andFigure 8.7ATP is synthesized and used up very rapidly. Butthese biochemical reactions could not proceed sorapidly without the help of enzymes.8.2 | WHAT IS THE ROLE OF ATP IN BIOCHEMICAL ENERGETICS? 155Synthesis of ATPfrom ADP and Pirequires energy.Hydrolysis of ATPto ADP and Pireleases energy.EnergyEnergyADP+ PiEndergonic reaction:(requires energy)• Active transport• Cell movements• AnabolismExergonic reaction:(releases energy)• Cell respiration• CatabolismATP8.6 Coupling of Reactions Exergonic cellular reactions release theenergy needed to make ATP from ADP. The energy released from theconversion of ATP back to ADP can be used to fuel endergonic reactions.HOH HH OHHOH HOHCH2OHOOH HH OHHOH HHOHOCH2O PThe positive ΔG indicatesan endergonic reaction.The coupled reaction has an overall negativeΔG, indicating an exergonic reaction thatproceeds toward completion.The negative ΔG indicatesan exergonic reaction.+ H2OATP hydrolysisEndergonic reaction(requires energy)Exergonic reaction(releases energy)ΔG = +4.0 kcal/molΔG = –7.3 kcal/molNet DG= –3.3 kcal/molADP + PiEnergyGlucose Glucose 6-phosphate (G6P)+ PiATPGO TO Web Activity 8.1 • ATP and Coupled ReactionsyourBioPortal.com8.7 Coupling of ATP Hydrolysis to an Endergonic Reaction The addition ofphosphate derived from the hydrolysis of ATP to glucose forms the molecule glucose6-phosphate (in a reaction catalyzed by hexokinase). ATP hydrolysis is exergonicand the energy released drives the second reaction, which is endergonic.8.3 What Are Enzymes?When we know the change in free energy (ΔG) of a reaction, weknow where the equilibrium point of the reaction lies: the morenegative ΔG is, the further the reaction proceeds toward completion.However, ΔG tells us nothing about the rate of a reaction—the speed at which it moves toward equilibrium. The reactionsthat cells depend on have spontaneous rates that areso slow that the cells would not survive without a way to speedup the reactions. That is the role of catalysts: substances thatspeed up reactions without themselves being permanently altered.A catalyst does not cause a reaction to occur that wouldnot proceed without it, but merely increases the rate of the reaction,allowing equilibrium to be approached more rapidly. This is animportant point: no catalyst makes a reaction occur that cannot otherwiseoccur.Most biological catalysts are proteins called enzymes. Althoughwe will focus here on proteins, some catalysts—perhapsthe earliest ones in the origin of life—are RNA molecules calledribozymes (see Section 4.3). Abiological catalyst, whether proteinor RNA, is a framework or scaffold within which chemicalcatalysis takes place. This molecular framework binds thereactants and can participate in the reaction itself; however, suchparticipation does not permanently change the enzyme. The catalystends up in exactly the same chemical condition after a reactionas before it. Over time, cells have evolved to utilize proteinsrather than RNA as catalysts in most biochemical reactions,probably because of the great diversity in the three-dimensionalstructures of proteins, and because of the variety of chemicalfunctions provided by their functional groups (see Figure 3.1).In this section we will discuss the energy barrier that controlsthe rate of a chemical reaction. Then we will focus on theroles of enzymes: how they interact with specific reactants, howthey lower the energy barrier, and how they permit reactions toproceed more quickly.To speed up a reaction, an energy barriermust be overcomeAn exergonic reaction may release a great deal of free energy,but take place very slowly. Such reactions are slow because thereis an energy barrier between reactants and products. Thinkabout the propane stove we describe in Section 2.3.The burning of propane (C3H8 + 5 O2→3 CO2 + 4 H2O + energy)is an exergonic reaction—energy is released in the formof heat and light. Once started, the reaction goes to completion:all of the propane reacts with oxygen to form carbon dioxideand water vapor.Because burning propane liberates so much energy, youmight expect this reaction to proceed rapidly whenever propaneis exposed to oxygen. But this does not happen; propane willstart burning only if a spark, an input of energy such as a burningmatch, is provided. A spark is needed because there is anenergy barrier between the reactants and the products.In general, exergonic reactions proceed only after the reactantsare pushed over the energy barrier by some added energy.The energy barrier thus represents the amount of energyneeded to start the reaction, known as the activation energy(Ea) (Figure 8.8A). Recall the ball rolling down the hill in Figure8.3. The ball has a lot of potential energy at the top of thehill. However, if it is stuck in a small depression, it will notroll down the hill, even though that action is exergonic. To startthe ball rolling, a small amount of energy (activation energy) isneeded to push it out of the depression (Figure 8.8B). In a chemicalreaction, the activation energy is the energy needed tochange the reactants into unstable molecular forms called transition-state intermediates.Transition-state intermediates have higher free energies thaneither the reactants or the products. Their bonds may bestretched and therefore unstable. Although the amount of activationenergy needed for different reactions varies, it is oftensmall compared with the change in free energy of the reaction.The activation energy put in to start a reaction is recovered duringthe ensuing “downhill” phase of the reaction, so it is not apart of the net free energy change, ΔG (see Figure 8.8A).156 CHAPTER 8 | ENERGY, ENZYMES, AND METABOLISMΔG for thereaction is notaffected by Ea.The ball needs a push (Ea) toget it out of the depression.A ball that has received aninput of activation energy canroll downhill spontaneously,releasing free energy.Ea is the activationenergy required fora reaction to begin.Free energy Free energy Free energy(A)(B)Reactants(stable)EnergybarrierTransition stateintermediate (unstable)ProductsTime course of reactionEaLess stablestate (transition state)StablestateΔG8.8 Activation Energy Initiates Reactions (A) In any chemical reaction,an initial stable state must become less stable before change is possible.(B) A ball on a hillside provides a physical analogy to the biochemicalprinciple graphed in (A).Where does the activation energy come from? In any collectionof reactants at room or body temperatures, the moleculesare moving around. Afew are moving fast enough that their kineticenergy can overcome the energy barrier, enter the transitionstate, and react. However, the reaction takes place veryslowly at room or body temperatures. If the system were heated,all the reactant molecules would move faster and have more kineticenergy, and the reaction would speed up. You have probablyused this technique in the chemistry laboratory.However, adding enough heat to increase the average kineticenergy of the molecules would not work in living systems. Sucha nonspecific approach would accelerate all reactions, includingdestructive ones such as the denaturation of proteins (seeFigure 3.9). Amore effective way to speed up a reaction in a livingsystem is to lower the energy barrier by bringing the reactantsclose together. In living cells, enzymes and ribozymes accomplishthis task.Enzymes bind specific reactants at their active sitesCatalysts increase the rates of chemical reactions. Most nonbiologicalcatalysts are nonspecific. For example, powdered platinumcatalyzes virtually any reaction in which molecular hydrogen(H2) is a reactant. In contrast, most biological catalystsare highly specific. An enzyme or ribozyme usually recognizesand binds to only one or a few closely related reactants, and itcatalyzes only a single chemical reaction. In the discussion thatfollows, we focus on enzymes, but remember that similar rulesof chemical behavior apply to ribozymes as well.In an enzyme-catalyzed reaction, the reactants are called substrates.Substrate molecules bind to a particular site on the enzyme,called the active site, where catalysis takes place (Figure8.9). The specificity of an enzyme results from the exact threedimensionalshape and structure of its active site, into whichonly a narrow range of substrates can fit. Other molecules—with different shapes, different functional groups, and differentproperties—cannot fit properly and bind to the active site. Thisspecificity is comparable to the specific binding of a membranetransport protein or receptor protein to its specific ligand, as describedin Chapters 6 and 7.The names of enzymes reflect their functions and often end withthe suffix “ase.” For example the enzyme lactase, which you encounteredin the opening story for this chapter, catalyzes the hydrolysisof lactose but not another disaccharide,sucrose. The enzyme hexokinase accelerates thephosphorylation of glucose, but not ribose, tomake glucose 6-phosphate (see Figure 8.7).The binding of a substrate to the active siteof an enzyme produces an enzyme–substratecomplex (ES) that is held together by one ormore means, such as hydrogen bonding, electricalattraction, or temporary covalent bonding.The enzyme–substrate complex gives riseto product and free enzyme:E + S →ES →E + Pwhere E is the enzyme, S is the substrate, P is the product, andES is the enzyme–substrate complex. The free enzyme (E) is inthe same chemical form at the end of the reaction as at the beginning.While bound to the substrate, it may change chemically,but by the end of the reaction it has been restored to itsinitial form and is ready to bind more substrate.Enzymes lower the energy barrier but do notaffect equilibriumWhen reactants are bound to the enzyme, forming anenzyme–substrate complex, they require less activation energythan the transition-state species of the corresponding uncatalyzedreaction (Figure 8.10). Thus the enzyme lowers theenergy barrier for the reaction—it offers the reaction an easierpath, speeding it up. When an enzyme lowers the energy bar-8.3 | WHAT ARE ENZYMES? 157Substrates fit preciselyinto the active site…The product separates from the activesite, leaving the enzyme unchanged.…but nonsubstratedoes not.EnzymeActivesiteEnzymeProduct releasedEnzyme–substratecomplexSubstratesNonsubstrate8.9 Enzyme and Substrate An enzyme is a proteincatalyst with an active site capable of binding oneor more substrate molecules.ΔGAn uncatalyzedreaction hasgreater activationenergy than does acatalyzed reaction.There is no differencein free energy betweencatalyzed anduncatalyzed reactions.ProductsReactantsCatalyzedreactionUncatalyzedreactionFree energyTime course of reactionEaEa8.10 Enzymes Lower the Energy Barrier Although the activationenergy is lower in an enzyme-catalyzed reaction than in an uncatalyzedreaction, the energy released is the same with or without catalysis. Inother words, Ea is lower, but ΔG is unchanged. A lower activation energymeans the reaction will take place at a faster rate.GO TO Web Activity 8.2 • Free Energy ChangesyourBioPortal.comrier, both the forward and the reverse reactions speed up, so theenzyme-catalyzed overall reaction proceeds toward equilibriummore rapidly than the uncatalyzed reaction. The final equilibriumis the same with or without the enzyme. Similarly, adding an enzymeto a reaction does not change the difference in free energy(ΔG) between the reactants and the products (see Figure 8.10).Enzymes can change the rate of a reaction substantially. Forexample, if 600 molecules of a protein with arginine as its terminalamino acid just sit in solution, the protein molecules tendtoward disorder and the terminal peptide bonds break, releasingthe arginines (ΔS increases). Without an enzyme this is avery slow reaction—it takes about 7 years for half (300) of theproteins to undergo this reaction. However, with the enzymecarboxypeptidase A catalyzing the reaction, the 300 argininesare released in half a second! The important consequence of thisfor living cells is not difficult to imagine. Such speeds make newrealities possible.8.3 RECAPA chemical reaction requires a “push” over the energybarrier to get started. Enzymes provide this activationenergy by binding specific reactants (substrates).• Explain how the structure of an enzyme makes thatenzyme specific. See p. 157 and Figure 8.9• What is the relationship between an enzyme and theequilibrium point of a reaction? See pp. 157–158Now that you have a general understanding of the structures,functions, and specificities of enzymes, let’s see how they workto speed up chemical reactions between the substrate molecules.8.4 How Do Enzymes Work?During and after the formation of the enzyme–substrate complex,chemical interactions occur. These interactions contributedirectly to the breaking of old bonds and the formation of newones. In catalyzing a reaction, an enzyme may use one or moremechanisms.Enzymes can orient substratesWhen free in solution, substrates are moving from place to placerandomly while at the same time vibrating, rotating, and tumblingaround. They may not have the proper orientation to interactwhen they collide. Part of the activation energy neededto start a reaction is used to bring together specific atoms so thatbonds can form (Figure 8.11A). For example, if acetyl coenzymeA (acetyl CoA) and oxaloacetate are to form citrate (a step in themetabolism of glucose; see Section 9.2), the two substrates mustbe oriented so that the carbon atom of the methyl group of acetylCoA can form a covalent bond with the carbon atom of thecarbonyl group of oxaloacetate. The active site of the enzymecitrate synthase has just the right shape to bind these two moleculesso that these atoms are adjacent.Enzymes can induce strain in the substrateOnce a substrate has bound to its active site, an enzyme cancause bonds in the substrate to stretch, putting it in an unstabletransition state (Figure 8.11B). For example, lysozyme is a protectiveenzyme abundant in tears and saliva that destroys invadingbacteria by cleaving polysaccharide chains in their cellwalls. Lysozyme’s active site “stretches” the bonds of the bacterialpolysaccharide, rendering the bonds unstable and morereactive to lysozyme’s other substrate, water.Enzymes can temporarily add chemical groupsto substratesThe side chains (R groups) of an enzyme’s amino acids maybe direct participants in making its substrates more chemicallyreactive (Figure 8.11C).• In acid–base catalysis, the acidic or basic side chains of theamino acids in the active site transfer H+ to or from the substrate,destabilizing a covalent bond in the substrate, andpermitting it to break.• In covalent catalysis, a functional group in a side chain formsa temporary covalent bond with a portion of the substrate.• In metal ion catalysis, metal ions such as copper, iron, andmanganese, which are often firmly bound to side chains ofenzymes, can lose or gain electrons without detaching fromthe enzymes. This ability makes them important participantsin oxidation–reduction reactions, which involve theloss or gain of electrons.Molecular structure determines enzyme functionMost enzymes are much larger than their substrates. An enzymeis typically a protein containing hundreds of amino acids andmay consist of a single folded polypeptide chain or of severalsubunits (see Section 3.2). Its substrate is generally a small moleculeor a small part of a large molecule. The active site of theenzyme is usually quite small, not more than 6–12 amino acids.Two questions arise from these observations:• What features of the active site allow it to recognize andbind the substrate?• What is the role of the rest of the huge protein?THE ACTIVE SITE IS SPECIFIC TO THE SUBSTRATE The remarkableability of an enzyme to select exactly the right substrate dependson a precise interlocking of molecular shapes and interactionsof chemical groups at the active site. The binding of the substrateto the active site depends on the same kinds of forces thatmaintain the tertiary structure of the enzyme: hydrogen bonds,the attraction and repulsion of electrically charged groups, andhydrophobic interactions.158 CHAPTER 8 | ENERGY, ENZYMES, AND METABOLISMIn 1894, the German chemist Emil Fischer compared the fitbetween an enzyme and its substrate to that of a lock and key.Fischer’s model persisted for more than half a century with onlyindirect evidence to support it. The first direct evidence came in1965, when David Phillips and his colleagues at the Royal Institutionin London crystallized the enzyme lysozyme and determinedits tertiary structure using the technique of X-ray crystallography(described in Section 13.2). They observed a pocketin lysozyme that neatly fits its substrate (see Figure 8.11B).AN ENZYME CHANGES SHAPE WHEN IT BINDS A SUBSTRATE Just asa membrane receptor protein may undergo precise changes inconformation upon binding to its ligand (see Chapter 7), someenzymes change their shapes when they bind their substrate(s).These shape changes, which are called induced fit, expose theactive site (or sites) of the enzyme.An example of induced fit can be seen in the enzyme hexokinase(see Figure 8.7), which catalyzes the reactionglucose + ATP→glucose 6-phosphate + ADPInduced fit brings reactive side chains from the hexokinase activesite into alignment with the substrates (Figure 8.12), facilitatingits catalytic mechanisms. Equally important, the foldingof hexokinase to fit around the substrates (glucose and ATP) excludeswater from the active site. This is essential, because if waterwere present, the ATP could be hydrolyzed to ADP and Pi.But since water is absent, the transfer of a phosphate from ATPto glucose is favored.Induced fit at least partly explains why enzymes are so large.The rest of the macromolecule may have three roles:• It provides a framework so that the amino acids of theactive site are properly positioned in relation to thesubstrate(s).• It participates in significant changes in protein shapeand structure that result in induced fit.• It provides binding sites for regulatory molecules(see Section 8.5).8.4 | HOW DO ENZYMES WORK? 159(A) Orientation–+– +The two substrates are oriented so they can react.The enzyme adds chargesto the substrate.The enzyme strains the substrate.Two amino acids at the activesite of chymotrypsin becomecharged when in contact withthe substrate.The active site of lysozymestrains and flattens itspolysaccharide substrate.Two substrates are boundnext to one another at theactive site of the enzymecitrate synthase.(B) Physical strain(C) Chemical chargeCitrate synthaseLysozymeChymotrypsin8.11 Life at the Active Site Enzymes have severalways of causing their substrates to enter the transitionstate: (A) orientation, (B) physical strain, and (C) chemicalcharge.Some enzymes require other moleculesin order to functionAs large and complex as enzymes are, many of them require thepresence of nonprotein chemical “partners” in order to function(Table 8.1):• Prosthetic groups are distinctive, non-amino acid atoms ormolecular groupings that are permanently bound to theirenzymes. An example is a flavin nucleotide, which binds tosuccinate dehydrogenase, an important enzyme in cellularrespiration (see Section 9.2).• Cofactors are inorganic ions such as copper, zinc, and ironthat bind to certain enzymes. For example, the cofactor zincbinds to the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase.• Acoenzyme is a carbon-containing molecule that is requiredfor the action of one or more enzymes. It is usually relativelysmall compared with the enzyme to which it temporarilybinds.A coenzyme moves from enzyme to enzyme, adding or removingchemical groups from the substrate. Acoenzyme is likea substrate in that it does not permanently bind to the enzyme;it binds to the active site, changes chemically during the reaction,and then separates from the enzyme to participate in other reactions.ATP and ADP, as energy carriers, can be considered coenzymes,even though they are really substrates. The term coenzymewas coined before the functions of these molecules werefully understood. Biochemists continue to use the term, and tobe consistent with the field, we will use the term in this book.In the next chapter we will encounter other coenzymes thatfunction in energy-harvesting reactions by accepting or donatingelectrons or hydrogen atoms. In animals, some coenzymesare produced from vitamins—substances that must be obtainedfrom food because they cannot be synthesized by the body.For example, the B vitamin niacin is used to make the coenzymenicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD).The substrate concentration affects the reaction rateFor a reaction of the type A→B, the rate of the uncatalyzed reactionis directly proportional to the concentration of A. Thehigher the concentration of substrate, the more reactions perunit of time. Addition of the appropriate enzyme speeds up thereaction, of course, but it also changes the shape of a plot of rateversus substrate concentration (Figure 8.13). For a given concentrationof enzyme, the rate of the enzyme-catalyzed reactioninitially increases as the substrate concentration increases fromzero, but then it levels off. At some point, further increases inthe substrate concentration do not significantly increase thereaction rate—the maximum rate has been reached.Since the concentration of an enzyme is usually much lowerthan that of its substrate and does not change as substrate concentrationchanges, what we see is a saturation phenomenonlike the one that occurs in facilitated diffusion (see Figure 6.14).When all the enzyme molecules are bound to substrate molecules,the enzyme is working as fast as it can—at its maximumrate. Nothing is gained by adding more substrate, because nofree enzyme molecules are left to act as catalysts. Under theseconditions the active sites are said to be saturated.The maximum rate of a catalyzed reaction can be used tomeasure how efficient the enzyme is—that is, how many moleculesof substrate are converted into product per unit of timewhen there is an excess of substrate present. This turnover numberranges from one molecule every two seconds for lysozymeto an amazing 40 million molecules per second for the liverenzyme catalase.160 CHAPTER 8 | ENERGY, ENZYMES, AND METABOLISMWhen the substrates bind to the activesite, the two halves of the enzyme movetogether, changing the shape of theenzyme so that catalysis can take place.Emptyactive siteTABLE 8.1Some Examples of Nonprotein“Partners” of EnzymesTYPE OF MOLECULE ROLE IN CATALYZED REACTIONSCOFACTORSIron (Fe2+ or Fe3+) Oxidation/reductionCopper (Cu+ or Cu2+) Oxidation/reductionZinc (Zn2+) Helps bind NADCOENZYMESBiotin Carries —COO—Coenzyme A Carries —CO—CH3NAD Carries electronsFAD Carries electronsATP Provides/extracts energyPROSTHETIC GROUPSHeme Binds ions, O2, and electrons;contains iron cofactorFlavin Binds electronsRetinal Converts light energy8.12 Some Enzymes Change Shape When Substrate Binds to ThemShape changes result in an induced fit between enzyme and substrate, improvingthe catalytic ability of the enzyme. Induced fit can be observed in the enzyme hexokinase,seen here with and without its substrates, glucose (red) and ATP (yellow).8.4 RECAPEnzymes orient their substrates to bring togetherspecific atoms so that bonds can form. An enzymecan participate in the reaction it catalyzes by temporarilychanging shape or destabilizing the enzymesubstratecomplex. Some enzymes require cofactors,coenzymes, or prosthetic groups in order to function.• What are three mechanisms of enzyme catalysis? Seep. 158 and Figure 8.11• What are the chemical roles of coenzymes in enzymaticreactions? See p. 160Now that you understand more about how enzymes function,let’s see how different enzymes work together in a complexorganism.8.5 How Are Enzyme Activities Regulated?A major characteristic of life is homeostasis—the maintenanceof stable internal conditions (see Chapter 40). How does a cellmaintain a relatively constant internal environment while thousandsof chemical reactions are going on? These chemical reactionsoperate within metabolic pathways in which the productof one reaction is a reactant for the next. The pathway for themetabolism of lactose begins with lactase (as we described inthe chapter’s opening story), and is just one of many pathwaysthat regulate the internal environment of the cell. These pathwayshave such diverse functions as the catabolism of glucoseto yield energy, CO2,and H2O, and the anabolism of amino acidsto yield proteins. Metabolic pathways do not exist in isolation,but interact extensively, and each reaction in each pathway iscatalyzed by a specific enzyme.Within a cell or organism, the presence and activity of enzymesdetermine the “flow” of chemicals through differentmetabolic pathways. The amount of enzyme activity, in turn, iscontrolled in part via the regulation of gene expression. Manysignal transduction pathways (described in Chapter 7) end withchanges in gene expression, and often the genes that areswitched on or off encode enzymes. But the simple presenceof an enzyme does not ensure that it is functioning. Anothermeans by which cells can control which pathways are active ata particular time is by the activation or inactivation of enzymes.If one enzyme in the pathway is inactive, that step and all subsequentsteps shut down. Thus, enzymes are target points forthe regulation of entire sequences of chemical reactions.Regulation of the rates at which thousands of different enzymesoperate contributes to homeostasis within an organism.Such control permits cells to make orderly changes in their functionsin response to changes in the external environment. InChapter 7 we describe a number of enzymes that become activatedin signal transduction pathways, illustrating how enzymeactivation can dramatically alter cell functions. (For example,see the activation of glycogen phosphorylase in Figure 7.20.)The flow of chemicals such as carbon atoms through interactingmetabolic pathways can be studied, but this process becomescomplicated quickly, because each pathway influencesthe others. Computer algorithms are used to model these pathwaysand show how they mesh in an interdependent system(Figure 8.14). Such models can help predict what will happenif the concentration of one molecule or another is altered. Thisnew field of biology is called systems biology, and it has numerousapplications.In this section we will investigate the roles of enzymes in organizingand regulating metabolic pathways. In living cells,enzymes can be activated or inhibited in various ways, andthere are also mechanisms for controlling the rates at whichsome enzymes catalyze reactions. We will also examine howthe environment—particularly temperature and pH—affectsenzyme activity.Enzymes can be regulated by inhibitorsVarious chemical inhibitors can bind to enzymes, slowingdown the rates of the reactions they catalyze. Some inhibitorsoccur naturally in cells; others are artificial. Naturally occurringinhibitors regulate metabolism; artificial ones can be usedto treat disease, to kill pests, or to study how enzymes work.In some cases the inhibitor binds the enzyme irreversibly, andthe enzyme becomes permanently inactivated. In other casesthe inhibitor has reversible effects; it can separate from theenzyme, allowing the enzyme to function fully as before. Theremoval of a natural reversible inhibitor increases an enzyme’srate of catalysis.IRREVERSIBLE INHIBITION If an inhibitor covalently binds to certainside chains at the active site of an enzyme, it will permanentlyinactivate the enzyme by destroying its capacity to interactwith its normal substrate. An example of an irreversibleinhibitor is DIPF (diisopropyl phosphorofluoridate), which8.5 | HOW ARE ENZYME ACTIVITIES REGULATED? 161At high substrate concentration, themaximum rate is reached when allenzyme molecules are occupied withsubstrate molecules.With no enzyme present, thereaction rate increases steadily assubstrate concentration increases.At low substrate concentration, thepresence of an enzyme greatlyincreases the reaction rate.Concentration of substrateReaction rateReactionwith enzymeReaction withoutenzymeMaximum rate8.13 Catalyzed Reactions Reach a Maximum Rate Because thereis usually less enzyme than substrate present, the reaction rate levels offwhen the enzyme becomes saturated.reacts with serine (Figure 8.15). DIPF is an irreversible inhibitorof acetylcholinesterase, whose operation is essential for the normalfunctioning of the nervous system. Because of their effecton acetylcholinesterase, DIPF and other similar compounds areclassified as nerve gases, and were developed for biological warfare.One of these compounds, Sarin, was used in an attack onthe Tokyo subway in 1995, resulting in a dozen deaths and thehospitalization of hundreds more. The widely used insecticidemalathion is a derivative of DIPF that inhibits only insect acetylcholinesterase,not the mammalian enzyme. The irreversible inhibitionof enzymes is of practical use to humans, but this formof regulation is not common in the cell, because the enzyme ispermanently inactivated and cannot be recycled. Instead, cellsuse reversible inhibition.REVERSIBLE INHIBITION In some cases an inhibitor is similarenough to a particular enzyme’s natural substrate to bind noncovalentlyto its active site, yet different enough that the enzymecatalyzes no chemical reaction. While such a molecule is boundto the enzyme, the natural substrate cannot enter the active siteand the enzyme is unable to function. Such a molecule is calleda competitive inhibitor because it competes with the natural substratefor the active site (Figure 8.16A). In this case, the inhibitionis reversible. When the concentration of the competitive inhibitoris reduced, it detaches from the active site, and theenzyme is active again.A noncompetitive inhibitor binds to an enzyme at a site distinctfrom the active site. This binding causes a change in theshape of the enzyme that alters its activity (Figure 8.16B). Theactive site may no longer bind the substrate, or if it does, therate of product formation may be reduced. Like competitive inhibitors,noncompetitive inhibitors can become unbound, sotheir effects are reversible.Allosteric enzymes control their activityby changing shapeThe change in enzyme shape due to noncompetitive inhibitorbinding is an example of allostery (allo, “different”; stereos,“shape”). Allosteric regulation occurs when an effector moleculebinds to a site other than the active site of an enzyme, inducingthe enzyme to change its shape. The change in shape alters theaffinity of the active site for the substrate, and so the rate ofthe reaction is changed.Often, an enzyme will exist in the cell in more than one possibleshape (Figure 8.17):• The active form of the enzyme has the proper shape forsubstrate binding.• The inactive form of the enzyme has a shape that cannotbind the substrate.162 CHAPTER 8 | ENERGY, ENZYMES, AND METABOLISMThe metabolites and reactionpathways overlap and intersect.Each circle represents asmall molecule (metabolite).Each line represents an enzymecatalyzedmetabolic reaction.CarbohydrateMetabolismMetabolism ofCofactors and VitaminsNucleotideMetabolismMetabolism ofOther SubstancesATPproductionAmino AcidMetabolismLipidMetabolism8.14 Metabolic Pathways The complex interactions of metabolicpathways can be modeled by the tools of systems biology. In cells, themain elements controlling these pathways are enzymes.FHCH3CH3OHCH3CH3PO OSer OHCH3CH3OHCH3CH3PO OSer OHThe hydroxyl group ison the side chain ofserine in the active site.DIPF, an irreversibleinhibitor, reacts with thehydroxyl group of serine.Covalent attachment of DIPFto the active site preventssubstrate from entering.AcetylcholinesteraseActivesiteDIPFActive siteserine8.15 Irreversible Inhibition DIPF forms a stable covalent bond withthe side chain of the amino acid serine at the active site of the enzymeacetylcholinesterase, thus irreversibly disabling the enzyme.Other molecules, collectively referred to as effectors, can influencewhich form the enzyme takes:• Binding of an inhibitor to a site separate from the active sitecan stabilize the inactive form of the enzyme, making it lesslikely to convert to the active form.• The active form can be stabilized by the binding of an activatorto another site on the enzyme.Like substrate binding, the binding of inhibitors and activatorsto their regulatory sites (also called allosteric sites) is highlyspecific. Most (but not all) enzymes that are allosterically regulatedare proteins with quaternary structure; that is, they aremade up of multiple polypeptide subunits. The polypeptidethat has the active site is called the catalytic subunit. The allostericsites are often on different polypeptides, called the regulatorysubunits.Some enzymes have multiple subunits containing activesites, and the binding of substrate to one of the active sitescauses allosteric effects. When substrate binds to one subunit,there is a slight change in protein structure that influences theadjacent subunit. The slight change to the second subunit makesits active site more likely to bind to the substrate. So the reactionspeeds up as the sites become sequentially activated.As a result, an allosteric enzyme with multiple active sitesand a nonallosteric enzyme with a single active site differgreatly in their reaction rates when the substrate concentrationis low. Graphs of reaction rates plotted against substrateconcentrations show this relationship. For a nonallosteric enzyme,the plot looks like that in Figure 8.18A. The reaction ratefirst increases sharply with increasing substrate concentration,then tapers off to a constant maximum rate as the supply of enzymebecomes saturated.The plot for a multisubunit allosteric enzyme is radically different,having a sigmoid (S-shaped) appearance (Figure 8.18B).At low substrate concentrations, the reaction rate increases graduallyas substrate concentration increases. But within a certainrange, the reaction rate is extremely sensitive to relatively smallchanges in substrate concentration. In addition, allostericenzymes are very sensitive to low concentrations of inhibitors.Because of this sensitivity, allosteric enzymesare important in regulating entire metabolic pathways.Allosteric effects regulate metabolismMetabolic pathways typically involve a starting material,various intermediate products, and an endproduct that is used for some purpose by the cell. Ineach pathway there are a number of reactions, each8.5 | HOW ARE ENZYME ACTIVITIES REGULATED? 163Inhibitor and substrate“compete”; only oneat a time can bind tothe active site.An inhibitor maybind to a site awayfrom the active site,changing theenzyme’s shape sothat the substrateno longer fits.NoncompetitiveinhibitorActive siteSubstrateActive siteCompetitiveinhibitorSubstrate(A) Competitive inhibition(B) Noncompetitive inhibitionWhen the enzymeis in the activeform, it can acceptsubstrate.Binding of anactivator makes itmore likely that theactive form will occur.When the enzymeis in the inactiveform, it cannotaccept substrate.Binding of aninhibitor makes itless likely that theactive form will occur.Inactive formActivator siteActive siteInhibitorsiteRegulatorysubunitsCatalyticsubunitAllostericinhibitorNo productformationActive formProductformationAllostericactivatorSubstrate8.16 Reversible Inhibition (A) A competitive inhibitor binds temporarilyto the active site of an enzyme. (B) A noncompetitive inhibitor bindstemporarily to the enzyme at a site away from the active site. In bothcases, the enzyme’s function is disabled for only as long as the inhibitorremains bound.8.17 Allosteric Regulation of Enzymes Active and inactive forms ofan enzyme can be interconverted, depending on the binding of effectormolecules at sites other than the active site. Binding an inhibitor stabilizesthe inactive form and binding an activator stabilizes the active form.GO TO Animated Tutorial 8.1 • Enzyme CatalysisyourBioPortal.comGO TO Animated Tutorial 8.2 • Allosteric Regulation of EnzymesyourBioPortal.comforming an intermediate product and each catalyzed by a differentenzyme. The first step in a pathway is called the commitmentstep, meaning that once this enzyme-catalyzed reactionoccurs, the “ball is rolling,” and the other reactions happen insequence, leading to the end product. But what if the cell hasno need for that product—for example, if that product is availablefrom its environment in adequate amounts? It would beenergetically wasteful for the cell to continue making somethingit does not need.One way to avoid this problem is to shut down the metabolicpathway by having the final product inhibit the enzyme thatcatalyzes the commitment step (Figure 8.19). Often this inhibitionoccurs allosterically. When the end product is present at ahigh concentration, some of it binds to an allosteric site on thecommitment step enzyme, thereby causing it to become inactive.Thus, the final product acts as a noncompetitive inhibitor (describedearlier in this section) of the first enzyme in the pathway.This mechanism is known as feedback inhibition orend-product inhibition. We will describe many other examplesof such inhibition in later chapters.Enzymes are affected by their environmentEnzymes enable cells to perform chemical reactions and carryout complex processes rapidly without using the extremes oftemperature and pH employed by chemists in the laboratory.However, because of their three-dimensional structures and thechemistry of the side chains in their active sites, enzymes (andtheir substrates) are highly sensitive to changes in temperatureand pH. In Section 3.2 we describe the general effects ofthese environmental factors on proteins. Here we will examinetheir effects on enzyme function (which, of course, dependson enzyme structure and chemistry).pH AFFECTS ENZYME ACTIVITY The rates of most enzyme-catalyzedreactions depend on the pH of the solution in which theyoccur. While the water inside cells is generally at a neutral pHof 7, the presence of acids, bases, and buffers can alter this. Eachenzyme is most active at a particular pH; its activity decreasesas the solution is made more acidic or more basic than the ideal(optimal) pH (Figure 8.20). As an example, consider the humandigestive system (see Section 51.3). The pH inside the humanstomach is highly acidic, around pH 1.5. Many enzymes thathydrolyze macromolecules, such as proteases, have pH optimain the neutral range. So when food enters the small intestine, abuffer (bicarbonate) is secreted into the intestine to raise the pHto 6.5. This allows the hydrolytic enzymes to be active and digestthe food.Several factors contribute to this effect. One factor is ionizationof the carboxyl, amino, and other groups on either the substrateor the enzyme. In neutral or basic solutions, carboxylgroups (—COOH) release H+ to become negatively charged carboxylategroups (—COO–). On the other hand, in neutral oracidic solutions, amino groups (—NH2) accept H+ to becomepositively charged —NH3+ groups (see the discussion of acidsand bases in Section 2.4). Thus, in a neutral solution, an aminogroup is electrically attracted to a carboxyl group on anothermolecule or another part of the same molecule, because bothgroups are ionized and have opposite charges. If the pH changes,however, the ionization of these groups may change. For example,at a low pH (high H+ concentration, such as the stomachcontents where the enzyme pepsin is active), the excess H+ mayreact with —COO– to form —COOH. If thishappens, the group is no longer charged andcannot interact with other charged groups inthe protein, so the folding of the protein maybe altered. If such a change occurs at the activesite of an enzyme, the enzyme may no longerbe able to bind to its substrate.164 CHAPTER 8 | ENERGY, ENZYMES, AND METABOLISM(A) Nonallosteric enzyme (B) Allosteric enzymeReaction rateConcentration of substrate8.18 Allostery and Reaction Rate The number of active sites on anenzyme determines how the rate of the enzyme-catalyzed reactionchanges as substrate concentration increases. A sigmoid curve (B) is typicalfor an enzyme with multiple subunits, each with an active site. Afterone subunit binds the substrate, changes in structure make it more likelythat the next subunit will also bind substrate. So the reaction speeds upmore rapidly than in the case of an enzyme with a single active site (A).C COO– HOH H CCH3NH3+ C COO– HCH3 H CCH2CH3NH3+COO– CCH2CH3OThe first reaction isthe commitmentstep.Each of these reactions is catalyzed bya different enzyme, and each forms adifferent intermediate product.2Buildup of the end product allosterically inhibitsthe enzyme catalyzing the commitment step, thusshutting down its own production.31Threonine(starting material)a-ketobutyrate(intermediate product)Isoleucine(end product)8.19 Feedback Inhibition of MetabolicPathways The first reaction in a metabolic pathwayis referred to as the commitment step. It is oftencatalyzed by an enzyme that can be allostericallyinhibited by the end product of the pathway. Thespecific pathway shown here is the synthesis ofisoleucine from threonine in bacteria. It is typical ofmany enzyme-catalyzed biosynthetic pathways.TEMPERATURE AFFECTS ENZYME ACTIVITY In general, warmingincreases the rate of a chemical reaction because a greater proportionof the reactant molecules have enough kinetic energyto provide the activation energy for the reaction. Enzymecatalyzedreactions are no different (Figure 8.21). However, temperaturesthat are too high inactivate enzymes, because at hightemperatures enzyme molecules vibrate and twist so rapidlythat some of their noncovalent bonds break. When an enzyme’stertiary structure is changed by heat it loses its function. Someenzymes denature at temperatures only slightly above that ofthe human body, but a few are stable even at the boiling point(or freezing point) of water. All enzymes, however, have an optimaltemperature for activity.Individual organisms adapt to changes in the environmentin many ways, one of which is based on groups of enzymes,called isozymes, that catalyze the same reaction but have differentchemical compositions and physical properties. Differentisozymes within a given group may have different optimal temperatures.The rainbow trout, for example, has several isozymesof the enzyme acetylcholinesterase. If a rainbow trout is transferredfrom warm water to near-freezing water (2°C), the fishproduces an isozyme of acetylcholinesterase that is differentfrom the one it produces at the higher temperature. The newisozyme has a lower optimal temperature, allowing the fish’snervous system to perform normally in the colder water.In general, enzymes adapted to warm temperatures do notdenature at those temperatures because their tertiary structuresare held together largely by covalent bonds, such as charge interactionsor disulfide bridges, instead of the more heat-sensitiveweak chemical interactions. Most enzymes in humans aremore stable at high temperatures than those of the bacteria thatinfect us, so that a moderate fever tends to denature bacterialenzymes, but not our own.8.5 RECAPThe rates of most enzyme-catalyzed reactions areaffected by interacting molecules (such as inhibitorsand activators) and by environmental factors (suchas temperature and pH).• What is the difference between reversible and irreversibleenzyme inhibition? See pp. 161–162• How are allosteric enzymes regulated? See pp.162–163 and Figure 8.17• Explain the concept of feedback inhibition. Howmight the reactions shown in Figure 8.19 fit intoa systems diagram such as the one shown inFigure 8.14?8.5 | HOW ARE ENZYME ACTIVITIES REGULATED? 165Reaction rate1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11Acidic pH Basic12Pepsin ArginaseChymotrypsinReaction rateTemperatureOptimaltemperatureMaximumrate8.20 pH Affects Enzyme Activity An enzyme catalyzes its reactionat a maximum rate. The activity curve for each enzyme peaks at its optimalpH. For example, pepsin is active in the acidic environment of thestomach, while chymotrypsin is active in the small intestine.8.21 Temperature Affects Enzyme Activity Each enzyme is mostactive at a particular optimal temperature. At higher temperatures theenzyme becomes denatured and inactive; this explains why the activitycurve falls off abruptly at temperatures above the optimal.8.1 What Physical Principles Underlie Biological EnergyTransformations?• Energy is the capacity to do work. In a biological system, theusable energy is called free energy (G). The unusable energy isentropy, a measure of the disorder in the system.• Potential energy is the energy of state or position; it includesthe energy stored in chemical bonds. Kinetic energy is theenergy of motion; it is the type of energy that can do work.• The laws of thermodynamics apply to living organisms. Thefirst law states that energy cannot be created or destroyed. Thesecond law states that energy transformations decrease theamount of energy available to do work (free energy) andincrease disorder. Review Figure 8.2• The change in free energy (DG) of a reaction determines itspoint of chemical equilibrium, at which the forward andreverse reactions proceed at the same rate.CHAPTER SUMMARY8.1 What Physical Principles Underlie Biological EnergyTransformations?• Energy is the capacity to do work. In a biological system, theusable energy is called free energy (G). The unusable energy isentropy, a measure of the disorder in the system.• Potential energy is the energy of state or position; it includesthe energy stored in chemical bonds. Kinetic energy is theenergy of motion; it is the type of energy that can do work.• The laws of thermodynamics apply to living organisms. Thefirst law states that energy cannot be created or destroyed. Thesecond law states that energy transformations decrease theamount of energy available to do work (free energy) andincrease disorder. Review Figure 8.2• The change in free energy (DG) of a reaction determines itspoint of chemical equilibrium, at which the forward andreverse reactions proceed at the same rate.• An exergonic reaction releases free energy and has a negativeΔG. An endergonic reaction consumes or requires free energyand has a positive ΔG. Endergonic reactions proceed only if freeenergy is provided. Review Figure 8.3• Metabolism is the sum of all the biochemical (metabolic) reactionsin an organism. Catabolic reactions are associated withthe breakdown of complex molecules and release energy (areexergonic). Anabolic reactions build complexity in the cell andare endergonic.8.2 What Is the Role of ATP in Biochemical Energetics?• Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) serves as an energy currency incells. Hydrolysis of ATP releases a relatively large amount of freeenergy.• The ATP cycle couples exergonic and endergonic reactions, harvestingfree energy from exergonic reactions, and providingfree energy for endergonic reactions. Review Figure 8.6, WEBACTIVITY 8.18.3 What Are Enzymes?• The rate of a chemical reaction is independent of ΔG, but isdetermined by the energy barrier. Enzymes are protein catalyststhat affect the rates of biological reactions by lowering theenergy barrier, supplying the activation energy (Ea) needed toinitiate reactions. Review Figure 8.10, WEB ACTIVITY 8.2• A substrate binds to the enzyme’s active site—the site ofcatalysis—forming an enzyme–substrate complex. Enzymesare highly specific for their substrates.8.4 How Do Enzymes Work?• At the active site, a substrate can be oriented correctly, chemicallymodified, or strained. As a result, the substrate readilyforms its transition state, and the reaction proceeds. ReviewFigure 8.11• Binding substrate causes many enzymes to change shape,exposing their active site(s) and allowing catalysis. The changein enzyme shape caused by substrate binding is known asinduced fit. Review Figure 8.12• Some enzymes require other substances, known as cofactors,to carry out catalysis. Prosthetic groups are permanently boundto enzymes; coenzymes are not. A coenzyme can be considereda substrate, as it is changed by the reaction and then releasedfrom the enzyme.• Substrate concentration affects the rate of an enzyme-catalyzedreaction.8.5 How Are Enzyme Activities Regulated?• Metabolism is organized into pathways in which the product ofone reaction is a reactant for the next reaction. Each reaction inthe pathway is catalyzed by an enzyme.• Enzyme activity is subject to regulation. Some inhibitors bindirreversibly to enzymes. Others bind reversibly. Review Figures8.15 and 8.16, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 8.1• An allosteric effector binds to a site other than the active siteand stabilizes the active or inactive form of an enzyme. ReviewFigure 8.17, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 8.2• The end product of a metabolic pathway may inhibit anenzyme that catalyzes the commitment step of that pathway.Review Figure 8.19• Enzymes are sensitive to their environments. Both pH and temperatureaffect enzyme activity. Review Figures 8.20 and 8.21