Canis lupus familiaris, the dog, was domesticated byhumans from the gray wolf thousands of years ago.While there are many kinds of wolves, they all lookmore or less the same. Not so with “man’s best friend.” TheAmerican Kennel Club recognizes about 155 differentbreeds. Dog breeds not only look different, they varygreatly in size. For example, an adult Chihuahua weighs just1.5 kg, while a Scottish deerhound weighs 70 kg. No othermammal shows such large phenotypic variation, and biologistsare curious about how this occurs. Also, there are hundredsof genetic diseases in dogs, and many of these diseaseshave counterparts in humans. To find out about thegenes behind the phenotypic variation, and to elucidatethe relationships between genes and diseases, the DogGenome Project began in the late 1990s. Since then the sequencesof several dog genomes have been published.Two dogs—a boxer and a poodle—were the first tohave their entire genomes sequenced. The dog genomecontains 2.8 billion base pairs of DNA in 39 pairs of chromosomes.There are 19,000 protein-coding genes, most ofthem with close counterparts in other mammals, includinghumans. The whole genome sequence made it easy to createa map of genetic markers—specific nucleotides or shortsequences of DNA at particular locations on the genomethat differ between individual dogs and/or breeds.Genetic markers are used to map the locations of (andthus identify) genes that control particular traits. For example,Dr. Elaine Ostrander and her colleagues at the NationalInstitutes of Health studied Portuguese water dogsto identify genes that control size. Taking samples of cellsfor DNA isolation was relatively easy: a cotton swab wasswept over the inside of the cheek. As Dr. Ostrander said,the dogs “didn’t care, especially if they thought they weregoing to get a treat or if there was a tennis ball in ourother hand.” It turned out that the gene for insulin-likegrowth factor 1 (IGF-1) is important in determining size:large breeds have an allele that codes for an active IGF-1and small breeds have a different allele that codes for aless active IGF-1.Another gene important to phenotypic variation wasfound in whippets, sleek dogs that run fast and are oftenraced. A mutation in the gene for myostatin, a proteinthat inhibits overdevelopment of muscles, results in aThe dog genome17Variation in Dogs The Chihuahua (bottom) and the Brazilianmastiff (top) are the same species, Canis lupus familiaris, and yetshow great variation in size. Genome sequencing has revealedinsights into how size is controlled by genes.PART FIVE GENOMESIN THIS CHAPTER we look at genomes. First we lookat how large molecules of DNA are cut and sequenced, andwhat kinds of information these genome sequences provide.Then we turn to the results of ongoing sequencing effortsin both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. We next considerthe human genome and some of the real and potential usesof human genome information. Finally, we will describe theemerging fields of proteomics and metabolomics, which attemptto give a complete inventory of a cell’s proteins andmetabolic activity.whippet that is more muscular and runs faster. Myostatinis important in human muscles as well.Inevitably, some scientists have set up companies totest dogs for genetic variations, using DNA supplied byanxious owners and breeders. Some traditional breedersfrown on this practice, but others say it will improve thebreeds and give more joy (and prestige) to owners. Sothe issues surrounding the Dog Genome Project are notvery different from ones arising from the HumanGenome Project.Powerful methods have been developed to analyzeDNA sequences, and the resulting information is accumulatingat a rapid rate. Comparisons of sequencedgenomes are providing new insights into evolutionaryrelationships and confirming old ones. We are in a newera of biology.Genetic Bully These dogs are both whippets, but the muscle-bound dog (right) has a mutation in a gene that limitsmuscle buildup.17.1 How Are Genomes Sequenced?As you saw in the opening story on dogs, one reason for sequencinggenomes is to compare different organisms. Anotheris to identify changes in the genome that result in disease. In1986, the Nobel laureate Renato Dulbecco and others proposedthat the world scientific community be mobilized to undertakethe sequencing of the entire human genome. One challengediscussed at the time was to detect DNA damage in people whohad survived the atomic bomb attacks and been exposed toradiation in Japan during World War II. But in order to detectchanges in the human genome, scientists first needed to knowits normal sequence.The result was the publicly funded Human Genome Project,an enormous undertaking that was successfully completedin 2003. This effort was aided and complemented by privatelyfunded groups. The project benefited from the developmentof many new methods that were first used in the sequencing ofsmaller genomes—those of prokaryotes and simple eukaryotes.Two approaches were used to sequence thehuman genomeMany prokaryotes have a single chromosome, while eukaryoteshave several to many. Because of their differing sizes, chromosomescan be separated from one another, identified, and experimentallymanipulated. It might seem that the moststraightforward approach to sequencing a chromosome wouldbe to start at one end and simply sequence the entire DNAmolecule.However, this approach is not practical since only about700 base pairs can be sequenced at a time using current methods.Prokaryotic chromosomes contain 1–4 million base pairsand human chromosome 1 contains 246 million base pairs.To sequence an entire genome, chromosomal DNA must becut into short fragments about 500 base pairs long, which areseparated and sequenced. For the haploid human genome,which has about 3.3 billion base pairs, there are more than 6 millionsuch fragments. When all of the fragments have been sequenced,the problem becomes how to put these millions of sequencestogether. This task can be accomplished using larger,overlapping fragments.Let’s illustrate this process using a single, 10 base-pair (bp)DNA molecule. (This is a double-stranded molecule, but forconvenience we show only the sequence of the noncodingCHAPTER OUTLINE17.1 How Are Genomes Sequenced?17.2 What Have We Learned from SequencingProkaryotic Genomes?17.3 What Have We Learned from SequencingEukaryotic Genomes?17.4 What Are the Characteristics of the HumanGenome?17.5 What Do the New Disciplines of Proteomics andMetabolomics Reveal?strand.) The molecule is cut three ways. The first cut generatesthe fragments:TG, ATG, and CCTACThe second cut of the same molecule generates the fragments:AT, GCC, and TACTGThe third cut results in:CTG, CTA, and ATGCCan you put the fragments into the correct order? (The answeris ATGCCTACTG.) Of course, the problem of ordering 6 millionfragments, each about 500 bp long, is more of a challenge!The field of bioinformatics was developed to analyze DNA sequencesusing complex mathematics and computer programs.Until recently, two broad approaches were used to analyzeDNAfragments for alignment: hierarchical sequencing and shotgunsequencing. These were developed for the Human GenomeProject, but have been applied to other organisms as well.HIERARCHICAL SEQUENCING The publicly funded humangenome sequencing team developed a method known as hierarchicalsequencing. The first step was to systematically identifyshort marker sequences along the chromosomes, ensuringthat every fragment of DNA to be sequenced would contain amarker (Figure 17.1A). Genetic markers can be short tandem repeats(STRs), single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), or therecognition sites for restriction enzymes, which recognize and cutDNAat specific sequences (see Chapter 15).Some restriction enzymes recognize sequences of 4–6 basepairs and generate many fragments from a large DNA molecule.For example, the enzyme Sau3A cuts DNA every time itencounters GATC. Other restriction enzymes recognize sequencesof 8–12 base pairs (NotI cuts at GCGGCCGC, for example)and generate far fewer, but much larger, fragments.In hierarchical sequencing, genomic DNA is cut up into a setof relatively large (55,000 to 2 million bp) fragments. If differentenzymes are used in separate digests, the fragments will overlapso that some fragments share particular markers. Each fragmentis inserted into a bacterial plasmid to create a bacterial artificialchromosome (BAC), which is then inserted into bacteria. Eachbacterium gets just one plasmid with its fragment of (for example)the human genome and is allowed to grow into a colony containingmillions of genetically identical bacteria (called a clone).Clones differ from one another in that each has a different fragmentfrom the human genome. Acollection of clones, containingmany different fragments of a genome, is called a genomic library.The DNA from each clone is then extracted and cut intosmaller overlapping pieces, which in turn are cloned, purified,and sequenced. The overlapping parts of the sequences allow researchers(with the aid of computers) to align them to create thecomplete sequence of the BAC clone. The genetic markers on eachBAC clone are used to arrange the larger fragments in the properorder along the chromosome map. This method works, but it isslow. An alternative approach, shotgun sequencing, makes fargreater use of use of computers to align the sequences.17.1 | HOW ARE GENOMES SEQUENCED? 367TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE17.1 Sequencing Genomes Involves Fragment OverlapsShort fragments of the whole genome can be sequenced, but then the fragments must be correctly aligned. Historically two approacheswere used. Both involved the use of bacterial clones to separate and amplify individual DNA fragments.Markers321Each fragmentis amplified andthen sequenced.2A marker mapis made on alarge DNA.1 DNA is randomlybroken into 500 bpfragments. Severalcuts are made tocreate overlappingfragments.3 A computer finds sequencesshared by fragments (overlaps),and aligns the fragments.The DNA is cut intofragments of 55,000 to2 million bp. Severalcuts are made to createoverlapping fragments.Each fragment is amplifiedin a bacterial artificialchromosome (BAC).4 Marker sequences are identifiedon the fragments; common onesindicate overlap.5 The BAC fragments are cut intosmall pieces and sequenced frommarker to marker, 500 bp at a time.(A) Hierarchical sequencing (B) Shotgun sequencingGO TO Animated Tutorial 17.1 • Sequencing the GenomeyourBioPortal.comSHOTGUN SEQUENCING Instead ofmapping the genome and creating aBAC library, the shotgun sequencingmethod involves directly cutting genomicDNAinto smaller, overlappingfragments that are cloned and sequenced.Powerful computers alignthe fragments by finding sequence homologiesin the overlapping regions(Figure 17.1B). As sequencing technologiesand computers have improved,the shotgun approach has becomemuch faster and cheaper thanthe hierarchical approach.As a demonstration, researchersused this method to sequence a 1.8million-base-pair prokaryotic genomein just a few months. Next came largergenomes. The entire 180 million-basepairfruit fly genome was sequencedby the shotgun method in little over ayear. This success proved that theshotgun method might work for themuch larger human genome, and infact it was used to sequence the humangenome rapidly relative to the hierarchicalmethod.The nucleotide sequenceof DNA can be determinedHow are the individual DNA fragmentsgenerated by the hierarchicalor shotgun methods sequenced? Currenttechniques are variations of amethod developed in the late 1970sby Frederick Sanger. This methoduses chemically modified nucleotidesthat were originally developed tostop cell division in cancer. As wediscuss in Chapter 13, deoxyribonucleosidetriphosphates (dNTPs) arethe normal substrates for DNA replication,and contain the sugar deoxyribose.If that sugar is replacedwith 2,3-dideoxyribose, the resultingdideoxyribonucleoside triphosphate(ddNTP) will still be added by DNApolymerase to a growing polynucleotidechain. However, becausethe ddNTP has no hydroxyl group(—OH) at the 3′ position, the next nucleotidecannot be added (Figure17.2A). Thus synthesis stops at theposition where ddNTP has been incorporatedinto the growing end of aDNAstrand.368 CHAPTER 17 | GENOMESTOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE17.2 Sequencing DNA(A) The normal substrates for DNA replication are dNTPs. The chemically modified structureof ddNTPs causes DNA synthesis to stop. (B) When labeled ddNTPs are incorporated into areaction mixture for replicating a DNA template of unknown sequence, the result is acollection of fragments of varying lengths that can be separated by electrophoresis.The DNA fragment for which the basesequence is to be determined isisolated and serves as the template.Absence of OH at the 3′ position meansthat additional nucleotides cannot be added.1A sample of the unknown DNA is combinedwith primer, DNA polymerase, dNTPs, andthe fluorescent ddNTPs. Synthesis begins.34Each of the ddNTPsis bound to afluorescent dye.2The results are illustratedhere by what binds to a Tin the unknown template.If ddATP is added,synthesis stops. A seriesof fragments of differentlengths is made, eachending with a ddNTP.A6 Each fragment fluoresces a colorthat identifies the ddNTP thatterminated the fragment. The colorat the end of each fragment isdetected by a laser beam.7 The sequence of the DNAcan now be deduced fromthe colors of each fragment…5 The newly synthesized fragmentsof various lengths are separatedby electrophoresis.8 …and converted tothe sequence of thetemplate strand.Deoxyribonucleosidetriphosphate (dNTP)(normal)Dideoxyribonucleosidetriphosphate (ddNTP)(chemically modified)ddCTP ddGTP ddTTP ddATPPrimer(sequence known)Template strandLongestfragmentShortestfragmentElectrophoresisTCTGGGCAC TTAA(A) Base(A, T, G, or C)Base(A, T, G, or C)5′ 3′5′5′3′3′5′5′ 3′5′5′3′5′3′3′5′3′5′3′AA T C T GG GC T A T T C GGDetectorTGG(B)LaserCH2H HH HHOO–O P OOO–P O POO–OOO–CH2H HH HO–O P OOO–P O POO–OOO–2′ 3′ 2′????????????????????????????????????CGCAGCGTTT??????????????CGCAATCTGGGCTATTCGGGCGTAATCTGGGCTATTCGGGCGTC G T AH HH3′TTAGACCCGATAAGCCCGCAT???????????????CGCATo determine the sequence of a DNA fragment (usually nomore than 700 base pairs long), it is isolated and mixed with• DNApolymerase• Ashort primer appropriate for the DNA sequence• The four dNTPs (dATP, dGTP, dCTP, and dTTP)• Small amounts of the four ddNTPs, each bondedto a differently colored fluorescent “tag”In the first step of the reaction, the DNA is heated todenature it (separate it into single strands). Only oneof these strands will act as a template for sequencing—the one to which the primer binds. DNA replicationproceeds, and the test tube soon contains amixture of the original DNAstrands and shorter, newcomplementary strands. The new strands, each endingwith a fluorescent ddNTP, are of varying lengths.For example, each time a T is reached on the templatestrand, DNA polymerase adds either a dATP or addATP to the growing complementary strand. IfdATP is added, the strand continues to grow. IfddATP is added, growth stops (Figure 17.2B).After DNA replication has been allowed to proceedfor a while, the new DNA fragments are denaturedand the single-stranded fragments separatedby electrophoresis (see Figure 15.8), which sorts theDNAfragments by length. During the electrophoresisrun, the fragments pass through a laser beamthat excites the fluorescent tags, and the distinctivecolor of light emitted by each ddNTP is detected.The color indicates which ddNTP is at the end ofeach strand. Acomputer processes this informationand prints out the DNA sequence of the fragment(see Figure 17.2B).The delivery of chemical reagents by automatedmachines, coupled with automated analysis, hasmade DNAsequencing faster than ever. Huge laboratoriesoften have 80 sequencing machines operatingat once, each of which can sequence and analyzeup to 70,000 bp in a typical 4-hour run. This may befast enough for a prokaryotic genome with 1.5 millionbase pairs (20 runs), but when it comes to routinesequencing of larger genomes (like the 3.3 billion-base-pair human genome), even more speed isneeded.High-throughput sequencing has beendeveloped for large genomesThe first decade of the new millennium has seenrapid development of high-throughput sequencingmethods—fast, cheap ways to sequence and analyzelarge genomes. A variety of different approachesare being used. They generally involvethe amplification of DNA templates by the polymerasechain reaction (PCR; see Section 13.5), andthe physical binding of template DNA to a solidsurface or to tiny beads called microbeads. Thesetechniques are often referred to as massively parallel DNA sequencing,because thousands or millions of sequencing reactions arerun at once to greatly speed up the process. One such highthroughputmethod is illustrated in Figure 17.3. In one 7-hourrun, these machines can sequence 50,000,000 base pairs of DNA!How does it work?17.1 | HOW ARE GENOMES SEQUENCED? 369TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE17.3 High-Throughput SequencingHigh-speed sequencing is faster and cheaper than traditional methods,and involves the chemical amplification of DNA fragments. One example ofhigh-throughput sequencing is shown here.1 A large DNA moleculeis cut into fragmentsof 300–800 bp anddenatured to singlestrands.2 Each single-strandedDNA fragment isattached to a microbead.3 PCR amplifies eachfragment to 2 millioncopies per bead.5 DNA sequencing isdone one fluorescentbase at a time andread by a laserscanner.6 The sequenceis analyzed bycomputer.4 Each bead is put intoa microwell on a plate.DNAMicrobeadFluorescentbaseSequencing labGO TO Animated Tutorial 17.2 • High-Throughput SequencingyourBioPortal.comFor massively parallel sequencing using microbeads, the genomicDNAis first cut into 300- to 800-base-pair fragments. Thefragments are denatured to single strands and attached to tinybeads that are less than 20 μm in diameter, one DNA fragment(template) per bead. PCR is used to create several million identicalcopies of the fragment on each bead. Then each bead isloaded into a tiny (40 μm diameter) well in a multi-well plate,and the sequencing begins.The automated sequencer adds a reaction mix like the one describedabove, but containing only one of four fluorescently labeleddNTPs. That nucleotide will become incorporated as thefirst nucleotide in a complementary strand only in wells wherethe first nucleotide in the template strand can base-pair with it.For example, if the first nucleotide on the template in well #1has base T, then a fluorescent nucleotide with base A will bindto that well. Next, the reaction mix is removed and a scannercaptures an image of the plate, indicating which wells containthe fluorescent nucleotide. This process is repeated with a differentlabeled nucleotide. The machine cycles through many repeatsusing all four dNTPs, and records which wells gain newnucleotides after each cycle. A computer then identifies the sequenceof nucleotides that were gained by each well, and alignsthe fragments to provide the complete sequence of the genome.This method was used to sequence the genome of James Watson,codiscoverer of the DNA double helix. It took less than twomonths and cost less than $1 million. Sequencing methods arebeing continually refined to increase speed and accuracy anddecrease costs.Genome sequences yield several kinds of informationNew genome sequences are published more and more frequently,creating a torrent of biological information (Figure 17.4).In general, biologists use sequence information to identify:• Open reading frames, the coding regions of genes. For protein-coding genes, these regions can be recognized by thestart and stop codons for translation, and by intron consensussequences that indicate the locations of introns.• Amino acid sequences of proteins, which can be deducedfrom the DNA sequences of open reading frames by applyingthe genetic code (see Figure 14.6).• Regulatory sequences, such as promoters and terminators fortranscription.• RNA genes, including rRNA, tRNA, and small nuclear RNA(snRNA) genes.• Other noncoding sequences that can be classified into variouscategories including centromeric and telomeric regions, nuclearmatrix attachment regions, transposons, and repetitivesequences such as short tandem repeats.Sequence information is also used for comparative genomics, thecomparison of a newly sequenced genome (or parts thereof)with sequences from other organisms. This can give informationabout the functions of sequences, and can be used to traceevolutionary relationships among different organisms.370 CHAPTER 17 | GENOMESA chromosome has a single DNA molecule with specializedDNA sequences for the initiation of DNA replication, for spindleinteractions in mitosis (centromeres), and for maintaining theintegrity of the ends (telomeres). See Chapters 11 and 12.Chromatin remodeling altersgenome packaging andtherefore gene expression.See Chapter 16.Large chromosomes contain multipleorigins for DNA replication. See Chapter 13.CentromeresequencesHistonesDNA replication machineryTelomeresequencesChromosome17.4 The Genomic Book of Life Genome sequencescontain many features, some of which are summarized in thisoverview. Sifting through all the information contained in agenome sequence can help us understand how an organismfunctions and what its evolutionary history might be.17.1 RECAPThe sequencing of genomes required the developmentof ways to cut large chromosomes into fragments,sequence the fragments, and then line themup on the chromosome. Two ways to do this arehierarchical sequencing and shotgun sequencing.Today new procedures are being developed thatrequire automation and powerful computers. ActualDNA sequencing involves labeled nucleotides thatare detected at the ends of growing polynucleotidechains.• What are the hierarchical and shotgun approaches togenome analysis? See pp. 367–368 and Figure 17.1• What is the dideoxy method for DNA sequencing?See pp. 368–369 and Figure 17.2• Explain how high-throughput sequencing methodswork. See pp. 369–370 and Figure 17.3• How are open reading frames recognized in a genomicsequence? What kind of information can bederived from an open reading frame? See p. 370We now turn to the first organisms whose sequences were determined,prokaryotes, and the information these sequencesprovided.What Have We Learned from 17.2 Sequencing Prokaryotic Genomes?When DNA sequencing became possible in the late 1970s, thefirst life forms to be sequenced were the simplest viruses withtheir relatively small genomes. The sequences quickly providednew information on how these viruses infect their hosts and reproduce.But the manual sequencing techniques used on viruseswere not up to the task of studying the genomes of prokaryotesand eukaryotes. The newer, automated sequencing techniqueswe just described made such studies possible. We nowhave genome sequences for many prokaryotes, to the great benefitof microbiology and medicine.The sequencing of prokaryotic genomes led tonew genomics disciplinesIn 1995 a team led by Craig Venter and Hamilton Smith determinedthe first complete genomic sequence of a free-living cellularorganism, the bacterium Haemophilus influenzae. Manymore prokaryotic sequences have followed, revealing not onlyhow prokaryotes apportion their genes to perform different cellularfunctions, but also how their specialized functions are carriedout. Soon we may even be able to ask the provocative questionof what the minimal requirements of a living cell might be.FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS Functional genomics is the biologicaldiscipline that assigns functions to the products of genes. This17.2 | WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED FROM SEQUENCING PROKARYOTIC GENOMES? 371Gene expression occurs at open reading frames,from which RNA polymerase transcribes mRNAsthat are translated to form proteins. Genes containDNA sequences for control of their expression.See Chapters 14–16.RNA genes encode RNAs that are nottranslated into proteins. These RNAsinclude rRNA and tRNA, which are partof the protein translation machinery(Chapter 14), and miRNAs involved incontrol of gene expression (Chapter 16).Noncoding sequences on the genomeinclude highly repetitive sequences andtransposons. See Chapters 15 and 17.RNApolymeraseRNA genesNoncodingsequencestRNAPromoter oftranscriptionTerminator ofmRNA transcriptionOpen reading frame(protein coding sequence)Epigenetic modificationof gene: methylationfield, less than 15 years old, is now a major occupationof biologists. Let’s see how funtional genomics methodswere applied to the bacterium H. influenzae once its sequencewas known.The only host for H. influenzae is humans. It lives inthe upper respiratory tract and can cause ear infectionsor, more seriously, meningitis in children. Its single circularchromosome has 1,830,138 base pairs (Figure 17.5).In addition to its origin of replication and the genes codingfor rRNAs and tRNAs, this bacterial chromosomehas 1,738 open reading frames with promoters nearby.When this sequence was first announced, only 1,007(58 percent) of the open reading frames coded for proteinswith known functions. The remaining 42 percentcoded for proteins whose functions were unknown.Since then scientists have identified many of these proteins’roles. For example, they found genes for enzymesof glycolysis, fermentation, and electron transport. Othergene sequences code for membrane proteins, includingthose involved in active transport. An important findingwas that highly infective strains of H. influenzae, butnot noninfective strains, have genes for surface proteinsthat attach the bacterium to the human respiratory tract.These surface proteins are now a focus of research onpossible treatments for H. influenzae infections.COMPARATIVE GENOMICS Soon after the sequence of H.influenzae was announced, smaller (Mycoplasma genitalium;580,073 base pairs) and larger (E. coli; 4,639,221 basepairs) prokaryotic sequences were completed. Thus begana new era in biology, that of comparative genomics,which compares genome sequences from different organisms.Scientists can identify genes that are present in one bacteriumand missing in another, allowing them to relate these genes tobacterial function.M. genitalium, for example, lacks the enzymes needed to synthesizeamino acids, which E. coli and H. influenzae both possess.This finding reveals that M. genitalium must obtain all itsamino acids from its environment (usually the human urogenitaltract). Furthermore, E. coli has 55 regulatory genes codingfor transcriptional activators and 58 for repressors; M. genitaliumonly has 3 genes for activators. What do such findings tellus about an organism’s lifestyle? For example, is the biochemicalflexibility of M. genitalium limited by its relative lack of controlover gene expression?Some sequences of DNA can move about the genomeGenome sequencing allowed scientists to study more broadlya class of DNA sequences that had been discovered by geneticistsdecades earlier. Segments of DNA called transposableelements can move from place to place in the genome and caneven be inserted into another piece of DNA in the same cell (e.g.,a plasmid). Atransposable element might be at one location inthe genome of one E. coli strain, and at a different location in anotherstrain. The insertion of this movable DNA sequence fromelsewhere in the genome into the middle of a protein-codinggene disrupts that gene (Figure 17.6A). Any mRNA expressedfrom the disrupted gene will have the extra sequence and the372 CHAPTER 17 | GENOMESOn this map, colors denotespecific gene functions. Forexample, red genes regulatecellular processes……yellow genes regulatereplication……and green genes regulatethe production of the cell wall.17.5 Functional Organization of the Genome of H. influenzaeThe entire DNA sequence has 1,830,137 base pairs. Different colorsreflect different classes of gene function.If a transposableelement is copiedand inserted intothe middle ofanother gene, theoriginal gene istranscribed intoan altered mRNA.A transposon consists of two transposableelements flanking another gene or genes. Theentire transposon is copied and inserted as a unit.(A)(B)TransposonOther genesCopying and insertionDNAmRNAA B C D EA B C D EFAlteredmRNATransposable elementTransposableelementTransposableelement17.6 DNA Sequences that Move Transposable elements are DNA sequencesthat move from one location to another. (A) In one method of transposition, theDNA sequence is replicated and the copy inserts elsewhere in the genome. (B)Transposons contain transposable elements and other genes.protein will be abnormal. So transposable elements can producesignificant phenotypic effects by inactivating genes.Transposable elements are often short sequences of 1,000–2,000base pairs, and are found at many sites in prokaryotic genomes.The mechanisms that allow them to move vary. For example, atransposable element may be replicated, and then the copy insertedinto another site in the genome. Or the element mightsplice out of one location and move to another location.Longer transposable elements (up to 5,000 bp) carry additionalgenes and are called transposons (Figure 17.6B). Sometimesthese DNA regions contain a gene for antibiotic resistance.The sequencing of prokaryotic and viral genomeshas many potential benefitsProkaryotic genome sequencing promises to provide insightsinto microorganisms that cause human diseases. Genome sequencinghas revealed unknown genes and proteins that can betargeted for isolation and functional study. Such studies arerevealing new methods to combat pathogens and their infections.Sequencing has also revealed surprising relationships betweensome pathogenic organisms, suggesting that genes maybe transferred between different strains.• Chlamydia trachomatis causes the most common sexuallytransmitted disease in the United States. Because it is an intracellularparasite, it has been very hard to study. Amongits 900 genes are several for ATP synthesis—something scientistsused to think this bacterium could not accomplishon its own.• Rickettsia prowazekii causes typhus; it is carried by lice andinfects people bitten by the lice. Of its 634 genes, 6 encodeproteins that are essential for virulence. These virulenceproteins are being used to develop vaccines.• Mycobacterium tuberculosis causes tuberculosis. It has a relativelylarge genome, coding for 4,000 proteins. Over 250 ofthese are used to metabolize lipids, so this may be the mainway that this bacterium gets its energy. Some of its genescode for previously unidentified cell surface proteins; theseproteins are targets for potential vaccines.• Streptomyces coelicolor and its close relatives are the sourcefor the genes for two-thirds of all naturally occuring antibioticscurrently in clinical use. These antibiotics includestreptomycin, tetracycline, and erythromycin. The genomesequence of S. coelicolor reveals 22 clusters of genes responsiblefor antibiotic production, of which only four were previouslyknown. This finding may lead to new antibiotics tocombat pathogens that have evolved resistance to conventionalantibiotics.• E. coli strain O157:H7 causes illness (sometimes severe) in atleast 70,000 people a year in the United States. Its genomehas 5,416 genes, of which 1,387 are different from those inthe familiar (and harmless) laboratory strains of this bacterium.Many of these unique genes are also present inother pathogenic bacteria, such as Salmonella and Shigella.This finding suggests that there is extensive genetic exchangeamong these species, and that “superbugs” thatshare genes for antibiotic resistance may be on the horizon.• Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) was first detectedin southern China in 2002 and rapidly spread in 2003.There is no effective treatment and 10 percent of infectedpeople die. Isolation of the causative agent, a virus, andthe rapid sequencing of its genome revealed several novelproteins that are possible targets for antiviral drugs or vaccines.Research is underway on both fronts, since anotheroutbreak is anticipated.Genome sequencing also provides insights into organisms involvedin global ecological cycles (see Chapter 58). In additionto the well-known carbon dioxide, another important gas contributingto the atmospheric “greenhouse effect” and globalwarming is methane (CH4; see Figure 2.7). Some bacteria, suchas Methanococcus, produce methane in the stomachs of cows.Others, such as Methylococcus, remove methane from the air anduse it as an energy source. The genomes of both of these bacteriahave been sequenced. Understanding the genes involved inmethane production and oxidation may help us to slow theprogress of global warming.Metagenomics allows us to describe new organismsand ecosystemsIf you take a microbiology laboratory course you will learn howto identify various prokaryotes on the basis of their growth inlab cultures. For example, staphylococci are a group of bacteriathat infect skin and nasal passages. When grown on a specialmedium called blood agar they form round, raised colonies.Microorganisms can also be identified by their nutritional requirementsor the conditions under which they will grow (forexample, aerobic versus anaerobic). Such culture methods havebeen the mainstay of microbial identification for over a centuryand are still useful and important. However, scientists can nowuse PCR and modern DNA analysis techniques to analyze microbeswithout culturing them in the laboratory.In 1985, Norman Pace, then at Indiana University, came upwith the idea of isolating DNA directly from environmentalsamples. He used PCR to amplify specific sequences from thesamples to determine whether particular microbes were present.The PCR products were sequenced to explore their diversity.The term metagenomics was coined to describe this approachof analyzing genes without isolating the intact organism.It is now possible to perform shotgun sequencing with samplesfrom almost any environment. The sequences can be used to detectthe presence of known microbes and pathogens, and perhapseven the presence of heretofore unidentified organisms(Figure 17.7). For example:• Shotgun sequencing of DNA from 200 liters of seawaterindicated that it contained 5,000 different viruses and 2,000different bacteria, many of which had not been describedpreviously.• One kilogram of marine sediment contained a million differentviruses, most of them new.17.2 | WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED FROM SEQUENCING PROKARYOTIC GENOMES? 373• Water runoff from a mine contained many new species ofprokaryotes thriving in this apparently inhospitable environment.Some of these organisms exhibited metabolicpathways that were previously unknown to biologists.These organisms and their capabilities may be useful incleaning up pollutants from the water.These and other discoveries are truly extraordinary and potentiallyvery important. It is estimated that 90 percent of themicrobial world has been invisible to biologists and is only nowbeing revealed by metagenomics. Entirely new ecosystems ofbacteria and viruses are being discovered in which, for example,one species produces a molecule that another metabolizes.It is hard to overemphasize the importance of such an increasein our knowledge of the hidden world of microbes. This knowledgewill help us to understand natural ecological processes,and has the potential to help us find better ways to manageenvironmental catastrophes such as oil spills, or remove toxicheavy metals from soil.Will defining the genes required for cellular lifelead to artificial life?When the genomes of prokaryotes and eukaryotes are compared,a striking conclusion arises: certain genes are present inall organisms (universal genes). There are also some (nearly)universal gene segments that are present in many genes in manyorganisms; for example, the sequence that codes for an ATPbinding site. These findings suggest that there is some ancient,minimal set of DNA sequences common to all cells. One way toidentify these sequences is to look for them in computer analysesof sequenced genomes.Another way to define the minimal genome is to take anorganism with a simple genome and deliberately mutate onegene at a time to see what happens. M. genitalium has one of thesmallest known genomes—only 482 protein-coding genes. Evenso, some of its genes are dispensable under some circumstances.For example, it has genes for metabolizing both glucose andfructose, but it can survive in the laboratory on a medium containingonly one of these sugars.What about other genes? Researchers have addressed thisquestion with experiments involving the use of transposons asmutagens. When transposons in the bacterium are activated,they insert themselves into genes at random, mutating and inactivatingthem (Figure 17.8). The mutated bacteria are testedfor growth and survival, and DNA from interesting mutants issequenced to find out which genes contain transposons.The astonishing result of these studies is that M. genitaliumcan survive in the laboratory with a minimal genome of only382 functional genes! Is this really all it takes to make a viableorganism? Experiments are underway to make a syntheticgenome based on that of M. genitalium, and then insert it intoan empty bacterial cell. If the cell starts transcribing mRNA andmaking proteins—is in fact viable—it may turn out to be thefirst life created by humans.In addition to the technical feat of creating artificial life, thistechnique could have important applications. New microbescould be made with entirely new abilities, such as degradingoil spills, making synthetic fibers, reducing tooth decay, or convertingcellulose to ethanol for use as fuel. On the other hand,fears of the misuse or mishandling of this knowledge are notunfounded. For example, it might also be possible to developsynthetic bacteria harmful to people, animals or plants, and usethem as agents of biological warfare or bioterrorism. The “genomicsgenie” is, for better or worse, already out of the bottle.Hopefully human societies will use it to their benefit.17.2 RECAPDNA sequencing is used to study the genomes ofprokaryotes that are important to humans and toecosystems. Functional genomics uses gene sequencesto determine the functions of the geneproducts. Comparative genomics compares genesequences from different organisms to help identifytheir functions and evolutionary relationships. Transposableelements and transposons move from oneplace to another in the genome.• Give some examples of prokaryotic genomes thathave been sequenced. What have the sequencesshown? See pp. 371–373• What is metagenomics and how is it used? See pp.373–374 and Figure 17.7• How are selective inactivation studies being used todetermine the minimal genome? See p. 374 andFigure 17.8374 CHAPTER 17 | GENOMES1 DNA is isolated fromthe environment.2 DNA is fragmentedand inserted into acloning vector.3 Clones are amplifiedand inserted intoE. coli to make alibrary.MetagenomicDNA fragmentDNA and proteinanalysisVector17.7 Metagenomics Microbial DNA extracted from the environmentcan be amplified and analyzed. This has led to the description of manynew genes and species.Advances in DNA sequencing and analysis have led to the rapidsequencing of eukaryotic genomes. We now turn to the resultsof these analyses.What Have We Learned from 17.3 Sequencing Eukaryotic Genomes?As genomes have been sequenced and described, a number ofmajor differences have emerged between eukaryotic andprokaryotic genomes (Table 17.1). Key differences include:they have more protein-coding genes. This difference is notsurprising, given that multicellular organisms have manycell types with specific functions. Many proteins are neededto do those specialized jobs. Atypical viruscontains enough DNA to code for only afew proteins—about 10,000 base pairs (bp).As we saw above, the simplest prokaryote,Mycoplasma, has several hundred proteincodinggenes in a genome of 0.5 million bp.Arice plant, in contrast, has 37,544 genes.• Eukaryotic genomes have more regulatory sequences—and many more regulatory proteins—than prokaryotic genomes. Thegreater complexity of eukaryotes requiresmuch more regulation, which is evident inthe many points of control associated withthe expression of eukaryotic genes (see Figure16.13).• Much of eukaryotic DNA is noncoding. Distributedthroughout many eukaryotic genomesare various kinds of DNA sequences that arenot transcribed into mRNA, most notablyintrons and gene control sequences. As wediscuss in Chapter 16, some noncoding sequencesare transcribed into microRNAs. Inaddition, eukaryotic genomes contain variouskinds of repeated sequences. These featuresare rare in prokaryotes.• Eukaryotes have multiple chromosomes. Thegenomic “encyclopedia” of a eukaryote isseparated into multiple “volumes.” Eachchromosome must have, at a minimum,three defining DNA sequences that we havedescribed in previous chapters: an origin ofreplication (ori) that is recognized by theDNAreplication machinery; a centromereregion that holds the replicated chromosomestogether before mitosis; and a telomericsequence at each end of the chromosomethat maintains chromosome integrity.Model organisms reveal manycharacteristics of eukaryotic genomesMost of the lessons learned from eukaryoticgenomes have come from several simple model organisms thathave been studied extensively: the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae,the nematode (roundworm) Caenorhabditis elegans, the fruit flyDrosophila melanogaster, and—representing plants—the thalecress, Arabidopsis thaliana. Model organisms have been chosenbecause they are relatively easy to grow and study in a laboratory,their genetics are well studied, and they exhibit characteristicsthat represent a larger group of organisms.YEAST: THE BASIC EUKARYOTIC MODEL Yeasts are single-celledeukaryotes. Like most eukaryotes, they have membrane-enclosedorganelles, such as the nucleus and endoplasmic reticulum,and a life cycle that alternates between haploid and diploidgenerations (see Figure 11.15).17.3 | WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED FROM SEQUENCING EUKARYOTIC GENOMES? 375HYPOTHESIS Only some of the genes in a bacterial genome are essential forcell survival.INVESTIGATING LIFEMETHODRESULTS17.8 Using Transposon Mutagenesis to Determine the Minimal GenomeMycoplasma genitalium has the smallest number of genes of any prokaryote.But are all of its genes essential to life? By inactivating the genes one by one,scientists determined which of them are essential for the cell’s survival. Thisresearch may lead to the construction of artificial cells with customized genomes,designed to perform functions such as degrading oil and making plastics.CONCLUSION If each gene is inactivated in turn, a "minimal essentialgenome" can be determined.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, andrelevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.M. genitalium has 482genes; only two areshown here.A transposon insertsrandomly into onegene, inactivating it.Each mutant is putinto growth medium.Growth means thatgene A is not essential.No growth means thatgene B is essential.Experiment 1 Experiment 2A BInactivegene BInactivegene A• Eukaryotic genomes are larger than those of prokaryotes, andWhile the prokaryote E. coli has a single circular chromosomewith about 4.6 million bp and 4,290 protein-coding genes, buddingyeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) has 16 linear chromosomesand a haploid content of more than 12.5 million bp, with 5,770protein-coding genes. Gene inactivation studies similar to thosecarried out for M. genitalium (see Figure 17.7) indicate that fewerthan 20 percent of these genes are essential to survival.The most striking difference between the yeast genome andthat of E. coli is in the number of genes for targeting proteins toorganelles (Table 17.2). Both of these single-celled organisms appearto use about the same numbers of genes to perform thebasic functions of cell survival. It is the compartmentalizationof the eukaryotic yeast cell into organellesthat requires it to have many more genes.This finding is direct, quantitative confirmation ofsomething we have known for a century: the eukaryoticcell is structurally more complex than theprokaryotic cell.THE NEMATODE: UNDERSTANDING EUKARYOTIC DEVELOPMENTIn 1965 Sydney Brenner, fresh frombeing part of the team that first isolated mRNA,looked for a simple organism in which to studymulticellularity. He settled on Caenorhabditis elegans,a millimeter-long nematode (roundworm)that normally lives in the soil. It can also live inthe laboratory, where it has become a favoritemodel organism of developmental biologists (see Section 19.4).The nematode has a transparent body that develops over 3 daysfrom a fertilized egg to an adult worm made up of nearly 1,000cells. In spite of its small number of cells, the nematode has anervous system, digests food, reproduces sexually, and ages. Soit is not surprising that an intense effort was made to sequencethe genome of this model organism.The C. elegans genome (100 million bp) is eight times larger thanthat of yeast and has 3.5 times as many protein-coding genes(19,427). Gene inactivation studies have shown that the worm cansurvive in laboratory cultures with only 10 percent of these genes.So the “minimum genome” of a worm is about twice the size ofthat of yeast, which in turn is four times the size of the minimumgenome for Mycoplasma. What do these extra genes do?All cells must have genes for survival, growth, and division.In addition, the cells of multicellular organisms must have genesfor holding cells together to form tissues, for cell differentiation,and for intercellular communication. Looking at Table 17.3, youwill recognize functions that we discussed in earlier chapters,376 CHAPTER 17 | GENOMESTABLE 17.1Representative Sequenced GenomesHAPLOID PROTEINGENOMENUMBER CODINGORGANISM SIZE (Mb) OF GENES SEQUENCEBacteriaM. genitalium 0.58 485 88%H. influenzae 1.8 1,738 89%E. coli 4.6 4,377 88%YeastsS. cerevisiae 12.5 5,770 70%S. pombe 12.5 4,929 60%PlantsA. thaliana 115 28,000 25%Rice 390 37,544 12%AnimalsC. elegans 100 19,427 25%D. melanogaster 123 13,379 13%Pufferfish 342 27,918 10%Chicken 1,130 25,000 3%Human 3,300 24,000 1.2%Mb = millions of base pairsTABLE 17.2Comparison of the Genomes of E. coliand YeastE. COLI YEASTGenome length (base pairs) 4,640,000 12,068,000Number of protein-coding genes 4,290 5,770Proteins with roles in:Metabolism 650 650Energy production/storage 240 175Membrane transport 280 250DNA replication/repair/ 120 175recombinationTranscription 230 400Translation 180 350Protein targeting/secretion 35 430Cell structure 180 250TABLE 17.3C. elegans Genes Essential to MulticellularityFUNCTION PROTEIN/DOMAIN NUMBER OF GENESTranscription control Zinc finger; homeobox 540RNA processing RNA binding domains 100Nerve impulse transmission Gated ion channels 80Tissue formation Collagens 170Cell interactions Extracellular domains; 330glycotransferasesCell–cell signaling G protein-linked receptors; 1,290protein kinases; proteinphosphatasesincluding gene regulation (see Chapter 16) and cell communication(see Chapter 7).DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER: RELATING GENETICS TO GENOMICSThe fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster is a famous model organism.Studies of fruit fly genetics resulted in the formulation ofmany basic principles of genetics (see Section 12.4). Over 2,500mutations of D. melanogaster had been described by the 1990swhen genome sequencing began, and this fact alone was a goodreason for sequencing the fruit fly’s DNA. The fruit fly is a muchlarger organism than C. elegans, both in size (it has 10 times morecells) and complexity, and it undergoes complicated developmentaltransformations from egg to larva to pupa to adult.Not surprisingly, the fly’s genome (about 123 million bp) islarger than that of C. elegans. But as we mentioned earlier,genome size does not necessarily correlate with the number ofgenes encoded. In this case, the larger fruit fly genome containsfewer genes (13,379) than the smaller nematode genome. Figure17.9 summarizes the functions of the Drosophila genes thathave been characterized so far; this distribution is typical ofcomplex eukaryotes.ARABIDOPSIS: STUDYING THE GENOMES OF PLANTS About 250,000species of flowering plants dominate the land and fresh water.But in the context of the history of life, the flowering plants arefairly young, having evolved only about 200 million years ago.The genomes of some plants are huge—for example, the genomeof corn is about 3 billion bp, and that of wheat is 16 billion bp.So although we are naturally most interested in the genomes ofplants we use as food and fiber, it is not surprising that scientistsfirst chose to sequence a simpler flowering plant.Arabidopsis thaliana, thale cress, is a member of the mustardfamily and has long been a favorite model organism of plant biologists.It is small (hundreds could grow and reproduce in thespace occupied by this page) and easy to manipulate, and hasa relatively small (115 million bp) genome.The Arabidopsis genome has about 28,000 protein-codinggenes but, remarkably, many of these genes are duplicates andprobably originated by chromosomal rearrangements. Whenthese duplicate genes are subtracted from the total, about 15,000unique genes are left—similar to the gene numbers found infruit flies and nematodes. Indeed, many of the genes found inthese animals have homologs (genes with very similar sequences)in Arabidopsis and other plants, suggesting that plantsand animals have a common ancestor.But Arabidopsis has some genes that distinguish it as a plant(Table 17.4). These include genes involved in photosynthesis,in the transport of water into the root and throughout the plant,in the assembly of the cell wall, in the uptake and metabolismof inorganic substances from the environment, and in the synthesisof specific molecules used for defense against microbesand herbivores (organisms that eat plants). These plant defensemolecules may be a major reason why the number of proteincodinggenes in plants is higher than in animals. Plants cannotescape their enemies or other adverse conditions as animals can,and so they must cope with the situation where they are. So theymake tens of thousands of molecules to fight their enemies andadapt to the environment (see Chapter 39).These plant-specific genes are also found in the genomes ofother plants, including rice, the first major crop plant whose sequencehas been determined. Rice (Oryza sativa) is the world’smost important crop; it is a staple in the diet of 3 billion people.The larger genome in rice has a set of genes remarkably similarto that of Arabidopsis. More recently the genome of the poplartree, Populus trichocarpa, was sequenced to gain insight intothe potential for this rapidly growing tree to be used as a sourceof fixed carbon for making fuel. A comparison of the threegenomes shows many genes in common, comprising the basicplant genome (Figure 17.10).Eukaryotes have gene familiesAbout half of all eukaryotic protein-coding genes exist as onlyone copy in the haploid genome (two copies in somatic cells).The rest are present in multiple copies, which arose from geneduplications. Over evolutionary time, different copies of geneshave undergone separate mutations, giving rise to groups ofclosely related genes called gene families. Some gene families,such as those encoding the globin proteins that make up hemoglobin,contain only a few members; other families, such asthe genes encoding the immunoglobulins that make up antibodies,have hundreds of members. In the human genome,17.3 | WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED FROM SEQUENCING EUKARYOTIC GENOMES? 37717.9 Functions of the Eukaryotic Genome The distribution of genefunctions in Drosophila melanogaster shows a pattern that is typical ofmany complex organisms.25%20%20%15%10%10%CellsignalingCell cycleCell structureand organellesMembrane structureand transportEnzymesfor generalmetabolismDNA replication,maintenance,and expressionTABLE 17.4Arabidopsis Genes Unique to PlantsFUNCTION NUMBER OF GENESCell wall and growth 42Water channels 300Photosynthesis 139Defense and metabolism 94there are 24,000 protein-coding genes, but 16,000 distinct genefamilies. So only one-third of the human genes are unique.The DNA sequences in a gene family are usually differentfrom one another. As long as at least one member encodes afunctional protein, the other members may mutate in ways thatchange the functions of the proteins they encode. For evolution,the availability of multiple copies of a gene allows for selectionof mutations that provide advantages under certain circumstances.If a mutated gene is useful, it may be selected for in succeedinggenerations. If the mutated gene is a total loss, thefunctional copy is still there to carry out its role.The gene family encoding the globins is a good example ofthe gene families found in vertebrates. These proteins are foundin hemoglobin and myoglobin (an oxygen-binding protein presentin muscle). The globin genes all arose long ago from a singlecommon ancestral gene. In humans, there are three functionalmembers of the α-globin cluster and five in the β-globin cluster(Figure 17.11). In adults, each hemoglobin molecule is a tetramercontaining two identical α-globin subunits, two identical β-globinsubunits, and four heme pigments (see Figure 3.10).During human development, different members of the globingene cluster are expressed at different times and in different tissues.This differential gene expression has great physiological significance.For example, hemoglobin containing γ-globin, a subunitfound in the hemoglobin of the human fetus, binds O2 moretightly than adult hemoglobin does. This specialized form ofhemoglobin ensures that in the placenta, O2 will be transferredfrom the mother’s blood to the developing fetus’s blood. Just beforebirth the liver stops synthesizing fetal hemoglobin and thebone marrow cells take over, making the adult forms (2α and 2β).Thus hemoglobins with different binding affinities for O2 are providedat different stages of human development.In addition to genes that encode proteins, many gene familiesinclude nonfunctional pseudogenes, which are designatedwith the Greek letter psi (Ψ) (see Figure 17.11). These pseudogenesresult from mutations that cause a loss of function ratherthan an enhanced or new function. The DNA sequence of apseudogene may not differ greatly from that of other familymembers. It may simply lack a promoter, for example, and thusfail to be transcribed. Or it may lack a recognition site neededfor the removal of an intron, so that the transcript it makes isnot correctly processed into a useful mature mRNA. In somegene families pseudogenes outnumber functional genes. Becausesome members of the family are functional, there appearsto be little selection pressure for the deletion of pseudogenes.Eukaryotic genomes contain many repetitive sequencesEukaryotic genomes contain numerous repetitive DNA sequencesthat do not code for polypeptides. These include highlyrepetitive sequences, moderately repetitive sequences, andtransposons.Highly repetitive sequences are short (less than 100 bp) sequencesthat are repeated thousands of times in tandem (side-byside)arrangements in the genome. They are not transcribed. Theirproportion in eukaryotic genomes varies, from 10 percent inhumans to about half the genome in some species of fruit flies.Often they are associated with heterochromatin, the denselypacked, transcriptionally inactive part of the genome. Otherhighly repetitive sequences are scattered around the genome. Forexample, short tandem repeats (STRs) of 1–5 bp can be repeatedup to 100 times at a particular chromosomal location. The copynumber of an STR at a particular location varies between individualsand is inherited. In Chapter 15 we describe how STRs canbe used in the identification of individuals (DNA fingerprinting).Moderately repetitive sequences are repeated 10–1000 timesin the eukaryotic genome. These sequences include the genesthat are transcribed to produce tRNAs and rRNAs, which areused in protein synthesis. The cell makes tRNAs and rRNAsconstantly, but even at the maximum rate of transcription, singlecopies of the tRNA and rRNA genes would be inadequateto supply the large amounts of these molecules needed by mostcells. Thus the genome has multiple copies of these genes.In mammals, four different rRNA molecules make up the ribosome:the 18S, 5.8S, 28S, and 5S rRNAs. (The S stands forSvedberg unit, which is a measure of size.) The 18S, 5.8S, and378 CHAPTER 17 | GENOMESThese genes areunique to Arabidopsis.These genes areunique to poplar.These genes are shared byall three plant genomes.These genes areunique to rice.21,0004,000Arabidopsisthaliana1,600 756009,000 18,000PopulustrichocarpaOryzasativaNoncoding “spacer” DNA is foundbetween gene family members.b-globingene clustera-globingene clusterε Gγ Aγ ψβ1 δ βζ2 ψζ1 ψα1 α2 α1NonfunctionalpseudogenesDNAChromosome 16Chromosome 1117.10 Plant Genomes Three plant genomes share a common set ofapproximately 21,000 genes that appear to comprise the “minimal” plantgenome.17.11 The Globin Gene Family The α-globin and β-globin clusters ofthe human globin gene family are located on different chromosomes. Thegenes of each cluster are separated by noncoding “spacer” DNA. Thenonfunctional pseudogenes are indicated by the Greek letter psi (ψ). Theγ gene has two variants, Aγ and Gγ.28S rRNAs are transcribed together as a single precursor RNAmolecule (Figure 17.12). As a result of several posttranscriptionalsteps, the precursor is cut into the final three rRNA products,and the noncoding “spacer” RNA is discarded. The sequenceencoding these RNAs is moderately repetitive inhumans: a total of 280 copies of the sequence are located in clusterson five different chromosomes.TRANSPOSONS Apart from the RNA genes, most moderatelyrepetitive sequences are not stably integrated into the genome.Instead, these sequences can move from place to place, andare thus called transposable elements or transposons. Prokaryotesalso have transposons (see Figure 17.6). Transposons makeup over 40 percent of the human genome and about 50 percentof the maize genome, although the percentage is smaller(3–10 percent) in many other eukaryotes.There are four main types of transposons in eukaryotes:1. SINEs (short interspersed elements) are up to 500 bp long andare transcribed but not translated. There are about 1.5 millionof them scattered over the human genome, making up about15 percent of the total DNA content. Asingle type, the 300-bpAlu element, accounts for 11 percent of the human genome;it is present in a million copies.2. LINEs (long interspersed elements) are up to 7,000 bp long,and some are transcribed and translated into proteins. Theyconstitute about 17 percent of the human genome.SINEs and LINEs move about the genome in a distinctiveway: they are transcribed into RNA, which then acts as atemplate for new DNA. The new DNA becomes inserted ata new location in the genome. This “copy and paste” mechanismresults in two copies of the transposon: one at theoriginal location and the other at a new location.3. Retrotransposons also make RNA copies of themselves whenthey move about the genome. Some of them encode proteinsneeded for their own transposition, and others do not. SINEsand LINEs are types of retrotransposons. Non-SINE, non-LINE retrotransposons constitute about 8 percent of the humangenome.4. DNA transposons do not use RNA intermediates. Like someprokaryotic transposable elements, they are excised from theoriginal location and become inserted at a new location withoutbeing replicated.What role do these moving sequences play in the cell? Thebest answer so far seems to be that transposons are simply cellularparasites that can be replicated. The insertion of a transposonat a new location can have important consequences. Forexample, the insertion of a transposon into the coding region ofa gene results in a mutation (see Figure 17.8). This phenomenonaccounts for a few rare forms of several genetic diseases in humans,including hemophilia and muscular dystrophy. If the insertionof a transposon takes place in the germ line, a gametewith a new mutation results. If the insertion takes place in a somaticcell, cancer may result.Sometimes an adjacent gene can be replicatedalong with a transposon, resulting in agene duplication. Atransposon can carry a gene,or a part of it, to a new location in the genome,shuffling the genetic material and creating newgenes. Clearly, transposition stirs the genetic potin the eukaryotic genome and thus contributesto genetic variation.Section 5.5 describes the theory of endosymbiosis,which proposes that chloroplasts and mitochondriaare the descendants of once free-livingprokaryotes. Transposons may have played arole in endosymbiosis. In living eukaryotes thechloroplasts and mitochondria contain someDNA, but the nucleus contains most of the genes17.3 | WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED FROM SEQUENCING EUKARYOTIC GENOMES? 379This rRNA gene is repeated manytimes (280 in humans).Transcriptionbegins here……the RNAelongates……and elongates untilit is released here.Many rRNA precursors are beingtranscribed from multiple rRNA genes.Processing stepsremove the spacerswithin the transcribedregion.Pre-rRNAtranscriptrRNAs18S 5.8S 28S18S 5.8S 28S13,000 bpTranscribed region30,000 bpNontranscribedspacer regionDNA(A)(B)Strands of rRNADNA17.12 A ModeratelyRepetitive SequenceCodes for rRNA (A) ThisrRNA gene, along with itsnontranscribed spacerregion, is repeated 280 timesin the human genome, withclusters on five chromosomes.(B) This electronmicrograph shows transcriptionof multiple rRNA genes.that encode the organelles’ proteins. If the organelleswere once independent, they must originally have containedall of those genes. How did the genes move to thenucleus? They may have done so by DNAtranspositionsbetween organelles and the nucleus, which still occur today.The DNAthat remains in the organelles may be theremnants of more complete prokaryotic genomes.See Figure 17.13 for a summary of the various typesof sequences in the human genome.17.3 RECAPThe sequencing of the genomes of model organismsdemonstrated common features of the eukaryoticgenome, including the presence of repetitive sequencesand transposons. Some eukaryotic genesare in families, which may include members that aremutated and nonfunctional. Some sequences aretranscribed, but others are not.• What are the major differences between prokaryoticand eukaryotic genomes? See p. 375• Describe one function of genes found in C. elegansthat has no counterpart in the genome of yeast. Seep. 376 and Table 17.3• What is the evolutionary role of eukaryotic gene families?See p. 377• Why are there multiple copies of sequences coding forrRNA in the mammalian genome? See p. 378• What effects can transposons have on a genome?See p. 379The analysis of eukaryotic genomes has resulted in an enormousamount of useful information, as we have seen. In the next sectionwe look more closely at the human genome.What Are the Characteristics 17.4 of the Human Genome?By the start of 2005 the first human genome sequences werecompleted, two years ahead of schedule and well under budget.The published sequences, one produced by the publicallyfunded Human Genome Project, and the other by a private company,were haploid genomes that were composites of severalpeople. Since 2005, the diploid genomes of several individualshave been sequenced and published.The human genome sequence held some surprisesThe following are just some of the interesting facts that we havelearned about the human genome:• Of the 3.3 billion base pairs in the haploid human genome,fewer than 2 percent (about 24,000 genes) make up proteincodingregions. This was a surprise. Before sequencing began,humans were estimated, based on the diversity of theirproteins, to have 80,000–150,000 genes. The actual numberof genes—not many more than in a fruit fly—means thatposttranscriptional mechanisms (such as alternative splicing)must account for the observed number of proteins inhumans. That is, the average human gene must code forseveral different proteins.• The average gene has 27,000 base pairs. Gene sizes varygreatly, from about 1,000 to 2.4 million base pairs. Variationin gene size is to be expected given that human proteins(and RNAs) vary in size, from 100 to about 5,000 aminoacids per polypeptide chain.• Virtually all human genes have many introns.• Over 50 percent of the genome is made up of transposonsand other highly repetitive sequences. Repetitive sequencesnear genes are GC-rich, while those farther away fromgenes are AT-rich.• Most of the genome (about 97 percent) is the same in all people.Despite this apparent homogeneity, there are, of course,many individual differences. Scientists have mapped over 7million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in humans.• Genes are not evenly distributed over the genome. Chromosome19 is packed densely with genes, while chromosome8 has long stretches without coding regions. The Ychromosome has the fewest genes (231), while chromosome1 has the most (2,968).Comparisons between sequenced genomes from prokaryotesand eukaryotes have revealed some of the evolutionary relationshipsbetween genes. Some genes are present in bothprokaryotes and eukaryotes; others are only in eukaryotes; stillothers are only in animals, or only in vertebrates (Figure 17.14).380 CHAPTER 17 | GENOMESPromoters andexpressioncontrol sequencesIntronsTranscribed TranslatedExonsHighly repetitiveshort sequencesrRNA and tRNAgenesSINEsLINEsRetrotransposonsDNA transposonsTransposableelementsModeratelyrepetitivesequencesSingle-copygenes–++–+++++––+–––+++17.13 Sequences in the Eukaryotic Genome There are many types of DNAsequences. Some are transcribed, and some of those sequences are translated.More comparative genomics is possible now that thegenomes of two other primates, the chimpanzee and the rhesusmacaque, have been sequenced. The chimpanzee is evolutionarilyclose to humans, and shares 95 percent of the humangenome sequence. The more distantly related rhesus macaqueshares 91 percent of the human sequence. The search is on fora set of human genes that differ from the other primates and“make humans human.”Human genomics has potential benefits in medicineComplex phenotypes are determined not by single genes, butby multiple genes interacting with the environment. The singleallelemodels of phenylketonuria and sickle-cell anemia(see Chapter 15) do not apply to such commondisorders as diabetes, heart disease, and Alzheimer’sdisease. To understand the genetic bases of these diseases,biologists are now using rapid genotypingtechnologies to create “haplotype maps,” which areused to identify SNPs (pronounced “snips”) that arelinked to genes involved in disease.HAPLOTYPE MAPPING The SNPs that differ betweenindividuals are not inherited as independent alleles.Rather, a set of SNPs that are present on a segment ofchromosome are usually inherited as a unit. This linkedpiece of a chromosome is called a haplotype. You canthink of the haplotype as a sentence and the SNP asa word in the sentence. Analyses of haplotypes in humans fromall over the world have shown that there are at most 500,000common variations.GENOTYPING TECHNOLOGY AND PERSONAL GENOMICS New technologiesare continually being developed to analyze thousandsor millions of SNPs in the genomes of individuals. Such technologiesinclude rapid sequencing methods and DNA microarraysthat depend on DNA hybridization to identify specificSNPs. For example, a microarray of 500,000 SNPs has beenused to analyze thousands of people to find out which SNPsare associated with specific diseases. The aim is to correlate theSNP-defined haplotype with a disease state. The amount of datais prodigious: 500,000 SNPs, thousands of people, thousandsof medical records. With so much natural variation, statisticalmeasures of association between a haplotype and a diseaseneed to be very rigorous.These association tests have revealed particular haplotypesor alleles that are associated with modestly increased risks forsuch diseases as breast cancer, diabetes, arthritis, obesity, andcoronary heart disease (Figure 17.15 and Table 17.5). Privatecompanies will now scan a human genome for these variants—and the price for this service keeps getting lower. However, atthis point it is unclear what a person without symptoms shoulddo with the information, since multiple genes, environmentalinfluences, and epigenetic effects all contribute to the developmentof these diseases.Of course, the best way to analyze a person’s genome is byactually sequencing it. Until recently, this was prohibitively expensive.As we mentioned earlier, DNApioneer James Watson’sgenome cost over $1 million, certainly too much for a typical personor insurance company to afford in the context of health care.But with advances in sequencing technologies the cost is decreasingrapidly. One new method automatically sequences proteincodingexons only, for example. Once the cost of genome sequencingis within an affordable range, SNP testing will besuperseded.17.4 | WHAT ARE THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE HUMAN GENOME? 381IncreasingcomplexityVertebrates only22%All prokaryotesand eukaryotes21%Vertebratesand animals only24%Eukaryotes only32%Functionsnecessaryfor lifeCellcompartmentsMulticellularityDevelopmentImmunesystemNervoussystem17.14 Evolution of the Genome A comparison of the human andother genomes has revealed how genes with new functions have beenadded over the course of evolution. Each percentage number refers togenes in the human genome. Thus, 21 percent of human genes havehomologs in prokaryotes and other eukaryotes, 32 percent of humangenes occur only in other eukaryotes, and so on.Each bar is a SNP. There are manythousands of SNPs in the human genome.Comparing the profiles reveals SNPsthat correlate with disease.DNASNP profile in peoplewith the diseaseSNP profile in peoplewithout the disease17.15 SNP Genotyping and Disease Scanning the genomes of peoplewith and without particular diseases reveals correlations betweenSNPs and complex diseases.PHARMACOGENOMICS Genetic variation can affect how an individualresponds to a particular drug. For example, a drug maybe chemically modified in the liver to make it more or less active.Consider an enzyme that catalyzes the following reaction:active drug →less active drugAmutation in the gene that encodes this enzyme may make theenzyme less active. For a given dose of the drug, a person withthe mutation would have more active drug in the bloodstreamthan a person without the mutation. So the effective dose of thedrug would be lower in these people.Now consider a different case, in which the liver enzyme isneeded to make the drug active:inactive drug →active drugAperson carrying a mutation in the gene encoding this liver enzymewould not be affected by the drug, since the activating enzymeis not present.The study of how an individual’s genome affects his or herresponse to drugs or other outside agents is called pharmacogenomics.This type of analysis makes it possible to predictwhether a drug will be effective. The objective is to personalizedrug treatment so that a physician can know in advance whetheran individual will benefit from a particular drug (Figure 17.16).This approach might also be used to reduce the incidence ofadverse drug reactions by identifying individuals that will metabolizea drug slowly, which can lead to a dangerously highlevel of the drug in the body.17.4 RECAPThe haploid human genome has 3.3 billion basepairs, but less than 2 percent of the genome codesfor proteins. Most human genes are subject to alternativesplicing; this may account for the fact thatthere are more proteins than genes. SNP mapping tofind correlations with disease and drug susceptibilityholds promise for personalized medicine.• What are some of the major characteristics of the humangenome? See p. 380• How does SNP mapping work in personalized medicine?See pp. 381–382 and Figures 17.15 and 17.16Genome sequencing has had great success in advancing biologicalunderstanding. High-throughput technologies are now beingapplied to other components of the cell: proteins andmetabolites. We now turn to the results of these studies.What Do the New Disciplines 17.5 Proteomics and Metabolomics Reveal?“The human genome is the book of life.” Statements like thiswere common at the time the human genome sequence was firstrevealed. They reflect “genetic determinism,” that a person’sphenotype is determined by his or her genotype. But is an organismjust a product of gene expression? We know that it isnot. The proteins and small molecules present in any cell at agiven point in time reflect not just gene expression but modificationsby the intracellular and extracellular environment. Twonew fields have emerged to complement genomics and take amore complete snapshot of a cell and organism—proteomicsand metabolomics.The proteome is more complex than the genomeAs mentioned above, many genes encode more than a singleprotein (Figure 17.17A). Alternative splicing leads to differentcombinations of exons in the mature mRNAs transcribed froma single gene (see Figure 16.22). Posttranslational modificationsalso increase the number of proteins that can be derived fromone gene (see Figure 14.22). The proteome is the sum total of theproteins produced by an organism, and it is more complex thanits genome.382 CHAPTER 17 | GENOMESTABLE 17.5SNP Human Genome Scans and DiseasesLOCATION OF SNP % INCREASED RISK(CHROMOSOMEDISEASE NUMBER) HETEROZYGOTES HOMOZYGOTESBreast cancer 8 20 63Coronary heartdisease 9 20 56Heart attack 9 25 64Obesity 16 32 67Diabetes 10 65 277Prostate cancer 8 26 58These patients either do not respondto the drug or suffer side effects.They need an alternative drug or dose.These patients have the genes foran effective response to the drug.All patients with the same diagnosis17.16 Pharmacogenomics Correlations between genotypes andresponses to drugs will help physicians develop personalized medical care.Two methods are commonly used to analyze the proteome:• Because of their unique amino acid compositions (primarystructures), most proteins have unique combinations ofelectric charge and size. On the basis of these two properties,they can be separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis.Thus isolated, individual proteins can be analyzed,sequenced, and studied (Figure 17.17B).• Mass spectrometry uses electromagnets to identify proteinsby the masses of their atoms and displays them as peaks ona graph.The ultimate aim of proteomics is just as ambitious as that ofgenomics. While genomics seeks to describe the genome and itsexpression, proteomics seeks to identify and characterize all ofthe expressed proteins.Comparisons of the proteomes of humans and other eukaryoticorganisms have revealed a common set of proteins that canbe categorized into groups with similar amino acid sequencesand similar functions. Forty-six percent of the yeast proteome,43 percent of the worm proteome, and 61 percent of the fly proteomeare shared by the human proteome. Functional analysesindicate that this set of 1,300 proteins provide the basic metabolicfunctions of a eukaryotic cell, such as glycolysis, the citricacid cycle, membrane transport, protein synthesis, DNA replication,and so on. (Figure 17.18).Of course, these are not the only human proteins. There aremany more, which presumably distinguish us as human eukaryoticorganisms. As we have mentioned before, proteins have differentfunctional regions called domains (for example, a domainfor binding a substrate, or a domain for spanning a membrane).While a particular organism may have many unique proteins,those proteins are often just unique combinations of domainsthat exist in other organisms. This reshuffling of the genetic deck isa key to evolution.Metabolomics is the study of chemical phenotypeStudying genes and proteins gives a limited picture of what isgoing on in a cell. But as we have seen, both gene function andprotein function are affected by the internal and external environmentsof the cell. Many proteins are enzymes and their activitiesaffect the concentrations of their substrates and products.So as the proteome changes, so will the abundances ofthese often-small molecules, called metabolites. The metabolomeis the quantitative description of all of the small moleculesin a cell or organism. These include:• Primary metabolites involved in normal processes, such asintermediates in pathways like glycolysis. This categoryalso includes hormones and other signaling molecules.• Secondary metabolites, which are often unique to particularorganisms or groups of organisms. They are often involvedin special responses to the environment. Examples are antibioticsmade by microbes, and the many chemicals madeby plants that are used in defense against pathogens andherbivores.Not surprisingly, measuring metabolites involves sophisticatedanalytical instruments. If you have studied organic or analyticalchemistry, you may be familiar with gas chromatographyand high-performance liquid chromatography, whichseparate molecules, and mass spectrometry and nuclear magneticresonance spectroscopy, which are used to identify them.These measurements result in “chemical snapshots” of cells ororganisms, which can be related to physiological states.There has been some progress in defining the humanmetabolome. A database created by David Wishart and col-17.5 | WHAT DO THE NEW DISCIPLINES PROTEOMICS AND METABOLOMICS REVEAL? 3831 Alternative splicingcan producedifferent mRNAs…2 …that gettranslated intodifferent proteins.3 Posttranslational modificationsof proteins result in differentstructures and functions.This gel separateshundreds of proteinsin two dimensions.A protein can beisolated, sequenced,and studied.PmRNASecond separation (size)First separation (charge)DNA(A)(B)Proteinkinase17.17 Proteomics (A) A single gene can code for multiple proteins.(B) A cell’s proteins can be separated on the basis of charge and size bytwo-dimensional gel electrophoresis. The two separations can distinguishmost proteins from one another.Transcriptionand translationMetabolismTransportReplicationProteinfoldingMiscellaneous17.18 Proteins of the Eukaryotic Proteome About 1,300 proteinsare common to all eukaryotes and fall into these categories. Althoughtheir amino acid sequences may differ to a limited extent, they performthe same essential functions in all eukaryotes.Exon Intron384 CHAPTER 17 | GENOMES17.1 How Are Genomes Sequenced?• The sequencing of genomes required the development of waysto cut large chromosomes into fragments, sequence each of thefragments, and then line them up on the chromosome. ReviewFigure 17.1, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 17.1• Hierarchical sequencing involves mapping the genome withgenetic markers, cutting the genome into smaller pieces andsequencing them, then lining up the sequences using themarkers.• Shotgun sequencing involves directly cutting the genome intooverlapping fragments, sequencing them, and using a computerto line up the sequences.• DNA sequencing technologies involve labeled nucleotidesthat terminate the growing polynucleotide chain. ReviewFigure 17.2• Rapid, automated methods for high-throughput sequencingare being developed. Review Figure 17.3, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 17.217.2 What Have We Learned from SequencingProkaryotic Genomes?• DNA sequencing is used to study the genomes of prokaryotesthat are important to humans and ecosystems.• Functional genomics aims to determine the functions of geneproducts. Comparative genomics involves comparisons ofgenes and genomes from different organisms to identify commonfeatures and functions.• Transposable elements and transposons can move about thegenome. Review Figure 17.6• Metagenomics is the identification of DNA sequences withoutfirst isolating, growing and identifying the organisms present inan environmental sample. Many of these sequences are fromprokaryotes that were heretofore unknown to biologists.Review Figure 17.7• Transposon mutagenesis can be used to inactivate genes oneby one. Then the organism can be tested for survival. In thisway, a minimal genome of less than 350 genes was identifiedfor the bacterium Mycoplasma genitalium. Review Figure 17.817.3 What Have We Learned from SequencingEukaryotic Genomes?• Genome sequences from model organisms have demonstratedsome common features of the eukaryotic genome. In addition,there are specialized genes for cellular compartmentation,development, and features unique to plants. Review Tables17.1–17.4 and Figures 17.9 and 17.10• Some eukaryotic genes exist as members of gene families.Proteins may be made from these closely related genes at differenttimes and in different tissues. Some members of genefamilies may be nonfunctional pseudogenes.• Repeated sequences are present in the eukaryotic genome.• Moderately repeated sequences include those coding forrRNA. Review Figure 17.1217.4 What Are the Characteristics of the Human Genome?• The haploid human genome has 3.3 billion base pairs.• Only 2 percent of the genome codes for proteins; the rest consistsof repeated sequences and noncoding DNA.• Virtually all human genes have introns, and alternative splicingleads to the production of more than one protein per gene.• SNP genotyping correlates variations in the genome with diseasesor drug sensitivity. It may lead to personalized medicine.Review Figure 17.15• Pharmacogenomics is the analysis of genetics as applied todrug metabolism.17.5 What Do the New Disciplines of Proteomics andMetabolomics Reveal?• The proteome is the total protein content of an organism.• There are more proteins than protein-coding genes in the genome.• The proteome can be analyzed using chemical methods thatseparate and identify proteins. These include two-dimensionalelectrophoresis and mass spectrometry. See Figure 17.17• The metabolome is the total content of small molecules, suchas intermediates in metabolism, hormones, and secondarymetabolites.SEE WEB ACTIVITY 17.1 for a concept review of this chapter.CHAPTER SUMMARYleagues at the University of Alberta contains over 6,500 metaboliteentries. The challenge now is to relate levels of these substancesto physiology. For example, you probably know highlevels of glucose in the blood are associated with diabetes. Butwhat about early stages of heart disease? There may be a patternof metabolites that is diagnostic of this disease. This couldaid in early diagnosis and treatment.Plant biologists are far ahead of medical researchers in thestudy of metabolomics. Over the years, tens of thousands of secondarymetabolites have been identified in plants, many ofthem made in response to environmental challenges. Some ofthese are discussed in Chapter 39. The metabolome of the modelorganism Arabidopsis thaliana is being described, and will giveinsight into how a plant copes with stresses such as droughtor pathogen attack. This knowledge could be helpful in optimizingplant growth for agriculture.17.5 RECAPThe proteome is the total of all proteins produced byan organism. There are more proteins than genes inthe genome. The metabolome is the total content ofsmall molecules such as intermediates in metabolism,hormones, and secondary metabolites. Theproteome and the metabolome can be analyzed usingchemical methods that separate and identifymolecules.• How is the proteome analyzed? See p. 383 and Figure17.17• Explain the differences between genome, protoeome,and metabolome.
17.1 How Are Genomes Sequenced?• The sequencing of genomes required the development of waysto cut large chromosomes into fragments, sequence each of thefragments, and then line them up on the chromosome. ReviewFigure 17.1, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 17.1• Hierarchical sequencing involves mapping the genome withgenetic markers, cutting the genome into smaller pieces andsequencing them, then lining up the sequences using themarkers.• Shotgun sequencing involves directly cutting the genome intooverlapping fragments, sequencing them, and using a computerto line up the sequences.• DNA sequencing technologies involve labeled nucleotidesthat terminate the growing polynucleotide chain. ReviewFigure 17.2• Rapid, automated methods for high-throughput sequencingare being developed. Review Figure 17.3, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 17.217.2 What Have We Learned from SequencingProkaryotic Genomes?• DNA sequencing is used to study the genomes of prokaryotesthat are important to humans and ecosystems.• Functional genomics aims to determine the functions of geneproducts. Comparative genomics involves comparisons ofgenes and genomes from different organisms to identify commonfeatures and functions.• Transposable elements and transposons can move about thegenome. Review Figure 17.6• Metagenomics is the identification of DNA sequences withoutfirst isolating, growing and identifying the organisms present inan environmental sample. Many of these sequences are fromprokaryotes that were heretofore unknown to biologists.Review Figure 17.7• Transposon mutagenesis can be used to inactivate genes oneby one. Then the organism can be tested for survival. In thisway, a minimal genome of less than 350 genes was identifiedfor the bacterium Mycoplasma genitalium. Review Figure 17.817.3 What Have We Learned from SequencingEukaryotic Genomes?• Genome sequences from model organisms have demonstratedsome common features of the eukaryotic genome. In addition,there are specialized genes for cellular compartmentation,development, and features unique to plants. Review Tables17.1–17.4 and Figures 17.9 and 17.10• Some eukaryotic genes exist as members of gene families.Proteins may be made from these closely related genes at differenttimes and in different tissues. Some members of genefamilies may be nonfunctional pseudogenes.• Repeated sequences are present in the eukaryotic genome.• Moderately repeated sequences include those coding forrRNA. Review Figure 17.1217.4 What Are the Characteristics of the Human Genome?• The haploid human genome has 3.3 billion base pairs.• Only 2 percent of the genome codes for proteins; the rest consistsof repeated sequences and noncoding DNA.• Virtually all human genes have introns, and alternative splicingleads to the production of more than one protein per gene.• SNP genotyping correlates variations in the genome with diseasesor drug sensitivity. It may lead to personalized medicine.Review Figure 17.15• Pharmacogenomics is the analysis of genetics as applied todrug metabolism.17.5 What Do the New Disciplines of Proteomics andMetabolomics Reveal?• The proteome is the total protein content of an organism.• There are more proteins than protein-coding genes in the genome.• The proteome can be analyzed using chemical methods thatseparate and identify proteins. These include two-dimensionalelectrophoresis and mass spectrometry. See Figure 17.17• The metabolome is the total content of small molecules, suchas intermediates in metabolism, hormones, and secondarymetabolites.SEE WEB ACTIVITY 17.1 for a concept review of this chapter.