25Almost anyone who has spent time around freshwater ponds is familiar with dragonflies. Theirhovering flight, bright colors, and transparentwings stimulate our visual senses on bright summer afternoonsas they fly about their business of devouringmosquitoes, mating, and laying their eggs. The largestdragonflies alive today have wingspans that can be coveredby a human hand. Three hundred million years ago,however, dragonflies such as Meganeuropsis permianahad wingspans of more than 70 centimeters—well over2 feet, matching or exceeding the wingspans of manymodern birds of prey—and were the largest flyingpredators on Earth.No flying insects alive today are anywhere near thissize. But during the Carboniferous and Permian geologicalperiods, between 350 and 250 million years ago, manygroups of flying insects contained gigantic members.Meganeuropsis probably ate huge mayflies and othergiant flying insects that shared their home in the Permianswamps. These enormous insects were themselves eatenby giant amphibians.None of the giant flying insects or amphibians of thattime would be able to survive on Earth today. The oxygenconcentrations in Earth’s atmosphere were about 50 percenthigher then than they are now, and those high oxygenlevels are thought to have been necessary to supportgiant insects and their huge amphibian predators.Paleontologists have uncovered fossils of Meganeuropsispermiana in the rocks of Kansas. How do we knowthe age of these fossils, and how can we know how muchoxygen that long-vanished atmosphere contained? Thestratigraphic layering of the rocks allows us to tell theirages relative to each other, but it does not by itself indicatea given layer’s absolute age.One of the remarkable achievements of twentiethcenturyscientists was to develop sophisticated techniquesthat use the decay rates of various radioisotopes,changes in Earth’s magnetic field,and the ratios of certain molecules to inferconditions and events in the remote past andto date them accurately. It is those methodsthat allow us to age the fossils of Meganeuropsisand to calculate the concentration ofoxygen in Earth’s atmosphere at the time.The development of the science ofbiology is intimately linked tochanging concepts ofWhen hawk-sized dragonflies ruled the airGiant Dragonflies Meganeuropsis permiana,shown here in a reconstruction from fossils,dwarfed modern dragonflies (shown in the insetat the same scale) in size. Otherwise, however,the Permian giant was quite similar to moderndragonflies in general appearance.How Do Scientists Date 25.1 Ancient Events?Many evolutionary changes happen rapidly enough to bestudied directly and manipulated experimentally. Plant andanimal breeding by agriculturalists and insects’ evolution ofresistance to pesticides are examples of rapid, short-term evolution.Other changes, such as the appearance of new speciesand evolutionary lineages, usually take place over muchlonger time frames.To understand the long-term patterns of evolutionarychange, we must think in time frames spanning many millionsof years, and consider events and conditions very different fromthose we observe today. Earth of the distant past was so unlikethe present that it seams like a foreign planet inhabited bystrange organisms. The continents were not where they are today,and climates were sometimes dramatically different fromthose of today.Fossils—the preserved remains of ancient organisms—cantell us a great deal about the body form, or morphology, of organismsthat lived long ago, as well as how and where theylived. Fossils provide a direct record of evolution. But to understandpatterns of evolutionary change, we must also understandhow Earth has changed over time.Earth’s history is largely recorded in its rocks. We cannot tellthe ages of rocks just by looking at them, but we can determinethe ages of rocks relative to one another. The first person to formallyrecognize that this could be done was the seventeenthcenturyDanish physician Nicolaus Steno. Steno realized thatin undisturbed sedimentary rocks (rocks formed by the accumulationof grains on the bottom of bodies of water), the oldestlayers of rock, or strata (singular stratum), lie at the bottom;thus successively higher strata are progressively younger.Geologists, particularly the eighteenth-century English scientistWilliam Smith, subsequently combined Steno’s insightwith their observations of fossils contained in sedimentaryrocks. They concluded that:• Fossils of similar organisms are found in widely separatedplaces on Earth.• Certain fossils are always found in younger rocks, and certainother fossils in older rocks.• Organisms found in higher, more recent strata are moresimilar to modern organisms than are those found in lower,more ancient strata.These patterns revealed much about the relative ages of sedimentaryrocks as well as patterns in the evolution of life. But thegeologists still could not tell how old the rocks were. Amethodof dating rocks did not become available until after radioactivitywas discovered at the beginning of the twentieth century.IN THIS CHAPTER we will examine how biologists assigndates to events in the distant evolutionary past, and howsuch dating allows us to review the major changes in physicalconditions on Earth during the past 4 billion years. Wewill then look at how these changes in physical conditionshave influenced the major patterns in the evolution of life,and describe how scientists organize our knowledge of biologicaldiversity based on the relationships among species.time, especially of the age of Earth. About 150 years ago,geologists first provided solid evidence that Earth is ancient;before 1850, most people believed it was no morethan a few thousand years old. For many more years,physicists continued to underestimate Earth’s age, untilan understanding of radioactive decay was developed.Today we know that Earth is about 4.5 billion years oldand that life has existed on it for about 3.8 billion ofthose years. That means human civilizations have occupiedEarth for less than 0.0003 percent of the history oflife. Discovering what happened before humans werearound is an ongoing and exciting area of science.CHAPTER OUTLINE25.1 How Do Scientists Date Ancient Events?25.2 How Have Earth’s Continents and ClimatesChanged over Time?25.3 What Are the Major Events in Life’s History?Younger Rocks Lie on Top of Older Rocks In the GrandCanyon, the Colorado River cut through and exposed manystrata of ancient rocks. The oldest rocks visible here formedabout 540 million years ago. The youngest, at the top, areabout 500 million years old. Knowing the ages of rock strataallows scientists to date the fossils found in each stratum.Radioisotopes provide a way to date rocksRadioactive isotopes of atoms (see Section 2.1) decay in a predictablepattern over long time periods. During each successivetime interval, known as a half-life, half of the remaining radioactivematerial of the radioisotope decays to become a different,stable isotope (Figure 25.1A).To use a radioisotope to date a past event, we must know orestimate the concentration of the isotope at the time of that event.In the case of carbon, the production of new carbon-14 (14C) inthe upper atmosphere (by the reaction of neutrons with nitrogen-14) just balances the natural radioactive decay of 14C to 14N.Therefore, the ratio of 14C to its stable isotope, carbon-12 (12C),is relatively constant in living organisms and their environment.As soon as an organism dies, however, it ceases to exchange carboncompounds with its environment. Its decaying 14C is nolonger replenished, and the ratio of 14C to 12C in its remains decreasesthrough time. Paleontologists can use the ratio of 14C to12C in fossil material to date fossils that are less than 50,000 yearsold (and thus the sedimentary rocks that contain those fossils).If fossils are older than that, so little 14C remains that the limitsof detection using this particular isotope are reached.520 CHAPTER 25 | THE HISTORY OF LIFE ON EARTH05010014C half-lives (thousands of years)1 2 3 45.7 11.4 17.1 22.81/21/41/8 1/16RadioisotopeHalf-life(years)DecayproductUseful datingrange (years)Carbon-14 (14C)Potassium-40 (40K)Uranium-238 (238U)5,700 Nitrogen-14 (14N) 100 – 50,0001.3 billion Argon-40 (40Ar) 10 million – 4.5 billion4.5 billion Lead 206 (206Pb) 10 million – 4.5 billion(A)(B)Radioisotope remainingin sample (%)Number of half-lives25.1 Radioactive Isotopes Allow Us to Date Ancient Rocks Thedecay of radioactive “parent” atoms into stable “daughter” isotopes happensat a steady rate known as a half-life. (A) The graph demonstrates theprinciple of half-life using carbon-14 (14C) as an example. (B) Radioisotopeshave different characteristic half-lives that allow us to measure how muchtime has elapsed since the rocks containing them were laid down.Earth’s Geological HistoryERA PERIOD ONSET MAJOR PHYSICAL CHANGES ON EARTHQuaternary 2.6 mya Cold/dry climate; repeated glaciationsCenozoicTertiary 65 mya Continents near current positions; climate coolsCretaceous 145 mya Northern continents attached; Gondwana begins to drift apart; meteoritestrikes Yucatán PeninsulaMesozoic Jurassic 200 mya Two large continents form: Laurasia (north) and Gondwana (south); climatewarmTriassic 251 mya Pangaea begins to slowly drift apart; hot/humid climatePermian 297 mya Extensive lowland swamps; O2 levels 50% higher than present; by end of periodcontinents aggregate to form Pangaea, and O2 levels begin to drop rapidlyCarboniferous 359 mya Climate cools; marked latitudinal climate gradientsPaleozoic Devonian 416 mya Continents collide at end of period; meteorite probably strikes EarthSilurian 444 mya Sea levels rise; two large land masses emerge; hot/humid climateOrdovician 488 mya Massive glaciation, sea level drops 50 metersCambrian 542 mya O2 levels approach current levels900 mya O2 level at >5% of current level1.5 bya O2 level at >1% of current levelPrecambrian 3.8 bya O2 first appears in atmosphere4.5 byaRELATIVE TIME SPANPrecambrianNote: mya, million years ago; bya, billion years ago.TABLE 25.1Radioisotope dating methods have beenexpanded and refinedSedimentary rocks are formed from materials that existed forvarying lengths of time before being transported, sometimesover long distances, to the site of their deposition. Therefore,the inorganic isotopes in a sedimentary rock do not contain reliableinformation about the date of its formation. Dating rocksmore ancient than 50,000 years requires estimating isotope concentrationsin igneous rocks—rocks formed when molten materialcools. To date older sedimentary rocks, geologists search forplaces where sedimentary rocks show igneous intrusions of volcanicash or lava flows.Apreliminary estimate of the age of an igneous rock determineswhich isotope is used to date it (Figure 25.1B). The decay of potassium-40 (which has a half-life of 1.3 billion years) to argon-40 hasbeen used to date many of the ancient events in the evolution oflife. Fossils in the adjacent sedimentary rock that are similar to thosein other rocks of known ages provide additional clues.Radioisotope dating of rocks, combined with fossil analysis,is the most powerful method of determining geological age. Butin places where sedimentary rocks do not contain suitable igneousintrusions and few fossils are present, paleontologiststurn to other methods.One method, known as paleomagnetic dating, relates theages of rocks to patterns in Earth’s magnetism, which changeover time. Earth’s magnetic poles move and occasionally reversethemselves. Because both sedimentary and igneous rockspreserve a record of Earth’s magnetic field at the time they wereformed, paleomagnetism helps determine the ages of thoserocks. Other dating methods use information about continentaldrift, sea level changes, and molecular clocks (the last ofwhich is described in Section 22.3).Using these methods, geologists divided the history of lifeinto eras, which in turn are subdivided into periods (Table 25.1).The boundaries between these time frames are based on strikingdifferences scientists have observed in the assemblages offossil organisms contained in successive layers of rocks. Geologistsdefined and named these divisions before they were ableto establish the ages of fossils, adding and refining the timescales as new methods for geological dating were developed.25.1 RECAPFossils in sedimentary rocks enabled geologists todetermine the relative ages of organisms, but absolutedating was not possible until the discovery ofradioactivity. Geologists divide the history of life intoeras and periods, based on assemblages of fossilorganisms found in successive layers of rocks.• What observations about fossils suggested to geologiststhat they could be used to determine the relativeages of rocks? See p. 519• How is the rate of decay of radioisotopes used to estimatethe absolute ages of rocks? See p. 520 andFigure 25.1The scale at the left of Table 25.1 gives a relative sense of geologicaltime, especially the vast expanse of the Precambrian era, duringwhich early life evolved amid stupendous physical changesof Earth and its atmosphere. During the Precambrian to Cambriantransition, an “explosion” of new life forms took place asrepresentatives of many of the major multicellular groups of lifeevolved. Earth continued to undergo massive physical changesthat influenced the evolution of life, and these events and importantmilestones are listed in the table. In the next two sectionswe’ll discuss the most important of these changes.How Have Earth’s Continents and 25.2 Climates Changed over Time?The globes and maps that adorn our walls, shelves, and booksgive an impression of a static Earth. It would be easy for us toassume that the continents have always been where they are,but we would be wrong. The idea that Earth’s land masses havechanged position over the millennia, and that they continue todo so, was first put forth in 1912 by the German meteorologist25.2 | HOW HAVE EARTH’S CONTINENTS AND CLIMATES CHANGED OVER TIME? 521MAJOR EVENTS IN THE HISTORY OF LIFEHumans evolve; many large mammals become extinctDiversification of birds, mammals, flowering plants, and insectsDinosaurs continue to diversify; mass extinction at end of period(≈76% of species disappear)Diverse dinosaurs; radiation of ray-finned fishes; first fossils offlowering plantsEarly dinosaurs; first mammals; marine invertebrates diversify;mass extinction at end of period (≈65% of species disappear)Reptiles diversify; giant amphibians and flying insects present;mass extinction at end of period (≈96% of species disappear)Extensive “fern” forests; first reptiles; insects diversifyFishes diversify; first insects and amphibians; mass extinction at endof period (≈75% of species disappear)Jawless fishes diversify; first ray-finned fishes; plants and animalscolonize landMass extinction at end of period (≈75% of species disappear)Rapid diversification of multicellular animals; diverse photosyntheticprotistsEdiacaran fauna; earliest fossils of multicellular animalsEukaryotes evolveOrigin of life; prokaryotes flourishLithospheric plateMagmaMantleCooling magmaforms crust.Convection currents in liquid magmagenerate pressure that pushes theplates apart, forming ocean basins.Where two plates collide,one is pushed under theother, generating seismicactivity, mountains, riftvalleys, and oceanictrenches.Melting lithosphereprovides magmathat fuels volcanoes.and geophysicist Alfred Wegener. His book The Origin of Continentsand Oceans was initially met with skepticism and resistance.By the 1960s, however, physical evidence and increasedunderstanding of the geophysics of plate tectonics—the studyof movement of major land masses—had convinced virtuallyall geologists of the reality of Wegener’s vision.Earth’s crust consists of several solid plates approximately40 kilometers thick, which collectively make up the lithosphere.The lithospheric plates float on a fluid layer of molten rock, ormagma (Figure 25.2). Heat produced by radioactive decay deepin Earth’s core sets up convection currents in the fluid magma,which then rises and exerts tremendous pressure on the solidplates. When the pressure of the rising magma pushes platesapart, ocean basins may form between them. When plates arepushed together, they either move sideways past each other orone plate slides under the other, pushing up mountain rangesand carving deep rift valleys. When they occur under the waterof ocean basins, rift valleys are known as trenches. Themovement of the lithospheric plates and the continents theycontain is known as continental drift.We now know that at times the drifting of the plates hasbrought continents together and at other times has pushed themapart (these movements are depicted in Figure 25.12). The positionsand sizes of the continents influence oceanic circulationpatterns, global climates, and sea levels. Major drops in sea levelhave usually been accompanied by massive extinctions—particularlyof marine organisms, which could not survive the exposureof vast areas of the continental shelves and the disappearanceof the shallow seas that covered them (Figure 25.3).522 CHAPTER 25 | THE HISTORY OF LIFE ON EARTH25.2 Plate Tectonics andContinental Drift The heatof Earth’s core generates convectioncurrents (arrows) in themagma that push the lithosphericplates, along with theland masses lying on them,together or apart. Whenlithospheric plates collide, oneoften slides under the other.The resulting seismic activitycan create mountains anddeep rift valleys (the latterknown as trenches when theyoccur under ocean basins).Millions of years ago (mya)Quaternary500 400 300 200 100 PresentCambrian Ordovician Silurian Devonian Carboniferous Permian Triassic Jurassic Cretaceous TertiaryPrecambrianP a l e o z o i c M e s o z o i c CenozoicAsterisks indicate times of mass extinctionsof marine organisms, most of which occurredwhen sea levels dropped.*****HighLowSea level25.3 Sea Levels Have Changed Repeatedly Most mass extinctionsof marine organisms (indicated by asterisks) have coincided with periodsof low sea levels.GO TO Animated Tutorial 25.1 • Evolution of the ContinentsyourBioPortal.comOxygen concentrations in Earth’satmosphere have changed over timeAs the continents have moved over Earth’s surface,the world has experienced other physicalchanges, including large increases and decreasesin atmospheric oxygen. The atmosphere of earlyEarth probably contained little or no free oxygengas (O2). The increase in atmospheric O2 came intwo big steps more than a billion years apart.The first step occurred at least 2.4 billion yearsago (bya), when certain bacteria evolved the abilityto use water as the source of hydrogen ionsfor photosynthesis. By chemically splitting H2O,these bacteria generated atmospheric O2 as awaste product. They also made electrons availablefor reducing CO2 to form organic compounds(see Section 10.3).One group of O2-generating bacteria, thecyanobacteria, formed rocklike structures calledstromatolites, which are abundantly preserved in the fossilrecord. Cyanobacteria are still forming stromatolites today ina few very salty places on Earth (Figure 25.4). Cyanobacterialiberated enough O2 to open the way for the evolution of oxidationreactions as the energy source for the synthesis of ATP(see Section 9.1).The evolution of life thus irrevocably changed the physicalnature of Earth. Those physical changes, in turn, influenced theevolution of life. When it first appeared in the atmosphere, O2was poisonous to the anaerobic prokaryotes that inhabited Earthat the time. Over millennia, however, prokaryotes that evolvedthe ability to metabolize O2 not only survived but gained severaladvantages. Aerobic metabolism proceeds more rapidlyand harvests energy more efficiently than anaerobic metabolism(see Section 9.4), and organisms with aerobic metabolismreplaced anaerobes in most of Earth’s environments.An atmosphere rich in O2 also made possible larger cells andmore complex organisms. Small unicellular aquatic organismscan obtain enough O2 by simple diffusion even when O2 concentrationsare very low. Larger unicellular organisms havelower surface area-to-volume ratios (see Figure 5.2); to obtainenough O2 by simple diffusion, they must live in an environmentwith a relatively high oxygen concentration. Bacteria canthrive on 1 percent of the current atmospheric O2 levels; eukaryoticcells require levels that are at least 2–3 percent of currentconcentrations. (For concentrations of dissolved O2 in the oceansto reach these levels, much higher atmospheric concentrationswere needed.)Probably because it took many millions of years for Earthto develop an oxygenated atmosphere, only unicellular prokaryoteslived on Earth for more than 2 billion years. About 1.5 bya,atmospheric O2 concentrations became high enough for largeeukaryotic cells to flourish (Figure 25.5). Further increases inatmospheric O2 levels 750 to 570 million years ago (mya) enabledseveral groups of multicellular organisms to evolve.(A)(B)The layers areformed as biofilms ofcyanobacteria die andothers take their place.12 cm30 cmLiving cyanobacteriaare found in the upperparts of these structures.25.4 Stromatolites (A) A vertical section through a fossil stromatolite.(B) These rocklike structures are living stromatolites that thrive in the verysalty waters of Shark Bay in western Australia. Layers of cyanobacteriaare found in the uppermost parts of the structures.O2 levels almost 50%higher than present.O2 levels 25–40%lower than present.Rapid drop ofO2 levels at endof the PermianO2 in atmosphere (%)4,000 3,000 2,000 1,000 500 250 100 PresentMillions of years ago (mya)50101520253035FirstlifeFirstphotosyntheticbacteriaFirstaerobicbacteriaFirsteukaryotesFirstmulticellularorganismsFirstchordatesInvasionof landGiant flying insectsFirstfloweringplants25.5 Larger Cells, Larger Organisms Need More Oxygen Changes in oxygen concentrationshave strongly influenced, and been influenced by, the evolution of life. (Note that thehorizontal axis of the graph is on a logarithmic scale.)523O2 concentrations increased again during the Carboniferousand Permian periods because of the evolution of large vascularplants in the expansive lowland swamps that existed then (seeTable 25.1). These swamps resulted in extensive burial of plantdebris from vascular plants, which led to the formation of Earth’svast coal deposits. As the buried organic material was not subjectto oxidation, and the living plants were producing largequantities of O2, atmospheric O2 increased to concentrations thathave not been reached again in Earth’s history (see Figure 25.5).As mentioned in the opening of this chapter, high concentrationsof atmospheric O2 allowed the evolution of giant flying insectsand amphibians that could not survive in today’s atmosphere.The drying of the lowland swamps at the end of the Permian reducedglobal organic burial, and also the production of atmosphericO2, so O2 concentrations dropped rapidly. Over the past200 million years, with the diversification of flowering plants,O2 concentrations have again increased, but not to the levels thatcharacterized the Carboniferous and Permian periods.Biologists have conducted experiments that demonstrate thechanging selective pressures that can accompany changes inO2 levels. In experimental conditions, an increase in O2 concentrationcan be simulated by increasing atmospheric pressure ina hyperbaric chamber. Increasing atmospheric pressure increasesthe partial pressure of oxygen (see Chapter 49) in a manner thatsimulates an increase in O2 concentration at normal atmosphericpressure. When lines of fruit flies (Drosophila) are raised in artificialhyperbaric atmospheres (which have higher partial pressureof O2), they quickly evolve larger body sizes over just a fewgenerations (Figure 25.6). The current levels of atmospheric O2appear to constrain body size evolution of these flying insects;increases in O2 appear to relax these constraints. This demonstratesthat the stabilizing selection on body size at present O2 concentrationscan quickly switch to directional selection (see Section21.3) for a change in body size in response to a change in O2 levels.Directional selection over a period of millions of years wouldbe sufficient to account for giant insects such as Meganeuropsis,described at the beginning of this chapter.Many physical conditions on Earth have oscillated in responseto the planet’s internal processes, such as volcanic activityand continental drift. Extraterrestrial events, such as collisionswith meteorites, have also left their mark. In some cases,as we saw earlier and will see again in this chapter, changingphysical parameters caused mass extinctions, during which alarge proportion of the species living at the time disappeared.After each mass extinction, the diversity of life rebounded, butrecovery took millions of years.Earth’s climate has shifted between hot/humidand cold/dry conditionsThrough much of its history, Earth’s climate was considerablywarmer than it is today, and temperatures decreased more graduallytoward the poles. At other times, Earth was colder thanit is today. Large areas were covered with glaciers near the endof the Precambrian and Ordovician, and during parts of the Carboniferousand Permian periods. These cold periods were separatedby long periods of milder climates (Figure 25.7). Becausewe are living in one of the colder periods in Earth’s history, it isdifficult for us to imagine the mild climates that were found athigh latitudes during much of the history of life. During the524 CHAPTER 25 | THE HISTORY OF LIFE ON EARTHCONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE25.6 Rising Oxygen Levels and Body Size in InsectsIn this experiment, flies were raised under hyperbaric conditions(increased atmospheric pressure), thus increasing the partialpressure of O2 in a manner that simulated the greater levels ofatmospheric O2 characteristic of the Carboniferous andPermian. Robert Dudley asked if flies raised in hyperbaricconditions would grow larger than their normal counterparts.HYPOTHESIS Under increased atmospheric pressure, theincreased partial pressure of O2 will allowdirectional selection for increased body size inflying insects.In at least some flying insects, increasedconcentrations of oxygen could lead to along-term evolutionary trend toward increasedbody size.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTS The average body mass of F6 individuals of bothsexes in the experimental line was significantly(p < 0.0001) greater than that of insects in thecontrol line.Body mass (mg)Males Females0.60.70.80.91.01.11.2Normal atmosphere(control)Hyperbaric conditionsFURTHER INVESTIGATION: How would you confirm that thechange in average body size is relatedto increased partial pressure of O2,and not to other aspects of overallincreased atmospheric pressure?1. Divide a population of fruit flies (Drosophilamelanogaster) into two lines.2. Raise one line (the control) at current atmosphericoxygen conditions. Raise the experimental line inhyperbaric conditions (increased partial pressureof O2, simulating increased atmospheric oxygenconcentrations). Continue for 5 generations.3. Raise the F6 offspring of both lines under identicalenvironmental conditions.4. Weigh all the F6 individuals and test for statisticaldifferences in the average body mass of the fliesin each population.Quaternary period there has been a series of glacial advances,interspersed with warmer interglacial intervals during whichthe glaciers retreated.“Weather” refers to daily events, such as individual storms.“Climate” refers to long-term average expectations of the variousseasons at a given location. Weather often changes rapidly;climates typically change slowly. Major climatic shifts have takenplace over periods as short as 5,000 to 10,000 years, primarilyas a result of changes in Earth’s orbit around the sun. Afew climaticshifts have been even more rapid. For example, during oneQuaternary interglacial period, the ice-locked Antarctic Oceanbecame nearly ice-free in less than 100 years. Such rapid changesare usually caused by sudden shifts in ocean currents. Someclimate changes have been so rapid that the extinctions causedby them appear to be nearly “instantaneous” in the fossil record.We are currently living in a time of rapid climate changethought to be caused by a buildup of atmospheric CO2, primarilyfrom the burning of fossil fuels. We are reversing the process oforganic burial that occurred (especially) in the Carboniferous andPermian, but we are doing so over a few hundred years ratherthan the many millions of years over which these deposits accumulated.The current rate of increase of atmospheric CO2 is unprecedentedin Earth’s history. Adoubling of the atmospheric CO2concentration—which may happen during the current century—is expected to increase the average temperature of Earth, changerainfall patterns, melt glaciers and ice caps, and raise sea level. Thepossible consequences of such climate changes are discussed inChapters 58 and 59.Volcanoes have occasionally changed the history of lifeMost volcanic eruptions produce only local or short-lived effects,but a few large volcanic eruptions have had major consequencesfor life. When Krakatoa erupted in Indonesia in 1883,it ejected more than 25 cubic kilometers of ash and rock, as wellas large quantities of sulphur dioxide gas (SO2). The SO2 wasejected into the stratosphere and then moved by high-levelwinds around the planet. This led to high concentrations of sulphurousacid (H2SO3) in high-level clouds, which meant lesssunlight got through to Earth’s surface. Global temperaturesdropped by 1.2°C in the year following the eruption, and globalweather patterns showed strong effects for another 5 years. Thiswas all the result of a single volcanic eruption. The collision ofcontinents during the Permian period (about 275 mya) formeda single, gigantic land mass (Pangaea) and caused many massivevolcanic eruptions. These eruptions resulted in considerableblockage of sunlight, contributing to the glaciations of thattime (see Figure 25.7). Massive volcanic eruptions occurredagain as the continents drifted apart during the late Triassic andat the end of the Cretaceous.Extraterrestrial events have triggered changes on EarthAt least 30 meteorites between the sizes of baseballs and soccerballs hit Earth each year. Collisions with large meteorites orcomets are rare, but such collisions have probably been responsiblefor several mass extinctions. Several types of evidence tellus about these collisions. Their craters, and the dramatically disfiguredrocks that resulted from their impact, are found in manyplaces. Geologists have also discovered compounds in theserocks that contain helium and argon with isotope ratios characteristicof meteorites, which are very different from the ratiosfound elsewhere on Earth.Ameteorite caused or contributed to a mass extinction at theend of the Cretaceous period (about 65 mya). The first clue thata meteorite was responsible came from the abnormally highconcentrations of the element iridium in a thin layer separatingrocks deposited during the Cretaceous from those depositedduring the Tertiary (Figure 25.8). Iridium is abundant in somemeteorites, but it is exceedingly rare on Earth’s surface. Scientistsdiscovered a circular crater 180 kilometers in diameterburied beneath the northern coast of the Yucatán Peninsula of25.2 | HOW HAVE EARTH’S CONTINENTS AND CLIMATES CHANGED OVER TIME? 525Millions of years ago (mya)Quaternary500 400 300 200 100 PresentCambrian Ordovician Silurian Devonian Carboniferous Permian Triassic Jurassic Cretaceous TertiaryPrecambrianP a l e o z o i c M e s o z o i c CenozoicPangaeaLarge areas of Earth’s surface werecovered by glaciers during these periods.HighLowEarth’s mean temperatureHot/humidHot/humidHot/humidCold/dryCold/dryCold/dryCold/dry25.7 Hot/Humid and Cold/Dry Conditions HaveAlternated over Earth’s History Throughout Earth’s history,periods of cold climates and glaciations (white depressions)have been separated by long periods of milder climates.Mexico. When it collided with Earth, the meteorite released energyequivalent to that of 100 million megatons of high explosives,creating great tsunamis. A massive plume of debrisswelled to a diameter of up to 200 kilometers, spread aroundEarth, and descended. The descending debris heated the atmosphereto several hundred degrees, ignited massive fires, andblocked the sun, preventing plants from photosynthesizing. Thesettling debris formed the iridium-rich layer. About a billiontons of soot, which has a composition that matches smoke fromforest fires, was also deposited. Many fossil species (particularlydinosaurs) that are found in Cretaceous rocks are not found inthe Tertiary rocks of the next layer.25.2 RECAPConditions on Earth have changed dramatically overtime. Changes in atmospheric concentrations of O2and in Earth’s climate have had major effects on biologicalevolution. Continental drift, volcanic eruptions,and large meterorite strikes have contributedto climatic changes during Earth’s history.• Describe how increases in atmospheric concentrationsof O2 affected the evolution of multicellular organisms.See pp. 523–524 and Figure 25.5• How have volcanic eruptions and meteorite strikes influencedthe course of life’s evolution? See p. 525The many dramatic physical events of Earth’s history have influencedthe nature and timing of evolutionary changes amongEarth’s living organisms. We now will look more closely at someof the major events that characterize the history of life on Earth.What Are the Major Events 25.3 in Life’s History?Life first evolved on Earth about 3.8 bya. By about 1.5 bya, eukaryoticorganisms had evolved (see Table 25.1). The fossilrecord of organisms that lived prior to 550 mya is fragmentary,but it is good enough to show that the total number of speciesand individuals increased dramatically in late Precambriantimes. As discussed above, pre-Darwinian geologists dividedgeological history into eras and periods based on their distinctfossil assemblages. Biologists refer to the assemblage of all organismsof all kinds living at a particular time or place as a biota.All of the plants living at a particular time or place are its flora;all of the animals are its fauna. Table 25.1 describes some of thephysical and biological changes, such as mass extinctions anddramatic increases in the diversity of major groups of organisms,associated with each unit of time.About 300,000 species of fossil organisms have been described,and the number steadily grows. The number of namedspecies, however, is only a tiny fraction of the species that haveever lived. We do not know how many species lived in the past,but we have ways of making reasonable estimates. Of the present-day biota, nearly 1.8 million species have been named. Theactual number of living species is probably well over 10 million,and possibly much higher, because many species have not yetbeen discovered and described by biologists. So the number ofdescribed fossil species is only about 3 percent of the estimatedminimum number of living species. Life has existed on Earthfor about 3.8 billion years. Many species last only a few millionyears before undergoing speciation or going extinct; therefore,Earth’s biota must have turned over many times duringgeological history. So the total number of species that have livedover evolutionary time must vastly exceed the number livingtoday. Why have only about 300,000 of these tens of millionsof species been described from fossils to date?Several processes contribute to the paucity of fossilsOnly a tiny fraction of organisms ever become fossils, and onlya tiny fraction of fossils are ever discovered by paleontologists.Most organisms live and die in oxygen-rich environments inwhich they quickly decompose. They are not likely to becomefossils unless they are transported by wind or water to sites thatlack oxygen, where decomposition proceeds slowly or not atall. Furthermore, geological processes often transform rocks, destroyingthe fossils they contain, and many fossil-bearing rocksare deeply buried and inaccessible. Paleontologists have studiedonly a tiny fraction of the sites that contain fossils, but theyfind and describe many new ones every year.The fossil record is most complete for marine animals thathad hard skeletons (which resist decomposition). Among thenine major animal groups with hard-shelled members, approximately200,000 species have been described from fossils—roughly twice the number of living marine species in thesesame groups. Paleontologists lean heavily on these groups intheir interpretations of the evolution of life. Insects and spidersare also relatively well represented in the fossil record, becausethey are numerically abundant and have hard exoskeletons526 CHAPTER 25 | THE HISTORY OF LIFE ON EARTHIridium-rich layer at theCretaceous-Tertiary(K/T) boundary25.8 Evidence of a Meteorite Impact The white layers of rock areCretaceous in age; the layers at the upper left were deposited in theTertiary. Between the two is a thin, dark layer of clay that contains largeamounts of iridium, a metal common in some meteorites but rare onEarth. Its high concentration in sediments deposited about 65 millionyears ago suggests the impact of a large meteorite.(Figure 25.9). The fossil record, though incomplete, is goodenough to document clearly the factual history of the evolutionof life.By combining information about geological changes duringEarth’s history with evidence from the fossil record, scientistshave composed portraits of what Earth and its inhabitantsmay have looked like at different times. We know ingeneral where the continents were and how life changed overtime, but many of the details are poorly known, especially forevents in the more remote past.Precambrian life was small and aquaticFor most of its history, life was confined to the oceans, and allorganisms were small. Over the long ages of the Precambrianera—more than 3 billion years—the shallow seas slowly beganto teem with life. For most of the Precambrian, life consistedof microscopic prokaryotes; eukaryotes evolved about twothirdsof the way through the era (Figure 25.10). Unicellular eukaryotesand small multicellular animals fed on floating photosyntheticmicroorganisms. Small floating organisms, knowncollectively as plankton, were strained from the water and eatenby slightly larger filter-feeding animals. Other animals ingestedsediments on the seafloor and digested the remains of organismswithin them. By the late Precambrian (630–542 mya), manykinds of multicellular soft-bodied animals had evolved. Someof them were very different from any animals living today, andmay be members of groups that have no living descendants(Figure 25.11).Life expanded rapidly during the Cambrian periodThe Cambrian period (542–488 mya) marks the beginning of thePaleozoic era. The oxygen concentration in the Cambrian atmospherewas approaching its current level, and the landmasses had come together to form several large continents. Ageologically rapid diversification of life took place that is sometimesreferred to as the Cambrian explosion (although in fact itbegan before the Cambrian, and the “explosion” took millionsof years). Several of the major groups of animals that havespecies living today first evolved during the Cambrian. Anoverview of the continental and biotic shifts that characterizedthe Cambrian and subsequent periods is shown in Figure 25.12on the following pages.For the most part, fossils tell us only about the hard parts oforganisms, but in three known Cambrian fossil beds—theBurgess Shale in British Columbia, Sirius Passet in northernGreenland, and the Chengjiang site in southern China—the softparts of many animals were preserved. Crustacean arthropods(crabs, shrimps, and their relatives) are the most diverse group25.3 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR EVENTS IN LIFE’S HISTORY? 527Solenopsis sp.25.9 Insect Fossils Chunks of amber—fossilized tree resin—oftencontain insects that were preserved when they were trapped in the stickyresin. This fire ant fossil is some 30 million years old.4Firstoceans Originof lifeOrigin ofphotosynthesis FirsteukaryotesFirstphotosyntheticeukaryotesFirst fossils ofmulticellularanimalsFormationof the EarthBILLIONS OFYEARS AGO3 2 1 0MILLIONS OFYEARS AGOQuaternary500 400 300 200 100 PresentCambrian Ordovician Silurian Devonian Carboniferous Permian Triassic Jurassic Cretaceous TertiaryPrecambrianP r e c a m b r i a nP a l e o z o i c M e s o z o i c Cenozoic25.10 A Sense of Life’s Time The top timeline shows the 4.5 billionyear history of life on Earth. Most of this time is accounted for by thePrecambrian, a 3.4 billion year era that saw the origin of life and the evolutionof cells, photosynthesis, and multicellularity. The final 600 millionyears are expanded in the second timeline and detailed in Figure 25.12.in the Chinese fauna; some of them were large carnivores. Multicellulardiversity was largely or completely aquatic during theCambrian. If there was life on land at this time, it was probablyrestricted to microbial organisms.Many groups of organisms that arose during theCambrian later diversifiedGeologists divide the remainder of the Paleozoic era into theOrdovician, Silurian, Devonian, Carboniferous, and Permianperiods. Each period is characterized by the diversification ofspecific groups of organisms. Mass extinctions marked the endsof the Ordovician, Devonian, and Permian.THE ORDOVICIAN (488–444 MYA) During the Ordovician period,the continents, which were located primarily in the SouthernHemisphere, still lacked multicellular plants. Evolutionary radiationof marine organisms was spectacular during the earlyOrdovician, especially among animals, such as brachiopods andmollusks, that lived on the seafloor and filtered small prey fromthe water. At the end of the Ordovician, as massive glaciersformed over the southern continents, sea levels dropped about50 meters and ocean temperatures dropped. About 75 percentof the animal species became extinct, probably because of thesemajor environmental changes.THE SILURIAN (444–416 MYA) During the Silurian period, the continentsbegan to merge together. Marine life rebounded fromthe mass extinction at the end of the Ordovician. Animals ableto swim in open water and feed above the ocean bottom appearedfor the first time. Jawless fishes diversified, and the firstray-finned fishes evolved. The tropical sea was uninterruptedby land barriers, and most marine organisms were widely distributed.On land, the first vascular plants evolved late in theSilurian (about 420 mya). The first terrestrial arthropods—scorpionsand millipedes—evolved at about the same time.THE DEVONIAN (416–359 MYA) Rates of evolutionary change acceleratedin many groups of organisms during the Devonianperiod. The major land masses continued to move slowly towardeach other. In the oceans there were great evolutionary radiationsof corals and of shelled, squidlike cephalopod mollusks.Fishes diversified as jawed forms replaced jawless onesand as heavy armor gave way to the less rigid outer coveringsof modern fishes.Terrestrial communities changed dramatically during the Devonian.Club mosses, horsetails, and tree ferns became common;some attained the size of large trees. Their roots accelerated theweathering of rocks, resulting in the development of the firstforest soils. The ancestors of gymnosperms—the first plants toproduce seeds—appeared in the Devonian. The first known fossilsof centipedes, spiders, mites, and insects date to this period,and fishlike amphibians began to occupy the land.Amassive extinction of about 75 percent of all marine speciesmarked the end of the Devonian. Paleontologists are uncertainabout its cause, but two large meteorites that collided with Earthat that time (one in present-day Nevada and the other in westernAustralia) may have been responsible, or at least a contributingfactor. The continued coalescence of the continents, with thecorresponding reduction in continental shelves, may have alsocontributed to this mass extinction event.THE CARBONIFEROUS (359–297 MYA) Large glaciers formed overhigh-latitude portions of the southern land masses during theCarboniferous period, but extensive swamp forests grew on thetropical continents. These forests were not made up of the kindsof trees we know today, but were dominated by giant tree fernsand horsetails with small leaves. Fossilized remains of thoseforests formed the coal we now mine for energy. In the seas,528 CHAPTER 25 | THE HISTORY OF LIFE ON EARTHSpriggina floundersi Mawsonites spriggi Dickinsonia costata25.11 Precambrian Life These fossils of soft-bodied invertebrates,excavated at Ediacara in southern Australia, were formed about 600 millionyears ago. Very different from later life forms, they illustrate the diversityof life at the end of the Precambrian era.25.12 A Brief History of Life on Earth The geologically rapid “explosion”of life during the Cambrian saw the rise of several animal groups thathave representatives surviving today. The following three pages depict life’shistory from the Cambrian forward. Movements of the major continentsduring the past half-billion years are shown in the maps of Earth, andassociated biotas for each time period are depicted. The artists’ reconstructionsare based on fossils such as those shown in the photographs.Codiacrinus schultzeiMILLIONS OFYEARS AGO500 400CambrianCambrian DevonianMarrella splendensRapid increase of multicellularorganisms (Cambrian “explosion”)Major radiation ofseveral marine groups75% of all animals go extinct assea levels drop by 50 meters75% of marinespecies go extinctFirst vascular plantsand terrestrialarthropods evolveFirst jawed fishes;many animal groupsradiate; forests appearon landOrdovician Silurian DevonianPrecambrianP a l e o z o i cOttoia sp.Anomalocaris canadensis (claw only) Eridophyllum sp.OrthoconicnautiloidPhacops ferdinandiFirst knownfloweringplant fossils300 200Carboniferous Permian Triassic JurassicPermian TriassicExtinction of 96% of Earth’s species;oxygen levels drop rapidlyOn land, conifersbecome dominantplants; frogs and reptilesbegin to diversifyGiant amphibiansand flying insects;ray-finned fishesabundant in freshwaterDinosaurs, pterosaurs,ray-finned fishes diversify;first mammals appearExtensive swampforests produce coal;origin of amniotes;great increase interrestrial animal diversityP a l e o z o i c M e s o z o i cCacops sp.Walchia piniformisPhlebopterissmithiiCoelophysis bauriP A N G A E AL A U R A S I AG O N D W A N AQuaternary100 PresentCretaceous TertiaryCretaceous TertiaryMass extinction event, includingloss of most dinosaursFloweringplants diversifyFlowering plantsdominate on land;rapid radiation ofmammalsGrasslandsspread asclimates coolFour major iceages; evolutionof HomoMany radiations ofanimal groups, onboth land and seaM e s o z o i c C e n o z o i cMagnolia sp.Gryposaurus sp.Hyracotherium leporinumPlesiadapis fodinatus (jaw)25.3 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR EVENTS IN LIFE’S HISTORY? 531crinoids (sea lilies and feather stars) reached their greatest diversity,forming “meadows” on the seafloor.The diversity of terrestrial animals increased greatly duringthe Carboniferous. Snails, scorpions, centipedes, and insects wereabundant and diverse. Insects evolved wings, becoming the firstanimals to fly. Flight gave herbivorous insects easy access to tallplants; plant fossils from this period show evidence of chewingby insects (Figure 25.13). The terrestrial vertebrate lineage split,and amphibians became larger and better adapted to terrestrialexistence, while the sister lineage led to the amniotes, vertebrateswith well-protected eggs that can be laid in dry places.THE PERMIAN (297–251 MYA) During the Permian period, the continentscoalesced completely into the supercontinent Pangaea.Permian rocks contain representatives of many major groups ofinsects we know today. By the end of the period, the reptilessplit from a second amniote lineage (which would lead to themammals). Ray-finned fishes became common in the fresh watersof Pangaea.Conditions for life deteriorated toward the end of the Permian.Massive volcanic eruptions resulted in outpourings oflava that covered large areas of Earth. The ash and gases producedby the volcanoes blocked sunlight and cooled the climate,resulting in the largest glaciers in Earth’s history. Atmosphericoxygen concentrations gradually dropped from about 30 to 15percent. At such low concentrations, most animals would havebeen unable to survive at elevations above 500 meters; thusabout half of the land area would have been uninhabitable atthe end of the Permian. The combination of these changes resultedin the most drastic mass extinction event in Earth’s history.Scientists estimate that about 96 percent of all species becameextinct at the end of the Permian.Geographic differentiation increased duringthe Mesozoic eraThe few organisms that survived the Permian mass extinctionfound themselves in a relatively empty world at the start of theMesozoic era (251 mya). As Pangaea slowly began to breakapart, the oceans rose and once again flooded the continentalshelves, forming huge, shallow inland seas. Atmospheric oxygenconcentrations gradually rose. Life once again proliferatedand diversified, but different groups of organisms came tothe fore. The three groups of phytoplankton (floating photosyntheticorganisms) that dominate today’s oceans—dinoflagellates,coccolithophores, and diatoms—became ecologically importantat this time; their remains are the primary origin of theworld’s oil deposits. Seed-bearing plants replaced the trees thathad ruled the Permian forests.The Mesozoic era is divided into three periods: the Triassic,Jurassic, and Cretaceous. The Triassic and Cretaceous wereterminated by mass extinctions, probably caused by meteoriteimpacts.THE TRIASSIC (251–200 MYA) Pangaea began to break apart duringthe Triassic period. Many invertebrate groups became morespecies-rich, and many burrowing animals evolved from groupsliving on the surfaces of seafloor sediments. On land, conifersand seed ferns were the dominant trees. The first frogs and turtlesappeared. A great radiation of reptiles began, which eventuallygave rise to crocodilians, dinosaurs, and birds. The endof the Triassic was marked by a mass extinction that eliminatedabout 65 percent of the species on Earth.THE JURASSIC (200–145 MYA) During the Jurassic period, Pangaeabecame fully divided into two large continents: Laurasiadrifted northward and Gondwana drifted south. Ray-finnedfishes rapidly diversified in the oceans. The first lizards appeared,and flying reptiles (pterosaurs) evolved. Most of thelarge terrestrial predators and herbivores of the period weredinosaurs. Several groups of mammals made their first appearance,and the earliest known fossils of flowering plants are fromlate in this period.THE CRETACEOUS (145–65 MYA) By the early Cretaceous period,Laurasia and Gondwana had begun to break apart into the con-532 CHAPTER 25 | THE HISTORY OF LIFE ON EARTH25.13 Evidence of InsectDiversification The marginsof this fossil fern leaffrom the Carboniferous havebeen chewed by insects.tinents we know today. Acontinuous sea encircled the tropics.Sea levels were high, and Earth was warm and humid. Life proliferatedboth on land and in the oceans. Marine invertebratesincreased in diversity and in number of species. On land, thereptile radiation continued as dinosaurs diversified further andthe first snakes appeared. Early in the Cretaceous, floweringplants began the radiation that led to their current dominanceof the land. By the end of the period, many groups of mammalshad evolved. Most early mammals were small, but one speciesrecently discovered in China, Repenomamus giganticus, was largeenough to capture and eat young dinosaurs.As described in Section 25.2, another meteorite-caused massextinction took place at the end of the Cretaceous (the impactsite was near the present day Yucatán Peninsula of Mexico). Inthe seas, many planktonic organisms and bottom-dwelling invertebratesbecame extinct. On land, almost all animals largerthan about 25 kilograms in body weight became extinct. Manyspecies of insects died out, perhaps because the growth of theirfood plants was greatly reduced following the impact. Somespecies in northern North America and Eurasia survived in areasthat were not subjected to the devastating fires that engulfedmost low-latitude regions.Modern biota evolved during the Cenozoic eraBy the early Cenozoic era (65 mya), the positions of the continentsresembled those of today, but Australia was still attachedto Antarctica, and the Atlantic Ocean was much narrower. TheCenozoic was characterized by an extensive radiation of mammals,but other groups were also undergoing important changes.Flowering plants diversified extensively and came to dominateworld forests, except in the coolest regions, where theforests were composed primarily of gymnosperms. Mutationsof two genes in one group of plants (the legumes) allowed themto use atmospheric nitrogen directly by forming symbioses witha few species of nitrogen-fixing bacteria (see Section 36.4). Theevolution of this symbiosis between certain early Cenozoicplants and these specialized bacteria was the first “green revolution”and dramatically increased the amount of nitrogen availablefor terrestrial plant growth; the symbiosis remains fundamentalto the ecological base of life as we know it today.The Cenozoic era is divided into the Tertiary and the Quaternaryperiods. Because both the fossil record and our subsequentknowledge of evolutionary history become more extensiveas we approach our own time, paleontologists havesubdivided these two periods into epochs (Table 25.2).THE TERTIARY (65–2.6 MYA) During the Tertiary period, Australiabegan its northward drift. By 20 mya it had nearly reached itscurrent position. The early Tertiary was a hot and humid time,and the ranges of many plants shifted latitudinally. The tropicswere probably too hot for rainforests and were clothed inlow-lying vegetation instead. In the middle of the Tertiary, however,Earth’s climate became considerably cooler and drier.Many lineages of flowering plants evolved herbaceous (nonwoody)forms, and grasslands spread over much of Earth.By the start of the Cenozoic era, invertebrate faunas had alreadycome to resemble those of today. It is among the terrestrialvertebrates that evolutionary changes during the Tertiarywere most rapid. Frogs, snakes, lizards, birds, and mammals allunderwent extensive radiations during this period. Three wavesof mammals dispersed from Asia to North America across oneof the several land bridges that have intermittently connectedthe two continents during the past 55 million years. Rodents,marsupials, primates, and hoofed mammals appeared in NorthAmerica for the first time.THE QUATERNARY (2.6 MYA TO PRESENT) We are living in theQuaternary period. It is subdivided into two epochs, the Pleistoceneand the Holocene (the Holocene also being known as theRecent).The Pleistocene was a time of drastic cooling and climatefluctuations. During 4 major and about 20 minor “ice ages,”massive glaciers spread across the continents, and the ranges ofanimal and plant populations shifted toward the equator. Thelast of these glaciers retreated from temperate latitudes less than15,000 years ago. Organisms are still adjusting to these changes.Many high-latitude ecological communities have occupied theircurrent locations for no more than a few thousand years.It was during the Pleistocene that divergence within onegroup of mammals, the primates, resulted in the evolution ofthe hominoid lineage. Subsequent hominoid radiation eventuallyled to the species Homo sapiens—modern humans (see Section33.5). Many large bird and mammal species became extinctin Australia and in the Americas when H. sapiens arrived onthose continents about 45,000 and 15,000 years ago, respectively.Many paleontologists believe these extinctions were probablythe result of hunting and other influences of Homo sapiens.The tree of life is used to reconstruct evolutionary eventsThe fossil record reveals broad patterns in life’s evolution. Toreconstruct major events in the history of life, biologists also relyon the phylogenetic information in the tree of life (see Chapter22 and the Tree of Life Appendix). We can use phylogeny (incombination with the paleontological record) to reconstruct the25.3 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR EVENTS IN LIFE’S HISTORY? 533TABLE 25.2Subdivisions of the Cenozoic EraPERIOD EPOCH ONSET (MYA)Quaternary Holocenea 0.01 (~10,000 years ago)Pleistocene 2.6Tertiary Pliocene 5.3Miocene 23Oligocene 34Eocene 55.8Paleocene 65aThe Holocene is also known as the Recent.534 CHAPTER 25 | THE HISTORY OF LIFE ON EARTH25.1 How Do Scientists Date Ancient Events?• The relative ages of organisms can be determined by the datingof fossils and the strata of sedimentary rocks in which they arefound.• Paleontologists use a variety of radioisotopes with differenthalf-lives to date events at different times in the remote past.Review Figure 25.1• Geologists divide the history of life into eras and periods, basedon major differences in the fossil assemblages found in successivelayers of rocks. Review Table 25.125.2 How Have Earth’s Continents and ClimatesChanged over Time?• Earth’s crust consists of solid lithospheric plates that float onfluid magma. Continental drift caused by convection currentsin the magma moves these plates and the continents that lie ontop of them. Review Figure 25.2, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 25.1• Conditions on Earth have changed dramatically over time.Increases in atmospheric oxygen and changes in Earth’s climatehave greatly influenced the evolution of life on Earth. ReviewFigures 25.5 and 25.7• Oxygen-generating cyanobacteria liberated enough O2 to openthe door to oxidation reactions in metabolic pathways. The aerobicprokaryotes were able to harvest more energy than anaerobicorganisms and began to proliferate. Increases in atmosphericO2 levels supported the evolution of large eukaryoticcells.• Major physical events on Earth, such as the collision of continentsthat formed the supercontinent Pangaea, have affectedEarth’s surface, climate, and atmosphere. In addition, extraterrestrialevents such as meteorite strikes created sudden anddramatic environmental shifts. All of these changes have affectedthe history of life.25.3 What Are The Major Events in Life’s History?• Paleontologists use fossils and evidence of geological changesto determine what Earth and its biota may have looked like atdifferent times.• During most of its history, life was confined to the oceans.Multicellular life diversified extensively during the Cambrianexplosion. Review Figure 25.11• The periods of the Paleozoic era were each characterized by thediversification of specific groups of organisms. Amniotes—vertebrateswhose eggs can be laid in dry places—first appearedduring the Carboniferous period.• During the Mesozoic era, distinct terrestrial biotas evolved oneach continent.• Five episodes of mass extinction punctuated the history of lifein the Paleozoic and Mesozoic eras.• Earth’s flora has been dominated by flowering plants since theCenozoic era.• Phylogenetic trees help reconstruct the timing of evolutionaryevents and clarify relationships among modern species.SEE WEB ACTIVITY 25.1 for a concept review of this chapter.CHAPTER SUMMARYtiming of such major events as the acquisition of mitochondriain the ancestral eukaryotic cell, the several independent originsof multicellularity, and the movement of life onto dry land. Wecan also follow major changes in the genomes of organisms, andeven reconstruct many gene sequences of species that are longextinct (see Chapter 24).Changes to the physical environment on Earth have clearlyinfluenced the great diversity in living organisms we see on theplanet today. To study the evolution of that diversity, biologistsexamine the evolutionary relationships among species. Decipheringthese relationships is an important step in understandinghow life has diversified on Earth. Part Seven of this bookexplores the major groups of life and the different solutions thathave evolved for major functions such as reproduction, energyacquisition, dispersal, and escape from predation.25.3 RECAPLife evolved in the Precambrian oceans. It diversifiedas atmospheric oxygen approached its current leveland the continents came together to form severallarge land masses. Numerous climate changes andrearrangements of the continents, as well asmeteorite impacts, contributed to five major massextinctions.• Why have so few of the multitudes of organisms thathave existed over millennia become fossilized? Seepp. 526–527• What do we mean when we refer to the “Cambrianexplosion”? See p. 527• In what ways has continental drift affected the evolutionof life on Earth? See Figure 25.12GO TO The Interactive Tree of LifeyourBioPortal.com
25.1 How Do Scientists Date Ancient Events?• The relative ages of organisms can be determined by the datingof fossils and the strata of sedimentary rocks in which they arefound.• Paleontologists use a variety of radioisotopes with differenthalf-lives to date events at different times in the remote past.Review Figure 25.1• Geologists divide the history of life into eras and periods, basedon major differences in the fossil assemblages found in successivelayers of rocks. Review Table 25.125.2 How Have Earth’s Continents and ClimatesChanged over Time?• Earth’s crust consists of solid lithospheric plates that float onfluid magma. Continental drift caused by convection currentsin the magma moves these plates and the continents that lie ontop of them. Review Figure 25.2, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 25.1• Conditions on Earth have changed dramatically over time.Increases in atmospheric oxygen and changes in Earth’s climatehave greatly influenced the evolution of life on Earth. ReviewFigures 25.5 and 25.7• Oxygen-generating cyanobacteria liberated enough O2 to openthe door to oxidation reactions in metabolic pathways. The aerobicprokaryotes were able to harvest more energy than anaerobicorganisms and began to proliferate. Increases in atmosphericO2 levels supported the evolution of large eukaryoticcells.• Major physical events on Earth, such as the collision of continentsthat formed the supercontinent Pangaea, have affectedEarth’s surface, climate, and atmosphere. In addition, extraterrestrialevents such as meteorite strikes created sudden anddramatic environmental shifts. All of these changes have affectedthe history of life.25.3 What Are The Major Events in Life’s History?• Paleontologists use fossils and evidence of geological changesto determine what Earth and its biota may have looked like atdifferent times.• During most of its history, life was confined to the oceans.Multicellular life diversified extensively during the Cambrianexplosion. Review Figure 25.11• The periods of the Paleozoic era were each characterized by thediversification of specific groups of organisms. Amniotes—vertebrateswhose eggs can be laid in dry places—first appearedduring the Carboniferous period.• During the Mesozoic era, distinct terrestrial biotas evolved oneach continent.• Five episodes of mass extinction punctuated the history of lifein the Paleozoic and Mesozoic eras.• Earth’s flora has been dominated by flowering plants since theCenozoic era.• Phylogenetic trees help reconstruct the timing of evolutionaryevents and clarify relationships among modern species.SEE WEB ACTIVITY 25.1 for a concept review of this chapter.