38In the recent film Kate and Leopold, a Victorian Englishnobleman named Leopold is transplanted to moderndayNew York, where he meets and falls in love withKate. At one point, Leopold sees a bundle of flowers at aflorist’ shop and is amazed that this bouquet would begiven to a woman. It’s all wrong, he explains: the lavenderimplies distrust; the orange lily stands for extreme hatred.Better to send amaryllis, which symbolizes great beauty.During the Victorian era in England (1837–1891) floralsymbolism reached its peak of popularity. Social conventiondiscouraged open displays of emotion, so flowerswere often used to convey messages people dared notspeak aloud. This botanical language was so elaboratethat dictionaries were written to describe the specific“meanings” of flowers and their colors.A student at Cambridge University might “tell” awoman that she was beautiful with a calla lily. He mightindicate he would be patient by presenting her with adaisy. If the woman found her suitor attractive, she couldtell him so with a camellia; a geranium, on the other hand,would say, “Let’s just be friends.” Colors had meaning, too.A red rose symbolized love, while yellow was associatedwith jealousy and white with innocence.By the early twentieth century the rules of social communicationwere sufficiently relaxed that intricate floralcommunication was no longer necessary. Nevertheless,certain flowers continue to have symbolic meaning. Poppiesare worn in the British Commonwealth to memorializesoldiers who died in battle. Lilies are often used at funeralsto symbolize life and, for Christians, resurrection.The Hindu god Vishnu is often shown with a lotus flower,symbolizing that he is the pure source of all creation.Floral symbolism flourishes even in the United States.Consider the poinsettia, Euphorbia pulcherrima, a brightred shrub native to Central America that was used by theAztecs as a source of red dye. The plant was brought tothe U.S. by the first U.S. ambassador to Mexico, JohnRoberts Poinsett, an amateur botanist. Some years later amuch shorter strain of the plant was developed by a Californianplant breeder named Paul Ecke. By 1950, his son,Paul Ecke, Jr., began promoting this now portable plant asa holiday decoration, blanketing television specials withoffers of free plants during the period between Thanksgivingand Christmas. The campaign was successful: over100 million poinsettia plants are now sold in the U.S. duringthe winter holidays every year, making it the best-sellingpotted plant.The language of flowersFloral Message A girl holds a single flower, perhapswondering what message it conveys.IN THIS CHAPTER we contrast sexual and asexual reproductionin plants, focusing on the details of sexual reproduction.We consider angiosperm gametophytes, pollination,double fertilization, embryo development, and theroles of fruits in seed dispersal. We examine the transitionfrom the vegetative state to the flowering state, a key eventin angiosperm development. We conclude by consideringthe role of asexual reproduction in nature and in agriculture.You may be surprised to learn that the brightly coloredpoinsettia “flowers” are not flowers at all. The red(or sometimes pale yellow) parts of the plant that wemost notice and appreciate are actually leaves. The poinsettiahas a single tiny yellow female flower, withoutpetals, surrounded by male flowers.The main task of flowers is not to convey messages tohumans. Flowers are reproductive equipment: they producegametophytes, female and male, which in turn producethe gametes that give rise to the next sporophytegeneration. Wildflowers (those not “improved” by plantbreeders) may have pleasing shapes and colors, butthese are in aid not of poetry but of pollination, which iscrucial to angiosperm reproduction.Flowers Have Diverse Forms and MeaningsThe language of flowers still had some popularity in the earlytwentieth century, as demonstrated by these Edwardian postcards.How Do Angiosperms Reproduce 38.1 Sexually?Flowers—the hallmark of angiosperms—contain sex organs;thus it is no surprise that almost all angiosperms reproduce sexually.But many reproduce asexually as well; some even reproduceasexually most of the time. What are the advantages anddisadvantages of these two kinds of reproduction?The relative benefits of sexual versus asexual production area matter of whether genetic recombination will be advantageous.As we have seen, sexual reproduction produces newcombinations of genes and diverse phenotypes (see Section11.4). Asexual reproduction, in contrast, produces a clone of geneticallyidentical individuals.Many plants can reproduce either sexually or asexually. Forexample, strawberry plants can reproduce perfectly well byflowers and seeds (sexual reproduction), but they also reproduceasexually by a stem called a runner that spreads over thesurface of the soil, sprouting new plants at intervals. For thestrawberry plant it might be advantageous to reproduce sexuallywhen possible; this generates genetic diversity, and theseeds that are produced facilitate dispersal to far-flung sites.However, too much diversity can be a drawback for farmers,and they generally propagate this crop asexually to deliver predictablyplump and tasty strawberries to the market.We will return to asexual reproduction later in this chapter.Our concern for now is sexual reproduction.The flower is an angiosperm’s structure forsexual reproductionSexual reproduction involves mitosis and meiosis, and the alternationof haploid and diploid generations (see Chapter 11):In angiosperms, the plant that we see in nature is a sporophyteand male and/or female gametophytes are contained in theMulticellularsporophyteMulticellulargametophyteDIPLOID (2n)HAPLOID (n)Spore GametesZygoteMeiosisMitosisMitosisMitosisFertilizationCHAPTER OUTLINE38.1 How Do Angiosperms Reproduce Sexually?38.2 What Determines the Transition from theVegetative to the Flowering State?38.3 How Do Angiosperms Reproduce Asexually?flowers. A complete flower consists of four concentric groupsof organs arising from modified leaves: the carpels, stamens,petals, and sepals.The parts of the flower are usually borne on a stem tip, andderive from a meristem. The differentiation of the meristem intothe various organs of the flower is controlled by specific transcriptionfactors (see Figure 19.14). As we discussed in the introductoryessay for this chapter, flower parts are very diversein form.The carpels and stamens are, respectively, the female andmale sex organs. Flowers usually have both stamens andcarpels; such flowers are termed perfect (Figure 38.1A). Imperfectflowers, on the other hand, are those with only male or onlyfemale sex organs. Male flowers have stamens but not carpels,and female flowers have carpels but not stamens. Some plants,such as corn, bear both male and female flowers on an individualplant; such species are called monoecious (“one house”)(Figure 38.1B). In dioecious species, on the other hand, individualplants bear either male-only or female-only flowers; an exampleis bladder campion (Figure 38.1C).Flowering plants have microscopic gametophytesFigure 38.2 offers a detailed look at the gametophytes centralto angiosperm reproduction. The haploid gametophytes—thegamete-producing structures—develop from haploid spores inthe flower:• Female gametophytes (megagametophytes), which arecalled embryo sacs, develop in megasporangia.• Male gametophytes (microgametophytes), which are calledpollen grains, develop in microsporangia.FEMALE GAMETOPHYTE Locate the ovule in the flower shown inFigure 38.2. Within the ovule, a megasporocyte—a cell withinthe megasporangium—divides meiotically to produce four haploidmegaspores. In most flowering plants, all but one of thesemegaspores then undergo apoptosis. The surviving megasporeusually goes through three mitotic divisions without cytokinesis,producing eight haploid nuclei, all initially contained withina single cell—three nuclei at one end, three at the other, and twoin the middle. Subsequent cell wall formation leads to an elliptical,seven-celled megagametophyte with a total of eight nuclei:• At one end of the elliptical megagametophyte are three tinycells: the egg and two cells called synergids. The egg is thefemale gamete, and the synergids participate in fertilizationStamensCarpelsPetalsSepals796 CHAPTER 38 | REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS(A) Perfect: lilyStamens(B) Imperfect monoecious: corn(C) Imperfect dioecious: bladder campionCarpelsMale flowerwith stamensFemale flowerwith carpelsMale flowerwith stamensFemale flowerwith carpels38.1 Perfect and Imperfect Flowers (A) A lily is an example of a perfectflower, meaning one that has both male and female sex organs. (B) Imperfectflowers are either male or female. Corn is a monoecious species: both types ofimperfect flowers are borne on the same plant. (C) Bladder campion is a dioeciousspecies; some bladder campion plants bear male imperfect flowers whileothers bear female imperfect flowers.by attracting the pollen tube and receiving the sperm nucleiprior to their movement to the egg and central cell.• At the opposite end of the megagametophyte are threeantipodal cells, which eventually degenerate.• In the large central cell are two polar nuclei, which togethercombine with a sperm nucleus.38.1 | HOW DO ANGIOSPERMS REPRODUCE SEXUALLY? 7974 The pollen tube growstoward the embryo sac(see Figure 38.6).5 One spermnucleus fuseswith the egg.6 The secondsperm nucleusfuses with thetwo polar nuclei.7 The fruit is derivedfrom the ovary walland aids in seeddispersal.3 The embryo sac is the femalegametophyte. After three mitoticdivisions, it contains eight haploid nuclei.2 The pollen grainis transferred tothe stigma.1 In the ovule, threeof the four meioticproducts degenerate.Microspores (4)DIPLOID (2n)HAPLOID (n)Microsporocyte(2n; inside anther)AntherStamenAnther (microsporangia)OvaryOvuleAntipodal cells (3)MegagametophyteEgg (n)PolarnucleiPollen grains(microgametophytes, n)Pollen grain(microgametophyte, n)Tube cell nucleusSynergidsPollen tubeSperm (2)Megasporocyte (2n)MegasporangiumOvaryOvuleSurvivingmegaspore (n)Endospermnucleus (3n)Zygote (2n)Double Fertilization MeiosisFlower of maturesporophyteFruitSeedEndospermEmbryoSeedlingCarpelStigmaStyleReceptaclePetalSepal Filament38.2 Sexual Reproduction in Angiosperms The embryo sac isthe female gametophyte; the pollen grain is the male gametophyte.The male and female nuclei meet and fuse within the embryo sac.Angiosperms have double fertilization, in which a zygote and anendosperm nucleus form from separate fusion events—the zygotefrom one sperm and the egg, and the endosperm from the othersperm and two polar nuclei.GO TO Animated Tutorial 38.1 • Double FertilizationyourBioPortal.comThe embryo sac (megagametophyte) is the entire seven-cell,eight-nucleus structure.MALE GAMETOPHYTE The pollen grain (microgametophyte) consistsof fewer cells and nuclei than the embryo sac. The developmentof a pollen grain begins when a microsporocyte withinthe anther divides meiotically. Each resulting haploid microsporedevelops a spore wall, within which it normally undergoesone mitotic division before the anthers open and releasethese two-celled pollen grains. The two cells are the tube celland the generative cell. Further development of the pollen grain,which we will describe shortly, is delayed until the pollen arrivesat a stigma (the receptive part of the carpel). In angiosperms,the transfer of pollen from the anther to the stigma isreferred to as pollination.Pollination in the absence of water is anevolutionary adaptationAs Chapter 28 describes, the union of gametes in aquatic plantsis accomplished in the water. Fertilization of mosses and fernsalso requires at least a film of water for movement of gametes.While there are mechanisms to ensure fertilization if and whenthe two gametes meet, fertilization is clearly a low-probabilityevent. The evolution of pollen made it possible for male gametesto reach the female gametophyte without an aqueous conduit.With this selective advantage, pollen-bearing plants were ableto colonize the land.In the first land plants, wind was the primary vehicle bywhich pollen reached its destination, and many plant speciesare wind-pollinated today. Wind-pollinated flowers have stickyor featherlike stigmas, and they produce pollen grains in greatnumbers. Pollen transport by wind is, however, a relativelychancy means of achieving pollination, explaining why about75 percent of all angiosperms rely upon animals—including insects,birds, and bats—for pollen transport. Pollen transport byanimals greatly increases the probability that pollen will get tothe female gametophyte. Suitably pigmented, shaped, andscented flowers attract the pollinating animal, resulting in apollen transfer from flower to flower within the same plantspecies (Figure 38.3).Flower color is one of several adaptationsthat attract pollinators. Bees, for example,are attracted to blue and yellowflowers (bees cannot sense red but are attractedto patterns exhibited by pigmentsvisible in ultraviolet light; see Figure56.10). Many birds, on the other hand, areattracted to red flowers (bird-pollinatedplants also are often shaped to fit theirpollinator’s beak.) In both cases, the animals may derive nutritionfrom the flowers in the form of carbohydrate-rich nectarand/or pollen—a mutually beneficial situation.Flowering plants prevent inbreedingYou may recall from discussions of Mendel’s work (see Section12.1) that some plants can reproduce sexually by both crosspollinationand self-pollination. Self-pollination increases thechances of successful pollination, but leads to homozygosity,which reduces genetic diversity. Because diversity is the rawmaterial of evolution by natural selection, homozygosity can beselectively disadvantageous. Most plants have evolved mechanismsthat prevent self-fertilization. The two primary meansto prevent self-fertilization are (1) physical separation of maleand female gametophytes, and (2) genetic self-incompatibility.SEPARATION OF MALE AND FEMALE GAMETOPHYTES Self-fertilizationis prevented in dioecious species, which bear only maleor female flowers on a particular plant. Pollination in dioeciousspecies is accomplished only when one plant pollinates another.In monoecious plants, which bear both male and femaleflowers on the same plant, the physical separation of the maleand female flowers is often sufficient to prevent self-fertilization.Some monoecious species prevent self-fertilization bystaggering the development of male and female flowers sothey do not bloom at the same time, making these species functionallydioecious.GENETIC SELF-INCOMPATIBILITY Apollen grain that lands on thestigma of the same plant will fertilize the female gamete (reviewFigure 38.2) only if the plant is self-compatible, meaning capableof self-pollination. To prevent self-fertilization, many plants are798 CHAPTER 38 | REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS(A)(B)38.3 Flowers and Pollinators (A) Flies areattracted to some flowers (in this case, the tropicalplant Stapelia gigantea) by chemicals emittedfrom the flower. (B) Other flowers, such asthese Cavendishia sp. flowers, have red pigmentsand a shape that attracts certain birds.self-incompatible, which depends upon the ability of a plantto determine whether pollen is genetically similar or geneticallydifferent from “self.” Rejection of “same-as-self” pollen preventsself-fertilization. How does it occur?Self-incompatibility in plants is controlled by a cluster oftightly linked genes called the S locus (for self-incompatibility).The S locus encodes proteins in the pollen and style that interactduring the recognition process. Aself-incompatible speciestypically has many alleles of the S locus, and when the pollencarries an allele that matches one of the alleles of the recipientpistil, the pollen is rejected. Depending on the type of selfincompatibilitysystem, the rejected pollen either fails to germinateor is prevented from growing through the style (Figure38.4); either way, self-fertilization is prevented.A pollen tube delivers sperm cells to the embryo sacWhen a functional pollen grain lands on the stigma of a compatiblepistil, it germinates. A key event is water uptake bypollen from the stigma: pollen loses most of its water as it matures.Germination involves the development of a pollen tube(Figure 38.5). The pollen tube either traverses the spongy tissueof the style or, if the style is hollow, grows on the innersurface of the style until it reaches an ovule. The pollen tubetypically grows at the rate of 1.5–3 mm/hr, taking just an houror two to reach its destination, the female gametophyte.The growth of the pollen tube is guided in part by a chemicalsignal in the form of a small protein produced by the synergidswithin the ovule. If one synergid is destroyed, the ovulestill attracts pollen tubes, but destruction of both synergids rendersthe ovule unable to attract pollen tubes, and fertilizationdoes not occur. The attractant appears to be species-specific: insome cases, isolated female gametophytes attract only pollentubes of the same species.Angiosperms perform double fertilizationIn most angiosperm species, the mature pollen grain consistsof two cells, the tube cell and the generative cell. The largertube cell encloses the much smaller generative cell. Guidedby the tube cell nucleus, the pollen tube eventually growsthrough the style tissue and reaches the embryo sac. The generativecell, meanwhile, has undergone one mitotic divisionand cytokinesis to produce two haploid sperm cells (Figure38.6, steps 1 and 2).Two fertilization events now occur. One of the two synergidsdegenerates when the pollen tube arrives and the two spermcells are released into its remains. (Figure 38.6, step 3). Eachsperm cell then fuses with a different cell of the embryo sac (Figure38.6, steps 4 and 5). One sperm cell fuses with the egg cell,producing the diploid zygote. The nucleus of the other fuseswith the two polar nuclei in the central cell, forming a triploid(3n) nucleus. While the zygote nucleus begins mitotic divisionto form the new sporophyte embryo, the triploid nucleus undergoesrapid mitosis to form a specialized nutritive tissue, theendosperm. The endosperm will later be digested by the developingembryo as a source of nutrients, energy, and carbon-basedanabolic building blocks (since it often begins its development38.1 | HOW DO ANGIOSPERMS REPRODUCE SEXUALLY? 799(A) (B)StigmaStyleOvuleOvaryInhibitedpollen tubeInhibitedX pollen grainX38.4 Self-Incompatibility In a self-incompatible plant, pollen is rejectedif it expresses an S allele that matches one of the S alleles of the stigmaand style. Self pollen may (A) fail to germinate or (B) its pollen tubemay die before reaching an ovule. In either case, the egg cannot be fertilizedby a sperm from the same plant.Pollen tubeStylesPollen grainson stigmas38.5 Pollen Tubes Begin to Grow Staining pollen with a fluorescentdye allows them to be seen through a fluorescence microscope. Thesepollen grains have landed on the stigmas of a crocus.underground and thus cannot perform photosynthesis rightaway). The remaining cells of the male and female gametophytes,the antipodal cells, and the remaining synergid eventuallydegenerate, as does the pollen tube nucleus.Double fertilization is so named because it involves two nuclearfusion events:• One sperm nucleus fuses with the egg cell nucleus.• The other sperm nucleus fuses with the two polar nuclei.The fusion of a sperm cell nucleus with the two polar nuclei toform endosperm is one of the defining characteristics of angiosperms.Embryos develop within seedsFertilization initiates the highly coordinated growth and developmentof the embryo, endosperm, integuments, and carpel.The integuments—tissue layers immediately surrounding themegasporangium—develop into the seed coat, and the carpelultimately becomes the wall of the fruit that encloses the seed.The first step in the formation of the embryo is a mitotic divisionof the zygote that gives rise to two daughter cells. Thesetwo cells face different fates. An asymmetrical (uneven) distributionof cytoplasm within the zygote causes one daughter cellto produce the embryo proper and the other daughter cell toproduce a supporting structure, the suspensor (Figure 38.7).The suspensor pushes the embryo against or into the endosperm,thereby facilitating the transfer of nutrients from theendosperm into the embryo.800 CHAPTER 38 | REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS1 Initially the pollen tube consists of 2two haploid cells, the generativecell and the tube cell.The generative cell divides mitotically,producing two haploid sperm cells.One synergid cell degenerates whenthe pollen tube arrives.3The sperm cellsare released fromthe pollen tube.5 The other sperm nucleus uniteswith the two polar nuclei,forming a triploid (3n) nucleus.4 One sperm nucleus fertilizesthe egg, forming the zygote,the first cell of the 2nsporophyte generation.EggThree antipodalcellsPolarnucleiSynergidsGenerativecellTube cellTube cellnucleus38.6 Double Fertilization Two sperm are involved in two nuclear fusion events, hence the term “doublefertilization.” One sperm is involved in the formation of the diploid zygote and the other results in the formationof the triploid endosperm. Double fertilization is a characteristic feature of angiosperm reproduction.The zygote nucleus dividesmitotically, one daughter cellgiving rise to the embryo properand the other to the suspensor.EmbryoHeart-stageembryoEndospermnucleusEmbryosacZygoteShoot apexHypocotylRoot apexSuspensorTorpedo-stageembryoCotyledonsSuspensor38.7 Early Development of a Eudicot The embryodevelops through intermediate stages, including a characteristicheart-shaped stage, to reach the torpedo stage.GO TO Web Activity 38.1 • Early Development of a EudicotyourBioPortal.comThe asymmetrical division of the zygote establishes polarityas well as the longitudinal axis of the new plant. A long, thinsuspensor and a more spherical or globular embryo are distinguishableafter just four mitotic divisions. The suspensor soonceases to elongate, and the primary meristems and first organsbegin to form within the embryo.In eudicots, the initially globular embryo develops into thecharacteristic heart stage as the cotyledons (“seed leaves”) startto grow. Further elongation of the cotyledons and of the mainaxis of the embryo gives rise to the torpedo stage, during whichsome of the internal tissues begin to differentiate (see Figure34.7). Between the cotyledons is the shoot apex; at the other endof the axis is the root apex. Each of the apical regions containsa cluster of meristematic cells that continue to divide to give riseto new organs throughout the life of the plant.During seed development, large amounts of nutrients aremoved in from other parts of the parent plant, and the endospermaccumulates starch, lipids, and proteins. In manyspecies, the cotyledons absorb the nutrient reserves from thesurrounding endosperm and grow very large in relation to therest of the embryo (Figure 38.8A). In others, the cotyledons remainthin (Figure 38.8B) and draw on the reserves in the endospermas needed when the seed germinates.In the late stages of embryonic development, the seed loseswater—sometimes as much as 95 percent of its original watercontent. This helps the seed remain viable during the time betweenthe seed’s dispersal from the parent plant and its eventualgermination.What keeps seeds viable when they have lost water? It appearsthat as water leaves, sugars and certain protective proteins becomemore concentrated inside the seeds, creating a very viscousfluid similar to glass. The membranes and proteins of the cells insidethe seed retain their integrity in this viscous state. Once theembryo has become desiccated, it is incapable of further development;it remains dormant until internal and external conditionsare right for germination (as we saw in Section 37.1).Seed development is under hormonal controlChapter 37 describes the role of the hormone gibberellin in themobilization of stored macromolecules in the seed endospermduring germination. The development of seeds is under the controlof a different hormone, abscisic acid (ABA). Most plant tissuesmake this hormone, and like other plant hormones it hasmultiple effects (see Table 37.1). (Unfortunately, its name is misleading,because it does not directly control leaf abscission.)During early seed development the ABAlevel is low, and it risesas the seed matures. This increase stimulates the endospermto synthesize seed storage proteins. It also stimulates the synthesisof proteins that prevent cell death as the seeds dry.ABA also keeps the developing seed from germinating onthe plant before it dries. Premature germination, termed vivipary,is undesirable in seed crops (such as wheat) because thegrain is damaged if it has started to sprout. Viviparous seedlingsare also unlikely to survive if they remain attached to the parentplant and are unable to establish themselves in the soil. Mutantsof corn that are insensitive to ABAhave viviparous seeds,indicating the importance of ABA in preventing precociousgermination.The general effect of ABAin preventing germination extendsto seed dormancy. Seeds stay dormant if their ABAlevel is highand germinate when the level goes down, as usually occurs asdormancy is broken.Fruits assist in seed dispersalIn angiosperms the ovary wall—together with its seeds—developsinto a fruit after fertilization has occurred. Fruits havetwo main functions:• They protect the seed from damage by animals and infectionby microbial diseases• They aid in seed dispersalAfruit may consist of only the mature ovary and seeds, or it mayinclude other parts of the flower. Some species produce fleshy,edible fruits such as peaches and tomatoes, while the fruits ofother species are dry or inedible.Fruits are clearly important for carrying seeds, with their embryos,away from the parent plant. Why has this characteristicbeen selected for during evolution? As products of sexual reproduction,seeds are genetically diverse, and dispersal spreadsthis diversity around. But if a plant has successfully grown toreproduce, its environment would presumably be favorable forthe next generation, too. Some offspring do indeed stay near theparent, as is the case in many tree species, where the seeds essentiallyfall to the ground. However, this strategy has severaldisadvantages. If the species is a perennial, offspring that germinatenear their parent will be competing with their parent forresources, which may be too limited to support a dense population.Furthermore, even though the local conditions were goodenough for the parent to produce at least some seed, there is noguarantee that conditions will still be good the next year, or thatthey won’t be even better elsewhere. Thus, in many cases, seeddispersal is vital to a species’ survival.38.1 | HOW DO ANGIOSPERMS REPRODUCE SEXUALLY? 801In some eudicots, thecotyledons absorb muchof the endosperm and fillmost of the seed.In monocots, the singlecotyledon is pressedagainst the endosperm.Seed coatCotyledonCotyledonShoot apexRoot apexEndosperm(A) Kidney bean (B) Corn38.8 Variety in Angiosperm Seeds In some seeds, such as kidneybeans (A), the nutrient reserves of the endosperm are absorbed by thecotyledons. In others, such as corn (B), the reserves in the endospermwill be drawn upon after germination.Some fruits help disperse seeds over substantial distances,increasing the probability that at least a few of the many seedsproduced by a plant will find suitable conditions for germinationand growth to sexual maturity. Various plants, includingmilkweed and dandelion, produce a fruit with a “parachute”that may be blown some distance from the parent plant by thewind (Figure 38.9A). Still other fruits move by hitching rideswith animals—either on them, as with burrs stuck to an animal’sfur (or to your hiking socks) (Figure 38.8B), or insidethem, as with berries eaten by birds. Water disperses somefruits; coconuts have been known to travel thousands of milesbetween islands. Seeds swallowed whole along with fruits suchas berries travel through the animal’s digestive tract and are depositedsome distance from the parent plant. In some species,seeds must pass through an animal in order to break dormancy.38.1 RECAPFlowers contain the organs for sexual reproductionin angiosperms. Plants that use pollen for reproductionhave several selective advantages, among themthe ability to accomplish fertilization without water,which allowed plants to colonize land. After fertilization,the flower develops into seed(s) and fruit. Theselective advantages of seeds and fruits includelong-term viability and multiple modes of dispersal.• What are the relationships between an ovule and anovary, and between a fruit and a seed? See p. 796 andFigure 38.2• How do plants prevent self-pollination? See pp.798–799 and Figure 38.4• Describe the roles of the two sperm nuclei in doublefertilization. See p. 799 and Figure 38.6• How is plant development controlled by the hormoneabscisic acid? See p. 801We have now traced the sexual life cycle of angiosperms fromthe flower, to the fruit, to the dispersal of seeds. Seed germinationand the vegetative development of the seedling are presentedin Chapter 37. The next section covers the rest of theangiosperm life cycle—the transition from the vegetative to theflowering state—and how this transition is regulated.What Determines the Transition from 38.2 the Vegetative to the Flowering State?The act of flowering is one of the major events in a plant’s life.It represents a reallocation of energy and materials away frommaking more plant parts (vegetative growth) to making flowersand gametes (reproductive growth). Once a plant is oldenough, it can respond to internal or external signals to initiatereproduction. This can happen right at maturity as part of apredetermined developmental program (as in a dandelion plantin the summer) or in response to environmental cues such aslight or temperature (as with most ornamental flowers).Plants fall into three categories depending upon when they matureand initiate flowering, and what happens after they flower:• Annuals complete their lives in one year. This class includesmany crops important to the human diet, such as corn,wheat, rice, and soybean. When the environment is suitable,they grow rapidly, with little or no secondary growth. Afterflowering, they use most of their materials and energy to developseeds and fruits, and the rest of the plant withers away.• Biennials take two years to complete their lives. They aremuch less common than annuals and include carrots, cabbage,onions, and Queen Anne’s lace. Typically, biennialsproduce just vegetative growth during the first year andstore carbohydrates in underground roots (carrot) andstems (onion). In the second year, they use most of thestored carbohydrates to produce flowers and seeds ratherthan vegetative growth, and the plant dies after seeds form.• Perennials live three or more—sometimes many more—years. Maple trees, whose leaves symbolize Canada, can liveup to 400 years. Perennials include many trees and shrubs,as well as wildflowers. Typically these plants flower everyyear, but stay alive and keep growing for another season;the reproductive cycle repeats each year. However, someperennials (e.g., century plant) grow vegetatively for manyyears, flower once, and die.802 CHAPTER 38 | REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS38.9 Dispersing Fruit (A) A milkweed (A) Asclepias syriaca (B) Arctium sp.seed pod. Silky filaments catch the windcurrents and carry the brown seeds withthem. (B) Animals who rub up against the“hook-and-loop” surface of burdock fruitwalk away with it attached to their fur, thusmaking the animals unwitting agents of dispersal.This feature of the fruit is said tohave inspired the invention of Velcro.No matter what type of life cycle they have, angiosperms allmake the transition to flowering. This transition entails significantdevelopmental changes, to which we now turn.Apical meristems can become inflorescence meristemsThe first visible sign of a transition to the flowering state maybe a change in one or more apical meristems in the shootsystem. As described in Chapter 34, meristems have a pool ofundetermined cells. During vegetative growth, an apical meristemcontinually produces leaves, axillary buds, and stem tissues(Figure 38.10A) in a kind of unrestricted growth called indeterminategrowth (see Section 34.4).Flowers may appear singly or in an orderly cluster that constitutesan inflorescence. If a vegetative apical meristem becomesan inflorescence meristem, it ceases production of leavesand axillary buds and produces other structures: smaller leafystructures called bracts, as well as new meristems in the anglesbetween the bracts and the stem (Figure 38.10B). These newmeristems may also be inflorescence meristems, or they maybe floral meristems, each of which gives rise toa flower.Each floral meristem typically produces fourconsecutive whorls or spirals of organs—thesepals, petals, stamens, and carpels discussed earlierin the chapter—separated by very short internodes,keeping the flower compact (Figure38.10C). In contrast to vegetative apical meristemsand some inflorescence meristems, floral meristemsare responsible for determinate growth—growth of limited duration, like that of leaves.A cascade of gene expressionleads to floweringHow do apical meristems become floral meristemsor inflorescence meristems, and how doinflorescence meristems give rise to floral meristems?How does a floral meristem give rise, inshort order, to four different floral organs (sepals,petals, stamens, and carpels)? How does each flower come tohave the correct number of each of the floral organs? Numerousgenes are expressed and interact to produce these results. We’llrefer here to some of the genes whose actions have been mostthoroughly studied in Arabidopsis and snapdragons (Antirrhinum)(see Figure 38.10):• Expression of a group of meristem identity genes initiates acascade of further gene expression that leads to flower formation.The expression of the genes LEAFY and APETALA1is both necessary and sufficient for flowering. How do weknow this? There are two types of evidence, genetic andmolecular. For example, a mutated allele of the geneAPETALA1 leads to continued vegetative growth, even if allother conditions are suitable for flowering. On the otherhand, if the wild-type APETALA1 gene is coupled to an activepromoter and introduced into an apical meristem, theplant will flower regardless of the environment. This ispowerful evidence that APETALA1 plays a role in switchingmeristem cells from a vegetative to a reproductive fate.• Meristem identity gene products trigger the expression offloral organ identity genes, which work in concert to specifythe successive whorls of the flower (see Figure 19.14). Floralidentity genes are homeotic genes whose products are transcriptionfactors that determine whether cells in the floralmeristem will be sepals, petals, stamens, or carpels. An exampleis the gene AGAMOUS, which causes florally determinedcells to form stamens and carpels in the “ABC” systemdescribed in Section 19.5.How is this cascade of events initiated? Depending on thespecies, plants respond to either internal or external cues.Among external clues, the best studied are photoperiod (day803Inflorescence meristems give riseto floral meristems, bracts, andmore inflorescence meristems.A floral meristemgives rise to a flower.A bract is amodified, usuallyreduced, leaflikestructure.A vegetatively growing apicalmeristem continues to produceleaves and stem.Vegetativeapical meristemLeaf(A)InflorescencemeristemFloralmeristemCarpelStamenPetalSepal(B)(C)Floral (orinflorescence)meristemMeristemidentity genesFloralidentity genes38.10 Flowering and the Apical Meristem A vegetative apical meristem(A) grows without producing flowers. Once the transition to the flowering stateis made (B), inflorescence meristems give rise to bracts and to floral meristems(C), which become the flowers.length) and temperature. We begin with photoperiod, as it hasa fascinating history and clear experimental support.Photoperiodic cues can initiate floweringIn 1920, W. W. Garner and H. A. Allard of the U.S. Departmentof Agriculture studied the behavior of a newly discovered mutanttobacco plant. The mutant, named Maryland Mammoth,had large leaves and exceptional height (Figure 38.11). Normallytobacco is an annual that flowers in the summer and thenstops growing. In contrast, Maryland Mammoth plants remainedvegetative and continued to grow.Garner and Allard now tried to figure out why the mutantplants did not flower in the summer. It wasn’t that they couldnot flower: the scientists found that the plants would flower inDecember in the greenhouse under natural light. To determinewhat induces flowering in December, they tested several likelyenvironmental variables, such as temperature. The key variableproved to be day length. By moving plants between light anddark rooms at different times to vary the day length artificially,the scientists were able to establish a direct link between floweringand day length.Maryland Mammoth plants did not flower if exposed tomore than 14 hours of light per day, but flowering commencedonce the daylight period became shorter than 14 hours, as inDecember. Thus the critical day length for Maryland Mammothtobacco is 14 hours (Figure 38.12). Control of an organism’sresponses by the length of day or night is called photoperiodism.Plants vary in their responses to photoperiodic cuesPlants that flower in response to photoperiodic stimuli fall intotwo main classes:• Short-day plants (SDPs) flower only when the day isshorter than a critical maximum. They include poinsettiasand chrysanthemums, as well as Maryland Mammoth tobacco.Thus, for example, we see chrysanthemums in nurseriesin the fall, and poinsettias in winter, as noted in theopening of this chapter.• Long-day plants (LDPs) flower only when the day is longerthan a critical minimum. Spinach and clover are examplesof LDPs. For example, spinach tends to flower and becomebitter in the summer, and is therefore normally planted inearly spring.While there are variations on these two patterns, photoperiodiccontrol of flowering serves an important role: it synchronizesthe flowering of plants of the same species in a local population,and this promotes cross-pollination and successfulreproduction.The length of the night is the key photoperiodic cuedetermining floweringThe terms “short-day plant” and “long-day plant” became entrenchedbefore scientists determined that photoperiodically sen-804 CHAPTER 38 | REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTSMaryland Mammoth tobaccoflowers only when days areshorter than 14 hours, its criticalday length.Henbane flowers only whendays are longer than 14 hours,its critical day length.Long days;plant doesnot flowerLong days;plant flowersShort days;plant flowersShort days;plant doesnot flowerMarylandMammoth tobacco(short-day plant)Light14 hoursDarkHenbaneHyoscyamus niger(long-day plant)Light14 hoursDark38.11 Mammoth Plant Wild-type tobacco (left) is much smaller thanthe Maryland Mammoth mutant of the same age (right), which does notrespond to an environmental cue to stop growing and flower.38.12 Day Length and Flowering By artificially varying the day lengthin a 24-hour period, Garner and Allard showed that the flowering of MarylandMammoth tobacco is initiated when the days become shorter than acritical length. Maryland Mammoth tobacco is thus called a short-dayplant. Henbane, a long-day plant, shows an inverse pattern of flowering.sitive plants actually measure the length of the night (darkness), ratherthan the length of the day. This was demonstrated by Karl Hamnerof the University of California at Los Angeles and JamesBonner of the California Institute of Technology (Figure 38.13).Working with cocklebur, an SDP, Hamner and Bonner ran aseries of experiments using two sets of conditions:• One group of plants was exposed to a constant light period—either shorter or longer than the critical day length—and the dark period was varied.• Asecond group of plants was exposed to a constant darkperiod—and the light period was varied.Plants flowered under all treatments in which the dark periodexceeded 9 hours, regardless of the length of the light period.Hamner and Bonner thus concluded that the length of thenight is critical to flowering. For cocklebur, the critical nightlength is about 9 hours. It is thus more accurate to call cocklebura “long-night plant” than a short-day plant.In cocklebur, a single long night is sufficient to trigger fullflowering some days later, even if the intervening nights areshort. Most plants are less sensitive than cocklebur and requirefrom two to several nights of appropriate length to induce flowering.For some plants a single shorter night in a series of longones inhibits flowering, even if the short night comes only oneday before flowering would have commenced.Through other experiments Hamner and Bonner gainedsome insight into how plants measure night length. They grewSDPs and LDPs under a variety of light/dark conditions. Insome experiments, the dark period was interrupted by a briefexposure to light; in others, the light period was interruptedbriefly by darkness. Interruptions of the light period by darknesshad no effect on the flowering of either short-day or longdayplants. Even a brief interruption of the dark period by light,however, completely nullified the effect of a long night. An SDPflowered only if the long nights were uninterrupted. The investigatorshypothesized that something must accumulate during thatlong night that could be broken down by a flash of light in themiddle of the night.To find out what that “something” might be, Hamner andBonner tested flashes of interrupting light at various wavelengths.You may recall from Section 37.5 that several photoreceptorsplay roles in regulating plant growth, and that theseare sensitive to different wavelengths. In the interrupted-nightexperiments, the most effective wavelengths of light were inthe red range (Figure 38.14), and the effect of a red-light interruptionof the night could be fully reversed by a subsequentexposure to far-red light, indicating that a phytochrome is thephotoreceptor. Where does this occur and what happens downstreamfrom the reception? Once again, elegant experimentsprovided the answer.The flowering stimulus originates in a leafEarly experiments indicated that reception of the photoperiodicstimulus occurs within the leaf. For example, in spinach, an LDP,flowering would occur if the leaves were exposed to long-dayperiods of light while the bud meristem was masked to simulateshort days. Flowering could not occur when its leaves weremasked to simulate short days while the bud was exposed tolong-day periods of light.38.2 | WHAT DETERMINES THE TRANSITION FROM THE VEGETATIVE TO THE FLOWERING STATE? 805HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODThe data do not support the hypothesis.Short-day plants measure the length of thenight and thus could more accurately becalled long-night plants.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: How would you perform theseexperiments using long-day plantsand what would be the results?38.13 Night Length and FloweringShort-day plants (SDP) flower only when the day is shorterthan a critical maximum. But what environmental cue initiatesSDP flowering: day length or night length? To find out, KarlHamner and James Bonner carried out greenhouseexperiments using cocklebur, a SDP.Short-day plants measure day length.RESULTSINVESTIGATING LIFEDivide plants into two groups. Expose groups todifferent light conditions: one group to a constantdaylight period and varied periods of darkness, theother to varied periods of daylight and fixed periodsof darkness.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.Only plants given10 hours of darkflowered.Only plants given9 or more hoursof dark flowered.16Light constant Darkness variedLight varied 8 or 10 hours of darkness16161616168101281012No floweringNo floweringTime (hours)88769881010101011These “masking” experiments were extended to SDP plantsas well (Figure 38.15). Because the receptor of the stimulus (inthe leaf) is physically separated from the tissue on which thestimulus acts (the bud meristem), the inference can be drawnthat a systemic signal travels from the leaf through the plant’stissues to the bud meristem. Other evidence that a diffusiblechemical travels from the leaf to the bud meristem signal includesthe following:• If a photoperiodically induced leaf is immediately removedfrom a plant after the inductive dark period, the plant doesnot flower. If, however, the induced leaf remains attachedto the plant for several hours, the plant will flower. This resultsuggests that something is synthesized in the leaf in responseto the inductive dark period, and then moves out ofthe leaf to induce flowering.• If two or more cocklebur plants are grafted together and ifone plant is exposed to inductive long nights and its graft806 CHAPTER 38 | REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTSHYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODWhen plants are exposed to red (R) andfar-red (FR) light in alternation, the finaltreatment determines the effect.Phytochrome is the photoreceptor.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: How would you show that interruptingthe day with a brief period of darknesshad no effect on flowering?38.14 Interrupting the NightKnowing that plants measure night duration, the questionbecame whether the dark hours to which a plant is exposedmust be continuous. Using SDPs and LDPs as test subjects,Hamner and Bonner interrupted the night with light ofdifferent wavelengths.Red light participates in the photoperiodictiming mechanism.RESULTSINVESTIGATING LIFEGrow plants under short-day conditions,but interrupt the night with light of differentwavelengths.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.Light/dark combinationsLong-dayplantsShort-dayplantsFlowering No floweringNo floweringFloweringFloweringNo floweringFloweringRRR RFRFRFRR FR R FRFloweringNo floweringNo floweringFloweringNo floweringGO TO Animated Tutorial 38.2 • The Effect of InterruptedDays and NightsyourBioPortal.comHYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODThe leaves measure the photoperiod.Therefore, some signal must move fromthe induced leaf to the flowering partsof the plant.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: How would you show experimentallythat the flowering signal is the same indifferent species of plants?38.15 The Flowering Signal Moves from Leaf to BudThe receptor for photoperiod, phytochrome, is in the leaf butflowering occurs in the bud meristem. To investigate whetherthere is a diffusible substance that travels from leaf to bud,James Knott exposed only the leaf to the photoperiodicstimulus.The leaves measure the photoperiod.RESULTSINVESTIGATING LIFEGrow cocklebur plants under long days and shortnights. Mask a leaf on some plants and see ifflowering occurs.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.If even one leaf is masked for part of the day—thus shifting that leaf to short days and long nights—the plant will flower.Masked leafControl Plant withmasked leafBurrs (fruit)Masked leafpartners are exposed to noninductive short nights, all theplants flower.• In several species, if an induced leaf from one species isgrafted onto another, noninduced plant of a different species,the recipient plant flowers.Although the transmissible signal was long ago given aname, florigen (“flower inducing”), the nature of the signalhas only recently been explained.Florigen is a small proteinThe characterization of florigen was made possible by geneticand molecular studies of the model organism Arabidopsis, anLDP. Three genes are involved (Figure 38.16):• FT (FLOWERING LOCUS T) codes for florigen. Asmall protein(20 kDa molecular weight), FT can travel throughplasmodesmata. FT is synthesized in phloem companioncells of the leaf and diffuses into the adjacent sieve elements,where it enters the phloem flow to the apical meristem. If FTis coupled to an active promoter and expressed at high levelsin the shoot meristem, flowering is induced even in theabsence of an appropriate photoperiodic stimulus.• CO (CONSTANS) codes for a transcription factor that activatesthe synthesis of FT. Like FT, CO is expressed in leaf companioncells. If CO is experimentally overexpressed in the leaf,flowering is induced. Overexpression of CO in the apicalmeristem does not, however, induce flowering, indicatingthat its essential activity is in the leaf. CO protein is expressedall the time but is unstable; an appropriate photoperiodicstimulus stabilizes CO so that there is enough toturn on FT synthesis.• FD (FLOWERING LOCUS D) codes for a protein that binds toFT protein when it arrives in the apical meristem. The FD proteinis a transcription factor that when complexed with FTprotein, activates promoters for meristem identity genes,such as APETALA1 (see Figure 38.10). The expression of FDprimes meristem cells to change from a vegetative fate to areproductive fate once florigen arrives.Before florigen was isolated, grafting experiments indicatedthat many different plant species could be induced to flower bythe same chemical signal. Aphotoperiod-induced leaf from onespecies can induce flowering when grafted onto an uninducedplant of another species. Results of molecular experiments confirmthat the FT gene is involved in photoperiod signaling inmany species:• Transgenic plants (e.g., tobacco and tomato) that expressthe Arabidopsis FT gene at high levels flower regardless ofday length.• Transgenic Arabidopsis plants that express high levels of FThomologs from other plants (e.g., rice and tomato) flowerregardless of day length.While the molecular basis of the action of florigen has beenelucidated, commercial applications of this knowledge havebeen harder to realize. It was hoped that florigen might be avery small molecule, like auxin or gibberellin that could besprayed on economically important plants to induce flowering38.2 | WHAT DETERMINES THE TRANSITION FROM THE VEGETATIVE TO THE FLOWERING STATE? 8071 Photoperiodic stimulusat leaf companion cellstabilizes CO, whichacts as a transcriptionfactor.2 FT is made and enters sieve tube 4element through plasmodesmata.5 AP1 is made and actsto initiate flowering.3 FT is transportedthrough the phloemup to the apical bud.FT combines with FD andthe complex acts as atranscription factor for AP1.DNAFTFTCOPhotoperiodicstimulusCompanion cellSieve tubeelementTranscriptionDNAApicalmeristemFT FDAP1FloweringTranscriptionFTCONSTANS proteinFLOWERING LOCUS Tprotein (florigen)FLOWERING LOCUS DproteinAPETALA1 proteinFDFTAP1CO38.16 Florigen and its Molecular Biology Florigenis a protein (FT) made in the phloem companion cells,and travels in the sieve elements from the leaf to thebud meristem. There, florigen combines with anotherprotein to stimulate transcription of genes that initiateflower formation.at will. The fact that florigen is a protein that cannot readilyenter cells from the outside environment makes the developmentof commercial florigen treatments unlikely.We have considered the photoperiodic regulation of flowering,from photoreceptors in the leaf to florigen that travelsfrom the induced leaf to the sites of flower formation. In someplant species, however, flowering is induced by other stimuli.Flowering can be induced by temperature or gibberellinTEMPERATURE In some plant species, notably certain cerealgrains, the environmental signal for flowering is cold temperature,a phenomenon called vernalization (Latin vernus, “spring”).In both wheat and rye, we distinguish two categories of floweringbehavior. Spring wheat, for example, is a typical annualplant: it is sown in the spring and flowers in the same year. Winterwheat is sown in the fall, grows to a seedling, overwinters(often covered by snow), and flowers the following summer. Ifwinter wheat is not exposed to cold in its first year, it will notflower normally the next year.How vernalization leads to flowering has been elucidatedfrom model organisms such as Arabidopsis. In strains of Arabidopsisthat require vernalization to flower (Figure 38.17), agene called FLC (FLOWERING LOCUS C) encodes a transcriptionfactor that blocks the FT–FD florigen pathway (see Figure38.16) by inhibiting expression of FT and FD. Cold temperatureinhibits the synthesis of FLC protein, allowing FT and FD proteinsto be expressed and flowering to proceed. Similar proteinscontrol some steps in vernalization in cereals.GIBBERELLIN Arabidopsis plants do not flower if they are geneticallydeficient in the hormone gibberellin, or if they are treatedwith an inhibitor of gibberellin synthesis. These observationsimplicate gibberellins in flowering. Direct application of gibberellinsto buds in Arabidopsis results in activation of the meristemidentity gene LEAFY, which in turn promotes the transitionto flowering.Some plants do not require an environmentalcue to flowerA number of plant species and strains do not require a photoperiod,vernalization, or gibberellin to flower, but instead floweron cue from an “internal clock.” For example, flowering in somestrains of tobacco will be initiated in the terminal bud when thestem has grown four phytomers in length (recall that stems arecomposed of repeating units called phytomers; see Figure 34.1).If such a bud and a single adjacent phytomer is removed andplanted, the cutting will flower because the bud has already receivedthe cue for flowering. But the rest of the shoot below thebud that has been removed will not flower because it is onlythree phytomers long. After it grows an additional phytomer, itflowers. These results suggest that there is something about theposition of the bud (atop four phytomers of stem) that determinesits transition to flowering.The bud might “know” its position by the concentration ofsome substance that forms a positional gradient along the lengthof the plant. Such a gradient could be formed if the root makes adiffusible inhibitor of flowering whose concentration diminisheswith plant height. When the plant reaches a certain height, theconcentration of the inhibitor would become sufficiently low atthe tip of the shoot to allow flowering. What this inhibitor mightbe is unclear, but there is evidence that it acts by decreasing theamount of FLC, allowing the FT–FD pathway to proceed (just ascold acts on FLC in vernalization). Apositional gradient that actson FLC would be consistent with other mechanisms affectingflowering, which all converge on LEAFY and APETALA1:FLC VernalizationPositionalgradientpathwayAPETALA1LEAFYFT (florigen) FloweringPhotoperiod808 CHAPTER 38 | REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTSWinter-annual Arabidopsiswithout vernalizationWinter-annual Arabidopsiswith vernalization38.17 Vernalization A geneticstrain of Arabidopsis (winter-annualArabidopsis) requires vernalizationfor flowering. Without it, the plant islarge and vegetative (left), but withthe cold period it is smaller andflowers (right).38.2 RECAPFlowering of some angiosperms is controlled bynight length, a phenomenon called photoperiodism.Gibberellins can induce flowering in some species,as can exposure to low temperatures (vernalization).Some species flower when their stems have grownby a certain amount, independent of environmentalcues. All pathways to flowering converge on themeristem identity genes.• What are the differences between apical meristems,inflorescence meristems, and floral meristems?What genes control the transitions between them?See p. 803 and Figure 38.10• Explain why “short-day plant” is a misleading term.See p. 805 and Figure 38.13• What is the evidence for florigen? What is its molecularmechanism of action? See p. 807 and Figures 38.15and 38.16We have seen how environmental factors interact with genes tocontrol flowering in angiosperms. The function of flowers is sexualreproduction, which maintains beneficial genetic variationin a population. Many angiosperms, however, also benefit frombeing able to reproduce asexually.How Do Angiosperms 38.3 Reproduce Asexually?Although sexual reproduction takes up most of the space in thischapter, asexual reproduction accounts for many of the individualplants present on Earth. This fact suggests that in some circumstancesasexual reproduction must be advantageous.We have noted that genetic recombination is one of the advantagesof sexual reproduction. Self-fertilization is a form ofsexual reproduction, but offers fewer opportunities for geneticrecombination than does cross-fertilization. Adiploid, self-fertilizingplant that is heterozygous for a certain locus can produceboth kinds of homozygotes for that locus plus the heterozygoteamong its progeny, but it cannot produce anyprogeny carrying alleles that it does not itself possess. Neverthelessmany self-fertilizing plant species produce viable andvigorous offspring.Asexual reproduction eliminates genetic recombination altogether.A plant that reproduces asexually produces progenygenetically identical to the parent (clones). What, then, is the advantageof asexual reproduction? If a plant is well adapted toits environment, asexual reproduction allows it to pass on to allits progeny a superior combination of alleles, which mightotherwise be separated by sexual recombination.Many forms of asexual reproduction existStems, leaves, and roots are considered vegetative organs and aredistinguished from flowers, the reproductive parts of the plant.Asexual reproduction is often accomplished through the modificationof a vegetative organ, which is why the term vegetativereproduction is sometimes used to describe asexual reproductionin plants. Another type of asexual reproduction,apomixis, involves flowers but no fertilization.VEGETATIVE REPRODUCTION Often the stem is the organ that ismodified for vegetative reproduction. As noted earlier, strawberriesproduce horizontal stems, called stolons or runners, whichgrow along the soil surface, form roots at intervals, and establishpotentially independent plants. Asexual reproduction by tiplayers is accomplished when the tips of upright branches sag tothe ground and develop roots, as in blackberry and forsythia.Some plants, such as potatoes, form enlargedfleshy tips of underground stems,called tubers, that can produce new plants(from the “eyes”). Rhizomes are horizontalunderground stems that can give rise tonew shoots. Bamboo is a striking exampleof a plant that reproduces vegetatively bymeans of rhizomes. Asingle bamboo plantcan give rise to a stand—even a forest—ofplants constituting a single, physically connectedentity.Whereas stolons and rhizomes are horizontalstems, bulbs and corms are short,vertical, underground stems. Lilies andonions form bulbs (Figure 38.18A), shortstems with many fleshy, highly modified38.3 | HOW DO ANGIOSPERMS REPRODUCE ASEXUALLY? 809Storage leavesgrow in layersfrom the stemof this onion.The plantlets forming on the margin of thisKalanchoe leaf will fall to the ground andbecome independent plants.The short stem is visibleat the bottom of the bulb.(A) Allium sp. (B)38.18 Vegetative Organs Modified for Reproduction(A) Bulbs are short stems with largeleaves that store nutrients and can give rise to newplants. (B) In Kalanchoe, new plantlets can formon leaves.leaves that store nutrients. These storage leaves make up mostof the bulb. Bulbs are thus large underground buds. They cangive rise to new plants by dividing or by producing new bulbsfrom axillary buds. Crocuses, gladioli, and many other plantsproduce corms, underground stems that function very much asbulbs do. Corms are disclike and consist primarily of stem tissue;they lack the fleshy modified leaves that are characteristicof bulbs.Stems are not the only vegetative organs modified for asexualreproduction. Leaves may also be the source of newplantlets, as in some succulent plants of the genus Kalanchoe(Figure 38.18B). Many kinds of angiosperms, ranging fromgrasses to trees such as aspens and poplars, form interconnected,genetically homogeneous populations by means of suckers—shoots produced by roots. What appears to be a wholestand of aspen trees, for example, may be a clone derived froma single tree by suckers. This is why the leaves of a whole standof aspens typically turn yellow at the same time.Plants that reproduce vegetatively often grow in physicallyunstable environments such as eroding hillsides. Plants withstolons or rhizomes, such as beach grasses, rushes, and sandverbena, are common pioneers on coastal sand dunes. Rapidvegetative reproduction enables these plants, once introduced,not only to multiply but also to survive burial by the shiftingsand; in addition, the dunes are stabilized by the extensive networkof rhizomes or stolons that develops. Vegetative reproductionis also common in some deserts, where the environmentis often not suitable for seed germination and the establishmentof seedlings.APOMIXIS Some plants produce flowers but use them to reproduceasexually rather than sexually. Dandelions, blackberries,some citrus, and some other plants reproduce by the asexualproduction of seeds, called apomixis. As described earlier, in alternationof generations meiosis typically reduces the numberof chromosomes in gametes by half, and fertilization restoresthe sporophytic (diploid) number of chromosomes in the zygote.In a female gametophyte undergoing apomixis, eithermeiosis begins and the chromosomes do not undergo meiosisII, or meiosis does not occur at all. In either case, the resultinggamete is diploid. Cells within the ovule simply develop intothe embryo and the ovary wall develops into a fruit. The resultof apomixis is a fruit with seeds that are genetically identicalto the parent plant.Apomixis would be considered an oddity of the plant reproductiveworld were it not for its potential use in propagatingcrop plants. You may recall from Chapter 12 that many cropplants (such as corn) are grown as hybrids because the progenyof a cross between two inbred lines are often superior to eitherof their parents. The explanation for this phenomenon, calledhybrid vigor, is not completely understood. One hypothesis attributesthe superiority of hybrids to the suppression of undesirablerecessive alleles from one parent by dominant allelesfrom the other. Another hypothesis states that certain advantageouscombinations of alleles can be obtained by crossing twoinbred strains.Unfortunately, once a farmer has obtained a hybrid with desirablecharacteristics, (s)he cannot use those plants for furthercrosses with themselves (selfing) to get more seeds for the nextgeneration. You can imagine the genetic chaos when a hybrid,which is heterozygous at many of its loci (e.g., AaBbCcDdEe,etc.), is crossed with itself: there will be many new combinationsof alleles (e.g., AabbCCDdee, etc.), resulting in highly variableprogeny. The only way to reliably reproduce the hybrid isto maintain populations of the original parents to cross againeach year.However, if a hybrid carried a gene for apomixis, it could reproduceasexually, and its offspring would be genetically identicalto itself. So the search is on for a gene for apomixis thatcould be introduced into desirable crops and allow them to bepropagated indefinitely. (A recently published detective novel,Day of the Dandelion, explores this idea.)Researchers recently found a strain of Arabidopsis that exhibitsapomixis as a result of a mutation in a single gene calleddyad. In normal plants, dyad is essential for chromosome organization,specifically synapsis, during meiosis I (see Figure 11.17).In the apomictic strain, meiosis I resembles mitosis, and thechromosomes replicate again before what would be meiosis II.The result is diploid cells that are genetically identical to theparent instead of the genetically recombined haploid gametesthat normally result from meiosis. Scientists are trying to isolateand transfer such apomictic genes into corn and other cerealcrops with the hope that plant breeders can use apomixisto propagate plants with desirable hybrid traits (such as highyields, and disease- and insect-resistance) without compromisingtheir hybrid vigor.Vegetative reproduction has a disadvantageVegetative reproduction is highly efficient in an environmentthat is stable over the long term. Achange in the environment,however, can leave an asexually reproducing species at a disadvantage.A striking example is provided by the demise of the Englishelm, Ulmus procera, which was apparently introduced intoEngland as a clone by the ancient Romans. This tree reproducesasexually by suckers and is incapable of sexual reproduction.In 1967, Dutch elm disease first struck the English elms. Aftertwo millennia of clonal growth, the population lacked geneticdiversity, and no individuals carried genes that would protectthem against the disease. Today the English elm is all but gonefrom England.Vegetative reproduction is important in agricultureFarmers and gardeners take advantage of some natural formsof vegetative reproduction. They have also developed newtypes of asexual reproduction by manipulating plants. One ofthe oldest methods of vegetative reproduction used in agricultureconsists of simply making cuttings of stems, inserting themin soil, and waiting for them to form roots and thus become autonomousplants. The cuttings are usually encouraged to root810 CHAPTER 38 | REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTSby treatment with a plant hormone, auxin, as described in Section37.3.Horticulturists reproduce many woody plants by grafting—attaching a bud or a piece of stem from one plant to the root orroot-bearing stem of another plant. The part of the resultingplant that comes from the root-bearing “host” is called thestock; the part grafted on is the scion (Figure 38.19).For a graft to succeed, the vascular cambium of the scionmust associate with that of the stock. By cell division, both cambiumsform masses of wound tissue. If the two masses meet andconnect, the resulting continuous cambium can produce xylemand phloem, allowing transport of water and minerals to thescion and of photosynthate to the stock. Grafts are most oftensuccessful when the stock and scion belong to the same orclosely related species. Much fruit grown for market in theUnited States is produced on grafted trees. Another exampleis wine grapes. The roots of most grape strains are susceptibleto soil pests, and so grape varieties are grafted onto root stocksthat have pest resistance.Scientists in universities and commercial laboratories havebeen developing new ways to produce useful plants throughtissue culture. Because many plant cells are totipotent, culturesof undifferentiated tissue can give rise to entire plants, as cansmall pieces of tissue cut directly from a parent plant. Tissuecultures sometimes are used commercially to produce newplants. This is common in the forestry industry, where uniformityof trees is desirable.Culturing tiny bits of apical meristem can produce plantsfree of viruses. Because apical meristems lack developed vasculartissues, viruses tend not to enter them. Treatment withhormones causes a single apical meristem to give rise to 20 ormore shoots; thus, a single plant can give rise to millions of geneticallyidentical plants within a year by repeated meristemculturing. Using this approach, strawberry and potato producersare able to start each year’s crop from virus-free plants.38.3 RECAPAngiosperms may reproduce asexually by means ofmodified stems, roots, or leaves, or by apomixis.Asexual reproduction is advantageous when a planthas a superior genotype well adapted to its environment,but decreases the genetic diversity of plantpopulations.• How does apomixis differ from sexual reproduction?See p. 810• Explain how vegetative reproduction of plants isadvantageous to humans. See pp. 810–811We have seen how angiosperms reproduce sexually and asexually.Adisadvantage of asexual reproduction is that its geneticinflexibility may leave a population unable to cope with newchallenges. In the next chapter we focus on the mechanisms thathave evolved in plants to cope with biological and physical challengesin their environment.38.3 | HOW DO ANGIOSPERMS REPRODUCE ASEXUALLY? 811In grafting, the scion isaligned so that itsvascular cambium isadjacent to the vascularcambium in the stock.ScionStock38.19 Grafting Grafting—attaching a piece of a plant to the root orroot-bearing stem of another plant—is a common horticultural technique.The “host” root or stem is the stock; the upper grafted piece is the scion.In the photo, a Bing cherry scion is being grafted onto a hardier stock.38.1 How Do Angiosperms Reproduce Sexually?• Sexual reproduction promotes genetic diversity in a population.The flower is an angiosperm’s structure for sexual reproduction.• Flowering plants have microscopic gametophytes. The megagametophyteis the embryo sac, which typically contains eightnuclei in a total of seven cells. The microgametophyte is thepollen grain, which usually contains two cells. Review Figure38.2, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 38.1• Following pollination, the pollen grain delivers sperm cells tothe embryo sac by means of a pollen tube.• Most angiosperms exhibit double fertilization: one spermnucleus fertilizes the egg, forming a zygote, and the othersperm nucleus unites with the two polar nuclei to form atriploid endosperm. Review Figure 38.6• Plants have both physical and genetic methods of preventinginbreeding. Physical separation of the gametophytes andgenetic self-incompatibility prevent self-pollination.• The zygote develops into an embryo (with an attached suspensor),which remains quiescent in the seed until conditions areright for germination. Review Figure 38.7, WEB ACTIVITY 38.1• Ovules develop into seeds, and the ovary wall and the enclosedseeds develop into a fruit.• The hormone abscisic acid promotes seed development anddormancy.CHAPTER SUMMARY
38.1 How Do Angiosperms Reproduce Sexually?• Sexual reproduction promotes genetic diversity in a population.The flower is an angiosperm’s structure for sexual reproduction.• Flowering plants have microscopic gametophytes. The megagametophyteis the embryo sac, which typically contains eightnuclei in a total of seven cells. The microgametophyte is thepollen grain, which usually contains two cells. Review Figure38.2, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 38.1• Following pollination, the pollen grain delivers sperm cells tothe embryo sac by means of a pollen tube.• Most angiosperms exhibit double fertilization: one spermnucleus fertilizes the egg, forming a zygote, and the othersperm nucleus unites with the two polar nuclei to form atriploid endosperm. Review Figure 38.6• Plants have both physical and genetic methods of preventinginbreeding. Physical separation of the gametophytes andgenetic self-incompatibility prevent self-pollination.• The zygote develops into an embryo (with an attached suspensor),which remains quiescent in the seed until conditions areright for germination. Review Figure 38.7, WEB ACTIVITY 38.1• Ovules develop into seeds, and the ovary wall and the enclosedseeds develop into a fruit.• The hormone abscisic acid promotes seed development anddormancy.
38.2 What Determines the Transition from theVegetative to the Flowering State?• In annuals and biennials, flowering and seed formation usuallyleads to death of the rest of the plant. Perennials live a longtime and typically reproduce repeatedly.• For a vegetatively growing plant to flower, an apical meristemin the shoot system must become an inflorescence meristem,which in turn must give rise to one or more floral meristems.These events are under the influence of meristem identitygenes and floral organ identity genes. Review Figure 38.10• Some plants flower in response to photoperiod. Short-dayplants flower when the nights are longer than a critical nightlength specific to each species; long-day plants flower whenthe nights are shorter than a critical night length. ReviewFigure 38.13• The mechanism of photoperiodic control involves phytochromesand a biological clock. Review Figure 38.14,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 38.2• A flowering signal, called florigen, is formed in a photoperiodicallyinduced leaf and is translocated to the sites where flowerswill form. Review Figures 38.15 and 38.16• In some angiosperm species, exposure to low temperatures—vernalization—is required for flowering; in others internal signals(one of which is gibberellin in some plants) induce flowering.All of these stimuli converge on the meristem identitygenes.38.3 How Do Angiosperms Reproduce Asexually?• Asexual reproduction allows rapid multiplication of organismsthat are well suited to their environment.• Vegetative reproduction involves the modification of a vegetativeorgan—usually the stem—for reproduction.• Some plant species produce seeds asexually by apomixis.• Horticulturists often graft different plants together to takeadvantage of favorable properties of both stock and scion.Review Figure 38.19