48The Olympic record for the women’s long jump is 7.4meters, set in 1988 by Jackie Joyner-Kersee. Anotherworld-record long jump that still stands was set twoyears earlier by Rosie the Ribeter, who jumped 6.5 meters.Rosie was a frog competing in the Calaveras CountyJumping Frog Contest. In some ways, Rosie’s jump is moreimpressive: while Jackie’s jump was about 5 times herbody length (i.e., her height), Rosie’s was about 20 timesher body length.Both jumps were powered by skeletal muscle. Muscletissue responds to commands from the nervous system.The cellular mechanisms of muscle contraction are essentiallythe same in the frog and the human, so why is thefrog’s jump so much more impressive? The answer involvesthe concept of leverage, which depends on themuscles and skeletal elements working together.Both frog and human jumping muscles pull on bonesthat are connected at joints to make levers. A lever makesit possible for the same force to move a large mass a smalldistance or a small mass a large distance. The ratio of afrog’s leg length to its body mass is simply greater thanthat in a human. Thus the frog’s legs are better at movinga small mass a long distance than are the human’s legs.Let’s add a flea to our interspecies competition. Theflea can jump more than 200 times its body length. Thisincredible performance is not due to feats of leverage, becauseno muscle can contract fast enough to explain thetake-off velocity of the flea. A different mechanismevolved in the flea—a kind of slingshot action. At the baseof the flea’s jumping legs is an elastic material that is compressedby muscles while the flea is resting. When a triggermechanism is released, the elastic material recoils and“fires” the flea into the air.In a contest of jumping endurance,the uncontested champion wouldbe the kangaroo. As a human runsfaster, the number of strides andthe energy expended per minuteincrease rapidly. Neither is true forthe kangaroo. When moving at speedsfrom about 5 to 25 kilometers per hour,the kangaroo takes the same number ofstrides per minute and its metabolic ratedoes not increase. Why is this?In kangaroos, as in frogs and humans,the muscles used to jump areattached to bones by tendons. Likethe material at the base of the flea’sChampion jumpersA Champion Jumper Jackie Joyner-Kersee set an Olympic record for thewomen’s long jump at the Seoul Olympicsin 1988.48.1 How Do Muscles Contract?Most behavior and many physiological actions, such as beatingof the heart and moving of food through the digestive tract, dependon muscle contraction. Wherever tissues contract, musclecells are responsible. As introduced in Section 40.1 and shownin Figure 40.4, there are three types of vertebrate muscle:• Skeletal muscle is responsible for all voluntary movements,such as running or playing a piano. It is also involved insome involuntary actions, such as breathing, shivering andmaintaining posture.• Cardiac muscle is responsible for the beating action of theheart.• Smooth muscle creates the movement in many hollow internalorgans, such as the gut, bladder, and blood vessels,and is under the control of the autonomic (involuntary)nervous system.All three muscle types use the same sliding filament contractilemechanism, and we begin our study of musculoskeletal movementby describing its underlying molecular mechanisms. Wewill use vertebrate skeletal muscle as our primary example.Later we will discuss the differences in cardiac and smooth musclethat adapt them to their particular functions.Sliding filaments cause skeletal muscle to contractSkeletal muscle is also called striated muscle because of its stripedappearance (see Figure 40.4A). Skeletal muscle cells, called musclefibers, are large and have many nuclei. These multinucleatecells form in development through the fusion of many individualembryonic muscle cells called myoblasts. A specificmuscle such as your biceps (which bends your arm) is composedof hundreds or thousands of muscle fibers bundled togetherby connective tissue (Figure 48.1).Muscle contraction is due to the interaction between the contractileproteins actin and myosin. Within muscle cells, actin andmyosin molecules are organized into filaments consisting ofmany molecules. Actin filaments are also called thin filaments,and myosin filaments are thick filaments. The two kinds of filamentslie parallel to each other. When muscle contraction is triggered,the actin and myosin filaments slide past each other ina telescoping fashion.What is the relationship between a skeletal muscle fiber andthe actin and myosin filaments responsible for its contraction?Each muscle fiber is packed with myofibrils—bundles of thinactin and thick myosin filaments arranged in orderly fashion.In most regions of the myofibril, each thick myosin filament issurrounded by six thin actin filaments, and each thin actin filamentsits within a triangle of three thick myosin filaments.IN THIS CHAPTER we will describe muscle structureand the molecular mechanisms of contraction. We will discussthe properties that enable different types of musclesto perform different kinds of tasks. To generate specific kindsof movement, muscles must have something to pull on; thuswe will describe skeletal systems and their roles in generatingmovement.legs, tendons can be elastic. The kangaroo’s tendonsstretch when it lands, and their recoil helps power thenext jump—similar to the action of a pogo stick. Tomove faster, the kangaroo simply increases the length ofits stride, thereby increasing both the stretch on its tendonseach time it lands and the magnitude of the recoilat the initiation of each jump.As discussed in Chapter 31, the ability to move is oneof the things that distinguishes animals from the othermulticellular organisms. It is our muscles and skeleton—the musculoskeletal system—that allow us to move.CHAPTER OUTLINE48.1 How Do Muscles Contract?48.2 What Determines Muscle Performance?48.3 How Do Skeletal Systems and Muscles WorkTogether?Champion Jumpers Relative to their size, many animalshave more impressive jumping skills than humans. This leopardfrog (Rana pipiens) can leap distances up to 20 times itsbody length.A longitudinal view of a myofibril reveals whyskeletal muscle appears striated. The myofibril consistsof repeating units called sarcomeres. Each sarcomereis made of overlapping filaments of actin andmyosin, which create a distinct banding pattern (seeFigure 48.1). Before the molecular nature of the musclebanding pattern was known, the bands were givennames that are still used today. Each sarcomere isbounded by Z lines, which anchor the thin actin filaments.Centered in the sarcomere is the Aband, whichcontains all the myosin filaments. The H zone and theI band, which appear light, are regions where actin andmyosin filaments do not overlap in the relaxed muscle.The dark stripe within the H zone is called the Mband; it contains proteins that help hold the myosinfilaments in their regular arrangement.1008 CHAPTER 48 | MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEMSWhere there are only actin filaments the myofibril appears light; where there areboth actin and myosin filaments the myofibril appears dark.Sarcomeres are theunits of contraction.A skeletal muscle is made upof bundles of muscle fibers.Each muscle fiber is a multinucleate cell containingnumerous myofibrils, which are highly orderedassemblages of thick myosin and thin actin filaments.MitochondriaI bandZ lineTendonsM bandSingle muscle fiber (cell)Connective tissueBundle of muscle fibersI bandSinglemyofibrilMusclePlasma membrane(sarcolemma)Z lineZ lineNucleusMyofibrilsActinfilamentActin filamentZ lineM bandTitinMyosinfilamentMyosin filamentA bandH zoneH zoneA bandSarcomereSingle sarcomere1 μm48.1 The Structure of Skeletal MuscleA skeletal muscle is made up of bundles ofmuscle fibers. Each muscle fiber is a multinucleatecell containing numerous myofibrils,which are highly ordered assemblagesof thick myosin and thin actin filaments. Thearrangement of the actin and myosin filamentsgives skeletal muscle fibers theircharacteristic striated appearance.GO TO Web Activity 48.1 • The Structure of a SarcomereyourBioPortal.comThe bundles of myosin filaments are held in a centered positionwithin the sarcomere by a protein called titin. Titin is thelargest protein in the body; it runs the full length of the sarcomerefrom Z line to Z line. Each titin molecule runs rightthrough a myosin bundle. Between the ends of the myosin bundlesand the Z lines, titin molecules are very stretchable, likebungee cords. In a relaxed skeletal muscle, resistance to stretchis mostly due to the elasticity of the titin molecules.As the muscle contracts, the sarcomeres shorten and the bandpattern changes. The H zone and the I band become much narrower,and the Z lines move toward the A band as if the actinfilaments were sliding into the H zone, the region occupied bythe myosin filaments (Figure 48.2). In the mid 1950s, this observationindependently led two teams of British biologists to proposethe sliding filament model of muscle contraction.It is not uncommon in science for critical breakthroughs tobe made simultaneously in different laboratories, but in this casethe coincidences are remarkable. The leaders of the two teamswere named Hugh Huxley and Andrew Huxley—but they werenot related. Working in separate Cambridge University labs, thetwo groups proposed the sliding filament model at the sametime, and both papers were published in the same issue of thejournal Nature.Actin–myosin interactions cause filaments to slideTo understand how the sliding filament model explains musclecontraction, we must first examine the structures of actin andmyosin (Figure 48.3). A myosin molecule consists of two longpolypeptide chains coiled together, each ending in a large globularhead. Amyosin filament is made up of many myosin moleculesarranged in parallel, with their heads projecting sidewaysat each end of the filament.An actin filament consists of actin monomers polymerizedinto a long molecule that looks like two strands of pearls twistedtogether. Twisting around the actin chains is another protein,tropomyosin, and attached to tropomyosin at intervals are moleculesof troponin. We’ll discuss the latter two proteins in thenext section.The myosin heads can bind specific sites on actin, formingcross-bridges between the myosin and the actin filaments. Moreover,when a myosin head binds to an actin filament, the head’sconformation changes, and it bends and exerts a tiny force thatcauses the actin filament to move 5 to 10 nanometers relative tothe myosin filament. The myosin heads also have ATPase ac-48.1 | HOW DO MUSCLES CONTRACT? 1009H zone I bandA bandZ line Actin M band MyosinMuscle relaxedMuscle contractedM ZM ZMM48.2 Sliding Filaments TitinThe banding pattern of thesarcomere changes as itshortens. Observations ofelectron micrographs suchas those on the right led tothe sliding filament hypothesisof muscle contraction.Actin monomer Tropomyosin TroponinGlobularheadLinearpolypeptide chainMyosin moleculeTroponin has three subunits: one binds actin,one binds tropomyosin, and one binds Ca2+.Single sarcomere Actin filamentMyosin filament48.3 Actin and Myosin Filaments Overlap to Form MyofibrilsMyosin filaments are bundles of molecules with globular heads andpolypeptide tails; the protein titin holds these filaments centered within thesarcomeres. Actin filaments consist of two chains of actin monomerstwisted together. They are wrapped by chains of the polypeptidetropomyosin and are studded at intervals with another protein, troponin.GO TO Animated Tutorial 48.1 • Molecular Mechanismsof Muscle ContractionyourBioPortal.comtivity; when they are bound to actin, they can bind and hydrolyzeATP. The energy released when this happens changesthe conformation of the myosin head, causing it to release theactin and return to its extended position, from which it can bindto actin again.Together, these details explain the cycle of events that causethe actin and myosin filaments to slide past each other andshorten the sarcomere. They also explain rigor mortis—the stiffeningof muscles soon after death. ATP is needed to break theactin–myosin bonds, so when ATP production ceases withdeath, the actin–myosin bonds cannot be broken and the musclesstiffen. Eventually, however, the proteins begin to lose theirintegrity, and the muscles soften. The timing of these eventshelps a medical examiner estimate the time of death.We have been discussing the cycle of contraction in termsof a single myosin head. Remember that each myosin filamenthas many myosin heads at both ends and is surrounded by sixactin filaments; thus the contraction of the sarcomere involvesa great many cycles of interaction between actin and myosinmolecules. That is why when a single myosin head breaks itscontact with actin, the actin filaments do not slip backward.Actin–myosin interactions are controlled by calcium ionsLike neurons, muscle cells are excitable—that is, their plasma membranescan generate and conduct action potentials. In skeletal musclefibers, action potentials are initiated by motor neurons arrivingat a neuromuscular junction. The axon terminals of motorneurons are generally highly branched and form synapses withhundreds of muscle fibers (Figure 48.4). Amotor neuron and allof the fibers with which forms synapses constitutea motor unit. The fibers contract simultaneouslywhen its motor neuron fires. Amuscle can consistof many motor units. Thus, there are two ways toincrease a muscle’s strength of contraction: increasethe firing rate of an individual motor neuron, or recruitmore motor neurons.As described in Section 45.3, when an actionpotential arrives at a neuromuscular junction, theneurotransmitter acetylcholine is released fromthe motor neuron terminals, diffuses across thesynaptic cleft, binds to receptors in the postsynapticmembrane, and causes ion channels in the motorend plate to open (see Figures 45.13 and 45.14).Most of the ions that flow through these channelsare Na+, and therefore the motor end plate is depolarized.The depolarization spreads to the surroundingplasma membrane of the muscle fiber,which contains voltage-gated sodium channels. When thresholdis reached, the plasma membrane fires an action potentialthat is conducted rapidly to all points on the surface of the musclefiber.An action potential in a muscle fiber also travels deep withinthe cell. The plasma membrane is continuous with a distributionsystem of tubules that descend into the muscle fiber cytoplasm(also called the sarcoplasm). The action potential thatspreads over the plasma membrane also spreads through thissystem of transverse tubules, or T tubules (Figure 48.5).The T tubules come very close to the endoplasmic reticulum(ER) of the muscle cell. In muscle cells, the ER is called the sar-1010 CHAPTER 48 | MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEMS48.4 The Neuromuscular Junction Axons branching from a singlemotor neuron end in terminals that innervate multiple skeletal muscle fibers.Axon Axon terminalSkeletalmusclefiber10 μm1 An action potential (black arrow)arrives at the axon terminal andvesicles of ACh are released.2 The postsynaptic membranegenerates an action potentialthat spreads down T tubules…3 …which causes therelease of Ca2+ storedin the sarcoplasmicreticulum.4 Released Ca2+diffuses in sarcoplasm,stimulating musclecontraction.5 Ca2+ is taken up by thesarcoplasmic reticulum,terminating muscle contraction.Muscle fiberMotor neuronMyofibrilNeuromuscularjunctionT tubuleSarcoplasmicreticulumPlasmamembraneActionpotential48.5 T Tubules Spread Action Potentials into the FiberAn action potential at the neuromuscular junction spreadsthroughout the muscle fiber via a network of T tubules,triggering the release of Ca2+ from the sarcoplasmic reticulum.yourBioPortal.comGO TO Web Activity 48.2 • The Neuromuscular JunctionATPCa2+ is released from thesarcoplasmic reticulum.1Ca2+ in the sarcoplasmbinds troponin and exposesmyosin-binding sites on theactin filaments.2In the power stroke, the myosin head changesconformation; filaments slide past one another.4ADP is released; ATPbinds to myosin, causingit to release actin.5 Myosin heads bind toactin; release of Piinitiates power stroke.3ATP is hydrolyzed.The myosin headreturns to itsextendedconformation.6 If Ca2+ is returned to thesarcoplasmic reticulum,the muscle relaxes.77If Ca2+ remains available, thecycle repeats and musclecontraction continues.8PiPiPiPiPiADPADPADPADPADPTropomyosin Actin filamentMyosin filamentTroponinMyosinbinding siteCa2+ATPADPSTARTcoplasmic reticulum, and it is a closed compartment surroundingevery myofibril. Calcium pumps in the sarcoplasmic reticulumtake up Ca2+ ions from the sarcoplasm. Therefore, whenthe muscle fiber is at rest, there is a higher concentration of Ca2+in the sarcoplasmic reticulum and a lower concentration in thesarcoplasm.Spanning the space between the membranes of the T tubulesand the membranes of the sarcoplasmic reticulum are two proteins.One protein, the dihydropyridine (DHP) receptor, is locatedin the T tubule membrane; it is voltage-sensitive and changes itsconformation when an action potential reaches it. The other protein,the ryanodine receptor, is located in the sarcoplasmic reticulummembrane; it is a Ca2+ channel. These two proteins are physicallyconnected. When the DHP receptor is activated by anaction potential, it changes conformation, causing the ryanodinereceptor to allow Ca2+ to leave the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Ca2+ions diffuse into the sarcoplasm surrounding the actin andmyosin filaments and trigger the interaction of actin and myosinand the sliding of the filaments. How do the Ca2+ ions do this?An actin filament, as we have seen, is a helical arrangementof actin monomers. Twisted around the actin filament are twostrands of the protein tropomyosin (Figure 48.6; see also Figure48.3). At regular intervals, the filament also includes a globularprotein, troponin. The troponin molecule has three subunits:one binds actin, one binds tropomyosin, and one binds Ca2+.When the muscle is at rest, the tropomyosin strands arepositioned so that they block the sites on the actin filamentwhere myosin heads can bind. When Ca2+ is released into thesarcoplasm, it binds to troponin, changing its conformation.Because the troponin is bound to the tropomyosin, this conformationalchange twists the tropomyosin enough to exposethe actin–myosin binding sites. Thus the cycle of making andbreaking actin–myosin bonds is initiated, the filaments arepulled past each other, and the muscle fiber contracts. Whenthe calcium pumps remove the Ca2+ ions from the sarcoplasm,the conformation of the tropomyosin returns to the state inwhich it blocks the binding of myosin heads to actin, and themuscle fiber returns to its resting condition. Figure 48.6 summarizesthis cycle.48.1 | HOW DO MUSCLES CONTRACT? 101148.6 Release of Ca2+ from the Sarcoplasmic Reticulum TriggersMuscle Contraction When Ca2+ binds to troponin, it exposes myosinbindingsites on the actin. As long as binding sites and ATP are available,the cycle of actin and myosin interactions continues and the filamentsslide past each other.Cardiac muscle is similar to and differentfrom skeletal muscleLike skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle appears striated becauseof the regular arrangement of actin and myosin filaments intosarcomeres (Figure 48.7). The difference between cardiac andskeletal muscle is that cardiac muscle cells are much smaller andhave only one nucleus each (uninucleate). Cardiac muscle cellsbranch, and the branches of adjoining cells interdigitate into ameshwork that is resistant to tearing. As a result, the heart wallscan withstand high pressures while pumping blood, withoutthe danger of developing leaks. Adding to the strength of cardiacmuscle are intercalated discs that provide strong mechanicaladhesions between adjacent cells. Gap junctions—proteinstructures that allow cytoplasmic continuity between cells—inthe intercalated discs offer low-resistance pathways for ioniccurrents to flow between cells (see Figure 7.21A and Section45.3). Therefore, cardiac muscle cells are electrically coupled.An action potential initiated at one point in the heart spreadsrapidly through a large mass of cardiac muscle.Certain cardiac muscle cells are specialized for generating andconducting electrical signals. These pacemaker and conducting cellshave a low density of actin and myosin filaments, but they initiateand coordinate the rhythmic contractions of the heart. (Themolecular basis for this pacemaking function is covered in Section50.3.) Pacemaker cells make the vertebrate heartbeat myogenic,meaning it is generated by the heart muscle itself. Aheartremoved from a vertebrate can continue to beat with no inputfrom the nervous system; although input from the autonomicnervous system modifies the rate of the pacemaker cells, it is notessential for their continued rhythmic function.The mechanism of excitation–contraction coupling in cardiacmuscle cells is different from that in skeletal muscle cells. TheT tubules are larger, and the voltage-sensitive DHP proteins inthe T tubules are Ca2+ channels. These T tubule proteins are notphysically connected with the ryanodine receptors in the sarcoplasmicreticulum. Instead, the ryanodine receptors are iongatedCa2+ channels that are sensitive to Ca2+. When an actionpotential spreads down the T tubules, it causes the voltagegatedchannels to open, allowing extracellular Ca2+ to flow intothe sarcoplasm. This slight rise in sarcoplasmic Ca2+ concentrationopens the Ca2+ channels in the sarcoplasmic reticulum,which in turn causes a huge rise in sarcoplasmic Ca2+ concentration,resulting in fiber contraction. This mechanism is calledCa2+-induced Ca2+ release.Smooth muscle causes slow contractionsof many internal organsSmooth muscle provides the contractile force for most of our internalorgans, which are under the control of the autonomic nervoussystem. Smooth muscle moves food through the digestivetract, controls the flow of blood through blood vessels, and emptiesthe urinary bladder. Structurally, smooth muscle cells are thesimplest muscle cells. They are smaller than skeletal muscle cells,usually long and spindle-shaped, and each has a single nucleus.They are “smooth” because the actin and myosin filaments arenot as regularly arranged as they are in skeletal and cardiac muscle,and so do not produce the striated appearance.Some smooth muscle tissue, such as that from the wall of thedigestive tract, has interesting properties. The cells are arrangedin sheets, and individual cells in a sheet are in electrical contactwith one another through gap junctions, as they are in cardiacmuscle. As a result, an action potential generated in themembrane of one smooth muscle cell can spread to all the cellsin the sheet of tissue. Thus the cells in the sheet contract in a coordinatedfashion.The plasma membranes of smooth muscle cells are sensitiveto stretch, with important consequences. If the wall of the digestivetract is stretched in one location (as by a mouthful offood passing down the esophagus to the stomach), the membranesof the stretched cells depolarize, reach threshold, andfire action potentials, which cause the cells to contract. Thus,smooth muscle contracts after being stretched, and the harderit is stretched, the stronger it contracts. This behavior of smoothmuscle is important for moving food through the gut.The walls of blood vessels are mostly smooth muscle. Thisis especially true on the arterial side where the blood is underhigher pressure. The muscle tone in these vessels is responsiveto changes in blood pressure and to both chemical and neuralinfluences, as we discuss in Chapter 50. Changes in vascularsmooth muscle tone are responsible for controlling the distributionof blood in the body.The neural influences on smooth muscle come from the twodivisions of the autonomic nervous system. The neurotransmittersof the sympathetic and parasympathetic postganglionic cellsalter the membrane potential of smooth muscle cells. For example,in the digestive tract, acetylcholine causes smooth musclecells to depolarize, making them more likely to fire action potentialsand contract. Antagonistically, norepinephrine causesthese muscle cells to hyperpolarize and thus be less likely to fireaction potentials and contract (Figure 48.8). In contrast, norep-1012 CHAPTER 48 | MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEMSIntercalated diskslink adjoining cells.Individual cells interdigitate,like fingers meshing together.15 μm48.7 Cardiac Muscle Cells Form a Strong Meshwork Cardiacmuscle cells branch and interdigitate, forming a tear-resistant mesh thatcan withstand the pressure of blood pumping through the heart.inephrine acting through G protein-coupled receptors causes thesmooth muscle in arteries serving the gut to contract. Rememberthat the action of the neurotransmitters depends on the receptorsin the target tissues. Sympathetic activity is high in afight-or-flight situation; in an emergency you don’t need to digestyour lunch, but you do need to send blood to the tissuescritical for survival.Although smooth muscle cell contraction is not controlledby the troponin–tropomyosin mechanism, calcium still plays acritical role. ACa2+ influx into the sarcoplasm of a smooth musclecell can be stimulated by action potentials, hormones, orstretching. The Ca2+ that enters the sarcoplasm combines witha protein called calmodulin. The calmodulin–Ca2+ complex activatesan enzyme called myosin kinase, which can phosphory-48.1 | HOW DO MUSCLES CONTRACT? 1013Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODINVESTIGATING LIFEANS neurotransmitters can alter membrane resting potentials and affect the rate at which smoothmuscle cells fire action potentials, thus controlling smooth muscle contraction.48.8 Neurotransmitters Alter the Membrane Potential of Smooth Muscle CellsEarlier experiments showed that stretching the smooth muscles of the gut (as in the stretch applied by a full stomach) depolarizesthe membranes, causing action potentials that activate the contractile mechanism. This follow-up experiment showed that theparasympathetic neurotransmitter acetylcholine and the sympathetic neurotransmitter norepinephrine act antagonistically to alterthe membrane potential of smooth muscle.Stimulation from neurotransmitters of the autonomic nervous system induce contractions in the smoothmuscles of the gut.RESULTSChart recorderForcetransducerMeasuresmuscle contractionsWash outacetylcholineApplynorepinephrineWash outnorepinephrine0–25–50Membrane potential (mV)ForceMusclecontractsMusclerelaxesSaline bathReference electrode(outside cell)Measuring electrodeApplyacetylcholineIntestinal muscle+25AmplifierA strip of intestinal muscleis anchored to a devicethat measures contractileforce.12 A pipette drips acetylcholine ornorepinephrine onto the strip.3The force of contraction of the muscleis measured by a force transducer.5Muscle membrane potential andaction potentials are recorded.4When acetylcholine is dripped onto the muscle,the cells depolarize, fire action potentials morerapidly, and increase their force of contraction.Norepinephrine, on the other hand, causes thecells to hyperpolarize, decreasing their rate offiring, and decreasing their force of contraction.An electrode detectsaction potentials in amuscle cell.late myosin heads. When the myosin heads in smooth muscleare phosphorylated, they undergo cycles of binding and releasingactin, causing muscle contraction. As Ca2+ is removed fromthe sarcoplasm, it dissociates from calmodulin, and the activityof myosin kinase falls. An additional enzyme, myosin phosphatase,dephosphorylates the myosin to help reduce actin–myosin interactions (Figure 48.9).Single skeletal muscle twitches are summed intograded contractionsIn skeletal muscle, the arrival of an action potential at a neuromuscularjunction causes an action potential in a muscle fiber.The spread of that action potential through the muscle fiber’sT tubule system causes a minimum unit of contraction,called a twitch. A twitch can be measuredin terms of the tension, or force, it generates(Figure 48.10A). A single action potential stimulatesa single twitch, but the ultimate force generatedby an action potential can vary enormouslydepending on how many muscle fibersare in the motor unit it innervates. The level oftension an entire muscle generates depends ontwo factors: the number of motor units activated,and the frequency at which the motor units fireIn muscles responsible for fine movements, such as those ofthe fingers, a motor neuron may innervate only one or a few musclefibers, but in a muscle that produces large forces, such as thebiceps, a motor neuron innervates a large number of muscle fibers.At the level of a muscle fiber, a single action potential stimulatesa single twitch. If action potentials reaching the musclefiber are adequately separated in time, each twitch is a discrete,all-or-none phenomenon. If action potentials are fired more rapidly,however, new twitches are triggered before the myofibrilshave a chance to return to their resting condition. As a result,the twitches sum, and the tension generated by the fiberincreases and becomes more sustained. Thus an individual musclefiber can show a graded response to increased levels of stimulationby its motor neuron.Twitches sum at high levels of stimulation because the calciumpumps in the sarcoplasmic reticulum are not able to clearthe Ca2+ ions from the sarcoplasm between action potentials.1014 CHAPTER 48 | MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEMSInactivecalmodulinActiveCa2+-calmodulincomplexCa2+Ca2+InactivemyosinkinaseActiveCa2+-calmodulinmysoin kinaseActinMyosinATPPiADPMyosinphosphataseSarcoplasm of smoothmuscle cellCell membrane48.9 The Role of Ca2+ in Smooth MuscleContraction When a smooth muscle cell is stimulatedby neurotransmitter, Ca2+ enters the sarcoplasm andbinds to calmodulin, which in turn activates an enzymethat phosphorylates the myosin heads, causing them tobind to actin. As long as the myosin remains phosphorylated,actin and myosin go through cycles of bindingand release. Thus in smooth muscle, the Ca2+-mediatedchange is on myosin, whereas in skeletal and cardiacmuscle it is on the actin-tropomyosin filamant.ForceForceStimulusStimulusTime(B)(A) Twitches in quick succession havea summed effect.Tetanus is sustained by ahigh rate of stimulation.Summed twitches bring the musclefiber to maximum contraction, knownas tetanus.A stimulus elicits a twitch, the minimumunit of contraction of a muscle fiber.Muscles relax when stimulation stops.48.10 Twitches and Tetanus (A) Actionpotentials from a motor neuron cause a musclefiber to twitch. Twitches in quick succession canbe summed. (B) Summation of many twitchescan bring the muscle fiber to the maximum levelof contraction, known as tetanus.GO TO Animated Tutorial 48.2 • Smooth Muscle ActionyourBioPortal.comEventually a stimulation frequency can be reached that resultsin continuous presence of Ca2+ in the sarcoplasm at high enoughlevels to cause continuous activation of the contractile machinery—a condition known as tetanus (Figure 48.10B). (Do notconfuse this condition with the disease called tetanus, whichis caused by a bacterial toxin and is characterized by spastic contractionsof skeletal muscles.)How long a muscle fiber can maintain a tetanic contractiondepends on its supply of ATP. Eventually the fiber will becomefatigued. It may seem paradoxical that the lack of ATP causesfatigue, since the action of ATP is to break actin–myosin bonds.But remember that the energy released from the hydrolysis ofATP “re-cocks” the myosin heads, allowing them to cyclethrough another power stroke. When a muscle is contractingagainst a load, the cycle of making and breaking actin–myosinbonds must continue, to prevent the load from stretching themuscle. The situation is like rowing a boat upstream: you cannotmaintain your position relative to the stream bank by justholding the oars out against the current; you have to keep rowing.Likewise, actin–myosin bonds have to keep cycling to maintaintension in the muscle.Many muscles of the body maintain a low level of tensioneven when the body is at rest. For example, the muscles of theneck, trunk, and limbs that maintain our posture against thepull of gravity are always working, even when we are standingor sitting still. Muscle tone comes from the activity of asmall but changing number of motor units in a muscle; at anyone time, some of the muscle’s fibers are contracting and othersare relaxed. The nervous system is constantly readjustingmuscle tone.48.1 RECAPThe contractile ability of muscle derives from interactionsbetween actin and myosin filaments. Thethree types of muscle are skeletal, cardiac, andsmooth. Contraction in all three depends on controlof Ca2+ in the sarcoplasm. Tropomyosin and troponinare controlling elements in skeletal and cardiac muscle.Calmodulin is the controlling element in smoothmuscle.• Explain how the cellular and subcellular structure ofskeletal muscle relate to the sliding filament theory ofmuscle contraction. See pp. 1007–1009 and Figures48.1, 48.2, and 48.3• What is the role of Ca2+ in the contractile mechanismof skeletal, cardiac, and smooth muscle? See pp.1010–1011 and Figures 48.5 and 48.6• What role does ATP play in the actin and myosin interactionsthat produce contraction? See Figure 48.6Now that we understand how muscles generate force, we canlook at what determines the characteristics of a muscle, and howindividual muscles can change their characteristics with regularuse and conditioning.What Determines Muscle 48.2 Performance?The functions that different muscles perform place different demandson them. Some muscles, such as postural muscles, mustsustain a load continuously over long periods of time. Othermuscles, such as those that control your fingers, generally donot have to sustain long contractions, but they must be able tocontract quickly. And what is “quick” for humans doesn’t beginto compare with insect flight muscles that can contract asfast as 1,000 times per second. How are muscles adapted to specificfunctions and demands?Muscle fiber types determine endurance and strengthNot all skeletal muscle fibers are alike, and a single muscle oftencontains more than one type of fiber. The two major typesof skeletal muscle fibers express different genes for theirmyosin molecules, and these myosin variants have differentrates of ATPase activity. Those with high ATPase activity canrecycle their actin–myosin cross-bridges rapidly and are thereforecalled fast-twitch fibers. Slow-twitch fibers have lowerATPase activity; they develop tension more slowly but canmaintain it longer.Slow-twitch fibers are also called oxidative or red muscle becausethey contain the oxygen-binding protein myoglobin, havemany mitochondria, and are well supplied with blood vessels.These characteristics both increase the fibers’ capacity for oxidativemetabolism and result in their red appearance. Themaximum tension a slow-twitch fiber produces is low anddevelops slowly but is highly resistant to fatigue. Slow-twitchfibers have substantial reserves of fuel (glycogen and fat), sothey can maintain steady, prolonged production of ATP as longas oxygen is available. Muscles with high proportions of slowtwitchfibers are good for long-term aerobic work (that is, workthat requires oxygen). Long-distance runners, swimmers, cyclists,and other athletes whose activities require endurancehave leg and arm muscles consisting mostly of slow-twitchfibers (Figure 48.11).Some fast-twitch fibers are also called glycolytic or white musclebecause, compared with slow-twitch fibers, they have fewmitochondria, little or no myoglobin, and fewer blood vessels;thus they look pale. Fast-twitch glycolytic fibers can developmaximum tension more rapidly than slow-twitch fibers can,and that maximum tension is greater. However, fast-twitchfibers fatigue rapidly. The myosin of these fibers puts the energyof ATP to work very rapidly, but the fibers cannot replenishATP quickly enough to sustain contraction for a long time.Fast-twitch fibers are especially good for short-term work thatrequires maximum strength. Weight lifters and sprinters haveleg and arm muscles with high proportions of fast-twitch fibers.The types of fibers that make up a muscle influence theperformance properties of that muscle. A sprinter benefitsfrom muscles that generate maximum force rapidly, but theydo not need to sustain a particular load for a long time. Bycontrast, a marathon runner benefits from muscles with maximumendurance.48.2 | WHAT DETERMINES MUSCLE PERFORMANCE? 1015What can you do to optimize your performance in a particularactivity? To a limited extent, you can alter the propertiesof your muscle fibers through training. There are fasttwitchfibers that are somewhat oxidative and thereforeintermediate in their properties between slow-twitch and fastglycolytic fibers. These intermediate fibers can become moreoxidative with endurance training and more glycolytic withstrength training. However, the most important determinantof your muscle fiber types is your genetic heritage. There issome truth to the statement that champions are born, notmade. A person born with a high proportion of fast-twitchfibers is unlikely to become a champion marathon runner,and one born with a high proportion of slow-twitch fibers isunlikely to become a champion sprinter.A muscle has an optimal length for generatingmaximum tensionIf you have ever done a pull-up, you know that two parts ofthis exercise are especially difficult. When you are hangingfrom the bar with your arms fully extended, it is hard to getthe pull-up started; and when your chin has just about reachedthe bar, pulling yourself up the last small distance is difficult.Why is this? Part of the explanation comes from the lever propertiesof the muscle–joint interaction that we discuss in the nextsection, and part comes from the structure of the sarcomere.When a muscle is stretched and the sarcomeres are lengthened,there is less overlap between the actin and myosin filaments;therefore, fewer cross-bridges can form, and less forcecan be produced. In fact, if the sarcomeres are stretched toomuch, actin and myosin do not overlap and no force can be produced.How would a muscle recover from such a difficult situation?The bungee cord–like titin molecules create enough elasticrecoil to pull the actin and myosin fibrils back into anoverlapping arrangement.When the muscle is fully contracted, the actin and myosinfilaments overlap so much that the myosin bundles are pressedup against the Z lines. Because they have no place to go, additionalshortening is difficult. You can see the relationship betweenthe length of a muscle fiber and its ability to develop tensionin Figure 48.12.1016 CHAPTER 48 | MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEMSFast-twitch fiberscan generatemaximum tensionquickly, but theyalso fatigue quickly.Slow-twitchfibers are betteradapted forsustainedaerobic activity.(A) Cross sections of leg muscles(B)20 40 60 80 10020 40 60 80 100Long-distancerunnerSwimmerTrainednon-athletesSprinterPercent slow-twitch muscle in body ( )Maximum oxygen uptake ( )(ml/min/kg)Fast-twitchSlow-twitchDistance cyclist Sprinter48.11 Slow- and Fast-Twitch Muscle Fibers The skeletal musclesin the micrographs were stained with a reagent that shows slowtwitchfibers as dark and fast-twitch muscle as light. Athletes in differentsports have different distributions of muscle fiber types.125 150 175Force of contraction (% maximum)0075 10050100Length of muscle aspercentage of resting lengthActinfilamentsMyosinfilament Titin48.12 Force and Length The amount of force a sarcomere can generatedepends on its resting length. When a muscle is stretched, the sarcomereslengthen, there is less overlap between the actin and myosin filaments, andless force is produced. Overstretched sarcomeres produce no force becausethere is no overlap between the actin and myosin.Exercise increases muscle strength and enduranceDifferent types of exercise produce different physical conditioningresponses. In general, anaerobic activities, such as weightlifting, increase strength, and aerobic activities, such as jogging,increase endurance. Strength is the maximum force that a musclecan exert, and endurance is work capacity or how long agiven workload can be sustained. What are the physiologicalbases for these differences?Strength is a function of the cross-sectional area of muscles:the more actin and myosin filaments in a muscle fiber, and themore muscle fibers in a muscle, the more tension it can produce.When athletes undertake strength training, they use weights orexercises such as pull-ups to repeatedly contract specific musclesunder heavy loads. Repetitions are usually done until themuscle is completely fatigued. Such stress on a muscle does minortissue damage—hence the soreness the day after a hardworkout—but it also induces the formation of new actin andmyosin filaments in existing muscle fibers. The muscle fibers,and hence the muscles, get bigger and stronger. In extremecases, and after serious muscle damage, new muscle fibers canalso be produced from stem cells called satellite cells in the muscle.In general, however, the major effect of strength training isto produce bigger, rather than more, muscle fibers.Aerobic exercise has a completely different effect on muscles:it enhances their oxidative capacity. This effect comes from increasesin the number of mitochondria, in enzymes involved inenergy use, and in the density of capillaries that deliver oxygento the muscle. Myoglobin also increases in skeletal muscle cells.Myoglobin is an oxygen-binding protein similar to hemoglobinin red blood cells. However, myoglobin has a higher affinityfor oxygen than does hemoglobin. Therefore, myoglobin acceptsoxygen from the blood, facilitates the diffusion of oxygenthroughout the muscle, and provides a store of oxygen for usewhen oxygen delivery by the blood is insufficient. By increasingthe capacity of muscle to use oxygen to produce ATP, aerobictraining increases the work load that muscles can sustainthrough time.Muscle ATP supply limits performanceMuscles have three systems for supplying the ATP they needfor contraction:• The immediate system uses preformed ATP and creatinephosphate.• The glycolytic system metabolizes carbohydrates to lactateand pyruvate.• The oxidative system metabolizes carbohydrates or fats allthe way to H2O and CO2.The capacity of these three systems and the rates at which theycan produce ATP determine both work capacity and endurance(Figure 48.13).ATP is present in muscles in very small amounts. However,muscle fibers also contain a storage compound called creatinephosphate (CP). This molecule stores energy in a phosphate bond,which it can transfer to ADP. The total energy available in allthe muscles of your body in the form of ATP and CP—the immediateenergy system—is only about 10 kilocalories. Whenat rest, you metabolize a kilocalorie of energy in less than aminute. Even though the energy available from ATP and CP islimited, it is available immediately, and it enables fast-twitchfibers to generate a lot of force quickly. During burst activity,the immediate system is exhausted in seconds.The glycolytic system activates within a few seconds to replacethe ATP depleted at the onset of muscle activity. The glycolyticenzymes are located in the cytoplasm of the muscle fiber,and therefore the ATP they generate is rapidly available to themyosin filaments. However, as noted in Chapter 9, glycolysisalone is an inefficient way to produce ATP, and it leads to theaccumulation of lactic acid, which slows the process. Thus, theglycolytic system and the immediate system together can providemost of the energy for active muscles for less than a minute(see Figure 48.13).48.2 | WHAT DETERMINES MUSCLE PERFORMANCE? 1017Pre-formed ATP and CPare immediately availablebut rapidly exhausted.1 Glycolysis comes on linewithin seconds but lackssustained efficiency.2Sustained ATPproduction by oxidativemetabolism kicks in afterabout 1 minute.3Relative energy potentialfrom each system (%)2 3 4 530 sec10 sec 1Time (min)255075100Speed (m/sec)10 100 1000 10,000Time of running (sec)46810MenWomen(A)(B)1 2 348.13 Supplying Fuel for High Performance (A) Muscles have threesystems for obtaining the ATP they need for contraction during exertionsuch as running. (B) Looking at a plot of world-record times for runningevents of different durations, you can see that the performance of theathletes corresponds to the time courses of the three energy systems.Oxidative metabolism becomes fully active in about aminute, producing relatively huge amounts of ATP because itcan completely metabolize carbohydrates and fats. However, itrequires many reactions (see Chapter 9), and it takes place inthe mitochondria, so O2 and substrate must diffuse into the mitochondria,and the formed ATP must diffuse from the mitochondriato the myosin filaments in the muscle. These processesare not instantaneous, so the rate at which oxidative metabolismcan make ATP available to do work is slower than the rateat which the other two systems can supply ATP.The fuel supply available to the muscles influences how longsomeone can sustain a high level of aerobic exercise. From thecirculating blood, muscle receives glucose and free fatty acids,which it can metabolize to generate ATP. At high levels of aerobicexercise, however, most of the fuel used by muscles to produceATP comes from the reserve of glycogen stored in the muscleitself. Depletion of muscle glycogen results in fatigue.The rate at which muscle glycogen is replenished dependson diet: it is high with a high-carbohydrate diet, low with ahigh-fat diet, and intermediate with a mixed diet. This fact isthe basis for a practice called “carbo-loading.” For 3 to 5 days,athletes exercise at a level that depletes muscle glycogen. Then,2 or 3 days before the event, they taper down their level of trainingand eat a diet rich in complex carbohydrates. The result canbe glycogen supercompensation, in which the restoration ofmuscle glycogen stores “overshoots” and reaches above-normallevels.Insect muscle has the greatest rate of cyclingInsect flight muscle can produce a wingbeat frequency of upto 1,000 cycles per second. Since neural action potentials last 1to 3 milliseconds, that number of cycles per second would pushthe capacity of motor neurons, let alone the mechanism of cyclingof the striated muscle contraction/relaxation. The wingbeatfrequency of a hummingbird is less than 50 cycles per second,and that seems fast. How do insects do it?The mechanism of excitation/contraction coupling is differentin insect flight muscle. Vertebrate striated muscle andmuch of invertebrate striated muscle is called “synchronous”because the cycling of the contractile mechanism is linked tothe firing of the motor neurons. This is not true of insect flightmuscle, which is therefore called “asynchronous” muscle. Thefiring of action potentials in the insect flight motor neuronsis not particularly fast, but it does cause depolarization of themuscle cell membrane, the spreading of an action potentialthroughout the membrane, and the release of Ca2+ from thesarcoplasmic reticulum. However, once the asynchronousmuscle fiber is stimulated, its cycle of contraction/relaxationproceeds at its own characteristic frequency as long as the Ca2+is available to bind to the troponin. The contraction of the musclefiber deactivates the actin–myosin binding, which in turnpermits a stretching of the muscle, which in turn activates theactin–myosin binding. Thus contractile cycling and the resultingwingbeat frequency are not tied to the firing rate of theflight motor neurons.48.2 RECAPDepending on the function a muscle serves, it mayneed to generate maximum force rapidly, sustainactivity for a long period, or contract and relax at avery rapid rate. Properties of muscles can facilitatethese types of activity.• Describe the differences between slow-twitch andfast-twitch fibers. See p. 1015 and Figure 48.11• How does exercise influence muscle strength andendurance? See p. 1017• How do the different sources of ATP influence performancein different types of exercise? See pp.1017–1018 and Figure 48.13• Explain how insects can beat their wings 10 timesfaster than hummingbirds can. See p. 1018Regardless of how much force a muscle can generate, how longit can sustain a work load, or how fast it can contract and relax,a muscle needs something to pull on; otherwise it wouldjust be a lump of pulsating or quivering tissue. Let’s look nowat how skeletal systems help generate movement.How Do Skeletal Systems and 48.3 Muscles Work Together?Muscles can contract and exert force, or they can relax. To createsignificant movement, they must have something to pull onand something that stretches the muscle back to a longer position.In some cases, muscles pull on each other, as in the trunkof an elephant or the arms of an octopus. In most cases, however,skeletal systems are the rigid supports against which musclespull to create directed movement. In this section, we examinethe three types of skeletal systems: hydrostatic skeletons,exoskeletons, and endoskeletons.A hydrostatic skeleton consists of fluidin a muscular cavityCnidarians, annelids, and other soft-bodied invertebrates havehydrostatic skeletons consisting of a volume of fluid enclosedin a body cavity surrounded by muscle (see Section 31.2). Whenmuscles oriented in one direction contract, the fluid-filled bodycavity bulges out in the opposite direction.An earthworm uses its hydrostatic skeleton to crawl. Theearthworm’s body cavity is divided into many separate segments,each of which contains a compartment filled with extracellularfluid. The body wall surrounding each segment has twomuscle layers: a circular layer and a longitudinal layer. If thecircular muscles in a segment contract, the compartment in thatsegment narrows and elongates. If the longitudinal muscles ina segment contract, the compartment shortens and bulges outward.Alternating contractions of the earthworm’s circular andlongitudinal muscles create waves of narrowing and widening,1018 CHAPTER 48 | MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEMSlengthening and shortening, that travel down the body. Bulging,shortened segments serve as anchors as long, narrow segmentsproject forward and longitudinal contractions pull other segmentsforward. Bristles help the widest parts of the body to holdfirm against the substratum (Figure 48.14).Exoskeletons are rigid outer structuresAn exoskeleton is a hardened, rigid outer surface to which musclescan be attached. Contractions of the muscles cause jointedsegments of the exoskeleton to move relative to each other. Thesimplest example of an exoskeleton is the shell of a mollusk.Some marine mollusks, such as clams, have shells composed ofprotein strengthened by crystals of calcium carbonate (a rockhardmaterial). These shells can be massive, affording significantprotection against predators. The shells of land mollusks(snails) generally lack the hard mineral component and aremuch lighter (see Figure 32.15B,D).The most complex exoskeletons are found among the arthropods.An exoskeleton, or cuticle, covers all the outer surfacesof the arthropod’s body and all its appendages. It is made up ofplates secreted by a layer of cells just below the exoskeleton. Thecuticle contains stiffening materials everywhere except at thejoints, where flexibility must be retained. Muscles attached tothe inner surfaces of the arthropod exoskeleton move its partsaround the joints (see Figure 32.4).Adrawback of the rigid arthropod exoskeleton is that it cannotexpand. Therefore, if the animal is to become larger, it mustmolt, shedding its exoskeleton and forming a new, larger one.A molting animal is vulnerable because the new exoskeletontakes time to harden. The animal’s body is temporarily unprotected,and without a firm exoskeleton against which its musclescan exert maximum tension, it is unable to move rapidly.Soft-shelled crabs, a gourmet delicacy, are crabs caught whenthey are molting.Vertebrate endoskeletons consist of cartilage and boneThe endoskeleton of vertebrates is an internal scaffolding. Musclesare attached to it and pull against it. Endoskeletons are composedof rodlike, platelike, and tubelike bones connected to oneanother at a variety of joints that allow a wide range of movements.An advantage of endoskeletons over the exoskeletons ofarthropods is that bones in the body can grow without the animalshedding its skeleton.The human skeleton consists of 206 bones, some of which areshown in Figure 48.15. It can be divided into an axial skeleton,which includes the skull, vertebral column, sternum, and ribs;and an appendicular skeleton, which includes the pectoral girdle,pelvic girdle, and bones of the arms, legs, hands, and feet.48.3 | HOW DO SKELETAL SYSTEMS AND MUSCLES WORK TOGETHER? 1019Constriction of circular muscles elongatesthe segments, pushing them forward.Bristles anchor the segments to preventbackward sliding.Constriction of longitudinal muscles shortens thesegments, pulling the trailing segments forward.48.14 A Hydrostatic Skeleton Alternating waves of muscle contractionmove the earthworm through the soil. The red dot enables you to followthe changes in one segment as the worm moves forward.CraniumMaxilla SkullMandibleClavicleScapulaPectoralgirdleHumerusRadiusSternumRibVertebralcolumnIliumSacrumPubisIschiumUlnaCarpalsMetacarpals PhalangesFemurFibulaPatellaTibiaTarsal bonesMetatarsal bonesCalcaneus PhalangesAxial skeletonApendicular skeletonCartilagePelvicgirdle48.15 The Human Endoskeleton Cartilage and bone make up theinternal skeleton of a human being.The vertebrate endoskeleton consists of two kinds of connectivetissue, cartilage and bone, which are produced by two kinds ofconnective tissue cells. Cartilage cells produce an extracellular matrixthat is a tough, rubbery mixture of polysaccharides and proteins—mainly fibrous collagen. Collagen fibers run in all directionslike reinforcing cords through the gel-like matrix and give itthe well-known strength and resiliency of “gristle.” This matrix,called cartilage, is found in parts of the endoskeleton where bothstiffness and resiliency are required, such as on the surfaces ofjoints where bones move against one another. Cartilage is also thesupportive tissue in stiff but flexible structures such as the larynx(voice box), nose, and ear pinnae. Sharks and rays are calledcartilaginous fishes because their skeletons are composed entirelyof cartilage. In most other vertebrates, cartilage is the principalcomponent of the embryonic skeleton, but during developmentmost of it is gradually replaced by bone.Bone also contains collagen fibers, but it gets its rigidity andhardness from an extracellular matrix of insoluble calcium phosphatecrystals. Bone serves as a reservoir of calcium for therest of the body and is in dynamic equilibrium with soluble calciumin the extracellular fluids of the body. This equilibrium isunder the control of calcitonin and parathyroid hormone (seeFigure 41.11). If too much calcium is taken from the skeleton,the bones are seriously weakened.The living cells of bone—osteoblasts, osteocytes, and osteoclasts—are responsible for the constant dynamic remodelingof bone (Figure 48.16). Osteoblasts lay down new matrix materialon bone surfaces. These cells gradually become surroundedby matrix and eventually become enclosed within thebone, at which point they cease laying down matrix but continueto exist within small lacunae (cavities) in the bone. Inthis state they are called osteocytes. Despite the vast amountsof matrix between them, osteocytes remain in contact with oneanother through long cellular extensions that run through tinychannels in the bone. Communication between osteocytes is importantin controlling the activities of the cells that are layingdown or removing bone.The cells that resorb bone are the osteoclasts. They are derivedfrom the same cell lineage that produces white blood cells.Osteoclasts erode bone, forming cavities and tunnels. Osteoblastsfollow osteoclasts, depositing new bone. Thus the interplayof osteoblasts and osteoclasts constantly replaces andremodels the bones, allowing a bone to recover from damageand adjust to the forces placed on it.How the activities of the bone cells are coordinated is not understood,but stress placed on bones somehow provides themwith information. Aremarkable finding in studies of astronautswho spent long periods in zero gravity was that their bones decalcified.Conversely, in athletes, certain bones thicken duringtraining. Both thickening and thinning of bones are experiencedby anyone who has had a leg in a cast for a long time: the bonesof the uninjured leg carry the person’s weight and thicken whilethe bones of the inactive leg in the cast thin.Because of the positive effects of physical stress on bone deposition,weight-bearing exercise is effective in preventing andtreating the loss of bone density (and hence strength) known asosteoporosis. More than 25 million people in the United Statessuffer from this debilitating condition. Although osteoporosisis most commonly a problem for postmenopausal women, itcan occur in younger people as a result of malnutrition. Forexample, the condition known as female athlete triad includes eatingdisorders, cessation of menstrual cycling, and osteoporosis.These are interactive conditions in which the eating disorderand excessive training lead to malnutrition that can result in endocrinedisruption and osteoporosis. Excessive training andmalnutrition can lead to bone loss in males as well.Bones develop from connective tissuesBones are divided into two types on the basis of how they develop.Membranous bone forms on a scaffold of connective tissuemembrane. Cartilage bone forms first as a cartilaginous structureresembling the future mature bone, then gradually hardens,or ossifies, to become bone. The outer bones of the skull are membranousbones; the bones of the limbs are cartilage bones.Cartilage bones can grow throughout the ossification process.The long bones of the legs and arms, for example, ossify firstat the centers and later at each end (Figure 48.17). Growth cancontinue until these areas of ossification join. The membranousbones forming the skull cap grow until their edges meet. Thesoft spot on the top of a baby’s head (the fontanelle) is the pointat which the skull bones have not yet joined.The structure of bone may be compact (solid and hard) orcancellous (having numerous internal cavities that make it appearspongy, although it is rigid). The architecture of a specificbone depends on its position and function, but most bones haveboth compact and cancellous regions. The shafts of the longbones of the limbs, for example, are cylinders of compact bonesurrounding central cavities that contain the bone marrow,where the cellular elements of the blood are made. The ends ofthe long bones are cancellous (see Figure 48.17). Cancellous boneis lightweight because of its numerous cavities, but it is alsostrong because its internal meshwork constitutes a support system.It can withstand considerable forces of compression. The1020 CHAPTER 48 | MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEMSOsteoblasts lay downnew bone to fill tunneldug out by osteoclasts.Osteoclastsdissolve old bone.Osteocytes are osteoblaststhat become trapped by theirown handiwork.Small blood vesselNewly depositedbone matrixOld bone48.16 Bone Is Living Tissue Bones are constantly being remodeledby osteoblasts, which lay down bone, and osteoclasts, which resorb bone.rigid, tubelike shaft of compact bone can withstand compressionand bending forces. Architects and nature alike use hollowtubes as lightweight structural elements.Most of the compact bone in mammals is called Haversianbone because it is composed of structural units called Haversiansystems (Figure 48.18). Each Haversian system is a set of thin,concentric bony cylinders, between which are the osteocytes intheir lacunae. Through the center of each Haversian system runsa narrow canal containing blood vessels and nerves. AdjacentHaversian systems are separated by boundaries called glue lines.Haversian bone is resistant to fracturing because cracks tend tostop at glue lines.Bones that have a common joint can work as a leverMuscles and bones work together around joints, where two ormore bones come together. Different kinds of joints allow motionin different directions (Figure 48.19), but muscles can exertforce in only one direction. Therefore, muscles create move-48.3 | HOW DO SKELETAL SYSTEMS AND MUSCLES WORK TOGETHER? 1021Long bones develop inthe embryo as structuresmade of cartilage.Secondary sitesof ossificationform at the ends.Epiphyseal plates are sitesof elongation between theossified regions.Blood vesselscarry calciumand nutrients todeveloping bone.Ossification beginsin the shaft.CartilageBlood vesselSecondaryossificationcenterPrimaryossificationcenterMarrow cavity CompactboneArticularcartilageEpiphysealcartilageCancellous(spongy) bone48.17 The Growth of Long Bones In the long bones of human limbs,ossification occurs first at the centers and later at each end.Osteoblasts lay down bone inlayers. In long bones these layersform concentric tubes parallel tothe long axis of the bone.Haversian canals containblood vessels and nerves(which convey pain whenwe break a bone).Glue line 0.5 mmSaddle jointEllipsoid jointBall-and-socket jointPivot jointHinge jointPlane joint48.18 Most Compact Bone Is Composed of Haversian SystemsA micrograph of a section of a long bone shows Haversian systems withtheir central canals. Glue lines separate Haversian systems.48.19 Types of Joints The designs of joints are similar to mechanicalcounterparts and enable a variety of movements.GO TO Web Activity 48.3 • JointsyourBioPortal.comment around joints by working in antagonistic pairs: when onemuscle contracts, the other relaxes. When both contract, the jointbecomes rigid (which is important for maintaining posture,for example).With respect to a particular joint, such as the knee, we referto the muscle that bends, or flexes, the joint as the flexor, andthe muscle that straightens, or extends, the joint as the extensor.The bones that meet at the joint are held together by ligaments,which are flexible bands of connective tissue. Otherstraps of connective tissue, called tendons, attach the musclesto the bones (Figure 48.20). In many kinds of joints, only thetendon spans the joint, sometimes moving over the surfaces ofthe bones like a rope over a pulley. The tendon of the quadricepsmuscle traveling over the knee joint is what is tapped toelicit the knee-jerk reflex (see Figure 47.3).Bones constitute a system of levers that are moved aroundjoints by the muscles. A lever has an effort arm and a load armthat work around a fulcrum (pivot). The length ratio of the twoarms determines whether a particular lever can exert a lot offorce over a short distance or is better at translating force intolarge or fast movements. Compare the jaw and knee joints, forexample (Figure 48.21). The effort arm of the jaw is long relativeto the load arm, allowing the jaw to apply great force overa small distance. Think of the powerful jaws of carnivores thatcan easily crack bones. The effort arm of the lower leg, by contrast,is short relative to the load arm, so you can run fast, jumphigh, and deliver swift kicks.48.3 RECAPMuscles can only contract and relax; to achieveorganized movement, they must pull against rigidstructures—other muscles, hydrostatic skeletons,exoskeletons, or endoskeletons.• How do the muscles and fluid-filled body cavity of anearthworm interact to enable the animal to crawl?See pp. 1018–1019 and Figure 48.14• Describe the differences between membranous andcartilaginous bone and between compact and cancellousbone. See p. 1020 and Figure 48.17• In terms of levers, explain how specific joints can producemaximum force versus maximum speed. See pp.1021–1022 and Figure 48.211022 CHAPTER 48 | MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEMSFlexor and extensor muscleswork antagonistically tooperate the joint.Ligaments attachbone to bone.Tendons attachmuscle to bone.Flexormuscle(bicepsfemoris)FemurFibulaTibiaCartilagePatella(kneecap)Extensormuscle(quadriceps)9e48.20 Joints, Ligaments, and Tendons A side view of the kneeshows the interactions of muscle, bone, cartilage, ligaments, and tendonsat this crucial and vulnerable human joint.Lever system designed tomaximize forceLoad arm: effort arm = 2:1 ratiowhich generates much force over asmall distance.An example of a lever systemdesigned for applying maximumforce is the human jaw. The effortarm is long relative to the load arm.An example of a leversystem designed forspeed is the human leg.The power arm is shortrelative to the load arm.Lever system designed for speedLoad arm: effort arm = 5:1 ratiowhich moves low weights longdistances with speed.Load arm = 5Effort arm = 1FulcrumEffort arm = 1Load arm = 248.21 Bones and Joints Work Like Systems of Levers A lever systemcan be designed for maximizing either force or speed.
48.1 How Do Muscles Contract?• Skeletal muscle consists of bundles of muscle fibers. Eachskeletal muscle fiber is a large cell containing multiple nuclei.• Skeletal muscles contain numerous myofibrils, which are bundlesof actin and myosin filaments. The regular, overlappingarrangement of the actin and myosin filaments into sarcomeresgives skeletal muscle its striated appearance. Review Figure48.1, WEB ACTIVITY 48.1• The changes in the banding patterns of sarcomeres led to thesliding filament model of muscle contraction. Review Figure48.2, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 48.1• The molecular mechanism of muscle contraction involves thebinding of the globular heads of myosin molecules to actin.Upon binding, the myosin head changes its conformation, causingthe two filaments to move past each other (the sliding filamentmechanism). Release of the myosin heads from actin andtheir return to their original conformation requires ATP. ReviewFigures 48.3 and 48.6• All the fibers activated by a single motor neuron constitute amotor unit. Each nerve ending of the motor neuron forms asynapse with the muscle cell membrane. When neurotransmitteris released at the synapse, the muscle cell membrane isdepolarized and action potentials are generated. Action potentialsspread across the plasma membrane and through the Ttubules, causing Ca2+ to be released from the sarcoplasmicreticulum. Review Figure 48.5, WEB ACTIVITY 48.2• Ca2+ binds to troponin and changes its conformation, pullingthe tropomyosin strands away from the myosin-binding siteson the actin filament. The muscle fiber continues to contractuntil the Ca2+ is returned to the sarcoplasmic reticulum. ReviewFigure 48.6• Cardiac muscle cells are striated, uninucleate, branching, andelectrically connected by gap junctions, so that action potentialsspread rapidly throughout sheets of cardiac muscle andcause coordinated contractions. Some cardiac muscle cells arepacemaker cells that generate and conduct electrical signals.• Smooth muscle provides contractile force for internal organs.Smooth muscle cells respond to stretch and to neurotransmittersfrom the autonomic nervous system. Review Figure 48.8,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 48.2• In skeletal muscle, a single action potential causes a minimumunit of contraction called a twitch. Twitches occurring in rapidsuccession can be summed, thus increasing the strength of contraction.Maximum sustained tension is known as tetanus.Review Figure 48.1048.2 What Determines Muscle Performance?• Slow-twitch fibers facilitate extended, aerobic work; fast-twitchfibers generate maximum forces for short periods of time. Theratio of slow-twitch to fast-twitch fibers in the muscles of anindividual is largely genetically determined. Review Figure48.11• The force that a muscle fiber can produce depends on its initialstate of extension or contraction. Review Figure 48.12• Anaerobic exercise stimulates the enlargement of muscle fibersthrough production of new microfilaments. Aerobic exercisestimulates greater oxidative capacity of muscle fibers.• Muscle performance depends on a supply of ATP. Available ATPand creatine phosphate can fuel maximum tension instantaneouslybut are exhausted within seconds. Glycolysis canregenerate ATP rapidly, but this process is inhibited by accumulationof lactic acid. Oxidative metabolism delivers ATP moreslowly but can continue to do so for a long time. Review Figure48.1348.3 How Do Skeletal Systems and Muscles WorkTogether?• Skeletal systems provide supports against which muscles canpull.• Hydrostatic skeletons are fluid-filled body cavities that can besqueezed by muscles. Review Figure 48.14• Exoskeletons are hardened outer surfaces to which internalmuscles are attached.• Endoskeletons are internal systems of rigid rodlike, platelike,and tubelike supports, consisting of bone and cartilage towhich muscles are attached. Review Figure 48.15• Bone is continually remodeled by osteoblasts, which lay downnew bone, and osteoclasts, which erode bone. Review Figure48.16• Bones develop from connective tissue membranes (membranousbone) or from cartilage (cartilage bone) through ossification.Cartilage bone can grow until centers of ossification meet.Review Figure 48.17• Bone can be compact (solid and hard), or cancellous (containingnumerous internal spaces). Most of the compact bone of mammalsis composed of Haversian systems. Review Figure 48.18• Joints enable muscles to power movements in different directions.Muscles and bones work together around joints as systemsof levers. Review Figures 48.19, 48.21, WEB ACTIVITY 48.3• Tendons connect muscles to bones; ligaments connect bonesto one another. Review Figure 48.20