Elephants use their trunks in a variety of ways. Theypluck leaves from trees and pull up plants from theground; they pick up objects ranging in size fromtrees to seeds; they suck in water and squirt it into theirmouths; they spray water and dust over their bodies;they smell the air around them; they communicate bytouch; and mothers can wallop their calves when theymisbehave.Of course, elephants also use their trunks to breathe.This function takes on special interest when elephants gointo deep water—for example, to cross rivers. Elephantscan swim or walk on the bottom. In either case, they usetheir trunks as snorkels. As long as the tip of the trunk isabove water, an elephant can breathe.You may be familiar with diving using a snorkel about afoot long. When you want to dive deeper, you hold yourbreath. Water is heavy, and as you swim deeper, waterpressure increases and presses on your body. The air inyour lungs is compressible, but the tissues of your bodyare not. So as you swim deeper, the volume of your lungsdecreases.Think what would happen if you tried to breathethrough a long snorkel in deep water. Because the snorkelwould be open to the air above, the pressure in yourlungs would be at water surface level pressure, but thesurrounding water would be pressing on your body. Toexpand your lungs, you would have to exert enough forceto push against the surrounding water. Not so easy! Unlikeelephants, we solve this problem with scuba equipment;by breathing air from a pressurized tank with a regulatorvalve, we keep the air in our lungs at the samepressure as the surrounding water.The chest of a snorkeling elephant can be 3 meters belowthe surface—and for every 3 meters, the water pressureincreases by 0.3 atmospheres. Evenif an elephant’s respiratory muscles werestrong enough to work against this pressure,there would be a serious problemfor the blood vessels lining the cavity inwhich the lungs are suspended. Thepressure difference across the walls ofthose blood vessels is the difference betweenthe pressure in the vessels (bloodpressure plus water pressure) and the airpressure at the surface (where the trunkopens to the air). If the blood vesselscouldn’t withstand that pressure difference,they would rupture and fill thechest cavity with blood.Why do elephants have long noses?49Proboscis as Snorkel Elephants cancross deep bodies of water either swimmingor by walking on the bottom—whichever willallow it to keep its trunk above water.What Physical Factors Govern 49.1 Respiratory Gas Exchange?Gas exchange systems are made up of gas exchange surfaces andthe mechanisms that ventilate and perfuse those surfaces. The respiratorygases that organisms must exchange are oxygen (O2) andcarbon dioxide (CO2). Cells need to obtain O2 from the environmentto produce an adequate supply of ATP by cellular respiration(see Chapter 9). CO2 is an end product of cellular respiration,and it must be removed from the body to prevent toxic effects.Diffusion is the only means by which respiratory gases areexchanged between an animal’s internal body fluids and the outsidemedium (air or water). There are no active transport mechanismsto move respiratory gases across biological membranes. Becausediffusion is a physical process, knowing what physicalfactors influence rates of diffusion helps us understand the diverseadaptations of gas exchange systems. (You should review the discussionabout the physical nature of diffusion in Section 6.3.)Diffusion is driven by concentration differencesDiffusion results from the random motion of molecules, and thenet movement of a molecule is down its concentration gradient.Concentrations in solutions are easy to think about becausethey are simply the amount of solute per volume of solution.Concentrations of gases are more complicated because the totalnumber of gas molecules in a specified volume depends onpressure; there are twice as many gas molecules in a liter ofgas under 2 atmospheres of pressure as there are in a liter under1 atmosphere of pressure. Biologists express the concentrationsof different gases in a mixture by the partial pressuresof those gases.First we have to know what the total pressure is, and wemeasure that with an instrument called a barometer. There aremany types of barometers, but the classical one is a glass tubeclosed at one end and filled with mercury. This is inverted overa pool of mercury with the open end of the tube under the surfaceof the mercury. At sea level, the pressure exerted by theatmosphere supports, and therefore equals, a column of mercuryin the tube that is about 760 mm high (depending on theweather). Therefore, barometric pressure (atmospheric pressure)at sea level is 760 mm of mercury (mm Hg). Because dryair is 20.9 percent O2, the partial pressure of oxygen (PO2) at sealevel is 20.9 percent of 760 mm Hg, or about 159 mm Hg. Iftwo gas mixtures are separated by a membrane permeable toO2, O2 will diffuse from the mixture where its partial pressureis higher to the mixture where its partial pressure is lower.IN THIS CHAPTER we will explore adaptations of therespiratory systems of both water and air breathers for exchangingoxygen and carbon dioxide with the environment.We will first discuss the physical factors that limit these gasexchange systems and identify those factors that naturalselection has optimized. We will then examine the gasexchange systems of insects, fishes, birds, and humans anddescribe the adaptations of the blood for transportingrespiratory gases. Finally, we will see how respiratory gasexchange systems are controlled and regulated.How does a snorkeling elephant avoid such damage?In all mammals except elephants, the surfaces of thelungs and the chest cavity move easily against eachother. As the lungs inflate and deflate, their surface slipsand slides against that of the chest cavity. In elephants,however, dense connective tissue attaches the surface ofthe lungs to the surface of the chest cavity. This connectivetissue acts as reinforcement for the fragile blood vesselson the surface of the chest cavity and prevents themfrom rupturing and filling the cavity with blood, whichwould destroy the function of the lungs—exchange ofoxygen and carbon dioxide.CHAPTER OUTLINE49.1 What Physical Factors Govern Respiratory GasExchange?49.2 What Adaptations Maximize Respiratory GasExchange?49.3 How Do Human Lungs Work?49.4 How Does Blood Transport Respiratory Gases?49.5 How is Breathing Regulated?Breathing Under Water Adapted to the aquatic life, fishessuch as this whitetip shark have gills that extract respiratorygases from the water. The human cannot “breathe” water, soto enter this environment, he must carry a supply of respiratorygases in a scuba tank.Describing the concentration of respiratory gases in a liquidsuch as water is more complicated because another factoris involved—the solubility of the gas in the liquid. Thus, the actualamount of a gas in a liquid depends on the partial pressureof that gas in the gas phase in contact with the liquid as wellas on the solubility of that gas in that liquid. However, the diffusionof the gas between the gaseous phase and the liquid stilldepends on the partial pressures of the gas in the two phases.Whether in air or water, the diffusion rate of a substance dependson its concentration gradient and on other factors thatare expressed in Fick’s law of diffusion.Fick’s law applies to all systems of gas exchangeDiffusion is a physical phenomenon that can be described quantitativelywith a simple equation called Fick’s law of diffusion.All environmental variables that limit respiratory gas exchangeand all adaptations that maximize respiratory gas exchange arereflected in one or more components of this equation. Fick’s lawis written aswhere• Q is the rate at which a gas such as O2 diffuses between twolocations.• D is the diffusion coefficient, which is a characteristic of thediffusing substance, the medium, and the temperature. Forexample, perfume has a higher D than motor oil vapor, andall substances diffuse faster at higher temperatures andfaster in air than in water. Temperature is not expressed explicitlyin Fick’s law because the diffusion coefficient is usuallydetermined at room temperature (about 20oC).• A is the cross-sectional area through which the gas isdiffusing.• P1 and P2 are the partial pressures of the gas at the twolocations.• L is the path length, or distance, between the two locations.Therefore, (P1 – P2)/L is a partial pressure gradient.Animals can maximize D for respiratory gases by using airrather than water as their gas exchange medium whenever possible.All other adaptations for maximizing respiratory gas exchangemust influence the surface area (A) for gas exchange orthe partial pressure gradient across that surface area.Air is a better respiratory medium than waterThe slow diffusion of O2 molecules in water affects both air- andwater-breathing animals. Eukaryotic cells carry out cellular respirationin their mitochondria, which are located in the cytoplasm—an aqueous medium. Cells are bathed in extracellularfluid—also an aqueous medium. In addition, all respiratory surfacesmust be protected from drying out by a thin film of fluidthrough which O2 must diffuse. Even in air-breathing animals,the slow rate of O2 diffusion in water limits the efficiency ofO2 distribution from gas exchange surfaces to the sites of cellularrespiration.Diffusion of O2 in water is so slow that even animal cells withlow rates of metabolism can be no more than a few millimetersaway from a good source of environmental O2. Therefore,there are severe size and shape limits on the many species of invertebratesthat lack internal systems for distributing O2. Mostof these species are very small, but some have grown larger byevolving a flat, thin body with a large external surface area (Figure49.1A). Others have a very thin body built around a centralcavity through which water can circulate (Figure 49.1B).A critical factor enabling larger, more complex animal bodieshas been the evolution of specialized respiratory systems withlarge surface areas for enhancing gas exchange (Figure 49.1C).O2 can be obtained more easily from air than from water forseveral reasons:• The O2 content of air is much higher than the O2 content ofan equal volume of water. The maximum O2 content of abubbling stream in equilibrium with air is less than 10 ml ofO2 per liter of water. The O2 content of the air over thestream is about 200 ml of O2 per liter of air.Q DAP PL=− 1 249.1 | WHAT PHYSICAL FACTORS GOVERN RESPIRATORY GAS EXCHANGE? 1027(A) Pseudobiceros sp.(B) Callyspongia pliciferaCentral cavity Channels(C) Ambystoma mexicanumGills49.1 Keeping in Touch with the Medium (A) No cell in the leaflike body of this marine flatworm is more than amillimeter away from seawater. (B) Sponges have body walls perforated by many channels, which allow water toflow between the outside world and a central cavity. No cell in the sponge is more than a millimeter away fromseawater. (C) A feathery fringe of gills on this aquatic larval salamander provides a large surface area for gasexchange. Blood circulating through the gills comes into close contact with the respiratory medium.• O2 diffuses about 8,000 times more rapidly in air than inwater. That is why the O2 content of a stagnant pond can bezero only a few millimeters below the surface.• An animal has to do work to move water or air over its gasexchange surfaces. More energy is required to move waterthan air because water is 800 times denser than air andabout 50 times more viscous. You can appreciate how importantthese facts were for the movement of life to the terrestrialenvironment—there were fewer constraints on theevolution of higher metabolic rates.High temperatures create respiratory problemsfor aquatic animalsAnimals that use water for their respiratory exchange mediumare in a double bind when environmental temperatures rise.Most water-breathing animals are ectotherms—their body temperaturesare closely tied to the temperature of the water aroundthem. As the water temperature rises, an ectotherm’s body temperatureand metabolic rate rise (see Figure 40.8). Thus, waterbreathers need more O2 as the water gets warmer. But warmwater holds less dissolved gas than cold water does (think ofthe gases that escape when you open a warm bottle of soda). Inaddition, if an animal performs work to move water across itsgas exchange surfaces (as fishes do), it must expend more energyto breath as water temperature rises. Therefore, as watertemperature goes up, a water-breathing animal must extractmore and more O2 from an environment that is increasinglyO2 deficient, and a lower percentage of that O2 is available tosupport activities other than breathing (Figure 49.2).O2 availability decreases with altitudeJust as a rise in water temperature reduces the supply of O2available to water-breathing animals, an increase in altitude reducesthe O2 supply for air breathers. At all altitudes, O2 makesup 20.9 percent of the dry air; however, as you go up in altitude,the total amount of gas per unit volume decreases, as reflectedin the barometric pressure. For example, at 5,800 m, barometricpressure is only half what it is at sea level, so the PO2 at that altitudeis only about 80 mm Hg. At the summit of Mount Everest(8,850 m), PO2 is only about 50 mm Hg—roughly one-thirdwhat it is at sea level.Because the movement of O2 across respiratory gas exchangesurfaces and into the body depends on diffusion, its rate ofmovement depends on the PO2 difference between the air andthe body fluids. Therefore, the drastically reduced PO2 in the airat high altitudes constrains O2 uptake. Because of this, mountainclimbers attempting the highest peaks usually breathe O2from pressurized bottles.CO2 is lost by diffusionRespiratory gas exchange is a two-way process: CO2 diffuses outof the body as O2 diffuses in. The direction and rate of diffusionof the respiratory gases across the exchange surfaces dependon the partial pressure gradients of the gases. The partialpressure gradients of O2 and CO2 across these exchange surfacesare quite different. The amount of CO2 in the atmosphere is extremelylow (0.03%), so for air-breathing animals there is alwaysa large concentration gradient for diffusion of CO2 from the bodyto the environment. Whereas the partial pressure gradient for O2decreases with increasing altitude, the gradient driving CO2 outof the body hardly changes. The partial pressure of CO2 in theatmosphere is close to zero both at sea level and atop MountEverest.In general, getting rid of CO2 is not a problem for waterbreathinganimals because CO2 is much more soluble in waterthan is O2. Even in stagnant water, where the PCO2 is higher thanin moving water, the lack of O2 becomes a problem for an animallong before CO2 exchange difficulties arise.49.1 RECAPRespiratory gases are exchanged only by diffusion.Air is a better respiratory medium than water becausea given volume of air has more O2 than thesame volume of water. O2 diffuses faster in air thanin water, and less work is required to move air overrespiratory exchange surfaces.• Describe how the variables in Fick’s law of diffusion relateto respiratory systems. See p. 1027• Why does a rise in water temperature create a doublebindsituation for water-breathing animals? Seep. 1028 and Figure 49.2• Explain the concept of partial pressures of gases andhow they relate to diffusion rates of O2 and CO2 at differentaltitudes. See p. 10281028 CHAPTER 49 | GAS EXCHANGE IN ANIMALSMetabolism ofresting fishO2 content of water0 10 20 30 40Water temperature (ºC)Oxygen consumption of fish ( ) (arbitrary units)Oxygen content of water ( ) (arbitrary units)Metabolism ofactive fishAn active fish uses moreO2 than an inactive fish.O2 consumptionincreases as watertemperature increases.Warm water carries lessO2 than cold water.49.2 The Double Bind of Water Breathers Fishes need more O2when the water is warmer, but warm water carries less O2 than cold water.Now that we have discussed the physical factors that influencediffusion rates of respiratory gases between animals and theirenvironments, let’s look at some of the adaptations that haveevolved for maximizing respiratory gas exchange.What Adaptations Maximize 49.2 Respiratory Gas Exchange?As you might expect from the components of Fick’s law of diffusion,adaptations to maximize respiratory gas exchange canbe categorized as those that:• Increase the surface area for gas exchange• Maximize the partial pressure difference driving diffusion• Minimize the diffusion path length• Minimize the diffusion that takes place in an aqueousmediumRespiratory organs have large surface areasA variety of anatomical adaptations maximize the specializedbody surface area (A) over which respiratory gases can diffuse.Water-breathing animals generally have gills, and air-breathinganimals have tracheae or lungs. External gills are highly branchedand folded extensions of the body surface that provide a largesurface area for gas exchange with water (Figure 49.3A; see alsoFigure 49.1C). External gills are found in larval amphibians andin the larvae of many insects. Because they consist of thin, delicatetissues, external gills minimize the path length (L) traversedby diffusing molecules of O2 and CO2. External gillsare vulnerable to damage, however, and are tempting morselsfor predators, so in many animals protective body cavities forgills have evolved. Such internal gills are found in most mollusksand arthropods and in all fishes (Figure 49.3B).Lungs are internal cavities for respiratory gas exchange withair (Figure 49.3C). Their structure is quite different from that ofgills. Lungs have a large surface area because they are highlydivided; and because they are elastic, they can be inflated withair and deflated.Insects have a respiratory gas exchange system consisting ofa network of air-filled tubes called tracheae that branch throughall tissues of the insect’s body (Figure 49.3D). The terminalbranches of these tubes are so numerous that they have an enormoussurface area compared with the external surface area ofthe insect’s body.Transporting gases to and from exchange surfacesoptimizes partial pressure gradientsPartial pressure gradients [(P1 – P2)/L] drive diffusion acrossgas exchange surfaces; the larger the gradient, the greater therate of gas exchange. These gradients can be maximized in severalways:• Minimization of path length: Very thin tissues in gills andlungs reduce the diffusion path length (L).• Ventilation: Actively moving the external medium over thegas exchange surfaces (i.e., breathing) regularly exposesthose surfaces to fresh respiratory medium containing maximumO2 and minimum CO2 concentrations. This maximizesthe concentration gradient.• Perfusion: Actively moving the internal medium (e.g.,blood) over the internal side of the exchange surfaces transportsCO2 to those surfaces and O2 away from them, thusmaximizing the concentration gradients driving diffusion.This chapter describes four gas exchange systems. First we willlook at the unique gas exchange system of insects. Then we willdescribe two highly efficient gas exchange systems, fish gillsand bird lungs. Lastly we examine the structure and functionof human lungs.Insects have airways throughout their bodiesThe tracheal system that enables insects to exchange respiratorygases extends to all tissues in the insect body. Thus, respiratorygases diffuse through air most of the way to and from everycell. The insect respiratory system communicates with the outsideenvironment through gated openings called spiracles in thesides of the abdomen (Figure 49.4A,B). The spiracles open to allowgas exchange and then close to decrease water loss. Theyopen into tubes called tracheae that branch into even finer tubes,49.2 | WHAT ADAPTATIONS MAXIMIZE RESPIRATORY GAS EXCHANGE? 1029(A) External gills(C) Lungs(B) Internal gills(D) Tracheae49.3 Gas Exchange Systems Large surface areas(blue in these diagrams) for the diffusion of respiratorygases are common features of animals. External (A) andinternal (B) gills are adaptations for gas exchange withwater. Lungs (C) and tracheae (D) are organs for gasexchange with air.or tracheoles, which end in tiny air capillaries that arethe actual gas exchange surfaces (Figure 49.4C). Inthe insect’s flight muscles and other highly active tissues,every mitochondrion is close to an air capillary.Fish gills use countercurrent flow to maximizegas exchangeThe internal gills of fishes are supported by gill archesthat lie between the mouth cavity and the protectiveopercular flaps on the sides of the fish just behind theeyes (Figure 49.5A). Water flows unidirectionally intothe fish’s mouth, over the gills, and out from underthe opercular flaps. Thus, the gills are continuouslybathed with fresh water. This constant, one-way flow1030 CHAPTER 49 | GAS EXCHANGE IN ANIMALSAir sacs(B) (C)Abdominalspiracles Thoracic Spiraclespiracles(A) TrachaeaAcherontia atropos49.4 The Tracheal Gas Exchange System of Insects (A) In insects, respiratorygases diffuse through a system of air tubes (tracheae) that open to theexternal environment through holes called spiracles. (B) The spiracles of a hawkmothlarva run down its sides. (C) A scanning electron micrograph shows aninsect trachea dividing into smaller tracheoles and still finer air capillaries.Water enters whenmouth is open.Water leaves,O2 is low.Water with high O2ventilates gills.O2 diffuses from waterinto the blood overthe entire length of alamella.Blood perfusion of thelamellae is countercurrentto the flow of water overthe lamellae.Gill arches(under opercular flap)Gill archLamellaOxygenated (efferent)blood leaves (O2 high)Deoxygenated (afferent)blood enters (O2 low)DeoxygenatedbloodWater flowEfferentblood vesselAfferentblood vesselWater flow(A)(B)(C)FilamentOxygenatedbloodOpercularflapHorizontal sectionthrough headGill archMouthGill filamentGill slit49.5 Fish Gills (A) Water flows unidirectionally over the gills of a fish. (B) Gill filamentshave a large surface area and thin tissues. (C) Blood flows through the lamellaein the direction opposite (left to right, in this depiction; small blue and red arrows) tothe flow of water (right to left; large blue arrows) over the lamellae.of water over the gills maximizes the PO2 on the external gillsurfaces. On the internal side of the gill membranes, the circulationof blood minimizes the PO2 by sweeping O2 away as rapidlyas it diffuses across.Gills have an enormous surface area for gas exchange becausethey are so highly divided. Each gill consists of hundredsof ribbonlike gill filaments (Figure 49.5B). The upper and lowerflat surfaces of each gill filament are covered with rows ofevenly spaced folds, or lamellae. The lamellae are the actualgas exchange surfaces. Because they are exceedingly thin, thepath length (L) for diffusion of gases between blood and wateris minimized. The surfaces of the lamellae consist of highly flattenedepithelial cells, so the water and the fish’s red blood cellsare separated by little more than 1 or 2 micrometers.The flow of blood perfusing the inner surfaces of the lamellae,like the flow of water over the gills, is unidirectional. Afferentblood vessels bring deoxygenated blood to the gills, whileefferent blood vessels take oxygenated blood away from the gills(Figure 49.5C). Blood flows through the lamellae in the directionopposite to the flow of water over the lamellae. This countercurrentflow optimizes the PO2 gradient between water andblood, making gas exchange more efficient than it would be ina system using concurrent (parallel) flow (Figure 49.6).Some fishes, including anchovies, tuna, and certain sharks,ventilate their gills by swimming almost constantly with theirmouths open. Most fishes, however, ventilate their gills bymeans of a two-pump mechanism. The closing and contractingof the mouth cavity pushes water over the gills, and the expansionof the opercular cavity prior to opening of the opercularflaps pulls water over the gills.These adaptations for maximizing the surface area (A) fordiffusion, minimizing the path length (L) for diffusion, and maximizingthe PO2 gradient allow fishes to extract an adequate supplyof O2 from meager environmental sources.Birds use unidirectional ventilationto maximize gas exchangeBirds are remarkable for their ability tosustain high levels of activity for a longtime—for example, on long-distanceflights—even at high altitudes wheremammals cannot even survive. The firstteam to climb Mount Everest was surprisedto see birds flying over the mountain when they themselvescould barely move without supplemental O2. The highestrecorded flight of a bird is from a vulture that collided withan airliner at 11,278 meters; a human could not exist at that altitudewithout supplemental O2. Yet the lungs of a bird aresmaller than the lungs of a similar-sized mammal, and birdlungs expand and contract less during a breathing cycle thando mammalian lungs. Furthermore, bird lungs are compressedduring inhalation and expand during exhalation.The structure of bird lungs allows air to flow unidirectionallythrough the lungs, rather than bidirectionally through allthe same airways, as it does in mammals. Because mammalianlungs are never completely emptied of air during exhalation,there is always some lung volume that is not ventilated withfresh air. The air remaining in lungs and airways after exhalationis called dead space. Bird lungs, by contrast, have verylittle dead space, and the fresh incoming air is not mixed withstale air. In this way, a high PO2 gradient is maintained.In addition to lungs, birds have air sacs at several locationsin their bodies (Figure 49.7A). The air sacs are interconnectedwith each other, with the lungs, and with air spaces in some ofthe bones. The air sacs receive inhaled air, but they are not gasexchange surfaces. As in other air-breathing vertebrates, air entersand leaves a bird’s gas exchange system through the trachea(commonly known as the windpipe, and not to be confusedwith the air-conducting tracheae of insects), which divides intosmaller airways called bronchi (singular bronchus).The bronchi divide into tubelike parabronchi that run parallelto one another through the lungs (Figure 49.7B). Branchingoff the parabronchi are numerous tiny air capillaries. Airflows through the parabronchi and diffuses into the air capillaries,which are the gas exchange surfaces. They are so numerousthat they provide an enormous surface area for gas exchange.The parabronchi coalesce into larger bronchi that takethe air out of the lungs and back to the trachea. Thus theanatomy of a bird’s airways allows air to flow unidirectionallyand continuously through the lungs.49.2 | WHAT ADAPTATIONS MAXIMIZE RESPIRATORY GAS EXCHANGE? 1031Exchange is morecomplete withcountercurrent flow.In the countercurrent exchanger, agradient of O2 saturation exists overthe full length of exchange surfaces.(A) Concurrent flowGill lamellaOxygen saturation (%)Blood flowWater flow20% 30 40 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50100% 80 70 60 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50(B) Countercurrent flowOxygen saturation (%)Blood flowWater flow 2 5 % 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 10020% 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 10049.6 Countercurrent Exchange Is MoreEfficient In these models of concurrent andcountercurrent gas exchange, the numbers representthe O2 saturation percentages of bloodand water. (A) In a concurrent exchanger, thesaturation percentages of blood and water reachequilibrium halfway across the exchange surface.(B) A countercurrent exchanger allows morecomplete gas exchange because the water isalways more O2-saturated than the blood; thus agradient of O2 saturation is maintained.The puzzle of how birds breathe was solved by placing smallO2 electronic sensors at different locations in birds’ air sacs andairways. The birds were then exposed to pure O2 for just a singlebreath, which made it possible to track that particular inhalation.The experiment demonstrated that a single breath remainsin a bird’s gas exchange system for two cycles ofinhalation and exhalation, and that the air sacs work like bellows;inhalation expands the sacs, and exhalation compressesthem to maintain a continuous and unidirectional flow of freshair through the lungs (Figure 49.8).The advantages of the bird gas exchange system are similarto those of fish gills. The air sacs keep fresh air flowing unidirectionallyover the gas exchange surfaces. Thus, a bird can supplyits gas exchange surfaces with a continuous flow of fresh airthat has a PO2 close to that of the ambient air. Even when thePO2 of the ambient air is only slightly above that of the blood,O2 can diffuse from air to blood.Tidal ventilation produces dead space thatlimits gas exchange efficiencyLungs evolved in the first “air-gulping” vertebrates as outpocketingsof the digestive tract. Although their structure hasevolved considerably, lungs remain dead-end sacs in all airbreathingvertebrates except birds. Because of this, ventilationcannot be constant and unidirectional but must be tidal: air flowsin and exhaled gases flow out by the same route. Since the lungsand airways can never be completely emptied of air, they alwayscontain dead space. We can easily measure the volumesof air exchanged during breathing, but we have to use an indirectmethod to measure the dead space contained in the lungsand airways.1032 CHAPTER 49 | GAS EXCHANGE IN ANIMALSAir capillaries carry air from a parabronchusover blood capillaries, where O2 is absorbed,and then out through the parabronchus.Blood capillaryAirParabronchusAir capillariesTracheaPosteriorair sacsAnteriorair sacsBronchusLung(A) Avian air sacs and lungs(B) Microscopic view of avian lung tissue1 The breath marked by pure O2 is inhaleddirectly into the posterior air sacs.3 During the next inhalation, the marked breathflows from the lungs to the anterior air sacs.4 Finally, during the next exhalation, thebreath marked by pure O2 is expelled.2 During exhalation, the markedbreath flows into the lungs.Breath 1LungPosteriorair sacsBreath 2Bronchus ParabronchusAnteriorair sacsTracheaInhalationLungPosteriorair sacsAnteriorair sacsInhalationPosteriorair sacsAnteriorair sacsPosteriorair sacsAnteriorair sacsExhalationExhalation49.7 The Respiratory System of a Bird (A) Air sacs and air spacesin the bones are unique to birds. (B) Air flows through bird lungs unidirectionallyin parabronchi. Air capillaries, the site of gas exchange, branch offthe parabronchi.49.8 The Path of Air Flow through Bird Lungs The air a bird takesin by breathing (blue) travels through the lungs in one direction, from theposterior to the anterior air sacs. Each breath of air remains in the systemfor two breathing cycles.GO TO Animated Tutorial 49.1 • Airflow in BirdsyourBioPortal.comA spirometer is a device that measuresthe volume of air breathed in andout (Figure 49.9). Using a human asan example, the amount of air thatmoves in and out per breath when atrest is called the tidal volume (TV)(about 500 ml for an average humanadult). When we breathe in as muchas possible, the additional volume isthe inspiratory reserve volume (IRV).Conversely, if we forcefully exhale asmuch air as possible, the additionalamount of air expelled is the expiratoryreserve volume (ERV). The maximumcapacity for air exchange in onebreath, or the vital capacity (VC), is thesum of TV + IRV + ERV. The vital capacityof an athlete is generally greaterthan that of a non-athlete, and vital capacitydecreases with age because ofstiffening of the lung tissue.Vital capacity is not the entire lungcapacity because, as mentioned above,there is dead space, also called theresidual volume (RV). We can’t measureRV directly with the spirometer,but we can measure it indirectly usingthe helium dilution method. Briefly, aperson breathes from a reservoir witha known volume of air containing aknown amount of helium (He). The helium is not absorbed fromthe lungs, so it becomes evenly distributed between the lungsand the reservoir as the subject inhales and exhales. Because thefixed amount of He becomes dispersed in a larger volume ofair, its concentration decreases. That decrease in He concentrationenables us to calculate the subject’s functional residual volume(FRV), which is the ERV + RV. Since we can measure the ERVwith the spirometer, we can subtract it and obtain the RV.Why is the RV important? Referring to Figure 49.9, you willsee that for a normal person the ERV is about 1000 ml and theRV is 1000 ml. Thus the FRV is 2000 ml, but the tidal volume isonly 500 ml. Thus, the air that reaches the alveoli with eachbreath consists of only 500 cc of fresh air diluted by 2000 cc ofstale air. The maximum PO2 in this mixed air is much below thePO2 of the outside air, and because of the tidal ventilation pattern,the PO2 in the alveoli is steadily dropping during thebreathing cycle. The RV is important because it contributes tothe FRC and to the dilution of the O2 in the inhaled air. Any diseaseor condition that increases the RV (such as emphysema orpulmonary fibrosis) compromises a patients respiratory ability.Similarly, considering the mixing of fresh air with the FRV, youcan understand why reductions in tidal volume can be a problem—and therefore why patients recovering from surgery areencouraged to breathe deeply, even if it hurts.Offsetting the inefficiencies of tidal breathing, mammalianlungs have some design features to maximize the rate of gas exchange:an enormous surface area and a very short path lengthfor diffusion.49.2 RECAPThe major adaptations that increase animals’ efficiencyof respiratory gas exchange are a largesurface area for exchange and a maximized concentrationgradient across that surface.• Describe three different ways that the concentrationgradient for gas exchange is maximized across fishgills. See pp. 1030–1031 and Figures 49.5 and 49.6• What respiratory adaptations enable birds to fly atextremely high altitudes? See pp. 1031–1032 andFigures 49.7 and 49.8• Explain why residual volume limits the efficiency oftidal breathing. See pp. 1032–1033 and Figure 49.9Despite their limitations, mammalian lungs serve the respiratoryneeds of mammals well. Let’s look at the human respiratorysystem as an example.49.2 | WHAT ADAPTATIONS MAXIMIZE RESPIRATORY GAS EXCHANGE? 1033GO TO Working with Data • Calculating the FunctionalResidual VolumeyourBioPortal.comTidal volume is thenormal amount of airexchanged in breathingwhen at rest.Residual volume isthe amount of airleft in the lungs aftermaximum exhalation.Expiratory reservevolume is theadditional air that canbe forcefully exhaled.The person breathesthrough the mouthpiece...…and the computerplots the rate of airflow of the flowmeteras change in lungvolume.Inspiratory reserve volume is an additional capacityof the lungs that enables the deepest breath.MouthpieceofspirometerMaximumexhalationVitalcapacityFlowmeter6543210LitersTotallungcapacityTOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE49.9 Measuring Lung VentilationA spirometer is a device that measures the volume of air a person breathes through amouthpiece. The combined tidal volume, inspiratory reserve volume, and expiratory reservevolume are the lungs’ vital capacity.The lungs lie within thethoracic cavity, which isbounded by the ribsand the diaphragm.The bronchi are the major airpassageways of the lungs. They leadto the bronchioles, which are finelyPleural membranes line branched, as are the blood vessels.the thoracic cavity andalso cover the lungs.Air enters the lungs from theoral cavity or nasal passagesvia the trachea and bronchi…In an alveolus, the air isvery close to the bloodflowing through thenetworks of capillariessurrounding the alveoli.Alveolar walls andcapillary walls areextremely thin, minimizingthe distancethat O2 must diffuse.…and eventuallyreaches the alveoli.PulmonaryarterioleO2CO2Nasal passageOral cavityPharynxLarynxTracheaBronchiolesBronchiIntercostalmusclesDiaphragmHeartDeoxygenatedblood from heartOxygenatedblood to heartPulmonaryvenuleSmooth muscleBronchioleSmallest bloodvessels (capillaries)AlveoliOxygenatedblood to heartRedbloodcellDeoxygenatedblood from heartCapillaryCell ofalveolusInterior ofalveolusAlveoli(B) Red blood cells(C)(A) 49.10 The Human Respiratory System The diagramstrace the hierarchy of human respiratory structures,from the airways to the minuscule alveoli.GO TO Web Activity 49.1 • The Human Respiratory SystemyourBioPortal.com49.3 How Do Human Lungs Work?In humans, air enters the lungs through the oral cavity or nasalpassage, which join together in the pharynx (Figure 49.10A). Belowthe pharynx, the esophagus conducts food to the stomach,and the trachea leads to the lungs. At the beginning of this airwayis the larynx, or voice box, which houses the vocal cords.The larynx is the “Adam’s apple” that you can see or feel on thefront of your neck. The trachea is about 2 cm in diameter. Itsthin walls are prevented from collapsing by C-shaped bands ofcartilage as air pressure changes during the breathing cycle. Ifyou run your fingers down the front of your neck just belowyour larynx, you can feel a few of these bands of cartilage.The trachea branches into two bronchi, one leading to eachlung. The bronchi branch repeatedly to generate a treelike structureof progressively smaller airways extending to all regionsof the lungs. After four branchings, the cartilage supports disappear,marking the transition to bronchioles. After about 16branchings, the bronchioles are less than a millimeter in diameter,and tiny, thin-walled air sacs called alveoli begin to appear.Alveoli are the sites of gas exchange. After alveoli begin to appear,about six more branchings of the airways occur that endin clusters of alveoli (Figure 49.10B). Because the airways conductair only to and from the alveoli and do not themselves participatein gas exchange, their volume is dead space.Human lungs have about 300 million alveoli. Although eachalveolus is very small, their combined surface area for diffusionof respiratory gases is about 70 square meters—about onefourththe size of a basketball court. Each alveolus is made ofvery thin cells. Between and surrounding the alveoli are networksof capillaries whose walls are also made up of exceedinglythin cells. Where capillary meets alveolus, very little tissueseparates them (Figure 49.10C), so the length of the diffusionpath between air and blood is less than 2 micrometers.Emphysema, a condition in which inflammation damages andeventually destroys the walls of the alveoli, is the fourth leadingcause of death in the United States. As a result of this disease thelungs have fewer but larger alveoli, the RV increases, and thelungs loses elasticity. Although genetic factors can contributeto emphysema, the principal cause of the disease is smoking.Respiratory tract secretions aid ventilationMammalian lungs produce two secretions that do not directlyinfluence their gas exchange but do affect the process of ventilation:mucus and surfactant.Many cells lining the airways produce sticky mucus that capturesbits of dirt and microorganisms that are inhaled. Othercells lining the airways have cilia whose beating continuallysweeps the mucus, with its trapped debris, up toward the pharynx,where it can be swallowed or spit out. This phenomenon,called the mucus escalator, can be adversely affected by inhaledpollutants. Smoking one cigarette can immobilize the cilia of theairways for hours. A smoker’s cough results from the need toclear the obstructing mucus from the airways when the mucusescalator is out of order. The genetic disease cystic fibrosis causesrespiratory problems by affecting the respiratory mucus (seeFigure 17.3B).A surfactant is a substance that reduces the surface tensionof a liquid. Surface tension gives the surface of a liquid suchas water the properties of an elastic membrane, and it is whycertain insects, such as water-striders, can walk on water. Asdiscussed in Section 2.4, surface tension is the result of chemicalforces of attraction between water molecules. The attractiveforces working on the water molecules at the surface pull frombelow and from the sides but not from above. This imbalanceof forces creates surface tension. The thin film of fluid coveringthe air-facing surfaces of the alveoli has surface tension thatcontributes to the lungs’ elasticity. To inflate the lungs, enoughforce has to be generated to overcome both the elasticity of thelung tissue and the surface tension in the alveoli.Lung surfactant is a fatty, detergent-like substance that is criticalfor reducing the work necessary to inflate the lungs. Certaincells in the alveoli release surfactant molecules when they arestretched. If a baby is born more than a month prematurely, thesecells may not have developed the ability to produce surfactant.Ababy with this condition, known as respiratory distress syndrome,will have great difficulty breathing and may die from exhaustionand lack of O2. Common treatments for premature babieshave been to put them on respirators to assist their breathing andto give them hormones to speed lung development. Anew approachis to apply surfactant to the lungs via an aerosol.Lungs are ventilated by pressure changesin the thoracic cavityHuman lungs are suspended in the thoracic cavity, a closedcompartment bounded on the bottom by a sheet of musclecalled the diaphragm (see Figure 49.10A). Each lung is coveredby a continuous sheet of tissue called the pleural membrane thatalso lines the thoracic cavity adjacent to that lung. There is noreal space between the pleural membranes of the lung and thethoracic cavity, but there is a thin film of fluid. This fluid lubricatesthe inner surfaces of the pleural membranes so they canslip and slide against each other during breathing movements.Just as we mentioned above in the explanation of surface tension,there are forces of attraction between the molecules of fluidin the pleural membranes. As a result, it is difficult to pull thepleural membranes apart. Think of two wet panes of glass ortwo wet microscope slides; you can slide them past each other,but it is difficult to separate them. While the inner surfaces ofthe pleural membranes are “stuck” to each other by surface tension,the outer surfaces are attached to the wall of the thoraciccavity and to the surface of the lung.Inhalation and exhalation involve changes in the volume ofthe thoracic cavity (Figure 49.11). Because the pleural membranesare attached to the walls of the thoracic cavity, and becausethe pleural membranes covering the cavity wall and thelung surface are stuck to each other by surface tension, anyattempt to increase the volume of the thoracic cavity increasesthe tension between the pleural membranes. Even betweenbreaths, there is tension between the pleural membranes becausethe rib cage is pulling outward and the elasticity of the49.3 | HOW DO HUMAN LUNGS WORK? 1035lung tissue is pulling inward. This slight negative pressurekeeps the alveoli partly inflated even at the end of an exhalation.If the thoracic cavity is punctured—by a knife wound, forexample—air can leak into the space between the pleural membranesand cause the lung to deflate. If the wound is not sealed,breathing movements pull air in between the pleural membranesrather than into the lung (a “sucking chest wound”),and there is no ventilation of the alveoli in that lung—a conditioncalled “collapsed lung.”At rest, inhalation is initiated by contraction of the musculardiaphragm (see Figure 49.11A). As the domed diaphragm contracts,it pulls down, expanding the thoracic cavity and pullingon the pleural membranes. Since the pleural membranes cannotseparate because of the surface tension of the thin film offluid between them, they pull on the lungs. The lungs are nota closed cavity; they have an airway to the atmosphere, and theycan expand. When the diaphragm contracts, air rushes inthrough the trachea from the outside and the lungs expand. Exhalationbegins when contraction of the diaphragm ceases. Asthe diaphragm relaxes, the elastic recoil of the lung tissues pullsthe diaphragm up and pushes air out through the airways (seeFigure 49.11B). When a person is at rest, inhalation is an activeprocess and exhalation is a passive process.The diaphragm is not the only muscle that can change thevolume of the thoracic cavity. Between the ribs are two sets ofintercostal muscles. The external intercostal muscles expand thethoracic cavity by lifting the ribs up and outward. The internalintercostal muscles decrease the volume of the thoracic cavity bypulling the ribs down and inward. During strenuous exercise,the external intercostal muscles increase the volume of air inhaled,making use of the inspiratory reserve volume, and theinternal intercostal muscles increase the amount of air exhaled,making use of the expiratory reserve volume. The abdominalmuscles can also aid in breathing. When they contract, theycause the abdominal contents to push up on the diaphragm andthereby contribute to the expiratory reserve volume.1036 CHAPTER 49 | GAS EXCHANGE IN ANIMALS49.11 Into the Lungs and OutAgain (A) Inhalation is an activeprocess spurred by contraction ofthe diaphragm. (B) Exhalation generallyis a passive process as thediaphragm relaxes. (C) There isalways negative pressure in thepleural cavity—the space betweenthe pleural membranes. Variations inthat negative pressure cause thelungs to inflate and deflate duringthe breathing cycle.During inhalation:• Diaphragm contracts• Thoracic cavity expands• Intrapleural pressure becomes more negative• Lungs expand• Air rushes inDuring exhalation:• Diaphragm relaxes• Thoracic cavity contracts• Intrapleural pressure becomes less negative• Lungs contract• Gases in lungs are expelled(C)–8+2+10–1–2–3–4–5–6–7Pressure (mm Hg relativeto atmospheric pressure)Inhalation ExhalationPleural cavity pressureAlveolar pressureTime1000200300400500Air exchanged (ml)ThoraciccavityInhalation:Thoracic cavityexpands duringinhalation(A) (B)PleuralcavityLung LungDiaphragmHeartExhalation:Thoracic cavitycontracts duringexhalationGO TO Animated Tutorial 49.2 •Airflow in MammalsyourBioPortal.comRemember that ventilation and perfusion work together tomaximize the partial pressure gradients across the gas exchangesurface. Ventilation delivers O2 to the environmental side of theexchange surface, where it diffuses across and is swept away bythe perfusing blood, which carries it to the tissues that need it.The reverse is true for the exchange of CO2. Perfusion deliversCO2 to the exchange surface, where it diffuses out and is sweptaway by ventilation.49.3 RECAPThe mammalian respiratory system consists of ahighly branching system of airways that lead to blindend sacs called alveoli which are the gas exchangesurfaces. Respiratory muscles ventilate the alveoliby creating pressure differences between the lungsand the outside air. CO2 and O2 are exchangedacross thin capillary and alveoli walls by diffusion.• Describe the path that a breath of air takes from thenose to the gas exchange surfaces. See p. 1035 andFigure 49.10• What roles do mucus and surfactant play in maintainingthe function of the mammalian respiratory system?See p. 1035• Explain the anatomical and functional relationshipsbetween the thoracic cavity, the pleural membranes,and the lungs. See pp. 1035–1036 and Figure 49.11Now that we have discussed how respiratory gases get to andfrom the environmental side of the gas exchange membranesthrough ventilation, we can look at how these gases get toand from the internal side of the gas exchange membranesthrough perfusion.How Does Blood Transport 49.4 Respiratory Gases?Perfusion of the lungs is one of the functions of the circulatorysystem. The circulatory system uses a pump (theheart) and a network of vessels to transport blood aroundthe body. Circulatory systems are the subject of Chapter50, so here we will discuss only one aspect of perfusion:how blood transports respiratory gases.The liquid part of blood, the blood plasma, carriessome O2 in solution, but its ability to transport this nonpolarmolecule is limited. The blood plasma of a humancan contain in solution only about 0.3 ml of O2 per 100ml of plasma, which is inadequate to support even basalmetabolism. However, the blood of most animals, vertebrateand invertebrate, contains molecules that reversiblybind O2 and thus augment its transport capacity.These molecules pick up O2 where PO2 is high andrelease it where PO2 is lower. There are many O2 transportmolecules in the animal kingdom, but in vertebratesthis role is played by the protein hemoglobin containedin red blood cells. Hemoglobin increases the capacity ofblood to transport O2 by about 60-fold, making high levels ofmetabolism possible.Hemoglobin combines reversibly with O2Red blood cells contain enormous numbers of hemoglobin molecules.Hemoglobin is a protein consisting of four polypeptidesubunits (see Figure 3.9), each of which surrounds a hemegroup—an iron-containing ring structure that can reversibly binda molecule of O2. Thus, each hemoglobin molecule can bindup to four O2 molecules, enabling the blood to carry a largeamount of O2 to the body’s tissues.Hemoglobin’s ability to pick up or release O2 depends on thePO2 in its environment. When the PO2 of the blood plasma is high,as it usually is in the lung capillaries, each hemoglobin moleculecan carry its maximum load of four O2 molecules. As the bloodcirculates through the rest of the body, it releases some of the O2it is carrying when it encounters lower PO2 values (Figure 49.12).The relation between PO2 and the amount of O2 bound to hemoglobinis not linear but S-shaped (sigmoidal). The hemoglobin–oxygen binding curve in Figure 49.12 reflects interactionsbetween the four subunits of the hemoglobin molecule. Atlow PO2 values, only one subunit will bind an O2 molecule.When it does so, the shape of that subunit changes, altering thequaternary structure of the whole hemoglobin molecule. Thatstructural change makes it easier for the other subunits to bindan O2 molecule; that is, their O2 affinity is increased. Therefore,a smaller increase in PO2 is necessary to get the hemoglobin moleculesto bind a second O2 molecule (that is, to become 50% saturated)than was necessary to get them to bind one O2 molecule49.4 | HOW DOES BLOOD TRANSPORT RESPIRATORY GASES? 1037The average PO2 ofdeoxygenated bloodreturning to the heartis 40 mm Hg.25% of the O2 inarterial blood isreleased to tissuesduring rest or lightexercise.An oxygen reserve of75% is held by thehemoglobin and canbe released to tissueswith a low PO2.The PO2 of bloodleaving the lungs isabout 100 mm Hg.255075100O2releasedO2 inreserveDrop in PO2from alveolito tissue bedOxygen binding (%)20040 60 80 100PO2of blood (mm Hg)49.12 Binding of O2 to Hemoglobin Depends on PO2 Hemoglobin in bloodleaving the lungs is 100 percent saturated (four O2 molecules are bound to eachhemoglobin molecule). Most hemoglobin molecules drop only one of their four O2molecules as they circulate through the body and are still 75 percent saturatedwhen the blood returns to the lungs. The steep portion of this O2-binding curvecomes into play when tissue PO2falls below the normal 40 mm Hg, at which pointhemoglobin “unloads” its O2 reserves.(to become 25% saturated). This influence of O2 binding by onesubunit on the O2 affinity of the other subunits is called positivecooperativity.Once the third O2 molecule is bound, the relationship seemsto change, as a larger increase in PO2 is required for the hemoglobinto reach 100 percent saturation. This upper bend of thesigmoid curve is due to a probability phenomenon. The closerwe get to having all subunits occupied, the less likely it is thatany particular O2 molecule will find a place to bind. Therefore,it takes a relatively greater PO2 to achieve 100 percent saturation.The O2-binding/dissociation properties of hemoglobin helpget O2 to the tissues that need it most. In the lungs, where thePO2 is about 100 mm Hg, hemoglobin is 100 percent saturated.The PO2 in blood returning to the heart from the body is usuallyabout 40 mm Hg. You can see in Figure 49.12 that at this PO2,the hemoglobin is still about 75 percent saturated. This meansthat as the blood circulates around the body, it releases onlyabout one in four of the O2 molecules it carries. This systemseems inefficient, but it is really quite adaptive, because thehemoglobin keeps 75 percent of its O2 in reserve to meet peakdemands of highly active tissues.When a tissue becomes starved of O2 and its local PO2 fallsbelow 40 mm Hg, the hemoglobin flowing through that tissueis on the steep portion of its binding/dissociation curve. Thatmeans relatively small decreases in PO2 below 40 mm Hg willresult in the release of lots of O2 to the tissue. Thus hemoglobinis very effective in making O2 available to tissues preciselywhen and where it is needed most.The O2 transport function of hemoglobin can rapidly andtragically be disrupted by a common by-product of incompletecombustion: carbon monoxide (CO). If CO from a faulty heatingsystem, engine exhaust, or burning charcoal accumulates ina closed space, the results can be deadly. Because CO binds tohemoglobin with a 240-fold higher affinity than O2, it preventshemoglobin from transporting O2. In the United States, morethan 5,000 people die each year from CO poisoning.Myoglobin holds an O2 reserveMuscle cells have their own O2-binding molecule, myoglobin.Myoglobin consists of just one polypeptide chain associatedwith an iron-containing ring structure that can bind one O2 molecule.Myoglobin has a higher affinity for O2 than hemoglobindoes, so it picks up and holds O2 at PO2 values at which hemoglobinis releasing its bound O2 (Figure 49.13).Myoglobin facilitates the diffusion of O2 in muscle cells andprovides an O2 reserve for times when metabolic demands arehigh and blood flow is interrupted. Interruption of blood flowin muscles is common because contracting muscles squeezeblood vessels. When tissue PO2 values are low and hemoglobincan no longer supply more O2, myoglobin releases its boundO2. Diving mammals such as seals have high concentrationsof myoglobin in their muscles, which is one reason they can stayunder water for so long. (We discuss more adaptations for divingin Chapter 50.) Even in nondiving animals, muscles calledon for extended periods of work frequently have more myoglobinthan muscles that are used for short, intermittent periods,as noted in Section 48.2.Hemoglobin’s affinity for O2 is variableVarious factors influence the O2-binding/dissociation propertiesof hemoglobin, thereby influencing O2 delivery to tissues.Three of those factors are the chemical composition of the hemoglobin,the blood pH, and the presence of 2,3-bisphosphoglycericacid (BPG) in red blood cells.HEMOGLOBIN COMPOSITION There is more than one type of hemoglobin,because the chemical composition of the polypeptidechains that form the hemoglobin molecule varies. The normal hemoglobinof adult humans has two each of two kinds of polypeptidechains—two α-globin chains and two β-globin chains—andthe O2-binding characteristics shown in Figure 49.13.Before birth, the human fetus has a different form of hemoglobin,consisting of two α-globin and two γ-globin chains. Thefunctional difference between fetal and adult hemoglobin is thatfetal hemoglobin has a higher affinity for O2. Therefore, the fetalhemoglobin–oxygen binding/dissociation curve is shiftedto the left compared with that for adults (see Figure 49.13).You can see from these curves that if both types of hemoglobinPO2(mm Hg)20406080100Oxygen binding (%)MyoglobinLlama hemoglobinHuman fetal hemoglobinHuman maternal hemoglobin(pH 7.4)20 40 60 80 100Lama glamaHuman hemoglobin (pH 7.2)1038 CHAPTER 49 | GAS EXCHANGE IN ANIMALS49.13 Oxygen-BindingAdaptations Myoglobin and thedifferent hemoglobins have differentO2-binding properties adapted to differentcircumstances. The hemoglobinof South American camelids, forexample, is adapted for binding O2 athigh altitudes, where PO2 is low. Fetalhemoglobin has a higher affinity forO2 than does maternal hemoglobin,facilitating O2 transfer in the placenta.When high metabolism lowers the pHof the blood, hemoglobin releasesmore of its O2.GO TO Web Activity 49.2 • Oxygen-Binding CurvesyourBioPortal.comare at the same PO2 (as they are in the placenta), fetal hemoglobinwill pick up O2 that the maternal hemoglobin releases. Thisdifference in O2 affinities enables the efficient transfer of O2 fromthe mother’s blood to the fetus’s blood.South American camelids—llamas, alpacas, guanacos, andvicuñas—are native to the Andes Mountains. In the naturalhabitat of these mammals, more than 5,000 m above sea level,the PO2 is below 85 mm Hg, and the PO2 in their lungs is about50 mm Hg. To increase their chances of survival in their lowO2 environment, the hemoglobins of these camelids have O2-binding/dissociation curves to the left of those of most othermammals—in other words, their hemoglobin can becomesaturated with O2 at lower PO2 values than those of othermammals.HEMOGLOBIN AND pH The O2-binding properties of hemoglobinare also influenced by physiological conditions. The influenceof pH on the function of hemoglobin is known as the Bohr effect.As blood passes through metabolically active tissue suchas exercising muscle, it picks up acidic metabolites such as lacticacid, fatty acids, and CO2. As a result, blood pH falls. The excessH+ binds preferentially to deoxygenated hemoglobin anddecreases its affinity for O2 and the O2-binding/dissociationcurve of hemoglobin shifts to the right (see Figure 49.13). Thisshift means the hemoglobin will release more O2 in tissueswhere pH is low—another way that O2 is supplied where andwhen it is most needed.2,3-BISPHOSPHOGLYCERIC ACID BPG is a metabolite of glycolysis(see Figure 7.5). Mammalian red blood cells respond tolow PO2 by increasing their rate of glycolysis and thus producingmore BPG, which is an important regulator of hemoglobinfunction. BPG, like excess H+, reversibly combines withdeoxygenated hemoglobin and lowers its affinity for O2. Theresult is that at any PO2, hemoglobin releases more of itsbound O2 than it otherwise would. In other words, BPG shiftsthe O2-binding/dissociation curve of mammalian hemoglobinto the right.When humans go to high altitudes, or when they cease beingsedentary and begin to exercise, their red blood cells are exposedto a lower PO2 and their level of BPG goes up, making iteasier for hemoglobin to deliver more O2 to tissues. The reasonfetal hemoglobin has a left-shifted O2-binding/dissociationcurve is that its γ-globin chains have a lower affinity for BPGthan do the β-globin chains of adult hemoglobin.CO2 is transported as bicarbonate ions in the bloodDelivering O2 to tissues is only half the respiratory function ofblood. Blood also must take CO2, a metabolic waste product,away from tissues (Figure 49.14). CO2 is highly soluble andreadily diffuses through cell membranes, moving from its siteof production in the tissues into the blood, where the partialpressure of CO2 (PCO2) is lower. However, very little dissolvedCO2 is transported by the blood. Most CO2 produced by the tissuesis transported to the lungs in the form of bicarbonate ions,HCO3–. CO2 is converted to HCO3–, transported to the lungs,and then converted back to CO2 in several steps.When CO2 dissolves in water, some of it slowly reacts withthe water molecules to form carbonic acid (H2CO3), some ofwhich then dissociates into a proton (H+) and a bicarbonate ion(HCO3–). This reversible reaction is expressed as follows:In the extracellular fluid, the reaction between CO2 and H2Oproceeds slowly. But it is a different story in the endothelial cellsof the capillaries and in the red blood cells, where the enzymecarbonic anhydrase speeds up the conversion of CO2 to H2CO3.CO H O H CO H HCO 2 3+3 + + −2 2 ~ ~49.4 | HOW DOES BLOOD TRANSPORT RESPIRATORY GASES? 1039In body tissues,CO2 diffuses fromcells into plasmaand into the redblood cells (RBCs).1About 20% of theCO2 combineswith hemoglobin(Hb).About 5% of the 3CO2 is carried insolution in theplasma.2 In RBCs and in theendothelium, about 70% ofthe CO2 is rapidly convertedto bicarbonate ions becausecarbonic anhydrase is present.4 Bicarbonate ionsenter the plasmain exchange forchloride ions.5 CO2 diffuses out ofthe RBCs to theblood plasma and tothe air in the alveolusand is exhaled.In the lungs, these 7processes are reversed.Bicarbonate forms carbonicacid, which dissociates,releasing CO2.6H2CO3CarbonicanhydraseH2CO3CarbonicanhydraseEndotheliumCO2 + H2OHCO3–HCO3–HCO3–+ H+Cl– Cl–HCO3–+ H+Body tissue Blood capillary Blood capillary LungCO2 + H2OHb HbAlveolusCO2CO2CO2CO2Endothelium49.14 Carbon Dioxide Is Transported as Bicarbonate IonsCarbonic anhydrase in capillary endothelial cells and in red blood cells facilitatesconversion of CO2 produced by tissues into bicarbonate ions carriedby the plasma. In the lungs, the process is reversed as CO2 is exhaled.The newly formed H2CO3 dissociates, and the resulting bicarbonateions enter the plasma in exchange for Cl– (seeFigure 49.14). By converting CO2 to H2CO3, carbonic anhydrasereduces the PCO2 in these cells and in the plasma, facilitatingthe diffusion of CO2 from tissue cells to endothelialcells, plasma, and red blood cells. Some CO2 is alsocarried in chemical combination with hemoglobin.In the lungs, the reactions involving CO2 and bicarbonateions are reversed. Remember that an enzyme such ascarbonic anhydrase only speeds up a reversible reaction; itdoes not determine its direction. The direction is determinedby concentrations of reactants and products (see Section 6.1).Ventilation keeps the CO2 concentration in the alveoli low,so CO2 diffuses from the blood plasma into the alveoli, loweringthe CO2 concentration in the blood, which favors theconversion of HCO3– into CO2.49.4 RECAPO2 is transported from the lungs to the body’s tissuesin reversible combination with hemoglobin.Each hemoglobin molecule can reversibly combinewith four O2 molecules; the saturation of the bindingsites is a function of the PO2 in the hemoglobin’senvironment.• Explain the advantage of having hemoglobin hold onto three O2 molecules at the usual PO2 of mixed venousblood. See pp. 1037–1038 and Figure 49.12• How is the O2-binding/dissociation curve of hemoglobininfluenced by pH? By BPG? By developmentfrom fetus to newborn infant? See p. 1039 andFigure 49.13• How is CO2 transported in the blood? See pp.1039–1040 and Figure 49.14We must breathe every minute of our lives, but we don’t usuallyworry about it, or even think about it very often. In the nextsection we will examine how the regular breathing cycle is generatedand controlled by the central nervous system.49.5 How Is Breathing Regulated?Breathing is an involuntary function of the central nervous system.The breathing pattern easily adjusts itself around other activities(such as speech and eating), and breathing rates changeto match the metabolic demands of our bodies. How is this accomplished?Breathing is controlled in the brainstemThe autonomic nervous system maintains breathing and modifiesits depth and frequency to meet the body’s demands forO2 supply and CO2 elimination. Breathing ceases if the spinalcord is severed in the neck region, showing that breathing isgenerated in the brain. If the brainstem is cut just above themedulla (the segment of the brainstem just above the spinalcord), an irregular breathing pattern remains (Figure 49.15).Groups of respiratory motor neurons in the medulla increasetheir firing rates just before an inhalation begins. As more andmore of these neurons fire—and fire faster and faster—the diaphragmcontracts. All of a sudden, the neurons stop firing, thePonsNormal breathingIf the brainstem is cutbelow the pons butabove the medulla,breathing continuesbut is irregular.If the spinal cord inthe neck is severed,breathing ceases.MedullaSpinal cord1040 CHAPTER 49 | GAS EXCHANGE IN ANIMALS49.15 Breathing Is Controlled in the Brainstem Basic breathingrhythm is generated in the medulla and is modified by neurons in orabove the pons.A small amount of CO2in the bloodstreamstimulates a large increasein breathing rate.A large drop inarterial O2 haslittle effect onbreathing rates.Ventilation rate (basal rate = 1)120 11020 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120Low High100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20High LowArterial PO2 ( ) (mm Hg)Arterial PCO2 ( ) (mm Hg)1234567891011Equilibrium49.16 Carbon Dioxide Affects Breathing Rate The breathing mechanism,controlled by feedback to the medulla, is more sensitive toincreased levels of CO2 in arterial blood than to decreased amounts ofO2. The intersection point occurs at normal (equilibrium) ventilation rateand blood gas levels.diaphragm relaxes, and exhalation begins.Exhalation is usually a passive process thatdepends on the elastic recoil of the lung tissues.When breathing demand is high,however, as during strenuous exercise, motorneurons for the intercostal muscles arerecruited to a greater extent than duringtidal breathing, increasing both the inhalationand the exhalation volumes. Brain areasabove the medulla modify breathing toaccommodate speech, ingestion of food,coughing, and emotional states.Regulating breathing requiresfeedback informationWhen breathing or metabolism changes, italters the PO2 and PCO2 in the blood. Weshould therefore expect the blood levels ofone or both of these gases to provide feedbackinformation to the breathing rhythmgenerator in the medulla. Experiments inwhich subjects breathe air with differentPO2 and PCO2 concentrations lead us to concludethat humans (and other mammals)are remarkably insensitive to falling levelsof O2 in arterial blood but are extremelysensitive to increases in CO2. That is, arterialPO2 can deviate considerably from normalwithout causing much of an increasein ventilation rate, but even a small rise inarterial PCO2 causes a large increase in ventilation(Figure 49.16). This relationship isreversed for water-breathing animals, inwhich O2 is the primary feedback stimulusfor gill ventilation.We might ask whether it is an increase inthe PCO2 of the blood that stimulates increasedbreathing when we exercise. To answerthis question, C. R. Bainton observeddogs running on treadmills at differentspeeds. As the speed of the treadmill increased,the dogs’ respiratory gas exchangerate increased but their blood PCO2 remainedconstant. Before concluding thatblood PCO2 does not control breathing rate,Bainton changed the experiment. Instead ofincreasing the speed of the treadmill, he gradually increased itsslope so that the dogs were running at the same speed but wereworking harder because they were running uphill (Figure 49.17).In this second experiment, the PCO2 of the blood increased asthe slope of the treadmill increased and as the respiratory gasexchange rate increased. Bainton concluded that the PCO2 of theblood is the primary metabolic feedback information for breathing.However, when an animal starts to run or changes its runningspeed, additional feedback information from receptors inmuscles and joints changes its sensitivity to CO2—an exampleof feedforward information. As noted in Section 40.1, feedforwardinformation can change the sensitivity or the set point ofa regulatory system.Where are partial pressures of gases in the blood sensed? Themajor site of PCO2 sensitivity is an area on the ventral surfaceof the medulla, not far from the groups of neurons that generatethe breathing rhythm. The primary sensitivity of thesechemosensitive cells is not to CO2, however. Rather, they arestimulated by H+ ions. The H+ ion concentration, or pH, in theenvironment of these cells is a direct reflection of the PCO2 of the49.5 | HOW IS BREATHING REGULATED? 1041HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODArterial CO2 level is the metabolic feedback signal that regulatesrespiration in response to workload.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: Exposure to cold is another variable that increases respiration.How would you test whether cold-induced respiration isdriven by elevated blood CO2 levels?49.17 Sensitivity of the Respiratory Control System Changes with ExerciseExperiments with dogs running on a treadmill show that sensitivity of therespiratory system to CO2 changes when speed of running changes, but notwhen workload changes without a change in speed.Rising levels of blood CO2 during exercise is the feedback signalthat stimulates an increase in respiratory rate.RESULTSGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, andrelevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.INVESTIGATING LIFE1. Dogs are trained to run on a treadmill.2. The trained dogs are equipped with instruments that measure theirrespiratory rate and with catheters that withdraw blood samples formeasurement of CO2 levels.3. The dog runs with the treadmill set first at different speeds, and then withthe slope of the treadmill elevated (which increases the workload).4. Respiratory rate is plotted as a function of arterial CO2 concentration.CHANGES IN SPEEDRespiratory rate changes with runningspeed but CO2 levels do not. Thehypothesis is not supported.Catheter fortaking bloodsamplesTo flowmeter andrespiratory analyzerRespiratoryrate (L/min)Arterial CO2LowHigh6 mph3 mphCHANGES IN SLOPERespiratory rate and CO2 levelsboth rise as workload increases.The hypothesis is supported.Respiratoryrate (L/min)Arterial CO2LowHighTreadmilldownTreadmillupblood. When the PCO2 of the blood is higher than that of theextracellular fluid in this area, CO2 diffuses out of the blood.That CO2 interacts with H2O to form carbonic acid (H2CO3),which dissociates into H+ ions and HCO3– ions as shown inFigure 49.14. The H+ ions that are produced stimulate thechemosensitive cells that increase respiratory gas exchange.Thus, even though we measure blood PCO2 as the stimulus forbreathing, the real stimulus is pH.Sensitivity to blood PO2 resides in nodes of neural tissue onthe large blood vessels leaving the heart: the aorta and thecarotid arteries (Figure 49.18). These carotid and aortic bodiesare chemosensors. If the blood supply to these structures decreases,or if the blood PO2 falls dramatically, the chemosensorsare activated and send nerve impulses to the breathing controlcenter. Although we are not very sensitive to changes in bloodPO2, the carotid and aortic bodies can stimulate increases inbreathing during exposure to very high altitudes or when bloodvolume or blood pressure is very low. Also, there is a synergismbetween CO2 and O2 sensing. When blood PCO2 increases, thereis an increased sensitivity to low O2 and vice versa.49.5 RECAPThe rhythmic contractions of the respiratory musclesthat drive breathing are generated by neurons in thebrainstem.• What is the primary chemical stimulus for controllingthe respiratory rate, and where is it sensed? See p.1040 and Figures 49.16 and 49.18• Explain what feedforward information is. Can you givean example of feedforward information in the respiratorycontrol system. See Figure 49.17• What are the functions of the carotid and aortic bodies?See p. 1042 and Figure 49.181042 CHAPTER 49 | GAS EXCHANGE IN ANIMALSChemoreceptors on the surfaceof the medulla are sensitive tothe PCO2 and the pH of thecerebrospinal fluid.Chemoreceptors on largeblood vessels leaving theheart are sensitive to theoxygen in the blood.Neural input from higherbrain centersMedullaPonsNervesCarotid bodyCarotid arteryHeartOutput torespiratorymusclesSpinalcordAortaAortic bodyBreathingcontrol areaNeurons thatexcite breathingneurons inmedulla49.18 Feedback Information Controls Breathing The body usesfeedback information from chemosensors in the heart and brain to matchbreathing rate to metabolic demand.49.1 What Physical Factors Govern Respiratory GasExchange?• Most cells require a constant supply of O2 and continuousremoval of CO2. These respiratory gases are exchangedbetween an animal’s body fluids and its environment bydiffusion.• Fick’s law of diffusion shows how various physical factors influencethe diffusion rate of gases. Adaptations to maximize respiratorygas exchange influence one or more variables of Fick’slaw.• In water-breathing animals, gas exchange is limited by the lowdiffusion rate and low amount of O2 in water. If water temperaturerises, water-breathing animals face a double bind in thatthe amount of O2 in water decreases, but their metabolism andthe amount of work required to move water over the gasexchange surfaces increase. Review Figure 49.2• In air, the partial pressure of oxygen (PO2) decreases withaltitude.49.2 What Adaptations Maximize Respiratory GasExchange?• Adaptations to maximize gas exchange include increasing thesurface area for gas exchange, maximizing partial pressure gradientsacross those exchange surfaces, ventilating the outersurface with the respiratory medium, and perfusing the innersurface with blood.• Insects distribute air throughout their bodies in a system oftracheae, tracheoles, and air capillaries. Review Figure 49.4• The gills of fishes have large gas exchange surface areas thatare ventilated continuously and unidirectionally with water. Thecountercurrent flow of blood helps increase the efficiency ofgas exchange. Review Figures 49.5 and 49.6CHAPTER SUMMARY
49.1 What Physical Factors Govern Respiratory GasExchange?• Most cells require a constant supply of O2 and continuousremoval of CO2. These respiratory gases are exchangedbetween an animal’s body fluids and its environment bydiffusion.• Fick’s law of diffusion shows how various physical factors influencethe diffusion rate of gases. Adaptations to maximize respiratorygas exchange influence one or more variables of Fick’slaw.• In water-breathing animals, gas exchange is limited by the lowdiffusion rate and low amount of O2 in water. If water temperaturerises, water-breathing animals face a double bind in thatthe amount of O2 in water decreases, but their metabolism andthe amount of work required to move water over the gasexchange surfaces increase. Review Figure 49.2• In air, the partial pressure of oxygen (PO2) decreases withaltitude.49.2 What Adaptations Maximize Respiratory GasExchange?• Adaptations to maximize gas exchange include increasing thesurface area for gas exchange, maximizing partial pressure gradientsacross those exchange surfaces, ventilating the outersurface with the respiratory medium, and perfusing the innersurface with blood.• Insects distribute air throughout their bodies in a system oftracheae, tracheoles, and air capillaries. Review Figure 49.4• The gills of fishes have large gas exchange surface areas thatare ventilated continuously and unidirectionally with water. Thecountercurrent flow of blood helps increase the efficiency ofgas exchange. Review Figures 49.5 and 49.6
The gas exchange system of birds includes air sacs that communicatewith the lungs but are not used for gas exchange. Airflows unidirectionally through bird lungs; gases are exchangedin air capillaries that run between parabronchi. ReviewFigure 49.7• Each breath of air remains in a bird’s respiratory system for twobreathing cycles. The air sacs work as bellows to supply the aircapillaries with a continuous unidirectional flow of fresh air.Review Figure 49.8, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 49.1• In all air-breathing vertebrates except birds, breathing is tidal.This is a less efficient form of gas exchange than that of fishesand birds. Although the volume of air exchanged with eachbreath can vary considerably in tidal breathing, the inhaled airis always mixed with stale air. Review Figure 49.949.3 How Do Human Lungs Work?• In mammalian lungs, the gas exchange surface area providedby the millions of alveoli is enormous, and the diffusion pathlength between the air and perfusing blood is short. Surfacetension in the alveoli would make inflation of the lungs difficultif the alveoli did not produce surfactant. Review Figure 49.10,WEB ACTIVITY 49.1• Inhalation occurs when contractions of the diaphragm pull onthe pleural membranes and reduce the pressure in the thoraciccavity. Relaxation of the diaphragm increases pressure in thethoracic cavity and results in exhalation. Review Figure 49.11,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 49.2• During periods of heavy metabolic demands such as strenuousexercise, the intercostal muscles, located between the ribs,increase the volume of air inhaled and exhaled.49.4 How Does Blood Transport Respiratory Gases?• O2 is reversibly bound to hemoglobin in red blood cells. Eachhemoglobin molecule can carry a maximum of four O2 molecules.Because of positive cooperativity, hemoglobin’s affinityfor O2 depends on the PO2 to which the hemoglobin is exposed.Therefore, hemoglobin picks up O2 as it flows through respiratoryexchange structures and gives up O2 in metabolicallyactive tissues. Review Figure 49.12• Myoglobin serves as an O2 reserve in muscle.• There is more than one type of hemoglobin. Fetal hemoglobinhas a higher affinity for O2 than does maternal hemoglobin,allowing fetal blood to pick up O2 from the maternal blood inthe placenta. Review Figure 49.13, WEB ACTIVITY 49.2• CO2 is transported in the blood principally as bicarbonate ions(HCO3–). Review Figure 49.1449.5 How Is Breathing Regulated?• The breathing rhythm is an autonomic function generated byneurons in the medulla and modulated by higher brain centers.The most important feedback stimulus for breathing is the levelof CO2 in the blood. Review Figures 49.16 and 14.17• The breathing rhythm is sensitive to feedback from chemoreceptorson the ventral surface of the medulla and in the carotidand aortic bodies on the large vessels leaving the heart. ReviewFigure 49.18SEE WEB ACTIVITY 49.3 for a concept review of thischapter.