52Blood, sweat, and tears taste salty because they haveionic concentrations similar to those of the interstitialfluids that bathe the cells of the body. The volumeand composition of the interstitial fluids must remainwithin certain limits and be kept relatively free of wastes.Maintaining homeostasis of the interstitial fluids is the jobof the excretory system, and it can be challenging. Sometimesit requires getting rid of excess fluids, and at othertimes it requires conserving fluids.The nature of the challenge depends on the environmentof the animal and its lifestyle. Some desert animalsrarely if ever encounter free water; they must be able tolive their entire lives without drinking. All animals derivewater from the metabolism of food, but to survive on thatamount of water, desert animals must conserve it to anexceptional degree. Accordingly, they excrete wastes thatare extremely concentrated. Insects excrete semisolidwastes, and desert rodents excrete urine that is so concentratedit forms crystals of solute. Animals that live infresh water have the opposite problem: water continuouslyenters their bodies by osmosis and with the foodthey eat, so they must constantly bail themselves out byproducing copious amounts of dilute urine while at thesame time conserving the solutes their bodies need.The physiological adaptations animals have to maintainsalt and water balance through excretion and conservationare remarkably flexible. Consider, for example,the vampire bat, a small tropical mammal that experiencesextreme conditions within minutes of each other.The vampire bat feeds on the blood of other mammals,such as goats and cattle. Landing on an unsuspecting(usually sleeping) victim, the bat uses itssharp incisor teeth to make a small incisionin a blood vessel and then laps up theblood that wells out.Blood contains lots of nutritious protein,but it consists mostly of water. Blood mealsmay be few and far between, so the batmust quickly consume as much as it can—up to half its body mass. To maximize itsprotein intake and keep its weight lowenough to fly, it rapidly eliminates the waterfrom its meal. Within minutes of startingto feed, the bat is producing a lot of very diluteurine. The warm trickle down the neckof the victim is not blood!Blood, sweat, and tearsBlood as a Fast Food The vampire batDesmodus rotundus is able to adjust its excretoryphysiology from water-excreting to waterconserving,depending on whether it is ingestingor digesting its blood meal.How Do Excretory Systems 52.1 Maintain Homeostasis?Controlling the volume, solute concentration, and compositionof extracellular fluids are not huge problems for marine invertebratesbecause their extracellular fluids are very similar toseawater, and their nitrogenous wastes can simply diffuse intothe surrounding seawater. The situation is different for marinevertebrates and for all freshwater and terrestrial animals becausetheir extracellular fluids differ considerably from the externalenvironment. These animals depend on excretory systems tomaintain the volume, concentration, and composition of theirextracellular fluids, and to excrete wastes.Homeostasis of the extracellular fluids is critical because theconcentration of solutes in them determines the water balanceof the cells those fluids bathe, and the composition of the extracellularfluid influences the health and functions of all thecells of the body. Consider, for example, the importance of ionconcentration gradients between the extracellular fluid and thecytoplasm of nerve and muscle cells (see Sections 45.2 and 48.1).Water enters or leaves cells by osmosisThe volume of cells depends on whether they take up water fromor lose water to the extracellular fluids. The movement of wateracross cell plasma membranes depends on differences insolute concentration on the two sides of the membrane and thepermeability of the membrane. This is the process of osmosis,which we discuss in Sections 6.3 and 35.1. If the solute concentrationof the extracellular fluid is less than that of the cytoplasm,water moves into the cells, causing them to swell and possiblyburst. If the solute concentration of the extracellular fluid isgreater than that of the cytoplasm, the cells lose water and shrink.Thus the solute concentration of the extracellular fluid affectsboth the volume and the solute concentration of the cells.Animal physiologists use the term osmolarity in discussingosmosis. The osmolarity of a solution is the number of moles ofosmotically active solutes per liter of solvent. Thus, a 1 molarsolution of glucose is also a 1 osmolar (1 osmole per liter) solution,but a 1 molar solution of sodium chloride (NaCl) is a 2osmolar solution, because each NaCl molecule dissociates intotwo osmotically active ions.To achieve cellular water balance, animals must maintain theosmolarity of their extracellular fluid within an appropriaterange. In addition, they must maintain an appropriate soluteIN THIS CHAPTER we will describe adaptations formaintaining salt and water balance and for excreting nitrogenouswastes in environments that present animalswith different challenges. Using some invertebrate examples,we will review the basic mechanisms common to allanimal excretory systems. We will learn about the basicanatomical unit of the vertebrate excretory system—thenephron—and how it evolved. Finally, we will consider themechanisms that control and regulate salt and water balancein mammals.Once feeding ends, this high rate of water loss muststop. Now the vampire bat is digesting and metabolizingprotein and must excrete large amounts of nitrogenouswastes while conserving its body water. Within minutes,the bat’s excretory system switches from producingabundant, dilute urine to producing a tiny amount ofhighly concentrated urine. In one feeding cycle, thevampire bat rapidly transitions from an excretory physiologytypical of a mammal living in an environment withabundant fresh water to that of a desert mammal thatnever sees water. What an amazing case of physiologicalflexibility!CHAPTER OUTLINE52.1 How Do Excretory Systems MaintainHomeostasis?52.2 How Do Animals Excrete Nitrogen?52.3 How Do Invertebrate Excretory Systems Work?52.4 How Do Vertebrates Maintain Salt and WaterBalance?52.5 How Does the Mammalian Kidney ProduceConcentrated Urine?52.6 How Are Kidney Functions Regulated?Living without Water Many kangaroo rat species(Dipodomys) inhabit arid deserts, and they rarely see freewater.composition by saving some substances (reabsorption) andeliminating others (secretion). To accommodate these needs,most animals have excretory systems.Excretory systems control extracellular fluid osmolarityand compositionExcretory systems control the osmolarity and composition ofthe extracellular fluids by excreting solutes that are present inexcess (such as NaCl when we eat lots of salty food) and conservingsolutes that are valuable or in short supply (such as glucoseand amino acids). Excretory systems also eliminate thetoxic waste products of protein metabolism. The output of theexcretory system is called urine.Three basic processes are common to a wide variety of animalexcretory systems: filtration, secretion, and reabsorption. Extracellularfluid is filtered to produce a filtrate that contains no cellsor large molecules, such as proteins. In animals with a closed circulatorysystem, the blood plasma is usually filtered from capillariesinto associated tubules. The walls of the capillaries and ofthe tubules are the filter, and the filtration is driven by blood pressure.As the filtrate flows through the tubules, its compositionand concentration are modified through processes of secretionand reabsorption to form the urine that leaves the body.The processing of the filtrate into urine involves movementof water into and out of the tubules. There are no mechanismsfor the active transport of water. The movement of water is dueeither to a pressure difference (filtration) or to a difference insolute concentration (osmosis). Water always flows down apressure gradient or up a solute concentration gradient.Animals can be osmoconformers or osmoregulatorsAnimals that live in marine, freshwater, or terrestrial environmentsface different salt and water balance problems. In the terrestrialenvironment, salts and water can be scarce and usuallymust be conserved by excretory systems. In the freshwaterenvironment, water is plentiful but salts are scarce. Freshwateranimals have to conserve salts and excrete the water thatcontinuously invades their bodies through osmosis.In contrast to fresh water, ocean water has a high osmolarity—over 1,000 milliosmoles/liter (mosm/l). Most marine invertebratesequilibrate their extracellular fluid osmolarity withthe ocean water and are therefore called osmoconformers. Othermarine animals maintain extracellular fluid osmolarities muchlower than seawater and are therefore called osmoregulators.All marine vertebrates except for sharks and rays are osmoregulators.These animals maintain their extracellular fluids atabout 300 mosm/l, like that of humans.There are limits to osmoconformity. Even animals that canosmoconform over a wide range of osmolarities must osmoregulatein extreme environments. No animal could survive if itsextracellular fluid had the osmolarity of fresh water. Therewould be too few solutes, including nutrients and ions essentialfor cell functions, and water would flow into the cells by osmosis,causing them to swell and burst. Nor could animals survivewith internal osmolarities as high as those that may bereached in an evaporating tidal pool. High solute concentrationscause proteins to denature.The brine shrimp Artemia is both an osmoconformer and anosmoregulator; this animal can live in environments of almostany osmolarity (Figure 52.1). Artemia are found in huge numbersin the most salty environments known, such as Utah’sGreat Salt Lake and in coastal evaporation ponds where salt isconcentrated for commercial purposes (see Figure 26.23) andcan reach an osmolarity of 2,500 mosm/l. At these high environmentalosmolarities, Artemia maintains its tissue fluid osmolarityconsiderably below that of the environment by activelytransporting NaCl from its extracellular fluid out across its gillmembranes to the environment. Artemia cannot survive in freshwater, but it can live in dilute seawater by reversing the directionof transport of NaCl across its gill membranes to maintainits extracellular fluid above that of the environment.Animals can be ionic conformers or ionic regulatorsOsmoconformers can also be ionic conformers, allowing the ioniccomposition, as well as the osmolarity, of their extracellular fluidto match that of the environment. Most osmoconformers, however,are ionic regulators to some degree; they employ activetransport mechanisms to excrete some ions and to maintain otherions in their extracellular fluid at optimal concentrations.Terrestrial animals obtain their salts from food and regulatethe ionic composition of their extracellular fluids by conservingsome ions and excreting others. For example, herbivores haveto conserve Na+ because the plants they eat have low concen-52.1 | HOW DO EXCRETORY SYSTEMS MAINTAIN HOMEOSTASIS? 1093Over a wide range ofsalinities, extracellularfluid osmolarityequilibrates withenvironmental.In dilute environments,brine shrimp transportions into theirextracellular fluid tomaintain its osmolarityabove environmental.In highly saline water,ions are transportedout of the extracellularfluid to maintain itsosmolarity belowenvironmental.Dilute seawaterOsmolarity of extracellular fluidSeawaterEvaporatingsalt pondOsmoconformityOsmolarity of environmentArtemia sp.52.1 Osmoconformity Has Limits Animals that experience anextreme range of salt concentrations in their environment can be osmoconformersover much of that range but must osmoregulate at theextremes. They regulate by actively transporting ions across their gillmembranes—in either direction, depending on the challenge.trations of Na+. By contrast, birds that feed on marine animalsmust excrete the excess of sodium they ingest with their food.Their nasal salt glands excrete a concentrated solution of NaCl viaa duct that empties into the nasal cavity. Birds, such as penguinsand gulls, that have nasal salt glands can be seen frequentlysneezing or shaking their heads to get rid of the salty droplets excretedfrom their nasal salt glands (Figure 52.2).52.1 RECAPExcretory systems control water and salt balanceand the excretion of nitrogenous waste productsthrough three mechanisms: filtration of body fluids toform urine, active secretion of substances into theurine, and active reabsorption of substances fromthe urine.• Describe the two mechanisms used to move wateracross membranes. See p. 1093• What different salt and water balance problems mightanimals encounter in marine, freshwater, and terrestrialenvironments? What are some of the ways theymeet those challenges? See pp. 1093–1094 andFigures 52.1 and 52.2In addition to maintaining salt and water balance, animals musteliminate the waste products of metabolism from their extracellularfluids. The major problem is nitrogen. When nitrogen-containingmolecules are broken down by metabolism, the endproduct can be toxic.52.2 How Do Animals Excrete Nitrogen?The end products of the metabolism of carbohydrates and fatsare water and carbon dioxide, which are not difficult to eliminate.Proteins and nucleic acids, however, contain nitrogen, sotheir metabolism produces nitrogenous wastes in addition to waterand carbon dioxide.Animals excrete nitrogen in a number of formsThe most common nitrogenous waste is ammonia (NH3). Becauseit is highly toxic, ammonia is either excreted continuouslyto prevent its accumulation or is detoxified by conversion intourea or uric acid (Figure 52.3).AMMONIA Ammonia is highly soluble in water and diffusesrapidly, so its continuous excretion is relatively simple for manyaquatic animals that continuously lose ammonia from theirblood to the environment by diffusion across their gill membranes.Animals that excrete ammonia, such as aquatic invertebratesand bony fishes, are ammonotelic.If ammonia builds up in the extracellular fluids, it becomestoxic at rather low levels and is a dangerous metabolite for terrestrialanimals and for those aquatic animals that cannot continuouslyexcrete ammonia. These animals must convert ammoniainto urea or uric acid.UREA Ureotelic animals, such as mammals, amphibians, andcartilaginous fishes (sharks and rays), excrete urea as their principalnitrogenous waste product. Urea is quite soluble in water,1094 CHAPTER 52 | SALT AND WATER BALANCE AND NITROGEN EXCRETIONCl– is actively transported by tubulecells into the tubules. Na+ follows.Some H2O is drawn into the tubuleby osmosis and flushes the NaClsolution into the central canal.(A)Note the secretion at thetip of the bird’s beak.Each bundle oftubules drains intoa central canal.The central canaldrains into thenasal cavity.Salt glands are located in depressionsin the skull above the eyes. They arebundles of secretory tubules servedby parallel arrangements of arteriolesSkull and venules.ArteryArterioleVeinVenuleCentralcanal SecretorytubuleCapillariesEyeNasalcavity(B) Macronectes giganteusNaCl52.2 Nasal Salt Glands Excrete Excess Salt(A) Marine birds have nasal salt glands that excretethe excess salt they ingest with their food. (B) Thisgiant petrel has returned from a feeding trip at seaand is secreting salt through its nasal salt gland.but its excretion can result in a large loss of water that many animalscan ill afford. As we will see later in this chapter, mammalshave evolved excretory systems that conserve water byproducing concentrated urea solutions. The sharks and rays areanother story. These marine species keep their extracellular fluidsalmost isosmotic (same osmotic concentration) to the marineenvironment by retaining high concentrations of urea andanother nitrogen-containing compound, trimethylamine oxide,in their body fluids.URIC ACID Animals that conserve water by excreting nitrogenouswastes mostly as uric acid are uricotelic. Insects, reptiles(including birds), and some amphibians are uricotelic. Uric acidis not very soluble in water, so it forms a colloidal suspensionin the urine and is excreted as a semisolid (for example, thewhitish material in bird droppings). A uricotelic animal losesvery little water as it disposes of its nitrogenous wastes.Most species produce more than onenitrogenous wasteHumans are ureotelic, but we also excrete uric acid. The uricacid in human urine comes largely from the metabolism of nucleicacids and caffeine. If uric acid levels in the extracellular fluidsrise too high, uric acid crystals can precipitate in joints andcause the age-old malady called gout. Because solubility goesdown with temperature, uric acid crystals usually precipitatefirst in the extremities, especially the big toe. Pain in the bigtoe is a telltale symptom of gout.Humans can also excrete ammonia, which is an importantmechanism for regulating the pH of the extracellular fluids.As we will see later in this chapter, excreted ammonia buffersthe urine and enables the secretion of more hydrogen ions.Species that live in different habitats at differentdevelopmental stages may use more than onemechanism of nitrogen excretion. The tadpoles offrogs and toads, for example, excrete ammoniaacross their gill membranes, but adult frogs andtoads generally excrete urea. Some adult amphibiansthat live in arid habitats excrete uric acid.52.2 RECAPAmmonia is a common metabolic waste product ofnitrogen-containing molecules. Most aquatic animalsexcrete ammonia by diffusion into the water. Terrestrialanimals and some aquatic animals detoxify it byconversion to urea or uric acid.• Why might you expect a species from an arid habitatto use uric acid as its primary nitrogenous wasteproduct? See p. 1095 and Figure 52.3Animals exhibit a variety of adaptations for dealing with thechallenges of salt and water balance in different environments.All of these adaptations, however, are based on two basic mechanisms—namely, filtration and tubular processing of the filtrateto conserve some solutes and excrete others.How Do Invertebrate Excretory 52.3 Systems Work?Freshwater and terrestrial invertebrates have a wide variety ofadaptations for maintaining salt and water balance and excretingnitrogen. In this section, we will explore three examplesof invertebrate excretory systems: protonephridia, metanephridia,and Malpighian tubules. Each of these systems produces an extractof interstitial fluid lacking in large molecules. They thenchange the solute composition (ions and small molecules) ofthat fluid to form an excretory product.The protonephridia of flatworms excrete waterand conserve saltsMany flatworms, such as Planaria, live in fresh water. These animalsexcrete water through an elaborate network of tubules1095CO2 H2O N H2 groupsN H3N H2N H2Carbohydrates Fats Proteins Nucleic acidsAmmonotelic animals(aquatic invertebratesand most bony fishes)Ureotelic animals (mammals,most amphibians,cartilaginous fishes)Uricotelic animals(birds, insects, reptiles)NHNHHNHN CCC OCOOUric acidO CAmmonia UreaC52.3 Waste Products of Metabolism The metabolismof proteins and nucleic acids produces nitrogenous wastes.Many aquatic animals, including most fishes, excretenitrogenous wastes as ammonia, which is highly diffusibleand soluble in an aqueous environment. Most terrestrial animalsand some aquatic animals excrete either urea or uricacid. Urea is more soluble in water and is the major nitrogenousexcretory product for mammals, amphibians, andsome fishes. Uric acid is not very soluble in water and isthe major nitrogenous excretory product for reptiles, birds,insects, and some amphibians.running throughout their bodies. The tubules endin flame cells, so called because each cell has a tuftof cilia projecting into the tubule (Figure 52.4).The beating of the cilia gives the appearance of aflickering flame. Aflame cell and a tubule togetherform a protonephridium (plural protonephridia;Greek proto, “before,” and nephros, “kidney”).Extracellular fluid enters the tubules by filtration.The beating of the cilia causes a slight negativepressure in the tubule, and movements of theanimal create positive pressure in the extracellularfluid. This pressure difference causes extracellularfluid to be filtered through tiny spaces betweentubule cells. The filtrate flows toward theanimal’s excretory pore, and along the way thecells of the tubules modify the composition of thefluid by reabsorption and secretion of specific ionsand molecules. Because more ions are reabsorbedthan are secreted, the urine that leaves the flatworm’sbody is less concentrated than the extracellularfluid. Thus, the protonephridium conservesions and excretes water and wastes.The metanephridia of annelids processcoelomic fluidFiltration of body fluids and modification of urineby tubules are highly developed processes in annelidworms such as the earthworm. Annelids aresegmented, and in each segment they have a fluidfilledbody cavity called a coelom (see Figure 32.12).Annelids have a closed circulatory system throughwhich blood is pumped under pressure. The pressurecauses the blood to be filtered across the thin,permeable capillary walls into the coelom. Some waste products,such as ammonia, diffuse directly from the tissues into thecoelom. Where does this coelomic fluid go?Each segment of the earthworm contains a pair of metanephridia(singular metanephridium; Greek meta, “akin to,” andnephros, “kidney”). Each metanephridium begins as a ciliated,funnel-like opening called a nephrostome. The nephrostome residesin one segment and continues as a tubule in the next segment.The tubule ends in a pore, called a nephridiopore, thatopens to the outside of the animal (Figure 52.5). Coelomic fluidis swept into the metanephridia through the ciliated nephrostomes.As the fluid passes through the tubules, their cells activelyreabsorb certain molecules from it and actively secreteother molecules into it. What leaves the animal through thenephridiopores is a dilute urine containing nitrogenous wastesand other solutes.1096 CHAPTER 52 | SALT AND WATER BALANCE AND NITROGEN EXCRETIONExtracellular fluid is filteredbetween the cells at the terminalends of the excretory tubules…Solutes arereabsorbedby tubule cells…and is driven down thetubules toward the excretorypore by the beating of thecilia in the flame cell.Excretory canalFlame cellNucleusExcretoryporeFiltrationslits1 Coelomic fluid is swept intothe metanephridium by ciliasurrounding the nephrostome.3 …producing a dilute urinethat is excreted throughthe nephridiopore.2 The tubule cells of themetanephridium alter thecomposition of the fluid asit flows through the tubule…Capillaries BladderNephridiopore UrineNephrostomeCollectingtubulesMetanephridiumCoelomic cavity52.5 Metanephridia in Earthworms The metanephridia of annelids are arrangedsegmentally. The cross section at the left end shows a pair of metanephridia. Three longitudinalsections (right) show only one metanephridium of the two in each segment.Coelomic fluid enters the nephrostome and flows through tubules leading to the nephridiopore.A close association of the tubules and blood capillaries facilitates the activeexchange of substances between the blood and the tubular fluid.52.4 Protonephridia in Flatworms The protonephridia of the flatworm Planariaconsist of tubules ending in flame cells. In the region of the flame cells, body fluid isfiltered between the tubule cells. The composition of the filtrate is modified as it flowsdown the tubule.GO TO Web Activity 52.1 • Annelid MetanephridiayourBioPortal.comThe Malpighian tubules of insects depend onactive transportInsects can excrete nitrogenous wastes with very little loss ofwater and can therefore live in the driest habitats on Earth. Theinsect excretory system consists of Malpighian tubules. An individualinsect has from 2 to more than 100 of these blind-endedtubules that open into the gut between the midgut and hindgut(Figure 52.6).Insects have an open circulatory system and therefore cannotuse a pressure difference to filter extracellular fluids into theMalpighian tubules. Instead, the cells of the tubules activelytransport uric acid, potassium ions, and sodium ions from theextracellular fluid into the tubules. The high concentration ofsolutes in the tubules causes water to follow osmotically, whichflushes the tubule contents toward the gut.The epithelial cells of the hindgut and rectum actively transportsodium and potassium ions from the gut contents back intothe extracellular fluid. This local transport of salts creates an osmoticgradient that pulls water out of the rectal contents. As itsconcentration increases, the uric acid forms a colloidal suspension,freeing even more water to be reabsorbed. Remaining in the rectumis the uric acid mixed with other wastes; this semisolid matteris what the insect excretes. The Malpighian tubule system is ahighly effective mechanism for excreting nitrogenous wastes andsome salts without giving up much water.52.3 RECAPProtonephridia and metanephridia work by creatinga filtrate of the body fluids that is modified by thesecretion and reabsorption of specific substancesbefore being excreted. Insect Malpighian tubules activelysecrete uric acid and other solutes into closedtubules.• Describe how an earthworm filters its blood andproduces urine. See p. 1096 and Figure 52.5• How do Malpighian tubules function, and how doesthis system make it possible for some insect species tosurvive in the desert? See p. 1097 and Figure 52.6Having described how several invertebrate groups handle nitrogenexcretion, we will next consider the nephron—the basicunit of the vertebrate excretory system—and how it evolvedto be able to respond to a variety of salt and water balance challengesand maintain a relatively constant internal environment.How Do Vertebrates Maintain Salt 52.4 and Water Balance?The main excretory organ of vertebrates is the kidney, and thefunctional unit of the kidney is the nephron, which has a bloodvessel component and a tubule component. The vascular componentbegins with a knot of capillaries that are highly permeableand filter the blood into the tubule component. The bloodvessels also carry substances to the tubules for secretion andcarry away substances that the tubule cells reabsorb. Nephronscan filter large volumes of blood and achieve bulk reabsorptionof salts and other valuable molecules such as glucose, makingthe vertebrate kidney well adapted for the excretion of excesswater.52.4 | HOW DO VERTEBRATES MAINTAIN SALT AND WATER BALANCE? 10971 Uric acid, Na+, and K+are actively transportedinto the Malpighiantubules; H2O follows.3 Na+ and K+ are actively transportedfrom the hindgut and rectum back to thecoelomic (extracellular) fluid; H2O follows.4 Uric acidprecipitates inrectum and isexcreted alongwith wastes.2 Contents of Malpighiantubules are dischargedinto the gut.MalpighiantubuleMalpighiantubulesHindgutMidgutUricacidUricacidSemisolid wastes(including uric acid)RectumMidgutHindgut RectumNa+Na+K+K+H2OH2OH2OAbdomenof ant52.6 Malpighian Tubules in Insects The blind, thin-walled Malpighiantubules are attached to the junction of the insect’s midgut and hindgutand project into the spaces containing extracellular fluid. This systemmakes it possible to excrete wastes with very little loss of water.If the ancestors of vertebrates evolved in fresh water, as paleontologistspropose, the excretory systems of vertebrateswould have evolved to excrete excess water. How then havevertebrates adapted to environments where water must be conservedand salts excreted? The answer to this question differsamong vertebrate groups. Even among the marine fishes, theexcretory adaptations of the bony fishes are different from thoseof the cartilaginous fishes. Reptiles, birds, and mammals haveexcretory systems that conserve water. Reptiles and birdsachieve this mainly by being uricotelic and producing a semisolidexcretory product that contains little water. Mammals incontrast are ammonotelic, excrete a liquid waste product, buthave evolved the ability to produce a highly concentrated urine.Marine fishes must conserve waterMarine bony fishes osmoregulate their extracellular fluids tomaintain them at one-third to one-half the osmolarity of seawater.Their only source of water is the sea around them, so theymust conserve water and excrete excess solutes. Marine bonyfishes cannot produce urine that is more concentrated than theirextracellular fluids, so they minimize water loss by producingvery little urine. In contrast, freshwater fishes produce lots ofdilute urine.If marine bony fishes cannot excrete excess solutes in theirurine, how do they deal with the large salt loads they ingestwith food? Marine bony fishes do not absorb from their gutssome of the ions they take in, especially divalent ions such asMg2+ or SO42–. NaCl, the major salt ingested, is actively excretedacross the gill membranes. As we mentioned earlier, bony fishescan lose their nitrogenous waste, ammonia, by diffusion acrosstheir gill membranes.Cartilaginous fishes (sharks and rays) are osmoconformersbut not ionic conformers. They raise the osmolarity of their bodyfluids in a unique way. Unlike boney fishes, they convert nitrogenouswastes to urea and trimethylamine oxide, and theyretain large amounts of these compounds in their body fluids.As a result, their body fluids have an osmolarity close to that ofseawater, so they do not lose body water to the environment byosmosis, and may actually gain water. These species haveadapted to a concentration of urea in the body fluids that wouldbe toxic to other vertebrates.Sharks and rays still have the problem of excreting the largeamounts of salts they take in with their food. They solve this problemby having a gland in the rectum that actively secretes NaClby a mechanism similar to that of the nasal salt glands of seabirds.Terrestrial amphibians and reptiles mustavoid desiccationMost amphibians live in or near fresh water, and they stay inhumid habitats when they do venture from the water. Likefreshwater fishes, most amphibians produce large amounts ofdilute urine and conserve salts. Some amphibians, however,have adapted to habitats that require water conservation.Amphibians living in dry terrestrial environments have reducedthe permeability of their skin to water. Some secrete awaxy substance over the skin to waterproof it. Several speciesof frogs that live in arid regions of Australia burrow deep intothe ground and remain there during long dry periods. They enterestivation, a state of very low metabolic activity and thereforelow water turnover. When it rains, the frogs come out ofestivation, feed, and reproduce. Their most interesting adaptationis an enormous urinary bladder. Before entering estivation,they fill the bladder with dilute urine, which can amount to onethirdof their body weight. This dilute urine serves as a waterreservoir that is gradually reabsorbed into the blood during thelong period of estivation.Reptiles occupy habitats ranging from aquatic to extremelyhot and dry. In fact, snakes, lizards, and birds are among themost prominent members of many desert faunas. Three majoradaptations have freed reptiles from the close association withwater that is necessary for most amphibians (see Section 33.4).First, reptiles are amniotes that do not need fresh water to reproducebecause they employ internal fertilization and lay eggswith shells that retard evaporative water loss. Second, they havea dry, epidermis (skin) that retards evaporative water loss.Third, they excrete nitrogenous wastes as uric acid semisolids,losing little water in the process.Mammals can produce highly concentrated urineMammals occupy diverse habitats, many of which present specialexcretory system challenges. The most challenging environmentsare those in which water is severely limited. Mammalshave a variety of adaptations to conserve water, but chief amongthem is the ability to produce a urine that is more concentratedthan their extracellular fluids. They are able to concentrate theirurine because of adaptations of their kidneys that we will explorein detail in Section 52.5. To understand how these adaptationswork, however, we must first describe the structure andfunction of the vertebrate nephron.The nephron is the functional unit of thevertebrate kidneyUrine formation in vertebrate nephrons involves three mainprocesses (Figure 52.7):• Filtration. Each nephron has a dense ball of capillariescalled a glomerulus (plural glomeruli). The glomerulus ishighly permeable to water, ions, and small molecules butimpermeable to large molecules. Blood pressure drives themovement of water and small molecular weight solutes outof the glomerular capillaries.• Tubular reabsorption. The filtrate from the glomerulus flowsinto the renal tubule. Cells in the renal tubule modify the filtrateby reabsorbing specific ions, nutrients, and water, returningthese to the blood, and leaving behind and concentratingexcess ions and waste products such as urea.• Tubular secretion. The filtrate in the renal tubule is furthermodified by tubule cells transporting substances into thetubular contents. These are substances that the body needsto excrete.1098 CHAPTER 52 | SALT AND WATER BALANCE AND NITROGEN EXCRETIONBlood enters the glomerular capillaries via an afferent arterioleand leaves the glomerulus in an efferent arteriole. Thisshort vessel is called an arteriole because it feeds another capillarybed called the peritubular capillaries that intimately surroundthe renal tubules (Figure 52.8A). Peritubular capillariesdeliver substances to the renal tubule cells that they will secreteinto the urine and carry away substances these cells absorbfrom the urine.Blood is filtered into Bowman’s capsuleThe renal tubule begins with Bowman’s capsule (seeFigure 52.7), which encloses the glomerulus. Theglomerulus appears to be pushed into Bowman’s capsulemuch like a fist pushed into an inflated balloon.The cells of the capsule that are in direct contact withthe glomerular capillaries are called podocytes (Figure52.8B). These highly specialized cells have numerousarmlike extensions, each with hundreds of fine, fingerlikeprocesses. The podocytes wrap around thecapillaries so that their processes interdigitate and intimatelycover the capillaries.The glomerulus filters the blood to produce a fluid(the renal filtrate) that lacks cells and large molecules.The walls of the capillaries, the basal lamina of the capillaryendothelium, and the podocytes of Bowman’scapsule all participate in filtration. Fenestrations in thewalls of the capillaries (see Section 50.4) allow waterand many solute molecules, but not red blood cells, topass through. The meshwork of the basal lamina andthe spaces between the processes of the podocytes areeven finer and prevent large molecules from leaving thecapillaries (Figure 52.8C). The arterial pressure of theblood entering the permeable capillaries causes the filtrationof water and small molecules in the glomerulus.The glomerular filtration rate is high because blood52.4 | HOW DO VERTEBRATES MAINTAIN SALT AND WATER BALANCE? 1099Bowman’scapsule receivesthe glomerularfiltrate.An efferent arteriolecarries blood from theglomerulus.Renal tubule cellsalter composition ofglomerular filtratethrough reabsorptionand secretion ofsolutes.Peritubular capillariesbring materials to thetubules that will besecreted into the urineand carry awayreabsorbed substances.The glomerulus, a knotof capillaries, is the site ofblood filtration.An arteriole suppliesblood under pressureto the glomerulus .The renal venule drainsthe peritubular capillaries.The processed filtrate (urine) of theindividual nephrons enters collectingducts and is delivered to a commonduct leaving the kidney.1 2 345678PeritubularcapillariesBowman’scapsuleUrineRenaltubuleFiltrationReabsorption andsecretionExcretion(A) (B) Podocytes (C)Capillaries Bowman’s capsuleAfferent arterioles Glomeruli Proximal renal tubulePodocytes52.8 A Tour of the Nephron Scanning electron micrographs illustratethe anatomical basis for blood filtration by the kidneys. (A) In a preparationshowing only the blood vessels (tubular tissue has been digestedaway), the glomeruli appear as balls of capillaries served by arterioles.(B) Higher magnification of a glomerulus with the tubule cells intact showsthe podocytes that wrap around the glomerular capillaries. (C) This crosssection of an intact glomerulus shows the tubule cells that formBowman’s capsule.52.7 The Vertebrate Nephron The vertebrate nephron consistsof a renal tubule closely associated with two capillary beds,the glomerulus and the peritubular capillaries.GO TO Web Activity 52.2 • The Vertebrate NephronyourBioPortal.compressure in the glomerular capillaries is unusually high, and becausethe capillaries of the glomerulus, along with their coveringof podocytes, are more permeable to water than other capillarybeds in the body.The renal tubules convert glomerular filtrate to urineThe composition of the filtrate that enters the renal tubule issimilar to that of the blood plasma, with the exception of highmolecular-weight solutes such as proteins. Reabsorption andsecretion cause the composition of this fluid to change as itpasses down the renal tubule. Cells of the tubule actively reabsorbcertain molecules from the tubule fluid (which are returnedto the blood flowing through the peritubular capillaries). Forexample, glucose and amino acids are reabsorbed. Most NaClis reabsorbed. Other substances in the blood of the peritubularcapillaries are actively secreted into the tubule fluid. An exampleis paraminohippuric acid (PAH), which is produced in theliver from benzoic acid, a common food preservative. Becauseof the actions of the renal tubules, the excreted urine is very differentfrom the original filtrate.52.4 RECAPThe kidney is the major excretory organ of vertebrates.Its functional unit is the nephron, which includesa glomerulus that filters blood and a renaltubule that secretes and reabsorbs solutes, modifyingthe filtrate to produce urine. The nephron is amechanism for excreting excess water while conservingvaluable solutes.• Explain the difference in the osmoregulatoryadaptations of marine bony and cartilaginous fishes.See p. 1098• What are the functional relationships between theglomerular and peritubular capillaries? See p. 1099and Figure 52.7• Describe how blood is filtered by the glomerulus.See pp. 1099–1100• How is the composition of the urine made differentfrom the composition of the blood? See p. 1100The adaptations that enable the mammalian kidney to produceurine more concentrated than extracellular fluids were importantsteps in vertebrate evolution, and they were largelyachieved through changes in the structure and regional functionsof the renal tubules.How Does the Mammalian Kidney 52.5 Produce Concentrated Urine?Mammals have high body temperatures and high metabolicrates, and therefore have the potential for a high rate of waterloss. Having an excretory system that minimizes water loss madeit possible for these highly active species to occupy arid habitats.Kidneys produce urine, and the bladder stores itMammalian excretory systems are similar, so we will use thatof humans as our example. Humans have two kidneys at theback of the upper region of the abdominal cavity (Figure 52.9A).Each kidney filters blood, processes the filtrate into urine, andreleases that urine into a duct called the ureter. The ureter ofeach kidney leads to the urinary bladder, where the urine isstored until it is excreted through the urethra, a short tube thatopens to the outside of the body.Two sphincter muscles surrounding the base of the urethracontrol urination. One of these sphincters is a smooth muscleand is controlled by the autonomic nervous system. As the bladderfills, stretch receptors in the walls of the bladder trigger aspinal reflex that relaxes this sphincter. This reflex is the onlycontrol of urination in infants, hence their frequent “accidents.”The other sphincter is a skeletal muscle and is controlled by thevoluntary nervous system. When the bladder is very full, onlydeliberate conscious effort prevents urination. Infant toilet traininginvolves learning to control this sphincter.Nephrons have a regular arrangement in the kidneyThe kidney is shaped like a kidney bean; when sliced along itslong axis, its key anatomical features are revealed (Figure 52.9B).The ureter and the renal artery and renal vein enter the kidneyon its concave (punched-in) side. The ureter extends into the kidneyin several branches, the ends of which envelop kidney tissuescalled renal pyramids. The renal pyramids make up the internalcore, or medulla, of the kidney. The medulla is covered byan outer layer, or cortex, that has a granular appearance. Betweenthe cortex and the medulla, the renal artery divides intothe many arterioles that serve the nephrons. In this same region,the renal vein collects blood from the many venules that drainthe peritubular capillaries.The organization of the nephrons within the kidney is veryregular. All of the glomeruli with their Bowman’s capsules arelocated in the cortex. The initial segment of a renal tubule iscalled the proximal convoluted tubule—“proximal” because it isclosest to the glomerulus, and “convoluted” because it is twisted(Figure 52.9C). All of the proximal convoluted tubules are alsolocated in the cortex.At the point at which the renal tubule descends into themedulla, it straightens and descends directly down into themedulla. In the medulla the tubule makes a hairpin turn and ascendsback to the cortex, forming what is called the loop of Henle.Some nephrons have longer loops of Henle than others. Some20 to 30 percent of human nephrons that have glomeruli deep inthe cortex (i.e., near the border with the medulla) have long loopsof Henle that go deep into the medulla. Nephrons that haveglomeruli farther up in the cortex generally have short loops ofHenle that descend only a short distance into the medulla. Aswe will see, the long loops are the critical adaptation of the mammaliannephron that enables the kidney to concentrate the urine.1100 CHAPTER 52 | SALT AND WATER BALANCE AND NITROGEN EXCRETIONGO TO Animated Tutorial 52.1 • The Mammalian KidneyyourBioPortal.comThe ascending limb of the loop of Henle becomes the distalconvoluted tubule when it reaches the cortex—“distal” becauseit is farther from the glomerulus. The distal convoluted tubulesof many nephrons join a common collecting duct in the cortex.The collecting ducts descend back down through the renal pyramid,parallel to and past the tips of the loops of Henle, andempty into the funnel-shaped pelvis. Divisions of the pelvis thatsurround each renal pyramid join together to leave the kidneyas the ureter (see Figure 52.9B).The organization of the blood vessels of the kidney closelyparallels the organization of the nephrons (see Figure 52.9C).Smaller arteries branch from the renal artery and radiate intothe cortex, forming the afferent arterioles that carry blood toeach glomerulus. Each glomerulus is drained by an efferentarteriole that gives rise to the peritubular capillaries, most ofwhich surround the cortical portions of the tubules. As we haveseen, the intimate association between the glomerular and peritubularcapillaries permits exchanges between the blood andthe specialized regions of the nephron tubule.Some of the peritubular capillaries run into the medulla inparallel with the loops of Henle and the collecting ducts, forminga vascular network called the vasa recta. All of the peritubularcapillaries from a nephron join back together into a venulethat joins with venules from other nephrons and eventuallyleads to the renal vein. As we will see, the concentrating abilityof the mammalian kidney depends on water reabsorption inthe renal medulla, and the vasa recta are the avenue by whichthat water gets out of the renal medulla and into the circulation.Most of the glomerular filtrate is reabsorbedby the proximal convoluted tubuleMost of the water and solutes filtered by the glomerulus are reabsorbedand do not appear in the urine. We can reach this con-52.5 | HOW DOES THE MAMMALIAN KIDNEY PRODUCE CONCENTRATED URINE? 1101KidneyUreterUrinary bladderUrethraGlomerulusCortexMedullaProximalconvolutedtubulePeritubularcapillariesLoop of Henle(thin ascendinglimb)Loop of Henle(descendinglimb)Bowman,s capsule Afferent arterioleEfferent arteriole DistalconvolutedtubuleCorticalnephron(short loop)VeinArteryVenuleCollectingductVasa recta(capillaries)Loop of Henle(thick ascendinglimb)(A)(B)(C)Renal arteryRenalpyramidRenal veinUreterPelvisMedullaCortex52.9 The Human Excretory System (A) The human kidneys lieagainst the back wall of the abdominal cavity, in the region of the middleback. (B) A highly organized internal structure is the basis for kidney function.Certain parts of the nephrons are in the organ’s outer region, calledthe cortex; other parts are in the internal region, called the medulla. (C)The glomeruli and the proximal and distal convoluted tubules are locatedin the cortex of the kidney. The loops of Henle run in parallel as straightsections down into the renal medulla and back up to the cortex.Collecting ducts run from the cortex to the inner surface of the medulla,where they open into the ureter. The vasa recta are peritubular capillariesthat parallel the loops of Henle.GO TO Web Activity 52.3 • The Human Excretory SystemyourBioPortal.comclusion by comparing the rate of filtration by the glomeruli withthe rate of urine production. The kidneys receive about 1 literof blood per minute, or about 1,500 liters of blood per day. Howmuch of this huge volume is filtered out of the glomeruli? Theanswer is about 12 percent. This is still a large volume—180liters per day! We normally urinate 2 to 3 liters per day, so about98 percent of the fluid volume that is filtered out of the glomerulusis returned to the blood. Where and how is this enormousfluid volume reabsorbed?The proximal convoluted tubule (PCT) is responsible formost of the reabsorption of water and solutes from the glomerularfiltrate. The cells of this section of the renal tubule have manymicrovilli that increase their apical (facing into the tubule) surfacearea for reabsorption, and they have many mitochondria—an indication that they are metabolically active. PCT cells activelytransport Na+ (with Cl– following) and other solutes, suchas glucose and amino acids, out of the tubule fluid.Almost all glucose and amino acid molecules that are filteredfrom the blood are actively reabsorbed by PCT cells and transportedinto the extracellular fluid. The active transport of solutesfrom the proximal tubule into the interstitial fluid causes waterto follow osmotically. The water and solutes moved into the interstitialfluid are taken up by the peritubular capillaries and returnedto the venous blood. These processes accomplish the reabsorptionof more than 75 percent of the fluid that initiallyenters the nephron.Despite the bulk reabsorption of water and solutes by thePCT, the overall osmolarity of the fluid flowing through the PCTdoes not change. Thus, the process that is occurring in the PCTis called isosmotic reabsorption. The fluid that enters the loop ofHenle has the same osmolarity as the blood plasma, althoughits composition is different. How then does the kidney produceurine that is more concentrated than the blood plasma?The loop of Henle creates a concentration gradientin the renal medullaHumans can produce urine that is four times more concentratedthan their blood plasma. The vampire bat we encountered atthe beginning of this chapter can produce urine that is twentytimes more concentrated than its blood plasma. The concentratingability of the mammalian kidney arises from a countercurrentmultiplier mechanism made possible by the anatomicalarrangement of the loops of Henle. The term “countercurrent”refers to the opposing directions in which the tubule fluid in thedescending and ascending limbs flows. The term “multiplier”refers to the ability of this system to create a solute concentrationgradient in the renal medulla.The loops of Henle do not themselves produce concentratedurine; rather, they increase the osmolarity of the extracellularfluid in the medulla in a graduated way. In humans, for example,the extracellular fluid may be 300 mosm/l (the concentrationof blood plasma) at the top of the medulla bordering thecortex, and increase to about 1,200 mosm/l near the hairpin turnof the loop of Henle (see Figure 52.10). How do the loops producethis effect?The cells that make up the different segments of the loop ofHenle differ anatomically and functionally. Cells of the descendinglimb and the initial cells of the ascending limb are thin, withno microvilli and few mitochondria. They are not specializedfor transport. Partway up the ascending limb, the cells becomespecialized for active transport. These cells are thick and havemany mitochondria. Accordingly, the segments of the loop ofHenle are named the thin descending limb, the thin ascending limb,and the thick ascending limb (Figure 52.10).The countercurrent multiplier mechanism may be more easilyunderstood by first considering events occurring in the thickascending limb (Figure 52.10, note 1). The cells of the thick ascendinglimb reabsorb Na+ and Cl– from the tubule fluid andmove it into the interstitial fluid. (In the following discussion,we will distinguish between the two components of extracellularfluid—the blood plasma and the interstitial fluid.) The thickascending limb is not permeable to water, so the reabsorptionof Na+ and Cl– from the tubular fluid raises the concentrationof those solutes in the surrounding interstitial fluid and decreasesthe concentration of the tubular fluid entering the distalconvoluted tubule.The thin descending limb, in contrast, is highly permeableto water but not very permeable to Na+ and Cl–. Since the localinterstitial fluid has been made more concentrated by the Na+and Cl– reabsorbed from the neighboring thick ascending limb,water is withdrawn osmotically from the tubule fluid in the descendinglimb. Therefore, the fluid in the descending limb becomesmore concentrated as it flows toward the hairpin turn atthe bottom of the renal medulla (Figure 52.10, note 2).The thin ascending limb, like the thick ascending limb, is notpermeable to water. It is, however, permeable to Na+ and Cl–.As the concentrated tubule fluid flows up the thin ascendinglimb, it is more concentrated than the surrounding interstitialfluid, so Na+ and Cl– diffuse out. When the tubule fluid reachesthe thick ascending limb, active transport continues to moveNa+ and Cl– from the tubule fluid to the interstitial fluid.As a result of the processes described above, the tubule fluidreaching the distal convoluted tubule is less concentrated thanthe blood plasma (Figure 52.10, note 3), and the solutes that havebeen left behind in the renal medulla have created a concentrationgradient in the interstitial fluid of the medulla (indicatedby the background color gradient in Figure 52.10).You may wonder why the blood flow through the medulladoes not wash out the concentration gradient established by theloops of Henle. The parallel arrangement of the descending andascending peritubular capillaries—the vasa recta—in themedulla helps preserve the concentration gradient in themedulla. These capillaries are permeable to both salt and water.Therefore, as blood flows down the descending limb of thevasa recta into the increasingly concentrated interstitial fluid ofthe medulla, it loses water and gains solutes. As blood flows upfrom the bottom of the medulla in the ascending limb of thevasa recta, the opposite happens (water is gained and solutesare lost) because now the blood is more concentrated than thesurrounding interstitial fluid (Figure 52.10, notes 4–6). The dynamicsof this countercurrent exchange of salts and water be-1102 CHAPTER 52 | SALT AND WATER BALANCE AND NITROGEN EXCRETIONtween the blood in the vasa recta and the interstitial fluids resultin little net change in the composition of the interstitial fluidin the medulla.Water permeability of kidney tubules dependson water channelsWe have noted that some tubule regions, such as the PCT, arehighly permeable to water while others, such as the thick ascendinglimb of the loop of Henle, are impermeable to water.How do differences in water permeability in different regionsof the nephron arise? Regions of the nephron that are highlypermeable to water have greater numbers of aquaporins, a classof membrane proteins that form water channels (see Section 6.3).Aquaporins are abundant in kidney PCT cells and in descendinglimbs of the loops of Henle, but not in the ascending limbsof the loop of Henle. The discovery of aquaporins resulted inPeter Agre of Johns Hopkins University receiving the NobelPrize in Chemistry in 2003.As an interesting evolutionary note, aquaporins are also importantin maintaining water balance in amphibians. When notin an aqueous environment, many amphibians can gain waterfrom a moist substrate because they have aquaporins in the epithelialcells of their belly skin. Thus, water can cross their skininto the interstitial fluid by osmosis.52.5 | HOW DOES THE MAMMALIAN KIDNEY PRODUCE CONCENTRATED URINE? 110312453The thick ascending limb of Henle transportsNaCl from filtrate to the interstitial fluid. Becausethis region is impermeable to water, H2O cannotfollow and so NaCl accumulates in the interstitialfluid of the renal medulla.The resulting higher osmolarity of the interstitialfluid causes osmotic reabsorption of water fromthe thin descending limb of Henle, thusconcentrating the tubule fluid entering theascending limb.Tubule fluid composition is finely controlled bysecretion and absorption of solutes in the distalconvoluted tubule.Fluid flowing down the collecting duct is lessconcentrated than the surrounding interstitialfluid, so water is withdrawn osmotically.Water reabsorbed from the descending limb ofHenle and the collecting duct leaves the medullavia the vasa recta.6 The lower portion of the collecting duct ispermeable to urea, which diffuses into theinterstitial fluid and is recycled, thus adding tothe concentration gradient in the medulla.Urine(1200 mosm/l)GlomerulusH2OH2OH2OH2OH2O3003004006008001000400500600700Osmolarity (mosm/l) of the tissue fluids800900100011001200 110020040011001000120015030040060080010001200Descending limbAscending limb Loop of HenleVasarectaNaClNaClNaClNaClNaClUreaNaClH2OH2OH2OH2OH2OH2OH2O200Collecting duct200H2O600800NaClProximalconvolutedtubuleGlucose, aminoacids, and othervaluable solutesH2ODistal convolutedtubuleBlood plasma(300 mosm/l)Cortex300300300300300BloodoutBloodinUreaDiffusion or osmotic flowActive transportFluid flowOutermedullaInnermedulla14625352.10 Concentrating the Urine A countercurrent multiplier mechanismenables the mammalian kidney to produce urine that is far moreconcentrated than the blood plasma. The composition—but not the concentration—of the filtrate is changed by the proximal convoluted tubule,which reabsorbs valuable molecules (including NaCl). Bulk reabsorption ofwater follows osmotically. The urine concentration process begins in thethick ascending limb of Henle, which reabsorbs NaCl but is impermeableto H2O. Some of the reabsorbed NaCl enters the descending limb and isthereby trapped in the renal medulla, creating a concentration gradient inthe interstitial fluid. As urine in the collecting duct passes through thisconcentration gradient, it can lose water osmotically and become highlyconcentrated.The distal convoluted tubule fine-tunes thecomposition of the urineThe first portion of the distal convoluted tubule is similar to thethick ascending limb of the loop of Henle. Na+ and Cl– are transportedout of the tubule fluid, and water cannot follow. As a result,the tubule fluid becomes even more dilute. The later sectionsof the distal convoluted tubule, however, can be permeableto water, and water can be osmotically drawn from the tubuleinto the interstitial fluid. As the tubule fluid flows from the distaltubule to the collecting duct, it can be below or equal to theosmolarity of the blood plasma.An important function of the distal tubule is the fine-tuningof the ionic composition of the urine. Even though bulk reabsorptionof substances such as calcium, phosphate, bicarbonate,and potassium occurs in the proximal convoluted tubule,changes in the concentrations of these substances occur in thedistal convoluted tubule. In the case of potassium, for example,if a person is potassium depleted, this ion is reabsorbed in thedistal convoluted tubule, but if a person has an abundance ofpotassium, this ion is secreted in the distal convoluted tubule.As we will see below, this exchange of K+ is controlled by thehormone aldosterone. Another example is reabsorption of Ca2+ inthe distal convoluted tubule, which is controlled by the actionsof vitamin D. The fine-tuning of urine composition continues inthe collecting duct. As you can imagine, the list of ion transportersin the distal convoluted tubule is large.Urine is concentrated in the collecting ductThe tubule fluid entering the collecting duct is at about the samesolute concentration as the blood plasma, but its solute compositionis considerably different from that of the plasma. The majorsolute in the tubular fluid is now urea, since salts were reabsorbedearlier in the nephron. As the tubule fluid flows downthe collecting duct, it loses water osmotically to the interstitialfluid, and that water returns to the circulatory system via thevasa recta (see Figure 52.10).The concentration gradient established in the renal medullaby the countercurrent multiplier actions of the loops of Henlecreates the osmotic potential that withdraws water from the collectingducts. The collecting ducts begin in the renal cortex andrun through the renal medulla before emptying into the ureterat the tips of the renal pyramids. During this journey, the soluteconcentration of the surrounding interstitial fluid increases, andmore and more water can be absorbed from the urine in the collectingduct. By the time it reaches the ureter, the urine can becomegreatly concentrated, with urea as a major solute.As water is withdrawn from the collecting duct, some ureaalso leaks out into the medullary interstitial fluid, adding toits osmotic potential. This urea diffuses back into the loop ofHenle and is returned to the collecting duct. The recycling ofurea in the renal medulla contributes significantly to the concentrationgradient and therefore the ability of the kidney toconcentrate the urine in the collecting duct.Overall, the ability of a mammal to concentrate its urine isdetermined by the maximum concentration gradient it can establishin its renal medulla. An important adaptation for increasingthe concentration gradient is to increase the lengths of theloops of Henle relative to overall kidney size. The small desertgerbil, for example, has such extremely long loops of Henle thatits renal pyramid (each of its kidneys has only one, in contrastto ours) extends far out of the concave surface of the kidney andinto the ureter (Figure 52.11). These animals are so effective inconserving water that they can survive just on the water releasedby the metabolism of their food.The kidneys help regulate acid–base balanceBesides regulating salt and water balance and excreting nitrogenouswastes, the kidneys have another important role: they regulatethe hydrogen ion concentration (the pH) of the extracellularfluids. pH is a critical variable because it influences thestructure and function of proteins.One way to minimize pH changes in a chemical solution is toadd a buffer—a substance that can either absorb or release hydrogenions (see Section 2.4). The major buffers in the blood arebicarbonate ions (HCO3–; see Figure 49.14) that are formed fromthe dissociation of carbonic acid, which in turn is formed bythe hydration of CO2 according to the following equilibriumreaction:CO2 + H2O ~ H2CO3 ~ H+ + HCO3–From this equation, you can see that if excess hydrogen ions areadded to this reaction mixture, the reaction will move to the leftand absorb the excess H+. If hydrogen ions are removed fromthe reaction mixture, however, the reaction will move to theright and supply more H+.The HCO3– buffer system is important for controlling the pHof the blood, and therefore of the interstitial fluids as well, becausethe reaction can be pushed to the right and pulled to theleft physiologically. The lungs control the levels of CO2 in the1104 CHAPTER 52 | SALT AND WATER BALANCE AND NITROGEN EXCRETIONRenalmedullaRenalcortex52.11 The Ability to Concentrate The ability of the mammalian kidneyto concentrate urine depends on the lengths of its loops of Henle relativeto the overall size of the kidney. The kidney of a desert gerbil has asingle renal pyramid with loops of Henle so long that the pyramid extendsfar into the ureter (ureter not shown).blood, thus altering the acid portion of the reaction. CO2 is consideredthe acid portion of the reaction because if you add additionalCO2, the reaction shifts to the right, producing more H+ions. The kidneys control the base portion of the reaction by removingH+ from the blood and returning HCO3– to the blood.How are H+ ions removed from the blood?One mechanism for H+ secretion and HCO3– reabsorption involvesammonia (NH3) and ammonium ion (NH4+). The metabolismof glutamine in tubule cells produces NH3 and HCO3–.The HCO3– is reabsorbed into the interstitial fluid. The NH3 istransported into the tubule fluid by means of an NH3 transporterthat has been characterized only recently in an effort toidentify novel proteins coming from the sequencing of the humanand other genomes (Figure 52.12).Another mechanism for H+ secretion and HCO3– reabsorptionis shown in Figure 52.13. The H+ is transported into thetubule fluid in exchange for Na+. The H+ combines with HCO3–that has been filtered in the glomerulus, producing H2CO3 thatdisassociates into H2O and CO2. The CO2 diffuses into thetubule cell where in the presence of the enzyme carbonic anhydraseit produces HCO3– that is transported into the interstitialfluid and thence to the blood.Kidney failure is treated with dialysisLoss of kidney function, or renal failure, results in the retentionof salts and water (hence high blood pressure), retention of urea(uremic poisoning), and a decreasing pH (acidosis). A personwho suffers complete renal failure will die within 2 weeks if nottreated. A drastic but highly successful treatment is kidneytransplant, but it is usually necessary to sustain a patient forconsiderable time while waiting for a kidney to become available.Therefore, artificial kidneys, or renal dialysis machines,are essential modes of treatment.In a dialysis machine, the patient’s blood flows throughmany small channels made of semipermeable membranes52.5 | HOW DOES THE MAMMALIAN KIDNEY PRODUCE CONCENTRATED URINE? 1105Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODINVESTIGATING LIFELack of functional Rhcg protein impairs a mouse’s ability to secrete ammonium ions in its urine, thus limiting thecapacity to regulate acid-base balance. This protein is probably an ammonia transporter in the renal tubules.52.12 An Ammonium Transporter in the Renal Tubules?An important way the kidney excretes hydrogen ions and buffers the blood is to secrete ammonia (NH3) into the renal tubules. It wasthought that ammonia simply diffused into the tubules until the function of Rhcg, a protein in the Rh blood antigen family, was discovered.This experiment demonstrated that loss of the Rhcg gene in mice impairs their ability to buffer their blood pH by excretingexcess H+ (in the form of ammonium).The protein Rhcg is an ammonia transporter and is critical for the kidney’s role in acid-base balance.RESULTS1. Create a line of mice in which the gene for the protein Rhcg is knocked out (see Section 18.4).2. Measure starting blood pH, plasma bicarbonate (HCO3−) levels, and urine ammonium (NH4+) levelsin experimental and control (wild-type) mice.3. For 6 days, administer drinking water containing NH4Cl (ammonium chloride, a mild acid)to control mice and to Rhcg knockout mice.4. Measure the three variables (see item 2 above) at days 2 and 6.Wild-typeKnockoutBlood pH0 2 6Days7.17.07.27.37.4NH4+ in urine (μmol/day)0 2 6Days501001502002503000350Plasma HCO3– (mM)0 2 6Days5101520025Ingested acid makes theblood pH of both groupsmore acidic, but by day6 the wild-type mice areable to re-establishacid-base balance.Throughout the experiment,wild-type mice excrete moreammonium (i.e., more H+)in their urine than knockoutmice do.By day 6, the ability of wild-typemice to buffer the blood byexcreting H+ as ammoniumleads to a return to normalof blood bicarbonate levels.1106 CHAPTER 52 | SALT AND WATER BALANCE AND NITROGEN EXCRETION(Figure 52.14). A dialysis solution flows on the other side ofthese membranes, through which small molecules can diffuse.Molecules and ions diffuse from an area of higher concentrationto an area of lower concentration, so the composition of thedialysis fluid is crucial. The concentrations of the molecules orions that need to be conserved must be at the same concentrationin the dialysis fluid as they are in the blood. The concentrationsof molecules and ions that need to be removed from theblood are zero in the dialysis fluid. The total osmotic potentialof the dialysis fluid must equal that of the plasma.About 500 ml of the patient’s blood is in the dialysis machineat any one time, and the unit processes several hundred milli-Na+ and HCO3– arefiltered in the glomerulus.1Renal tubule cellssecrete H+ inexchange for Na+.2 Na+/HCO3– symporter carriesNa+ and HCO3– across basalmembrane of tubule cell.5CO2 is formed by the reactionof HCO3–and H+ and diffusesinto the tubule cell.3 CO2 is convertedback to HCO3– inthe renal tubule cell.4GlomerulusRenal tubuleHCO3–H+ + HCO3– HCO3–H+Na H + +Na+ Na+Renal tubulelumenRenaltubulecellCarbonicanhydraseH2CO3H2O + CO2+CO2 + H2OInterstitialfluids52.13 The Kidney ExcretesAcids and Conserves BasesBicarbonate ions are filtered out ofthe blood at the glomerulus, andrenal tubule cells secrete hydrogenions into the tubule fluid. In therenal tubule, the filtered bicarbonatebuffers the secreted hydrogenions and keeps the urine frombecoming too acidic. The CO2formed by the reaction of bicarbonateand hydrogen ions is convertedback to bicarbonate by the renaltubule cells and transported backinto the interstitial fluid.The blood is dialyzedacross a semipermeablemembranebathed with a solutionsimilar in compositionto blood plasma.Used dialysis solutioncontaining metabolicwastes is discarded.Arterial blood istaken from thepatient.132Blood pumpBubbletrapDialyzerFresh dialysis solution Constant-temperature bathSTARTBlood is returned tothe body in a vein.452.14 Renal Dialysis Patients with kidney failure can havetheir blood cleansed of wastes by renal dialysis machines.Blood flows through channels of semipermeable membranesthat allow diffusion of waste molecules from the blood to adialysis fluid.liters of blood per minute. Apatient with no kidney function mustbe on the dialysis machine for 4 to 6 hours three times a week.52.5 RECAPThe anatomical organization of the nephrons makesit possible for the mammalian kidney to produce aurine more concentrated than the blood, therebyconserving water to maintain extracellular fluid volume.Bulk reabsorption of salts, other valuablesolutes, and water takes place in the proximal convolutedtubule. The loops of Henle act as a countercurrentmultiplier, creating a concentration gradientof the interstitial fluids in the renal medulla. Collectingducts run through the renal medulla and lose waterosmotically to the surrounding interstitial fluids,concentrating the urine.• Explain how the countercurrent multiplier mechanismof the nephron makes it possible for the kidney toform a concentrated urine. See p. 1102 and Figure52.10• How does the kidney contribute to acid–base balance?See pp. 1104–1105 and Figure 52.13The kidney contributes to homeostasis in several ways, includingregulating extracellular fluid volume, maintaining the osmoticconcentration and ionic composition of the extracellularfluid, and regulating pH. As we will see next, the kidneys alsoplay a major role in regulating blood pressure.52.6 How Are Kidney Functions Regulated?Several regulatory mechanisms act on the kidneys to maintainblood pressure, blood osmolarity, and blood composition. Wewill discuss these mechanisms separately, but keep in mind thatthey are always working together.Glomerular filtration rate is regulatedIf the kidneys stop filtering blood, they cannot accomplish anyof their functions. The maintenance of a constant glomerular filtrationrate (GFR) depends on an adequate blood supply to thekidneys at an adequate blood pressure. Renal arteries usuallydeliver blood to the kidneys at high pressure because they areearly branches off the aorta. In addition, autoregulatory mechanismsensure adequate blood supply and blood pressure for kidneyfunction regardless of what is happening elsewhere in thebody. The kidney’s autoregulatory adjustments compensate fordecreases in cardiac output or decreases in blood pressure sothat the GFR remains constant.One autoregulatory mechanism is the dilation (expansion)of the afferent renal arterioles when blood pressure falls. Thisdilation decreases the resistance in the arterioles and helpsmaintain blood pressure in the glomerulus. If arteriole dilationdoes not keep the GFR from falling, the kidney releases an enzyme,renin, into the blood. Renin converts a circulating protein,angiotensinogen, into angiotensin I, which is then acted on byangiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) to form the active hormoneangiotensin II, or simply, angiotensin (Figure 52.15). Angiotensinhas several effects that help restore the GFR to normal:• It constricts the efferent renal arterioles, raising the resistancefor blood leaving the glomerulus. Like putting a fingerover the end of a garden hose, this restriction of drainage elevatesblood pressure in the glomerular capillaries.• It constricts peripheral blood vessels all over the body, anaction that elevates central blood pressure.• It stimulates the adrenal cortex to release the hormonealdosterone. Aldosterone stimulates sodium reabsorptionby the kidney, thereby making its reabsorption of watermore effective. Enhanced water reabsorption helps maintainblood volume and therefore central blood pressure.• It acts on the brain to stimulate thirst. Increased water intakein response to thirst increases blood volume and bloodpressure.Thus the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, or RAAS, coordinatesmany responses to maintain blood pressure and kidneyfunction.Blood osmolarity and blood pressureare regulated by ADHCells in the hypothalamus can stimulate the release from theposterior pituitary of a hormone called antidiuretic hormone(ADH, also called vasopressin) that can act on cells of the collectingduct to insert aquaporins (water channels) into their plasmamembranes. The aquaporins increase the permeability of thesemembranes to water, and therefore more water is reabsorbedfrom the collecting duct fluid into the interstitial spaces of therenal medulla. The higher the circulating levels of ADH, thegreater the number of aquaporins. Various factors can stimulateor inhibit the release of ADH. Of key importance to kidneyfunction are osmoreceptors that monitor blood osmolarityand stretch receptors that monitor blood pressure (Figure 52.16).Osmoreceptor neurons in the hypothalamus are activated bya rise in blood osmolarity, and they increase the release of ADH.ADH helps regulate blood osmolarity by controlling water reabsorption.The osmoreceptors also stimulate thirst. The resultingwater retention and water intake dilute the blood as theyexpand blood volume.Stretch receptors in the walls of the aorta and the carotid arteries(see Figure 50.17) that detect an increase in blood pressurewill inhibit the release of ADH. With less circulating ADH,less water is reabsorbed, which decreases blood volume andhence acts to lower blood pressure.If blood pressure falls, as when you lose blood volumethrough hemorrhage or excessive evaporative water loss, activityof the stretch receptors in the aorta and carotid arteries decreases.Input via cranial nerves to the hypothalamus from thesereceptors inhibits the release of ADH, so when the firing rates52.6 | HOW ARE KIDNEY FUNCTIONS REGULATED? 1107AnteriorpituitaryPosterior pituitaryHypothalamusBlood pressureBlood osmolarityIn the kidney:ADH increasespermeability ofcollecting ductcells and distaltubule cellsto H2ORise inbloodosmolarityRenal excretionof solutes andreabsorptionof H2O decreaseblood osmolarityRelease of ADHin bloodstreamResorption of water helps maintainblood volume and blood pressureStretch receptorsin the aorta andcarotid arterydetect increasesin blood pressureand inhibit ADHreleaseRise inbloodpressureOsmoreceptors inthe hypothalamusdetect an increasein osmolarity andstimulate ADHreleaseDecrease in bloodpressure lessensthe inhibition andpromotes ADHreleaseFall inbloodpressure52.16 Antidiuretic Hormone Increases Blood Pressure andPromotes Water Reabsorption ADH is produced by neurons inthe hypothalamus and released from nerve endings in the posteriorpituitary. The release of ADH is stimulated by hypothalamic osmoreceptorsand inhibited by stretch receptors in the great arteries. Redlines indicate inhibitory actions; green lines show stimulatory actions.2 ...making the fluid in thedistal tubule more dilute.3 Where the distal tubule contactsthe glomerular arterioles, specializedtubule cells (macula densa) respondto the dilute fluid by signaling cellsadjacent to the afferent glomerulararteriole to release renin.4 Renin in the blood converts acirculating prohormone,angiotensinogen, to angiotensin I.5 Circulating angiotensin converting enzyme(ACE) produced in the lungs and kidneyconverts angiotensin I to angiotensin II,or simply angiotensin.6 Angiotensin raises GFR throughseveral mechanisms includingconstriction of the efferentglomerular arterioles.1 If glomerular filtration is low, flow offiltrate through the nephron is slow,and more NaCl is reabsorbed....ReninReninAfferentarterioleMacula densa cellsNephronEfferent arterioleAngiotensinAldosterone increases Na2+ reabsorptionStimulatesthirstStimulates adrenalcortex to releasealdosteroneStimulatesperipheralvasoconstrictionAngiotensinogen Angiotensin IAngiotensin I AngiotensinDistal convolutedtubuleGlomerulusBowman’scapsuleProximalconvolutedtubule52.15 Renin-Angiotensin-AldosteroneSystem Helps Regulate GFR When glomerularfiltration rate (GFR) falls, tubular fluid flowsmore slowly through the loops of Henle, moreNaCl is reabsorbed from the thick ascendinglimb, and the fluid reaching the distal convolutedtubule is more dilute. Dilute fluid in the distal convolutedtubule (where it comes into contact withthe afferent and efferent glomerular arterioles)stimulates release of the enzyme renin into thecirculation. Renin starts a cascade of events thatwork together to raise blood volume, blood pressure,and GFR.of these stretch receptors fall, ADH release increases. More ADHresults in more efficient water reabsorption and therefore a protectionof blood volume and blood pressure.Alcohol inhibits ADH release, explaining why excessive beerdrinking leads to excessive urination and dehydration, whichcontributes to the symptoms of a hangover.As mentioned earlier, the presence of aquaporins in plasmamembranes determines their water permeability. Aquaporinsplay an important and unique role in the collecting duct. Severalmembers of the aquaporin family of water channels arefound in the plasma membranes of cells in the distal tubules.At least two aquaporins are localized in the basolateral membranes(facing the blood vessels). Adifferent aquaporin, calledAQP-2, is found in the apical plasma membranes (facing intothe tubule). But the presence of AQP-2 in these membranes iscontrolled by ADH, as described in Figure 52.17.Sometimes AQP-2 is sequestered in the membranes of intracellularvesicles, and when it is, the collecting duct permeabilityis low. ADH causes these vesicles to insert their AQP-2 channelsinto the apical plasma membrane, making that membrane(and therefore the cell) permeable to water. ADH also stimulatesthe synthesis of new AQP-2 proteins. Thus, circulatingADH controls the number of AQP-2 water channels in theplasma membranes of the collecting duct cells, and thereforetheir water permeability.The heart produces a hormone that helps lowerblood pressureYou may not think of the heart as an endocrine organ, but it is.When blood volume is high, blood pressure is high, and that putsstrain on the heart. Under these conditions, the increased venousreturn stretches the atria of the heart. When the atrial musclefibers are overly stretched, they release a peptide hormone calledatrial natriuretic peptide (ANP). This peptide hormone enters thecirculation, and in the kidney it decreases the reabsorption ofsodium. If less sodium is reabsorbed, less water is reabsorbed,and more passes into the urine. Thus, ANP has the effect of loweringblood volume and therefore blood pressure.52.6 RECAPGlomerular filtration is essential for kidney functionand is sustained by autoregulatory mechanisms.Sensors that monitor blood pressure and blood osmolaritymay stimulate or inhibit the release of hormonesthat regulate kidney function.• Explain how falling GFR results in an increase in circulatingangiotensin and how angiotensin restores GFR.See p. 1107• Explain how falling blood pressure or increasing bloodosmolarity result in changes in permeability of the collectingducts. See Figure 52.1652.6 | HOW ARE KIDNEY FUNCTIONS REGULATED? 1109CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE52.17 ADH Induces Insertion of Aquaporins intoPlasma MembranesAquaporin proteins make different regions of renal tubulespermeable to water. One of these, AQP-2, is responsible forthe permeability of the collecting duct cells. How doesantidiuretic hormone act on these proteins to control the levelof permeability in renal cells?HYPOTHESIS Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) controls thelocation of aquaporin proteins.In the absence of ADH, AQP-2 is sequesteredintracellularly. When ADH is present, thesewater channels are inserted into the plasmamembranes, making the cells more permeableto water.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTS1. Isolate collecting ducts from rat kidney.2. Use immunochemical staining to localize theAQP-2 aquaporins in collecting duct cells bothwith and without the presence of ADH. Alsolocalize the aquaporins after ADH is applied andthen washed away.Without ADH, AQP-2are mostly found inplasma membranes ofintracellular vesicles.With ADH, AQP-2are mostly found inplasma membranesof collecting duct cells.After ADH washout,AQP-2 are againsequestered inintracellular vesicles.AQP-2VesicleCollectingduct cellInsidecollecting ductHighLowPermeability ofcollecting duct cellsWithoutADHWithADHAfter ADHwashout3. Perfuse collecting ducts and measure waterpermeability under the same three conditions.
52.1 How Do Excretory Systems MaintainHomeostasis?• Excretory systems maintain the osmolarity and volume of theextracellular fluids and eliminate the waste products of nitrogenmetabolism through the processes of filtration, reabsorption,and secretion. Urine is the output of excretory systems.• There is no active transport of water, so water must be movedacross membranes by a difference in either osmolarity or pressure.• Water enters or leaves cells by osmosis. To achieve cellularwater balance, animals must maintain the osmolarity of theirextracellular fluids within an acceptable range.• Marine animals can be osmoconformers or osmoregulators.Freshwater animals must be osmoregulators and must continuallyexcrete water and conserve salts. Most animals are ionicregulators to some degree.• Apart from regulating osmolarity of cells and extracellular fluids,most animals must also regulate their ionic composition byconserving some ions and secreting others. Salt glands areadaptations for secretion of NaCl. Review Figure 52.252.2 How Do Animals Excrete Nitrogen?• Aquatic animals that breathe water can eliminate nitrogenouswastes such as ammonia by diffusion across their gill membranes.Terrestrial animals and some aquatic animals mustdetoxify ammonia by converting it to urea or uric acid beforeexcretion. Review Figure 52.3• Depending on the form in which they excrete their nitrogenouswastes, animals are classified as ammonotelic, ureotelic, oruricotelic.52.3 How Do Invertebrate Excretory Systems Work?• The protonephridia of flatworms consist of flame cells andexcretory tubules. Extracellular fluid is filtered into the tubules,which process the filtrate to produce a dilute urine. ReviewFigure 52.4• In annelid worms, blood pressure causes filtration of the bloodacross capillary walls. The filtrate enters the coelomic cavity,where it is taken up by metanephridia, which alter the compositionof the filtrate by active transport mechanisms. ReviewFigure 52.5, WEB ACTIVITY 52.1• The Malpighian tubules of insects receive ions and nitrogenouswastes by active transport across the tubule cells. Water followsby osmosis. Ions and water are reabsorbed from the rectum, sothe insect excretes semisolid wastes. Review Figure 52.652.4 How Do Vertebrates Maintain Salt and WaterBalance?• Marine and terrestrial animals conserve water in various ways.Marine bony fishes produce little urine. Cartilaginous fishesretain urea so that the osmolarity of their body fluids remainsclose to that of seawater. Amphibians remain close to water.Reptiles have skin with low water permeability, lay shelled eggs,and excrete nitrogenous wastes as uric acid.• Mammals produce urine more concentrated than their extracellularfluids.• The nephron, the functional unit of the vertebrate kidney, consistsof a glomerulus, in which blood is filtered, a renal tubule,which processes the filtrate into urine to be excreted, and a systemof peritubular capillaries, which surround the tubule andserve as a site of secretion and reabsorption. Review Figure52.7, WEB ACTIVITY 52.252.5 How Does the Mammalian Kidney ProduceConcentrated Urine?• The concentrating ability of the mammalian kidney is a functionof its anatomy, which is ideal for countercurrent exchange.Review Figure 52.9, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 52.1• The glomeruli and the proximal and distal convoluted tubulesare located in the cortex of the kidney. Certain molecules areactively reabsorbed from the glomerular filtrate by the tubulecells, and other molecules are actively secreted. Straight sectionsof renal tubules called loops of Henle and collecting ductsare arranged in parallel in the medulla of the kidney. SEE WEBACTIVITY 52.3• Salts and water are reabsorbed in the proximal convolutedtubule without the renal filtrate becoming more concentrated,although its composition changes.• The loops of Henle create a concentration gradient in the interstitialfluid of the renal medulla by a countercurrent multipliermechanism. Urine flowing down the collecting ducts to theureter is concentrated by the osmotic reabsorption of watercaused by the concentration gradient in the surrounding interstitialfluid. Review Figure 52.10• Hydrogen ions secreted by the renal tubules are buffered in theurine by bicarbonate and other chemical buffering systems.Review Figures 52.12 and 52.1352.6 How Are Kidney Functions Regulated?• Kidney function in mammals is controlled by autoregulatorymechanisms that maintain a constant high glomerular filtrationrate (GFR) even if blood pressure varies.• An important autoregulatory mechanism is the release of reninby the kidney when blood pressure falls. Renin activatesangiotensin, which causes the constriction of efferent glomerulararterioles and peripheral blood vessels, causes the release ofaldosterone (which enhances water reabsorption), and stimulatesthirst.• Changes in blood pressure and osmolarity influence the releaseof antidiuretic hormone (ADH), which controls the permeabilityof the collecting duct to water and therefore the amount ofwater that is reabsorbed from the urine. ADH stimulates theexpression of and controls the intracellular location of aquaporins,which serve as water channels in the membranes of collectingduct cells. Review Figures 52.16 and 52.17• When the volume of blood returning to the heart increases andstretches the atrial walls, atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) isreleased, which causes increased excretion of salt and water.SEE WEB ACTIVITY 52.4 for a review of the major humanorgan systems.