On November 11, 1918, an armistice agreementsigned in France signaled the end of the FirstWorld War. But the death toll from four years ofwar was soon surpassed by the casualties of a massive influenzaepidemic that began in the spring of 1918 amongsoldiers in a U.S. Army barracks. Over the next year and ahalf, this particular strain of flu virus spread across theglobe in a true pandemic that killed more than 50 millionpeople worldwide—more than twice the number of WWIrelatedcombat deaths.The 1918–1919 pandemic was also noteworthy becausethe death rate among young adults—who are usuallyless likely to die from influenza than are the elderly orthe very young—was 20 times higher than in influenzaepidemics before or since. Why was that particular fluvirus so deadly, especially to typically hardy individuals?Influenza viruses evolve constantly and rapidly. The1918 strain triggered an especially intense reaction in thehuman immune system. This overreaction (called a “cytokinestorm”) meant that people with strong immune systemswere likely to be more severely affected. Usually,however, our immune system helps fight flu viruses, andthis immune response is the basis of vaccination (seeChapter 42). The first flu vaccines were offered in 1945, andsince then immunization programs have helped keep thenumber and severity of outbreaks in check. But flu virusesevolve so rapidly that last year’s vaccine is not effectiveagainst this year’s virus.Although many of the influenza strains circulating in agiven season are closely related, they are not identical.Genetic variation ensures that there are always differentstrains, and these different strains compete with one another.The strains that are best able to escapedetection by the immune systems of their hostsare most likely to spread, and thus have an advantageover other strains. But the immune systemresponds to counteract the virus, and lastyear’s virus loses its advantage. If flu viruses didnot evolve, we would become resistant andannual vaccination would be unnecessary.Our immune system recognizes an influenzainfection by detecting a protein calledhemagglutinin on the viral surface. New mutationsarise rapidly, and genetic sequencechanges in the viral genome sometimes resultin variation in the structure of hemagglutinin.Variants with altered hemagglutinin structureEvolutionary theory leads to better flu vaccines21Deadly Epidemic So many people were incapacitatedduring the flu epidemic of 1918–1919that temporary hospitals had to be set up. Herethe beds of flu-stricken patients cover the floor ofthe Dartmouth College gymnasium during thepeak of the epidemic in the United States.PART SIX THE PATTERNS AND PROCESSES OF EVOLUTIONWhat Facts Form the Basis of Our 21.1 Understanding of Evolution?The living world is constantly changing. Biologists observemany of these changes directly, both in laboratory experimentsand in natural populations. Many other changes are recordedin the fossil record of life. We can measure the rate at which newmutations arise, observe the spread of new genetic variantsthrough a population, and see the effects of genetic change onthe form and function of organisms. In other words, evolutionis a fact that we can observe directly. Biologists also have accumulateda large body of evidence about how evolutionarychanges occur, and about what evolutionary changes have occurredin the past. The understanding and application of themechanisms of evolutionary change to biological problems isknown as evolutionary theory.Evolutionary theory has many useful applications, such asthe development of influenza vaccines described in the openingof this chapter. We use evolution to study, understand, andtreat diseases; to develop better agricultural crops and practices;and to develop industrial processes that produce new moleculeswith useful properties. Knowledge of evolutionary principleshas helped biologists understand how life diversified and howspecies interact. It also allows us to make predictions aboutthe biological world.In everyday speech, people tend to use the word “theory” tomean an untested hypothesis, or even a guess. But the term“evolutionary theory” does not refer to any single hypothesis,and it certainly is not guesswork. As used in science, “theory”refers to the entire body of work on the understanding andapplication of a field of knowledge. When we refer to “gravitationaltheory,” we are not implying that gravity is an untestedidea. No one doubts that gravity exists—we can see its effectsall around us. Instead, we are referring to our understanding ofthe mechanisms that result in gravitational pull, and the use ofthat understanding to make predictions about the interactionsof physical objects. Drop this book, and it will fall at a predicablerate, according to gravitational theory.In a similar manner, when we refer to evolutionary theory,we are referring to our understanding of the mechanisms thatresult in biological changes in populations over time, and theuse of that understanding to interpret changes and interactionsof biological organisms. That biological populations evolvethrough time is not disputed by biologists. We can, and do,observe evolutionary change on a regular basis. We can directlyobserve the evolution of influenza viruses, but it is evolution-IN THIS CHAPTER we will examine the factual basisof evolution and consider some of the mechanisms that resultin evolutionary change. We will see how Charles Darwindeveloped his ideas on one such mechanism (naturalselection). We will discuss the genetic basis of evolution andshow how genetic variation in populations is measured.Throughout the chapter, we will discuss ways that evolutioncan be applied to practical problems and how it helpsus understand the diversity of life.are more likely to escape detection by our immune system,and thus more likely to survive and replicate. Theterm positive selection describes the evolution of favoredchanges like those in influenza hemagglutinin protein.In developing flu vaccines, biologists examine thehemagglutinin gene, particularly at certain sites knownto be under positive selection for change. Viruses withthe greatest number of changes at these sites are theones most likely to cause next year’s flu epidemic, andtherefore are the best targets for new vaccines. Understandingevolutionary theory thus helps us determine thecauses and find solutions for a potentially deadly disease.CHAPTER OUTLINE21.1 What Facts Form the Basis of Our Understandingof Evolution?21.2 What Are the Mechanisms of EvolutionaryChange?21.3 How Does Natural Selection Result in Evolution?21.4 How Is Genetic Variation Maintained withinPopulations?21.5 What Are the Constraints on Evolution?Reconstructing a Deadly Virus Terrence Tumpey, of theCenters for Disease Control and Prevention, reconstructed the1918 influenza virus in his lab to identify the characteristicsthat made it so deadly.ary theory that allows us to apply that information to the problemof developing more effective vaccines.Several mechanisms of evolutionary change are recognized,and the scientific community is continually expanding its understandingof how and when these mechanisms apply to particularbiological problems. Studying the mechanisms of evolutionand their innumerable applications constitutes the activeand exciting field of evolutionary theory.Charles Darwin articulated the principleof natural selectionToday a rich array of geological, morphological, and moleculardata support and enhance the factual basis of evolution. In the1820s, however, it was not yet evident to the young Charles Darwin(or almost anyone else) that life had evolved. Darwin waspassionately interested in both geology and natural history—thescientific study of how different organisms function and carryout their lives in nature. Despite these interests, he planned (athis father’s behest) to become a doctor. But surgery conductedwithout anesthesia nauseated Darwin, and he gave up medicineto study at Cambridge University for a career as a clergymanin the Church of England. Always more interested in sciencethan in theology, he gravitated toward scientists on the faculty,especially the botanist John Henslow. In 1831, Henslow recommendedDarwin for a position on the H.M.S. Beagle, which waspreparing for a survey voyage around the world (Figure 21.1).Whenever possible during the 5-year voyage, Darwin (whowas often seasick) went ashore to study rocks and to observeand collect plants and animals. He noticed striking differencesbetween the species he saw in South America and those fromEurope. He observed that the species of the temperate regionsof South America (Argentina and Chile) were more similar tothose of tropical South America (Brazil) than they were to temperateEuropean species. When he explored the islands of the442 CHAPTER 21 | EVIDENCE AND MECHANISMS OF EVOLUTIONNorthAtlanticOceanIndianOceanEquatorNorthPacificOceanSouthPacificOceanAustraliaAfricaSouthAmericaAsiaEuropeGalápagosIslandsBritishIslesTasmania NewZealand SantiagoSanta CruzSanta FeSan CristobalIsabelaFernandinaGalápagosIslands Pinta MarchenaGenovesaTortugaSanta Maria EspañolaNorthAmericaTahitiMauritius21.1 Darwin and the Voyage of the Beagle The mission of H.M.S. Beagle was to chartthe oceans and collect oceanographic and biological information from around the world. Theworld map indicates the ship’s path; the inset map shows the Galápagos Islands, whoseorganisms were an important source of Darwin’s ideas on natural selection. The portrait is ofCharles Darwin at age 24, shortly after the Beagle returned to England.Galápagos Archipelago west of Ecuador, he noted that most ofits animal species were found nowhere else, although they weresimilar to animals found on the mainland of South America. Darwinalso observed that the animals of the Galápagos differedfrom island to island. He postulated that some animals had cometo the archipelago from mainland South America and had subsequentlyundergone different changes on each of the islands.He then wondered what might account for these changes.When he returned to England in 1836, Darwin continued toponder his observations. Within a decade he had developed themajor elements of an explanatory theory for evolutionarychange based on three major propositions:• Species are not immutable; they change over time.• Divergent species share a common ancestor.• The mechanism that produces changes in species is naturalselection, or the differential survival and reproduction ofindividuals in a population based on variation in their traits.The revolutionary assertions in Darwin’s first two propositionswere that evolution is a historical fact that can be demonstratedto have taken place, and that species are related to one anotherthrough common descent. In 1844, he wrote a long essay on naturalselection, which he described as the mechanism of evolution(his third proposition), but despite urging from colleagues, he wasreluctant to publish it, preferring to assemble more evidence first.Darwin’s hand was forced in 1858 when he received a letterand manuscript from another traveling naturalist, Alfred RusselWallace, who was studying the biota of the Malay Archipelago.Wallace asked Darwin to evaluate his manuscript, which includedan explanation of natural selection almost identical to Darwin’s.Darwin was at first dismayed, believing Wallace had preemptedhis idea. But parts of Darwin’s 1844 essay, together with Wallace’smanuscript, were presented to the Linnaean Society of Londonon July 1, 1858, thereby crediting both men for the idea of naturalselection. Darwin then worked quickly to finish his own book,The Origin of Species, which was published the next year.Although Darwin and Wallace independently articulated theconcept of natural selection, Darwin developed his ideas first.Furthermore, The Origin of Species provided exhaustive evidencefrom many fields to support both natural selection and evolutionitself. Thus both concepts are more closely associated withDarwin than with Wallace.The facts that Darwin used to conceive and develop his explanationof evolution by natural selection were familiar to mostcontemporary biologists. His insight was to perceive the significanceof relationships among these facts. Both Darwin and Wallacewere influenced by the ideas of the economist ThomasMalthus, who in 1838 published An Essay on the Principle of Population.Malthus argued that because the rate of human populationgrowth is greater than the rate of increase in food production,unchecked growth inevitably leads to famine. Darwin sawparallels throughout nature. He recognized that populations ofall species have the potential to rapidly increase in number. Toillustrate this point, he used the following example:Suppose…there are eight pairs of birds, and that only four pairs of themannually…rear only four young, and that these go on rearing their youngat the same rate, then at the end of seven years…there will be 2048 birdsinstead of the original sixteen.Such increases are rarely seen in nature, though. Darwin thereforereasoned that death rates in nature must also be high. Ifthey weren’t, even the most slowly reproducing species wouldquickly reach enormous population sizes.Darwin also observed that although offspring tend to resembletheir parents, the offspring of most organisms are not identicalto one another or to their parents. He suggested that slightvariations among individuals affect the chance that a given individualwill survive and reproduce. Darwin called this differentialsurvival and reproduction of individuals natural selection.Darwin may have used the words “natural selection” becausehe was familiar with the artificial selection of strains with certaindesirable traits by animal and plant breeders. Many of Darwin’sobservations on the nature of variation came from domesticatedplants and animals. Darwin was a pigeon breeder, and he knewfirsthand the astonishing diversity in color, size, form, and behaviorthat breeders could achieve (Figure 21.2). He recognized21.1 | WHAT FACTS FORM THE BASIS OF OUR UNDERSTANDING OF EVOLUTION? 44321.2 Artificial Selection Charles Darwin raised pigeons as a hobby, and he noted similar forcesat work in artificial and natural selection. The “fancy” pigeons shown here represent three of themore than 300 varieties derived from the wild rock dove Columba livia (at left) by artificial selectionfor character traits such as color and feather distribution.close parallels between selection by breeders and selection in nature.As he argued in The Origin of Species,How can it be doubted, from the struggle each individual has to obtainsubsistence, that any minute variation in structure, habits or instincts,adapting that individual better to the new conditions, would tell upon itsvigour and health? In the struggle it would have a better chance of surviving;and those of its offspring which inherited the variation, be it everso slight, would have a better chance.That statement, written more than 150 years ago, still stands as agood expression of the process of evolution by natural selection.It is important to remember that, as Darwin clearly understood,individuals do not evolve; populations do. A population is agroup of individuals of a single species that live and interbreedin a particular geographic area at the same time. A major consequenceof the evolution of populations is that their membersbecome adapted to the environments in which they live. Butwhat do biologists mean when they say that an organism isadapted to its environment?Adaptation has two meaningsIn evolutionary biology, adaptation refers both to the processesby which characteristics that appear to be useful to their bearersevolve—that is, the evolutionary mechanisms that producethem—and to the characteristics themselves. With respect tothe latter, an adaptation is a phenotypic characteristic that hasmade it more likely for an organism to survive and reproduce.Biologists regard an organism as being adapted to a particularenvironment when they can demonstrate that a slightly differentorganism reproduces and survives less well in that environment.To understand adaptation, biologists compare theperformance of individuals that differ in their traits. For example,biologists can assess the adaptive role of changes to thehemagglutinin protein of influenza viruses, as described inthe opening of this chapter. By comparing the survival and proliferationrates of influenza viruses that have different hemagglutiningene sequences, biologists can study adaptation ofthe viruses through time.When Darwin proposed his ideas on evolution by natural selection,he could point to many examples of evolutionary mechanismsoperating in nature, but none were supported by experiments.Since then, biologists have conducted thousands ofobservational and experimental studies that have confirmed theimportant role of natural selection as a mechanism of evolution.Biologists have also documented changes over time in the geneticcomposition and morphology of many populations, and our understandingof the mechanisms of inheritance has improved enormouslysince Darwin’s time.Population genetics provides an underpinningfor Darwin’s theoryDarwin had no knowledge of the mechanisms of genetic transmission,and his speculations on the topic proved to be incorrect.Biologists did not have a good understanding of the geneticdetails of how natural selection works until the field of transmissiongenetics was established in the early 1900s. At that time, therediscovery of Gregor Mendel’s publications (see Section 12.1)paved the way for the development in the 1930s and 1940s of thefield of population genetics. As the principles of evolution wereintegrated with the principles of modern genetics during this period,a new understanding of evolutionary biology—known asthe Modern Synthesis—emerged. This was when biologists beganto study mechanistic aspects of evolution as well as thebroad evolutionary patterns that were so evident in nature.For a population to evolve, its members must possess heritablegenetic variation, which is the raw material on whichmechanisms of evolution act. In everyday life, we do not directlyobserve the genetic compositions of organisms. What wesee are phenotypes, the physical expressions of organisms’ genes(including interactions among genes). The features of a phenotypeare its characters—eye color, for example. The specificform of a character, such as brown eyes, is a trait. A heritabletrait is a characteristic that is at least partly determined by theorganism’s genes. The genetic constitution that governs a characteris called its genotype. A population evolves when individualswith different genotypes survive or reproduce at different rates.The field of population genetics has three main goals:• To explain the patterns and organization of genetic variation• To explain the origin and maintenance of genetic variation• To understand the mechanisms that cause changes in allelefrequencies in populationsThe perspective of population genetics complements the insightsinto evolutionary processes provided by developmentalbiology, as described in Chapter 20.444 CHAPTER 21 | EVIDENCE AND MECHANISMS OF EVOLUTIONThree alleles—X1, X2, andX3—exist at locus X inthis population. Eachdiploid individual carriestwo copies of the gene,which may be the sameor different alleles. Nodiploid individual canhave more than two ofthe alleles.X1X3X1X2X1X1 X2X2X2X2X2X2X3X3X2X3X2X3X2X3X1X3X1X2X1X1X2X2X2X2X2X X 2 3X3X2X3X2X3X2X3X1X3X1X2X1X1X2X2X2X2X2X2X3X3X2X3 X2X3X2X3Each ovalrepresentsa singleindividual.Gene poolof population21.3 A Gene Pool A gene pool is the sum of all the alleles found in apopulation, or for a particular locus. This figure shows the gene pool forone locus, X. The allele frequencies are 0.20 for X1, 0.50 for X2, and 0.30for X3.GO TO Animated Tutorial 21.1 • Natural SelectionyourBioPortal.comDifferent forms of a gene, known as alleles, may exist at aparticular locus. At any particular locus, a single individual hasonly some of the alleles found in the population to which itbelongs (Figure 21.3). The sum of all copies of all alleles at allloci found in a population constitutes its gene pool. (We can alsorefer to the “gene pool” for a particular locus or loci.) The genepool is the source of the genetic variation that produces the phenotypictraits on which natural selection acts. To understandevolution and the role of natural selection, we need to knowhow much genetic variation populations have, what the sourcesof that genetic variation are, and how genetic variation changesin populations over space and time.Most populations are genetically variableNearly all populations have genetic variation for many characters.Artificial selection on different characters in a single Europeanspecies of wild mustard produced many important cropplants (Figure 21.4). Agriculturalists could achieve these resultsbecause the original mustard population had genetic variationfor the characters of interest.Laboratory experiments also demonstrate the existence ofconsiderable genetic variation in populations. In one such experiment,investigators attempted to breed populations of thefruit fly Drosophila melanogaster with high or low numbers ofbristles on their abdomens from an initial population with intermediatenumbers of bristles. After 35 generations, all fliesin both the high- and low-bristle lineages had bristle numbersthat fell well outside the range found in the original population(Figure 21.5). Thus there must have been considerable geneticvariation in the original fruit fly population on which selectioncould act.Studying the genetic basis of natural selection is difficult becausegenotypes alone do not determine all phenotypes. Withdominance, for example, a particular phenotype can be producedby more than one genotype (e.g., AA and Aa individualsmay be phenotypically identical). Also, as we describe in Section20.5, a given genotype can produce different phenotypes,depending on the environment encountered during development.For example, the cells of all the leaves on a tree or shrubare usually genetically identical, yet leaves of the same plant oftendiffer in shape and size depending, for example, on theamount of ambient light they receive.21.1 | WHAT FACTS FORM THE BASIS OF OUR UNDERSTANDING OF EVOLUTION? 445CabbageBrussels sproutsKohlrabi KaleBroccoliCauliflowerBrassica oleracea(a commonwild mustard)Selection for stemSelection forlateral budsSelection forterminal budsSelection forflower clustersSelection forstems and flowersSelection for leavesLow- and high-selectedpopulations do notoverlap the originalpopulation.0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70Number of bristles80 90 100 110Number of individualsOriginalpopulationPopulationselected forlow numberof bristles.Population selected forhigh number of bristles.Abdominalbristles21.4 Many Vegetables from One Species All of the crop plantsshown here derive from a single wild mustard species. European agriculturalistsproduced these crop species by selecting and breeding plantswith unusually large buds, stems, leaves, or flowers. The results substantiatethe vast amount of variation present in a gene pool.21.5 Artificial Selection Reveals Genetic Variation In experimentssubjecting Drosophila melanogaster to artificial selection for bristle number,this trait evolved rapidly. The graphs show the number of flies withdifferent numbers of bristles after 35 generations of artificial selection,which clearly diverged from the bristle numbers present in the originalpopulation (the blue bars in the center).Evolutionary change can be measured by alleleand genotype frequenciesAllele frequencies are usually estimated in locally interbreedinggroups, called Mendelian populations, within a geographicpopulation of a species. To measure allele frequencies in aMendelian population precisely, we would need to count everyallele at every locus in every individual in the population. Bydoing so, we could determine the frequencies of all alleles in thepopulation. The word frequency in this case refers to an allele’sproportion in the gene pool at a particular locus.Fortunately, we do not need to make complete measurements,because we can reliably estimate allele frequencies fora given locus by counting alleles in a sample of individuals fromthe population. The sum of all allele frequencies at a locus isequal to 1, so measures of allele frequency range from 0 to 1.An allele’s frequency is calculated using the following formula:If only two alleles (we’ll call them A and a) for a given locus arefound among the members of a diploid population, they maycombine to form three different genotypes: AA, Aa, and aa. Sucha population is said to be polymorphic at that locus, since thereis more than one allele. Using the formula above, we can calculatethe relative frequencies of alleles A and a in a population ofN individuals as follows:• Let NAA be the number of individuals that are homozygousfor the A allele (AA).• Let NAa be the number that are heterozygous (Aa).• Let Naa be the number that are homozygous for the a allele(aa).Note that NAA + NAa + Naa = N, the total number of individualsin the population, and that the total number of copies of both allelespresent in the population is 2N, because each individual isdiploid. Each AA individual has two copies of the A allele, andeach Aa individual has one copy of the A allele. Therefore, thetotal number of A alleles in the population is 2NAA + NAa. Similarly,the total number of a alleles in the population is 2Naa + NAa.If p represents the frequency of A, and q represents the frequencyof a, thenandFigure 21.6 shows how these formulas can be used to calculateallele frequencies in two hypothetical populations, each containing200 diploid individuals. Population 1 has mostly homozygotes(90 AA, 40 Aa, and 70 aa), whereas population 2has mostly heterozygotes (45 AA, 130 Aa, and 25 aa).The calculations in Figure 21.6 demonstrate two importantpoints. First, notice that for each population, p + q = 1, whichmeans that q = 1 – p. So when there are only two alleles at agiven locus in a population, we can calculate the frequency ofone allele and then obtain the second allele’s frequency by subtraction.If there is only one allele at a given locus in a population,its frequency is 1: the population is then monomorphic atthat locus, and the allele is said to be fixed.The second thing to notice is that population 1 (consistingmostly of homozygotes) and population 2 (consisting mostly ofheterozygotes) have the same allele frequencies for A and a.Thus they have the same gene pool for this locus. Because thealleles in the gene pool are distributed differently among individuals,however, the genotype frequencies of the two populationsdiffer. Genotype frequencies are calculated as the number of individualsthat have a given genotype divided by the total numberof individuals in the population. Using the numbers in Figure21.6, the genotype frequencies in population 1 would be 0.45AA, 0.20 Aa, and 0.35 aa.The frequencies of different alleles at each locus and the frequenciesof different genotypes in a Mendelian population deqN NN= aa Aa22+pNN= AA Aa22+ Np =number of copies of the allele in the populationsumof alleles in the population446 CHAPTER 21 | EVIDENCE AND MECHANISMS OF EVOLUTIONTOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE21.6 Calculating Allele FrequenciesAllele frequencies for any gene pool can be calculated using the equations in panel 1. When these equations are applied tothe populations in panel 2, we find that the frequencies of alleles A and a in the two populations are the same, but thealleles are distributed differently between heterozygous and homozygous genotypes.1 Determine the allele frequencies in the population.In any population:Frequencyof allele Awhere N is the total number of individuals in the population.Frequencyof allele a=2NAA + NAa2Np = =2Naa + NAa2Nq =For population 1(mostly homozygotes):soFor population 2(mostly heterozygotes):180 + 40400p = = 0.55140 + 40400q = = 0.45so90 + 130400p = = 0.5550 + 130400q = = 0.45NAA = 90, NAa = 40, and Naa = 70 NAA = 45, NAa = 130, and Naa = 252 Compute allele frequencies for different populations.scribe that population’s genetic structure. Allele frequenciesmeasure the amount of genetic variation in a population; genotypefrequencies show how a population’s genetic variation isdistributed among its members. Other measures, such as theproportion of polymorphic loci, are also used to measure variationin populations.With these measurements, it becomes possibleto consider how the genetic structure of a populationchanges or remains the same over generations—that is, to measureevolutionary change.The genetic structure of a population changesover time, unless certain restrictive conditions existIn 1908, the British mathematician Godfrey Hardy and the Germanphysician Wilhelm Weinberg independently deduced theconditions that must prevail if the genetic structure of a populationis to remain the same over time. If the conditions theyidentified do not exist, then evolution will occur. The resultingprinciple, known as Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium, is a cornerstoneof population genetics. Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium describesa model in which allele frequencies do not change acrossgenerations and genotype frequencies can be predicted from allelefrequencies (Figure 21.7). The principles of Hardy–Weinbergequilibrium apply only to sexually reproducing organisms.Several conditions must be met for a population to be atHardy–Weinberg equilibrium:• Mating is random. Individuals do not preferentially choosemates with certain genotypes.• Population size is infinite. The larger a population, the smallerwill be the effect of genetic drift—random (chance) fluctuationsin allele frequencies from one generation to another.• There is no gene flow (movement of individuals into or outof the population, or reproductive contact with other populations).• There is no mutation. There is no change to alleles in the population,and no new alleles are added to change the gene pool.• Selection does not affect the survival of particular genotypes. Thereis no differential survival of individuals with different genotypes.If these “ideal” conditions hold, two major consequences follow.First, the frequencies of alleles at a locus remain constantfrom generation to generation. Second, following one generationof random mating, the genotype frequencies occur in thefollowing proportions:Genotype AA Aa aaFrequency p2 2pq q2Consider a population that is not in Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium,such as generation I of Figure 21.7. This could occur, forexample, if the initial population is founded by migrants fromseveral other populations, thus violating the Hardy–Weinbergassumption of no gene flow. In this example, “generation I” hasmore homozygous individuals and fewer heterozygous individualsthan would be expected under Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium(a condition known as heterozygote deficiency).Even with a starting population that is not in Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium, we would predict that after a single generationof random mating, and without violating the otherHardy–Weinberg assumptions, the allele frequencies will remainunchanged but the genotype frequencies will return to Hardy–Weinberg expectations. Let’s explore why this is true.In generation I of Figure 21.7, the frequency of the A allele(p) is 0.55. Because we assume that individuals select mates atrandom, without regard to their genotype, gametes carrying A21.1 | WHAT FACTS FORM THE BASIS OF OUR UNDERSTANDING OF EVOLUTION? 447Frequency ofAA genotype =p × p = 0.3025.Frequency ofaa genotype =q × q = 0.2025.The frequency of the Aagenotype is the sum of thesetwo boxes, or 2pq = 0.495.Generation II (Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium restored)Generation I (Founder population)Frequency ofgenotypes inpopulation (notin HW equilibrium)GenotypeFrequency ofalleles inpopulation(remains constant)Eggsq = 0.45p = 0.55p = 0.55q = 0.45SpermAAGametes0.45 + 0.10p = 0.55 q = 0.450.10 + 0.35Aa aa0.45 0.20 0.35AA (p2)= 0.55 × 0.55= 0.3025Aa (pq)= 0.55 × 0.45= 0.2475aa (q2)= 0.45 × 0.45= 0.2025Aa (pq)= 0.55 × 0.45= 0.2475aaaAAA21.7 One Generation of Random Mating Restores Hardy–WeinbergEquilibrium Generation I of this example population is founded bymigrants from several source populations, and so is not initially inHardy–Weinberg equilibrium. After one generation of random mating, theallele frequencies are unchanged and the genotype frequencies return toHardy–Weinberg expectations. The length of the sides of each rectangleare proportional to the allele frequencies in the population; the areas ofthe rectangles are proportional to the genotype frequencies.or a combine at random—that is, as predicted by the allele frequenciesof p and q. Thus in this example, the probability that aparticular sperm or egg will bear an A allele is 0.55. In otherwords, 55 out of 100 randomly sampled sperm or eggs will bearan A allele. Because q = 1 – p, the probability that a sperm or eggwill bear an a allele is 1 – 0.55 = 0.45. (You may wish to reviewthe discussion of probability in Section 12.1.)To obtain the probability of two A-bearing gametes comingtogether at fertilization, we multiply the two independent probabilitiesof their occurring separately:Therefore, 0.3025, or 30.25 percent, of the offspring in generationII will have homozygous genotype AA. Similarly, the probabilityof bringing together two a-bearing gametes isThus 20.25 percent of generation II will have the aa genotype.There are two ways of producing a heterozygote: an A spermmay combine with an a egg, the probability of which is p × q;or an a sperm may combine with an A egg, the probability ofwhich is q × p. Consequently, the overall probability of obtaininga heterozygote is 2pq, or 0.495. The frequencies of the AA,Aa, and aa genotypes in generation II of Figure 21.7 are now atHardy–Weinberg expectations, and the frequencies of the twoalleles (p and q) have not changed from generation I.Under the assumptions of Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium, allelefrequencies p and q remain constant for each generation. IfHardy–Weinberg assumptions are violated and the genotypefrequencies in the parental generation are altered (say, by theloss of a large number of AA individuals from the population),then the allele frequencies in the next generation would be altered.However, based on the new allele frequencies, anothergeneration of random mating is sufficient to restore the genotypefrequencies to Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium.Deviations from Hardy–Weinberg equilibriumshow that evolution is occurringYou probably have realized that populations in nature never meetthe stringent conditions necessary to be at Hardy–Weinbergequilibrium. Why, then, is this model considered so importantfor the study of evolution? There are two reasons. First, the equationis often useful for predicting the approximate genotype frequenciesof a population from its allele frequencies. Second—andcrucially—the model describes the conditions required for thereto be no evolution in a population.Few if any of the Hardy–Weinberg model’s conditions are evermet completely in real populations, and allele frequencies in allpopulations do in fact change through time—that is, populationsdo evolve. The specific patterns of deviation from Hardy–Weinbergequilibrium can help us identify the various mechanisms ofevolutionary change.21.1 RECAPEvolutionary change is directly observable in biologicalpopulations. Genetic variation is needed for evolutionarychange to occur, and natural selection isone of the major mechanisms that acts on that variationand results in evolution.• Can you articulate the principle of natural selection?The two meanings of adaptation? See pp. 442–444• How does calculating allele frequencies allow us tomeasure evolutionary change? See pp. 446–447 andFigure 21.6• Why is the concept of Hardy–Weinberg equilibriumimportant even though the assumptions on which it isbased are never completely met in nature? See pp.447–448We have briefly outlined Charles Darwin’s vision of natural selectionand adaptation and explained the mathematical basis ofHardy–Weinberg equilibrium and its importance for studyingevolution. We’ll now examine some of the forces that cause populationsto deviate from equilibrium—the mechanisms of evolutionarychange.What Are the Mechanisms of 21.2 Evolutionary Change?Evolutionary mechanisms are forces that change the geneticstructure of a population. Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium is a nullhypothesis that assumes those forces are absent. The knownevolutionary mechanisms include mutation, gene flow, geneticdrift, nonrandom mating, and selection—each of which contradictsone of the five basic assumptions of Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium.We have already discussed Darwin’s principal explanationfor evolution, namely natural selection. Although naturalselection is in many cases an important component of evolution,even Darwin recognized that it was not the only mechanismof evolution, and many additional evolutionary forceshave been discovered since Darwin’s time. Here we discusssome of the other mechanisms that result in evolution.Mutations generate genetic variationThe origin of genetic variation is mutation. Amutation, as Section14.6 describes, is any change in the nucleotide sequencesof an organism’s DNA. The process of DNA replication is notperfect, and changes appear almost every time a genome isreplicated. Mutations occur randomly with respect to an organism’sadaptive needs; it is selection acting on this random variationthat results in adaptation. Most mutations are either harmfulto their bearers or neutral. Afew are beneficial, however, andpreviously harmful or neutral alleles may become advantageousif conditions change. In addition, mutations can restore to a populationgenetic variation that other evolutionary processes haveq × q = q2 = (0.45)2 = 0.2025p × p = p2 = (0.55)2 = 0.3025448 CHAPTER 21 | EVIDENCE AND MECHANISMS OF EVOLUTIONGO TO Animated Tutorial 21.2 • Hardy–Weinberg EquilibriumyourBioPortal.comremoved. Thus mutations both create and help maintain geneticvariation in populations.Mutation rates can be high, as we saw with the influenzaviruses described in the opening of this chapter, but in many organismsthe mutation rate is very low (on the order of 10–8 to10–9 changes per base pair of DNA per generation). Even lowoverall mutation rates, however, are sufficient to create considerablegenetic variation, because each of a large number ofgenes may change, and populations often contain large numbersof individuals. For example, if the probability of a pointmutation (an addition, deletion, or substitution of a single base)were 10–9 per base pair per generation, then each human gamete,the DNA of which contains 3 × 109 base pairs, would averagethree new point mutations (3 × 109 × 10–9 = 3)—and eachzygote would carry an average of six new mutations. The currenthuman population of about 7 billion people would be expectedto carry about 42 billion new mutations that were notpresent one generation earlier. So even though the mutation ratein humans is quite low, human populations still contain enormousgenetic variation on which selection can act.One of the conditions for Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium isthat there be no mutation. Although this condition is neverstrictly met, the rate at which mutations arise at a single locusis usually so low that mutations by themselves result in onlysmall deviations from Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium. If large deviationsare found, it is usually appropriate to dismiss mutationas the cause and to look for evidence of other evolutionarymechanisms acting on the population.Gene flow may change allele frequenciesFew populations are completely isolated from other populationsof the same species. Migration of individuals and movements ofgametes between populations—a phenomenon called geneflow—can change allele frequencies in a population. If the arrivingindividuals survive and reproduce in their new location, theymay add new alleles to the population’s gene pool, or they maychange the frequencies of alleles already present if they comefrom a population with different allele frequencies. For a populationto be at Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium, there must be nogene flow from populations with different allele frequencies.Genetic drift may cause large changes insmall populationsIn small populations, genetic drift—random changes in allelefrequencies from one generation to the next—may producelarge changes in allele frequencies over time. Harmful allelesmay increase in frequency, and rare advantageous alleles maybe lost. Even in large populations, genetic drift can influencethe frequencies of alleles that do not affect the survival and reproductiverates of their bearers.As an example, suppose we cross Aa × Aa fruit flies to producean F1 population in which p = q = 0.5 and in which the genotypefrequencies are 0.25 AA, 0.50 Aa, and 0.25 aa. If we randomlyselect 4 individuals (= 8 copies of the gene) from the F1 populationto produce the F2 generation, the allele frequencies in thissmall sample population may differ markedly from p = q = 0.5.If, for example, we happen by chance to draw 2 AA homozygotesand 2 heterozygotes (Aa), the allele frequencies in the samplewill be p = 0.75 (6 out of 8) and q = 0.25 (2 out of 8). If we replicatethis experiment 1,000 times, one of the two alleles will bemissing entirely from about 8 of the 1,000 sample populations.The same principles operate when a population is reduceddramatically in size. Populations that are normally large mayoccasionally pass through a period in which only a small numberof individuals survive, a situation known as a populationbottleneck. During population bottlenecks, genetic variationcan be reduced by genetic drift. This is illustrated in Figure 21.8,in which red and yellow beans represent two different alleles ofa gene. Most of the “surviving” beans in the small sample takenfrom the original population are, just by chance, red, so the newpopulation has a much higher frequency of red beans than theprevious generation had. In a real population, the allele frequencieswould be described as having “drifted.”A population forced through a bottleneck is likely to losemuch of its genetic variation. For example, when Europeansfirst arrived in North America, millions of greater prairie-chickens(Tympanuchus cupido) inhabited the prairies. As a result ofhunting and habitat destruction by the new settlers, the Illinoispopulation of this species plummeted from about 100 millionbirds in 1900 to fewer than 50 in the 1990s (Figure 21.9A). A comparisonof DNA from birds collected in Illinois during the middleof the twentieth century with DNA from the surviving pop-21.2 | WHAT ARE THE MECHANISMS OF EVOLUTIONARY CHANGE? 449The original populationhas approximately equalfrequencies of red andyellow alleles.1 The allele frequencies inthe surviving populationdiffer from those of theoriginal population.3 As the population grows followingthe bottleneck event, its allelefrequencies reflect the survivingpopulation (more red than yellow alleles).A chance environmental 4event greatly reducesthe population size.221.8 A Population Bottleneck Populationbottlenecks occur when only a few individualssurvive a random event, resulting in a shift inallele frequencies within the population.ulation in the 1990s showed that Illinois prairie-chickens havelost most of their genetic diversity. The remaining populationis experiencing low reproductive success. Similarly, the Californiafan palm (Washingtonia filifera) was once widespread in Californiaand Mexico; today it is restricted to a few oases in extremesouthern California and adjacent Mexico (Figure 21.9B).The species has little genetic variation: an average individual isheterozygous at fewer than 1 percent of its loci.Genetic drift can have similar effects when a few pioneeringindividuals colonize a new region. Because of its small size, thecolonizing population is unlikely to have all the alleles foundamong members of its source population. The resulting changein genetic variation, called a founder effect, is equivalent to thatin a large population reduced by a bottleneck. For example, thecurrent population of the pitcher plant Sarracenia purpurea ona small island in central Ohio arose from a single individual thatwas planted there in 1912. Today the population has only onedetectable polymorphic locus in its entire genome.Scientists were given an opportunity to study the geneticcomposition of founding populations when Drosophila subobscura,a well-studied species of fruit fly native to Europe, wasdiscovered near Puerto Montt, Chile (in 1978), and at PortTownsend, Washington (in 1982). The D. subobscura foundersprobably reached Chile from Europe on a ship, and a few fliescarried north from Chile on another ship founded the NorthAmerican population. In both South and North America, populationsof the flies grew rapidly and expanded their ranges.Today in North America, D. subobscura ranges from British Columbiato central California. In Chile it has spread across 15 degreesof latitude (Figure 21.10).European populations of D. subobscura have 80 different chromosomalinversions, but the North and South American populationshave only a subset of 20 of these inversions—and they arethe same 20 on both continents. North and South American populationsalso have lower allele diversity at certain enzyme-producinggenes compared with European populations. Only thosealleles that have a frequency higher than 0.10 in European populationsare present in the Americas. Thus, as expected for asmall founding population, only a small part of the total geneticvariation found in Europe reached the Americas. Geneticists estimatethat somewhere between 4 and 100 flies founded theNorth and South American populations.450 CHAPTER 21 | EVIDENCE AND MECHANISMS OF EVOLUTION(A) Tympanuchus cupido (B) Washingtonia filifera21.9 Species with Low Genetic Variation (A) Greater prairiechickensin Illinois lost most of their genetic variation when the populationcrashed from millions to fewer than 50 individuals. (B) The California fanpalm, whose range has been reduced to a small area of southernCalifornia and neighboring Mexico, has little genetic variation.European populationsof D. subobscura have80 different inversions.These twopopulations ofD. subobscuraare very similar,and each has asubset of 20of the originalinversions.21.10 A Founder Effect Populations of the fruit fly Drosophila subobscurain North and South America contain less genetic variation than theEuropean populations from which they came, as measured by the numberof chromosome inversions in each population. Within two decades ofarriving in the Americas, D. subobscura populations had increased dramaticallyand spread widely in spite of their reduced genetic variation.Nonrandom mating can change genotype frequenciesMating patterns may alter genotype frequencies if individualsin a population do not choose mates at random. For example,if they mate preferentially with individuals of the samegenotype, then homozygous genotypes will be overrepresentedand heterozygous genotypes underrepresented relative toHardy–Weinberg expectations. Alternatively, individuals maymate primarily or exclusively with individuals of differentgenotypes.Nonrandom mating is seen in some plant species, such asprimroses (genus Primula), in which individual plants bearflowers of only one of two different types. One type, known aspin, has a long style (the stalk that supports the stigma, wherepollen is received) and short stamens (the stalks ending in anthers,where pollen is produced). The other type, known asthrum, has a short style and long stamens (Figure 21.11). Inmany species with this reciprocal arrangement, pollen fromone flower type can fertilize only flowers of the other type.Pollen grains from pin and thrum flowers are deposited on differentparts of the bodies of insects that visit the flowers. Whenthe insects visit other flowers, pollen grains from pin flowersare most likely to come into contact with stigmas of thrum flowers,and vice versa.Self-fertilization (selfing), another form of nonrandom mating,is common in many groups of organisms, especially plants.Selfing reduces the frequencies of heterozygous individualsfrom Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium and increases the frequenciesof homozygotes, but it does not change allele frequencies.Sexual selection is a particularly important form of nonrandommating that does change allele frequencies and also oftenresults in the evolution of significant differences between malesand females of a species. We will discuss this important evolutionarymechanism in detail in the next section.21.2 RECAPEvolutionary mechanisms are processes that changethe genetic structure of a population. Known evolutionarymechanisms include mutation, gene flow,genetic drift, nonrandom mating, and selection.• Why do mutations, by themselves, result in only smalldeviations from Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium?See pp. 448–449• Explain how genetic drift can cause large changes insmall populations. See pp. 449–450 and Figure 21.8• Why is it that some types of nonrandom mating altergenotype frequencies but not allele frequencies?See p. 451The evolutionary mechanisms discussed so far influence the frequenciesof alleles and genotypes in populations. Although allof these processes influence the course of biological evolution,only natural selection results in adaptation. For adaptation tooccur, individuals that differ in heritable traits must survive andreproduce with different degrees of success.How Does Natural Selection 21.3 Result in Evolution?Although evolution is defined as changes in the gene frequenciesof a population from one generation to the next, natural selectionacts on the phenotype—the physical features expressedby an organism with a given genotype—rather than directly onthe genotype. The reproductive contribution of a phenotypeto subsequent generations relative to the contributions of otherphenotypes is called its fitness.Changes in reproductive rate do not necessarily change thegenetic structure of a population. For example, if all individualsin a population experience the same increase in reproductiverate (during an environmentally favorable year, for instance),the genetic structure of the population will not change.Changes in numbers of offspring are responsible for increasesand decreases in the size of a population, but only changes inthe relative success of different phenotypes in a population leadto changes in allele frequencies from one generation to the next.The fitness of individuals of a particular phenotype is a functionof the probability of those individuals surviving multipliedby the average number of offspring they produce over theirlifetimes. In other words, the fitness of a phenotype is determinedby the relative rates of survival and reproduction of individuals withthat phenotype.21.3 | HOW DOES NATURAL SELECTION RESULT IN EVOLUTION? 451Insects transfer pollen from tallanthers to tall stigmas (thrum to pin)……or from short anthers to shortstigmas (pin to thrum).Primula sp. (pin type) Primula sp. (thrum type)Stamenpin flower thrum flowerStigmaStyleAnther21.11 Flower Structure Fosters Nonrandom Mating Differing floralstructure within the same plant species, as illustrated by this primrose,ensures that pollination usually occurs between individuals of differentgenotypes.Natural selection can change or stabilize populationsTo simplify our discussion until now, we have considered onlycharacters influenced by alleles at a single locus. As we describein Section 12.3, however, most characters are influenced by allelesat more than one locus. Such characters are likely to showquantitative rather than qualitative variation. For example,the distribution of body sizes of individuals in a population, acharacter that is influenced by genes at many loci as well as bythe environment, is likely to resemble the bell-shaped curvesshown in the right-hand column of Figure 21.12.Natural selection can act on characters with quantitative variationin any one of several different ways, producing quite differentresults:• Stabilizing selection preserves the average characteristics ofa population by favoring average individuals.• Directional selection changes the characteristics of a populationby favoring individuals that vary in one directionfrom the mean of the population.• Disruptive selection changes the characteristics of a populationby favoring individuals that vary in both directionsfrom the mean of the population.STABILIZING SELECTION If the smallest and largest individuals ina population contribute fewer offspring to the next generationthan do individuals closer to the average size, then stabilizingselection is operating on size (Figure 21.12A). Stabilizing selectionreduces variation in populations, but it does not change themean. Natural selection frequently acts in this way, counteringincreases in variation brought about by sexual recombination,mutation, or migration. Rates of evolution in many species areslow because natural selection is often stabilizing. Stabilizing selectionoperates, for example, on human birth weight. Babiesborn lighter or heavier than the population mean die at higherrates than babies whose weights are close to the mean (Figure21.13). In discussions of specific genes, stabilizing selection is oftencalled purifying selection, because there is selection againstany deleterious mutations to the usual gene sequence.DIRECTIONAL SELECTION Directional selection is operating whenindividuals at one extreme of a character distribution contributemore offspring to the next generation than other individuals do,shifting the average value of that character in the population towardthat extreme. In the case of a single gene locus, directionalselection may result in favoring a particular genetic variant(known as positive selection for that variant). By favoring onephenotype over another, directional selection results in an increaseof the frequencies of alleles that produce the favored phenotype(as with the hemagglutinin gene of influenza in theopening of this chapter).If directional selection operates over many generations, anevolutionary trend is seen in the population (Figure 21.12B). Directionalevolutionary trends often continue for many genera-If individuals close to the meanhave the highest fitness…If individuals at one extremehave the highest fitness…If individuals at both extremeshave high fitness……the mean does not change,but variation is reduced.…there is an evolutionary trendtoward that extreme.…variation in the population isincreased, and a bimodalpattern may result.FitnessPhenotypic trait (z) Phenotypic trait (z)FrequencyFitnessFrequencyFitnessFrequency(A) Stabilizing selection(B) Directional selection(C) Disruptive selection21.12 Natural Selection Can Operate in Several Ways The graphsin the left-hand column show the fitness of individuals with different phenotypesof the same trait. The graphs on the right show the distribution ofthe phenotypes in the population before (light green) and after (darkgreen) the influence of selection.Percent of population ( )Percent mortality ( ) 12345678910 11 0Birth weight (pounds)50101520 10070503020107532Mean birth weightOptimalbirth weight21.13 Human Birth Weight Is Influenced by Stabilizing SelectionBabies that weigh more or less than average are more likely to die soonafter birth than babies with weights close to the population mean.452 CHAPTER 21 | EVIDENCE AND MECHANISMS OF EVOLUTIONtions, but they can be reversed if the environment changes anddifferent phenotypes are favored, or halted when an optimalphenotype is reached or when trade-offs oppose further change.The character then falls under stabilizing selection.Many cases of directional selection have been observed directly,and long-term examples abound in the fossil record. Thelong horns of Texas Longhorn cattle (Figure 21.14) are an exampleof a trait that has evolved through directional selection.Texas Longhorns are descendants of cattle that ChristopherColumbus brought to the New World. Columbus picked up afew cattle in the Canary Islands and brought them to the islandof Hispaniola in 1493. The cattle quickly multiplied, and theirdescendants were taken to the mainland of Mexico. As the Spanishexplored what would later become Texas and the southwesternUnited States, they brought some of these cattle with them,some of which escaped and formed feral herds. Populations ofthese feral cattle increased greatly over the next few hundredyears, but there was heavy predation from bears, mountain lions,and wolves, especially on the young calves. Cows withlonger horns were more successful in protecting their calvesagainst attacks, and over the next few hundred years the averagehorn length of cattle in the feral herds increased considerably.In addition, the cattle evolved resistance to endemic diseasesof the Southwest, as well as higher fecundity andlongevity. Texas Longhorn cows often live and produce calveswell into their twenties, or about twice as long as many breedsof cattle that have been artificially selected by humans for traitssuch as high fat content or high milk production (which are examplesof artificial directional selection).DISRUPTIVE SELECTION When disruptive selection operates, individualsat opposite extremes of a character distribution contributemore offspring to the next generation than do individualsclose to the mean, which increases variation in thepopulation (Figure 21.12C).The strikingly bimodal (two-peaked) distribution of bill sizesin the black-bellied seedcracker (Pyrenestes ostrinus), a WestAfrican finch (Figure 21.15), illustrates how disruptive selectioncan influence populations in nature. The seeds of two typesof sedges (marsh plants) are the most abundant food source forthese finches during part of the year. Birds with large bills canreadily crack the hard seeds of the sedge Scleria verrucosa. Birdswith small bills can crack S. verrucosa seeds only with difficulty;however, they feed more efficiently on the soft seeds of S.goossensii than do birds with larger bills.Young finches whose bills deviate markedly from the two predominantbill sizes do not survive as well as finches whose billsare close to one of the two sizes represented by the distributionpeaks. Because there are few abundant food sources in the environment,and because the seeds of the two sedges do not overlapin hardness, birds with intermediate-sized bills are less efficientin using either one of the principal food sources. Disruptiveselection therefore maintains a bimodal bill size distribution.Sexual selection influences reproductive successSexual selection acts on characteristics that determine reproductivesuccess. In The Origin of Species, Darwin devoted only afew pages to sexual selection, but in 1871 he wrote an entire bookabout it: The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex. Sexualselection was Darwin’s explanation for the evolution of conspicuouscharacters that would appear to inhibit survival, such asbright colors, long tails, and elaborate courtship displays in malesof many species. He hypothesized that these features either improvedthe ability of their bearers to compete for access to mates(intrasexual selection) or made their bearers more attractive to membersof the opposite sex (intersexual selection). The concept of sexualselection was either ignored or questioned for many decades,but recent investigations have demonstrated its importance.21.14 Texas Longhorns Are the Result of Directional SelectionLonger horns were advantageous for defending young calves from attacksby predators, so feral herds of Spanish cattle developed much longerhorns between the early 1500s and the 1860s. The trend has been maintainedin modern times by ranchers practicing artificial selection.12 14Number of birds16 18Width of lower bill (mm)200406080100120Smaller-billed birds feed moreefficiently on soft seeds.Birds with bills of intermediate sizescannot use either kind of seedefficiently and survive poorly.Large-billed birdscan crack hard seeds.21.15 Disruptive Selection Results in a Bimodal Distribution Thebimodal distribution of bill sizes in the black-bellied seedcracker of WestAfrica is a result of disruptive selection, which favors individuals with largerand smaller bill sizes over individuals with intermediate-sized bills.21.3 | HOW DOES NATURAL SELECTION RESULT IN EVOLUTION? 453Darwin devoted an entire book to sexual selection becausehe recognized that, whereas natural selection typically favorstraits that enhance the survival of their bearers or their descendants,sexual selection is primarily about success in reproduction.Of course, an animal must survive to reproduce, but if itsurvives and fails to reproduce, it makes no contribution tothe next generation. Thus sexual selection may favor traits thatenhance an individual’s chances of reproduction but reduceits chances of survival. For example, females may be more likelyto see or hear males with a given trait (and thus be more likelyto mate with those males), even though the favored trait mayalso increase the chances that the male will be seen or heardby a predator. In other cases, the sexual signal may indicate asuccessful genotype in the male. In many species of frogs, forexample, females prefer males with low-frequency calls. Males’calls vary with body size, and a low-frequency call is indicativeof a large-bodied frog. Frogs exhibit indeterminate growth —that is, they continue to grow indefinitely—so a large frog is along-lived frog, which indicates high survivorship. In this case,the sexual signal represents what is known as an honest signalof the male’s ability to survive in the local environment.One example of a trait that Darwin attributed to sexual selectionis the remarkable tail of the male African long-tailed widowbird(Euplectes progne), which is longer than the bird’s head andbody combined. Male widowbirds normally select, and defendfrom other males, a territory where they perform courtship displaysto attract females. To investigate whether sexual selectiondrove the evolution of widowbird tails, Malte Andersson, a behavioralecologist at Gothenburg University, Sweden, clipped thetails of some captured male widowbirds and lengthened the tailsof others by gluing on additional feathers. He then cut andreglued the tail feathers of still other males, which served as controls.Both short- and long-tailed males successfully defendedtheir display territories, indicating that a long tail does not conferan advantage in male–male competition. However, males withartificially elongated tails attracted about four times more femalesthan did males with shortened tails (Figure 21.16).Why do female widowbirds prefer males with long tails? Onepossibility is that ability to grow and maintain a costly featuresuch as a long tail may indicate that the male bearing it is vigorousand healthy, even though the tail impairs the bird’s abilityto fly. If so, then females that are attracted to long tails are in-INVESTIGATING LIFEGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODINVESTIGATING LIFESexual selection in Euplectes progne has favored the evolution of long tails in the male.21.16 Sexual Selection in Male WidowbirdsThe extensive tail of the territorial male African long-tailed widowbird (Euplectes progne) actually inhibits its ability to fly. Darwin attributed theevolution of this trait to sexual selection. Behavioral ecologist Malte Andersson tested this hypothesis.Female widowbirds prefer to mate with the male that displays the longest tail; longer-tailed malesthus are favored by sexual selection because they will father more offspring.1. Capture males and artificially lengthen or shortentails by cutting or gluing on feathers. In a controlgroup, cut and replace tails to their normal length(to control for the effects of tail-cutting).2. Release the males to establish their territoriesand mate.3. Count the nests with eggs or young on eachmale’s territory.RESULTS Male widowbirds with artificially shortened tails establishedand defended display sites sucessfully but fathered feweroffspring than did control or unmanipulated males. Males withartificially lengthened tales fathered the most offspring.ArtificiallylengthenedControl(tails cutand replaced)ArtificiallyshortenedNormal(unmanipulated)Average number of nests per male210454 CHAPTER 21 | EVIDENCE AND MECHANISMS OF EVOLUTIONdirectly attracted to vigorous, healthy males, which likely carrybeneficial genes that would lead to higher survivorship of offspring.Although the manipulated males in Andersson’s investigationdid not have to pay the price of growing and supporting(except briefly) artificially long tails, the hypothesis thathaving well-developed ornamental traits signals vigor andhealth has been tested experimentally with captive zebra finches.The bright red bills of male zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata)are the result of red and yellow carotenoid pigments. Zebra finches(and most other animals) cannot synthesize carotenoids and mustobtain them from their food. In addition to influencing bill color,carotenoids are antioxidants and components of the immune system.Males in good health may need to allocate fewer carotenoidsto immune function than males in poorer health. If so, then femalescan use the brightness of a male’s bill to assess his health.Tim Birkhead and his colleagues at Sheffield University manipulatedblood levels of carotenoids in genetically similar malezebra finches by giving experimental males drinking water withadded carotenoids; they gave control males only distilled water.All the males had access to the same food. After one month,the experimental males had higher levels of carotenoids in theirblood, had much brighter bills than the control males, and werepreferred by female zebra finches.Next, the investigators challenged both groups of males immunologicallyby injecting phytohemagglutinin (PHA) intotheir wings. PHA induces a response by T lymphocytes, a typeof white blood cell that functions in the immune system to recognizeand deactivate foreign substances (see Chapter 42). Theinjection results in an accumulation of white blood cells andthus a thickening of the skin at the injection site. Experimentalmales with enhanced carotenoid levels developed thicker skinsbecause they responded more strongly to PHA than controlmales did, indicating that higher carotenoid levels are associatedwith stronger immune systems (Figure 21.17).This experiment showed that when a female chooses a malewith a bright red bill, she probably gets a mate with a healthy immunesystem. Such males are less likely to become infected withparasites and diseases, and are better able to assist with parentalcare.21.3 RECAPVariation in genotype can lead to variation in fitness.Fitness refers to the relative reproductive contributionof a phenotype to subsequent generations.Natural and sexual selection can both change andstabilize phenotypes within populations.• Explain why natural selection that acts on a phenotyperesults in changes in genotype frequencies. See p. 451• Describe the differences between stabilizing, directional,and disruptive selection, giving examples ofeach. See pp. 452–453 and Figure 21.12• Why did Darwin devote an entire book to sexualselection? See pp. 453–45521.3 | HOW DOES NATURAL SELECTION RESULT IN EVOLUTION? 455CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE21.17 Do Bright Bills Signal Good Health?Female zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata) preferentiallychoose mates with the brightest bill color. Does this preferenceincrease their chances of mating with the healthiest males?This experiment made use of carotenoids (antioxidant pigmentmolecules believed to boost immune response) to testthe hypothesis.HYPOTHESIS The brightness of a male zebra finch’s red billis correlated with the strength of the bird’simmune response and a correspondinglikelihood of good health.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTS671. Provide carotenoids in the drinking water ofexperimental, but not control, males.2. Challenge all males immunologically and measureresponses.Taeniopygia guttataConcentration ofcarotenoidsImmunologicalresponseControldietCarotenoidsupplementeddietWeakStrongLowHighExperimental males responded more strongly to theimmunological challenge. They also developed brighterbills than control males.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: How would you test this samehypothesis in the field? What wouldconstitute experimental and controlbirds?Bill color is an indication of immunologicalstrength and general health.Genetic drift, stabilizing selection, and directional selection alltend to reduce genetic variation within populations. Nevertheless,as we have seen, most populations harbor considerable geneticvariation. What processes produce and maintain geneticvariation within populations?How Is Genetic Variation 21.4 Maintained within Populations?Genetic variation is the raw material on which mechanisms ofevolution act. In this section we will discuss several processes—neutral mutations, sexual recombination, frequency-dependentselection, and heterozygote advantage—that operate to maintaingenetic variation in populations, despite the action of otherforces (such as genetic drift and many types of selection) thatreduce variation. We will also show how genetic variation maybe maintained over geographic space.Neutral mutations accumulate in populationsAs we discuss in Section 14.6, some mutations do not affectthe function of the proteins encoded by the mutated genes. Anallele that does not affect the fitness of an organism—that is, anallele that is no better or worse than alternative alleles at thesame locus—is called a neutral allele. Neutral alleles are unaffectedby natural selection. Even in large populations, neutralalleles may be lost or may increase in frequency, purely by geneticdrift. Neutral alleles are added to a population over timethrough mutation, providing the population with considerablegenetic variation.Much of the phenotypic variation we are able to observe isnot neutral. However, modern techniques enable us to measureneutral variation at the molecular level and provide the meansto distinguish it from adaptive variation. Section 24.2 discusseshow variation in neutral molecular traits can be used to studydivergence among genes, populations, and species.Sexual recombination amplifies the numberof possible genotypesIn asexually reproducing organisms, each new individual is geneticallyidentical to its parent unless there has been a mutation.When organisms reproduce sexually, however, offspring differfrom their parents because of crossing over and independentassortment of chromosomes during meiosis as well as the combinationof genetic material from two different gametes, as describedin Chapter 11. Sexual recombination generates an endlessvariety of genotypic combinations that increase theevolutionary potential of populations—a long-term advantageof sex. Although many species may reproduce asexuallymost of the time, few are strictly asexual over long periods ofevolutionary time. Almost all have some means of achievinggenetic recombination.The evolution of the mechanisms of meiosis and sexual recombinationwere crucial events in the history of life. Exactlyhow these attributes arose is puzzling, however, because sexhas at least three striking disadvantages in the short term:• Recombination breaks up adaptive combinations of genes.• Sex reduces the rate at which females pass genes on to theiroffspring.• Dividing offspring into separate genders greatly reducesthe overall reproductive rate.To see why this last disadvantage exists, consider an asexual femalethat produces the same number of offspring as a sexual female.Let’s assume that both females produce two offspring, butthat the sexual female produces 50 percent males. In the nextgeneration, both asexual F1 females will produce two moreoffspring, but there is only one sexual F1 female to produceoffspring. Thus, the effective reproductive rate of the asexuallineage is twice that of the sexual lineage. The evolutionaryproblem is to identify the advantages of sex that can overcomesuch short-term disadvantages.A number of hypotheses have been proposed for the existenceof sex, none of which are mutually exclusive. One is thatsexual recombination facilitates repair of damaged DNA, becausebreaks and other errors in DNA on one chromosome canbe repaired by copying the intact sequence from the homologouschromosome.Another advantage of sexual reproduction is that it permitsthe elimination of deleterious mutations. As Section 13.4 describes,DNA replication is not perfect. Errors are introduced inevery generation, and many or most of these errors result inlower fitness. Asexual organisms have no mechanism to eliminatedeleterious mutations. Hermann J. Muller noted that theaccumulation of deleterious mutations in a non-recombininggenome is like a genetic ratchet. The mutations accumulate—“ratchet up”—at each replication: that is, a mutation occurs andis passed on when the genome replicates, then two new mutationsoccur in the next replication, so three mutations are passedon, and so on. Deleterious mutations cannot be eliminated exceptby the death of the lineage or a rare back mutation. This accumulationof deleterious mutations in lineages that lack geneticrecombination is known as Muller’s ratchet.In sexual species, on the other hand, genetic recombinationproduces some individuals with more of these deleterious mutationsand some with fewer. The individuals with fewer deleteriousmutations are more likely to survive. Therefore, sexualreproduction allows natural selection to eliminate particulardeleterious mutations from the population over time.Another explanation for the existence of sex is that the greatvariety of genetic combinations created in each generation maybe advantageous. For example, genetic variation can be a defenseagainst pathogens and parasites. Most pathogens andparasites have much shorter life cycles than their hosts and canrapidly evolve counteradaptations to host defenses. Sexual recombinationmight give the host’s defenses a chance to keep up.Sexual recombination does not directly influence the frequenciesof alleles; rather, it generates new combinations of alleles onwhich natural selection can act. It expands variation in a characterinfluenced by alleles at many loci by creating new genotypes.That is why artificial selection for bristle number in Drosophila(see Figure 21.5) resulted in flies that had either more or fewerbristles than the flies in the initial population had.456 CHAPTER 21 | EVIDENCE AND MECHANISMS OF EVOLUTIONFrequency-dependent selection maintains geneticvariation within populationsNatural selection often preserves variation as a polymorphism(two or more variants of a trait present in the same population).Apolymorphism may be maintained when the fitness of a givenphenotype depends on its frequency in a population, a phenomenonknown as frequency-dependent selection.Asmall fish that lives in Lake Tanganyika in East Africa providesan example of frequency-dependent selection. Because ofan asymmetrical jaw joint, the mouth of this scale-eating fish,Perissodus microlepis, opens either to the right or to the left; thedirection is genetically determined (Figure 21.18). The scaleeaterapproaches its prey (another fish) from behind and dashesin to bite off several scales from its flank. “Right-mouthed” individualsalways attack from the victim’s left, and “leftmouthed”individuals always attack from the victim’s right. Thedistorted mouth enlarges the area of teeth in contact with theprey’s flank, but only if the scale-eater attacks from the appropriateside.Prey fish are alert to approaching scale-eaters, so attacksare more likely to be successful if the prey must watch bothflanks. Vigilance by prey thus favors equal numbers of rightandleft-mouthed scale-eaters, because if attacks from one sidewere more common than the other, prey fish would pay moreattention to potential attacks from that side. Over an 11-yearstudy of this fish in Lake Tanganyika, the polymorphism wasfound to be stable: the two forms of P. microlepis remained atabout equal frequencies.Heterozygote advantage maintains polymorphic lociIn many cases, different alleles for a particular gene have advantagesunder different environmental conditions. Most organisms,however, experience a wide diversity of environmentsover time. Anight is dramatically different from the precedingday. Acold, cloudy day differs from a clear, hot one. Day lengthand temperature change seasonally. For many genes, a singleallele is unlikely to perform well under all these conditions. Insuch situations, a heterozygous individual (with two differentalleles) is likely to outperform individuals that are homozygousfor either one of the alleles.Colias butterflies of the Rocky Mountains live in environmentswhere dawn temperatures often are too cold, and afternoontemperatures too hot, for the butterflies to fly. Populationsof this butterfly are polymorphic for the enzyme phosphoglucoseisomerase (PGI), which influences how well the butterflyflies at different temperatures. Butterflies with certain PGI genotypescan fly better during the cold hours of early morning; othersperform better during midday heat. The optimal body temperaturefor flight is 35°C to 39°C, but some butterflies can flywith body temperatures as low as 29°C or as high as 40°C. Duringspells of unusually hot weather, heat-tolerant genotypes arefavored; during spells of unusually cool weather, cold-tolerantgenotypes are favored.Heterozygous Colias butterflies can fly over a greater temperaturerange than homozygous individuals, which shouldgive them an advantage in foraging and finding mates. A testof this prediction did find a mating advantage in heterozygousmales, and further, that this advantage maintains the polymorphismin the population (Figure 21.19). Of course, the heterozygotescan never become fixed in the population, becausethe offspring of two heterozygotes will include both classes ofhomozygotes in addition to heterozygotes.Much genetic variation in species is maintainedin geographically distinct populationsMuch of the genetic variation in species is preserved as differencesamong members living in different places (populations).Populations often vary genetically because they are subjectedto different selective pressures in different environments. Environmentsmay vary significantly over short distances. For example,in the Northern Hemisphere, temperature and soil moisturediffer dramatically between north- and south-facingmountain slopes. In the Rocky Mountains of Colorado, the proportionof ponderosa pines (Pinus ponderosa) that are heterozygousfor a particular peroxidase enzyme is particularly high onsouth-facing slopes, where temperatures fluctuate dramatically,often on a daily basis. This heterozygous genotype performswell over a broad range of temperatures. On north-facing slopesand at higher elevations, where temperatures are cooler andfluctuate less strikingly, a peroxidase homozygote, which has alower optimal temperature, is much more frequent.Plant species may also vary geographically in the chemicalsthey synthesize to defend themselves against herbivores.Some individuals of the white clover (Trifolium repens) pro-21.4 | HOW IS GENETIC VARIATION MAINTAINED WITHIN POPULATIONS? 457“Right-mouthed” Perissodusattack prey from the left side.“Left-mouthed” Perissodusattack prey from the right side.21.18 A Stable Polymorphism Frequency-dependent selection maintainsequal proportions of left- and right-mouthed individuals of the scaleeatingfish Perissodus microlepis.duce the poisonous chemical cyanide. Poisonous individualsare less appealing to herbivores—particularly mice and slugs—than are nonpoisonous individuals. However, clover plants thatproduce cyanide are more likely to be killed by frost, becausefreezing damages cell membranes and releases cyanide into theplant’s own tissues.In European populations of Trifolium repens, the frequency ofcyanide-producing individuals increases gradually from north tosouth and from east to west (Figure 21.20). This gradual changein phenotype across a geographic gradient is known as clinal variation.In this cline, poisonous plants make up a large proportionof clover populations only in areas where winters are mild.Cyanide-producing individuals are rare where winters are cold,even though herbivores graze clovers heavily in those areas.21.4 RECAPNeutral mutations, sexual recombination, frequencydependentselection, and heterozygote advantageall act to maintain considerable genetic variation inmost populations. Variation within species is alsomaintained among geographically distinct, geneticallyvariable populations.• Do you understand why sexual reproduction is soprevalent in nature, despite its having at least threeshort-term evolutionary disadvantages? See p. 456• How does frequency-dependent selection act tomaintain genetic variation in a population?See p. 457The mechanisms of evolution have produced a remarkable varietyof organisms, some of which are adapted to most environmentson Earth. This natural variation, and the success of breedersattempting to produce desired traits in domesticated plantsand animals, suggests that evolution can produce a wide varietyof adaptive traits. But are there limits to the adaptations evolutioncan produce?CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE21.19 A Heterozygote Mating AdvantageAmong butterflies of the genus Colias, males that areheterozygous for two alleles of the PGI enzyme can fly fartherunder a broader range of temperatures than males that arehomozygous for either allele. Does this ability giveheterozygous males a mating advantage?HYPOTHESISHeterozygous Colias males have a matingadvantage over homozygous males.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSHeterozygous male Colias will haveproportionally greater mating success thanhomozygous males.1. For each of two Colias species, capture butterfliesin the field. In the laboratory, determine theirgenotypes and allow them to mate.2. Determine the genotypes of the offspring, thusrevealing paternity and mating success of themales.For both species, the proportion of heterozygousmales that mated successfully was higher than theproportion of all males seeking females (“flying”).Heterozygous males(as percentage of all males)Flying MatingsuccessfullyFlying Matingsuccessfully46%72%54%80%2505075100Species 1:Colias eurythemeSpecies 2:Colias philodiceThe proportion of cyanide-producingindividuals increases gradually along agradient from colder to milder winters.White lines (isobars)connect points withequal January meantemperatures.–13.3°C–8.9°C2.0°C –4.4°C8.0°C4.4°C0°CPlants producecyanidePlants do notproduce cyanide21.20 Geographic Variation in a Defensive Chemical The frequencyof cyanide-producing individuals in European populations of whiteclover (Trifolium repens) depends on winter temperatures.458 CHAPTER 21 | EVIDENCE AND MECHANISMS OF EVOLUTION21.5 What Are the Constraints on Evolution?We would be mistaken to assume that evolutionary mechanismscan produce any trait we might imagine. Evolution is constrainedin many ways. Lack of appropriate genetic variation,for example, prevents the development of many potentiallyfavorable traits. If the allele for a given trait does not exist in apopulation, that trait cannot evolve even if it would be highlyfavored by natural selection. Most possible combinations ofgenes and genotypes have never existed in any population, andso have never been tested under natural selection.Constraints are imposed on organisms by the dictates ofphysics and chemistry. The size of cells, for example, is constrainedby the stringencies of surface area-to-volume ratios (seeSection 2.1). The ways in which proteins can fold are limited bythe bonding capacities of their constituent molecules (see Section3.2). And the energy transfers that fuel life must operatewithin the laws of thermodynamics (see Section 8.1). Keep inmind that evolution works within the boundaries of these universalconstraints, as well as the constraints described here.Developmental processes constrain evolutionAs Section 20.5 explained, developmental constraints on evolutionare paramount because all evolutionary innovations are modificationsof previously existing structures. Human engineers seekingto power an airplane can start “from scratch” to design acompletely new type of engine (powered by jet propulsion), toreplace the previous type (powered by propellers). Evolutionarychanges, however, cannot happen in this way. Current phenotypesof organisms are constrained by historical conditionsand past selective pressures.Astriking example of such developmental constraints is providedby the evolution of fish that spend most of their time onthe sea bottom. One lineage, the bottom-dwelling skates andrays, share a common ancestor with sharks, whose bodies werealready somewhat ventrally flattened and whose skeletal frameis made of flexible cartilage. Skates and rays evolved a bodytype that further flattened their bellies, allowing them to swimalong the ocean floor (Figure 21.21A).By contrast, plaice, sole, and flounder are bottom-dwellingdescendants of deep-bellied, laterally flattened ancestors withbony skeletons. The only way these fishes can lie flat is to flopover on their sides. Their ability to swim is thus curtailed, buttheir bodies can lie still and are well camouflaged. During development,one eye of these flatfishes moves so that both eyesare positioned on the same side of the body (Figure 21.21B).Such shifts in eye position have evolved several times, and shiftshave happened in both directions (that is, both left- and righteyedflatfishes have evolved independently). Small shifts in theposition of one eye probably helped ancestral flatfishes see better,resulting in the flat body forms found today. This path toproducing a flattened body may not be optimal, but the fishes’developmental capabilities constrain the pathways that evolutioncan take.Trade-offs constrain evolutionAdaptations frequently impose both fitness costs and benefits.For an adaptation to evolve, the fitness benefits it confers mustexceed the fitness costs it imposes—in other words, the tradeoffmust be worthwhile. For example, there are metabolic costsassociated with developing and maintaining certain conspicuousfeatures (such as antlers or horns) that males use to competewith other males for access to females. The fact that thesefeatures are common in many species suggests that the benefitsderived from possessing them must outweigh the costs.As a result of trade-offs, many traits that are adaptive in onecontext may be maladaptive in another. Consider the roughskinnednewt, Taricha granulosa, and one of its predators, thecommon garter snake, Thamnophis sirtalis (Figure 21.22A). Thenewt sequesters in its skin a potent neurotoxin called tetrodotoxin(TTX). TTX paralyzes nerves and muscles by blocking21.5 | WHAT ARE THE CONSTRAINTS ON EVOLUTION? 459(A) Taeniura lymma(B) Bothus lunatus21.21 Two Solutions to a Single Problem (A) This stingray, whoseancestors were dorsoventrally flattened, lies on its belly. Stingrays’ bodiesare symmetrical around the dorsal backbone. (B) This flounder, whoseancestors were laterally flattened, lies on its side. (The backbone of thisindividual is at the right.) Flounders’ eyes migrate during development sothat both are on the same side of the body.sodium channels (see Section 6.3). Most vertebrates—includingmany garter snakes—will die if they eat a rough-skinned newt.But some snakes can eat rough-skinned newts and survive. Insome populations of garter snakes, TTX-resistant sodium channelshave evolved in the nerves and muscles (see Chapter 24 foranother example of the evolution of sodium channels). However,the snakes pay a price for this attribute. For several hoursafter eating a newt, TTX-resistant snakes can move only slowly,and they never move as fast as nonresistant snakes. Thus resistantsnakes are more vulnerable to their own predators thanare TTX-sensitive snakes that simply don’t encounter poisonousnewts. Therefore, there is selection against TTX-resistantsodium channels in populations of garter snakes that occur outsidethe range of rough-skinned newts, but selection for TTXresistancein many areas where newts are present (Figure21.22B).Short-term and long-term evolutionary outcomessometimes differThe short-term changes in allele frequencies within populationsthat we have emphasized in this chapter are an important focusof study for evolutionary biologists. These changes can beobserved directly, they can be manipulated experimentally, andthey demonstrate the actual processes by which evolution occurs.By themselves, however, they do not enable us to predictlong-term evolutionary changes.Long-term patterns of evolutionary change can be stronglyinfluenced by events that occur so infrequently (a meteorite impact,for example) or so slowly (continental drift) that they areunlikely to be observed during short-term studies. The ways inwhich evolutionary processes act may change over time withchanging environmental conditions. Even among the descendantsof a single ancestral species, different lineages may evolvein different directions. Therefore, additional types of evidence,demonstrating the effects of rare and unusual events on trendsin the fossil record, must be gathered if we wish to understandthe course of evolution over billions of years.21.5 RECAPDevelopmental processes constrain evolution becauseall evolutionary innovations are modificationsof previously existing structures. An adaptation canevolve only if the fitness benefits it confers exceedthe fitness costs it imposes.• Describe an example of an evolutionary trade-off inwhich the advantages of an adaptation outweigh itscosts in the long run. See pp. 459–460• Do you see why the presence of a great deal of geneticvariation within a population could increase thechances that some members of the population wouldsurvive an unprecedented environmental change?Do you also understand why there is no guaranteethat this would be the case?TTX resistance hasevolved in gartersnakes living withinthe range of Taricha.This population,outside therange of Taricha,has no TTXresistance.Bear Lake, IDIdahoBritish ColumbiaWashingtonOregonNevadaCaliforniaLevel of TTXresistance inThamnophisHighNone(A) (B)Thamnophis sirtalisTaricha granulosa21.22 Resistance to a Toxin Comes at a Cost (A) Garter snakes(above) prey on newts (below). Rough-skinned newts counter with theability to sequester a neurotoxin, TTX, in their skin. In turn, TTX-resistantsodium channels have evolved in some snake populations, allowing thesnakes to eat toxic prey but resulting in slower movement by the snakes.(B) High resistance to TTX in garter snakes is only found in regions wheresnake and newt populations overlap (tan area).460 CHAPTER 21 | EVIDENCE AND MECHANISMS OF EVOLUTIONGO TO Animated Tutorial 21.3 •Assessing the Costs of AdaptationyourBioPortal.com21.1 What Facts Form the Base of Our Understandingof Evolution?• Charles Darwin attributed changes in species over time to thepossession of advantageous traits by some individuals. Heunderstood that it is not individuals that evolve but populations.A population evolves when individuals with favorableheritable traits survive and reproduce at higher rates thanother members of the population.• Adaptation refers both to characteristics of organisms and theway those characteristics are acquired via natural selection.ANIMATED TUTORIAL 21.1• The sum of all copies of all alleles at all loci found in a populationconstitutes its gene pool and represents the genetic variationthat results in different phenotypic traits on which naturalselection can act. Review Figure 21.3• Artificial selection and laboratory experiments demonstrate theexistence of considerable genetic variation in most populations.Review Figure 21.5• Allele frequencies measure the amount of genetic variation in apopulation; genotype frequencies show how a population’sgenetic variation is distributed among its members. Together,allele and genotype frequencies describe a population’s geneticstructure. Review Figure 21.6• Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium predicts the allele frequencies inpopulations in the absence of evolution. Deviation from thesefrequencies indicates the work of evolutionary mechanisms.Review Figure 21.7, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 21.221.2 What Are the Mechanisms of Evolutionary Change?• Mutation provides new genetic variants; favored variantsincrease in populations through natural selection.• Migration or mating of individuals between populations resultsin gene flow.• In small populations, genetic drift—the random loss of individualsand the alleles they possess—may produce large changesin allele frequencies from one generation to the next and greatlyreduce genetic variation. Review Figure 21.8• Population bottlenecks occur when only a few individuals survivea random event, resulting in a drastic shift in allele frequencieswithin the population and the loss of variation. Similarly, apopulation established by a small number of individuals colonizinga new region may lose variation via a founder effect.• Nonrandom mating may result in genotype frequencies thatdeviate from Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium.21.3 How Does Natural Selection Result in Evolution?• Fitness is the reproductive contribution of a phenotype tosubsequent generations relative to the contributions of otherphenotypes.• Changes in numbers of offspring are responsible for changes inthe absolute size of a population, but only changes in the relativesuccess of different phenotypes within a population lead tochanges in allele frequencies.• Natural selection can act on variable traits in several differentways, resulting in stabilizing, directional, or disruptive selection.Review Figure 21.12• Sexual selection primarily affects success in reproduction,rather than success in survival. Review Figures 21.16 and 21.1721.4 How Is Genetic Variation Maintained withinPopulations?• Neutral mutations, sexual recombination, frequency-dependentselection, and heterozygote advantage can all maintain geneticvariation within populations.• Neutral alleles do not affect the fitness of an organism, are notaffected by natural selection, and may accumulate or be lost bygenetic drift.• Despite short-term disadvantages, sexual reproduction generatescountless genotypic combinations that increase the evolutionarypotential and survivorship of populations.• A polymorphism may be maintained by frequency-dependentselection when the fitness of a genotype depends on its frequencyin a population.• Genetic variation within species may be maintained by the existenceof genetically distinct populations over geographic space.A gradual change in phenotype across a geographic gradient isknown as clinal variation. Review Figure 21.2021.5 What Are the Constraints on Evolution?• Developmental processes constrain evolution because all evolutionaryinnovations are modifications of previously existingstructures.• Most adaptations impose costs. An adaptation can evolve onlyif the benefits it confers exceed the costs it imposes, a situationthat leads to trade-offs. Review Figure 21.22, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 21.3