Amphibians—frogs, toads, and salamanders—havebeen around for a long time. They watched the dinosaurscome and go. But today amphibian populationsaround the world are in dramatic decline, withmore than a third of the world’s amphibian species threatenedwith extinction. Why?Biologists work to answer this question by making observationsand doing experiments. A number of factorsmay be involved, and one possible cause may be theeffects of agricultural pesticides and herbicides. Severalstudies have shown that many of these chemicals testedat realistic concentrations do not kill amphibians. ButTyrone Hayes, a biologist at the University of California atBerkeley, probed deeper.Hayes focused on atrazine, the most widely used herbicidein the world and a common contaminant in fresh water.More than 70 million pounds of atrazine are appliedto farmland in the United States every year, and it is usedin at least 20 countries. Atrazine is usually applied in thespring, when many amphibians are breeding and thousandsof tadpoles swim in the ditches, ponds, and streamsthat receive runoff from farms.In his laboratory, Hayes and his associates raised frogtadpoles in water containing no atrazine and in waterwith concentrations ranging from 0.01 parts per billion(ppb) up to 25 ppb. The U.S. Environmental ProtectionAgency considers environmental levels of atrazine of 10to 20 ppb of no concern; the level it considers safe indrinking water is 3 ppb. Rainwater in Iowa has beenmeasured to contain 40 ppb. In Switzerland, where theuse of atrazine is illegal, the chemical has been measuredat approximately 1 ppb in rainwater.In the Hayes laboratory, concentrations as low as 0.1ppb had a dramatic effect on tadpole development: itfeminized the males. In some of the adult males that developedfrom these larvae, the vocal structures used inmating calls were smaller than normal, female sex organsdeveloped, and eggs were found growing in the testes. Inother studies, normal adult male frogs exposed to 25 ppbhad a tenfold reduction in testosterone levels anddid not produce sperm. You can imagine the disastrouseffects these developmental and hormonalchanges could have on the capacityof frogs to breed and reproduce.But Hayes’s experiments were performedin the laboratory, with a species offrog bred for laboratory use. Would his resultsbe the same in nature? To find out, he and hisstudents traveled from Utah to Iowa, sampling waterand collecting frogs. They analyzed the waterWhy are frogs croaking?1Frogs Are Having Serious Problems An alarmingnumber of species of frogs, such as this tiny leaf frog(Agalychnis calcarifer) from Ecuador, are in danger ofbecoming extinct. The numerous possible reasons forthe decline in global amphibian populations have beena subject of widespread scientific investigation.PART ONE THE SCIENCE OF LIFE AND ITS CHEMICAL BASIS1.1 What Is Biology?Biology is the scientific study of living things. Biologists define“living things” as all the diverse organisms descended from asingle-celled ancestor that evolved almost 4 billion years ago.Because of their common ancestry, living organisms share manycharacteristics that are not found in the nonliving world. Livingorganisms:• consist of one or more cells• contain genetic information• use genetic information to reproduce themselves• are genetically related and have evolved• can convert molecules obtained from their environmentinto new biological molecules• can extract energy from the environment and use it to dobiological work• can regulate their internal environmentThis simple list, however, belies the incredible complexity anddiversity of life. Some forms of life may not display all of thesecharacteristics all of the time. For example, the seed of a desertplant may go for many years without extracting energy fromthe environment, converting molecules, regulating its internalenvironment, or reproducing; yet the seed is alive.And what about viruses? Viruses do not consist of cells, andthey cannot carry out physiological functions on their own; theymust parasitize host cells to do those jobs for them. Yet virusescontain genetic information, and they certainly mutate andevolve (as we know, because evolving flu viruses require constantchanges in the vaccines we create to combat them). Theexistence of viruses depends on cells, and it is highly probablethat viruses evolved from cellular life forms. So, are virusesalive? What do you think?This book explores the characteristics of life, how these characteristicsvary among organisms, how they evolved, and howthey work together to enable organisms to survive and reproduce.Evolution is a central theme of biology and therefore ofthis book. Through differential survival and reproduction, livingsystems evolve and become adapted to Earth’s many environments.The processes of evolution have generated the enormousdiversity that we see today as life on Earth.Cells are the basic unit of lifeWe lay the chemical foundation for our study of life in the nextthree chapters, after which we will turn to cells and theprocesses by which they live, reproduce, age, and die. Some organismsare unicellular, consisting of a single cell that carries outIN THIS CHAPTER we identify and examine the mostcommon features of living organisms and put those featuresinto the context of the major principles that underlie all biology.Next we offer a brief outline of how life evolved andhow the different organisms on Earth are related. We thenturn to the subjects of biological inquiry and the scientificmethod. Finally we consider how knowledge discovered bybiologists influences public policy.for atrazine and examined the frogs. In the only sitewhere atrazine was undetectable in the water, the frogswere normal; in all the other sites, male frogs hadabnormalities of the sex organs.Like other biologists, Hayes made observations. Hethen made predictions based on those observations,and designed and carried out experiments to test hispredictions. Some of the conclusions from his experiments,described at the end of this chapter, could haveprofound implications not only for amphibians but alsofor other animals, including humans.CHAPTER OUTLINE1.1 What Is Biology?1.2 How Is All Life on Earth Related?1.3 How Do Biologists Investigate Life?1.4 How Does Biology Influence Public Policy?A Biologist at Work Tyrone Hayes grew up near the greatCongaree Swamp in South Carolina collecting turtles, snakes,frogs, and toads. Now a professor of biology at the Universityof California at Berkeley, he has more than 3,000 frogs in hislaboratory and studies hormonal control of their development.all the functions of life (Figure 1.1A–C). Others are multicellular,made up of many cells that are specialized for different functions(Figure 1.1D–G). Viruses are acellular, although they dependon cellular organisms.The discovery of cells was made possible by the inventionof the microscope in the 1590s by the Dutch spectacle makersHans and Zaccharias Janssen (father and son). In the mid- to late1600s, Antony van Leeuwenhoek of Holland and Robert Hookeof England both made improvements on the Janssens’ technologyand used it to study living organisms. Van Leeuwenhoekdiscovered that drops of pond water teemed with single-celledorganisms, and he made many other discoveries as he progressivelyimproved his microscopes over a long lifetime of research.Hooke put pieces of plants under his microscope and observedthat they were made up of repeated units he called cells (Figure1.2). In 1676, Hooke wrote that van Leeuwenhoek had observed“a vast number of small animals in his Excrements which weremost abounding when he was troubled with a Loosenesse andvery few or none when he was well.” This simple observationrepresents the discovery of bacteria—and makes one wonderwhy scientists do some of the things they do.More than a hundred years passed before studies of cells advancedsignificantly. As they were dining together one eveningin 1838, Matthias Schleiden, a German biologist, and TheodorSchwann, from Belgium, discussed their work on plant and animaltissues, respectively. They were struck by the similaritiesin their observations and came to the conclusion that the basicstructural elements of plants and animals were essentially thesame. They formulated their conclusion as the cell theory, whichstates that:• Cells are the basic structural and physiological units of allliving organisms.• Cells are both distinct entities and building blocks of morecomplex organisms.But Schleiden and Schwann also believed (wrongly) that cellsemerged by the self-assembly of nonliving materials, much ascrystals form in a solution of salt. This conclusion was in ac-4 CHAPTER 1 | STUDYING LIFE(F) Milkweed grasshopper(E) Stinkhorn mushrooms(A) Sulfolobus(G) Giant tortoise Galápagos hawk(B) Escherichia coli(D) Scarlet banksia(C) Coccolithophore0.5 μm 0.6 μm4 μm1.1 The Many Faces of Life The processes of evolution have led to the millions ofdiverse organisms living on Earth today. Archaea (A) and bacteria (B) are all single-celled,prokaryotic organisms, as described in Chapter 26. (C) Many protists are unicellular but, asdiscussed in Chapter 27, their cell structures are more complex than those of the prokaryotes.This protist has manufactured “plates” of calcium carbonate that surround and protectits single cell. (D–G) Most of the visible life on Earth is multicellular. Chapters 28 and 29cover the green plants (D). The other broad groups of multicellular organisms are the fungi(E), discussed in Chapter 30, and the animals (F, G), covered in Chapters 31–33.cordance with the prevailing view of the day, which was thatlife can arise from non-life by spontaneous generation—micefrom dirty clothes, maggots from dead meat, or insects frompond water.The debate continued until 1859, when the French Academyof Sciences sponsored a contest for the best experiment to proveor disprove spontaneous generation. The prize was won by thegreat French scientist Louis Pasteur, who demonstrated thatsterile broth directly exposed to the dirt and dust in air developeda culture of microorganisms, but a similar container ofbroth not directly exposed to air remained sterile (see Figure4.7). Pasteur’s experiment did not prove that it was microorganismsin the air that caused the broth to become infected, but itdid uphold the conclusion that life must be present in order fornew life to be generated.Today scientists accept the fact that all cells come from preexistingcells and that the functional properties of organismsderive from the properties of their cells. Since cells of all kindsshare both essential mechanisms and a common ancestry thatgoes back billions of years, modern cell theory has additionalelements:• All cells come from preexisting cells.• All cells are similar in chemical composition.• Most of the chemical reactions of life occur in aqueoussolution within cells.• Complete sets of genetic information are replicated andpassed on during cell division.• Viruses lack cellular structure but remain dependent oncellular organisms.At the same time Schleiden and Schwann were building thefoundation for the cell theory, Charles Darwin was beginningto understand how organisms undergo evolutionary change.All of life shares a common evolutionary historyEvolution—change in the genetic makeup of biological populationsthrough time—is the major unifying principle of biology.Charles Darwin compiled factual evidence for evolution inhis 1859 book On the Origin of Species. Since then, biologists havegathered massive amounts of data supporting Darwin’s theorythat all living organisms are descended from a common ancestor.Darwin also proposed one of the most important processesthat produce evolutionary change. He argued that differentialsurvival and reproduction among individuals in a population,which he termed natural selection, could account for much ofthe evolution of life.Although Darwin proposed that living organisms are descendedfrom common ancestors and are therefore related toone another, he did not have the advantage of understandingthe mechanisms of genetic inheritance. Even so, he observedthat offspring resembled their parents; therefore, he surmised,such mechanisms had to exist. That simple fact is the basis forthe concept of a species. Although the precise definition of aspecies is complicated, in its most widespread usage it refers toa group of organisms that can produce viable and fertile offspringwith one another.But offspring do differ from their parents. Any populationof a plant or animal species displays variation, and if you selectbreeding pairs on the basis of some particular trait, that trait ismore likely to be present in their offspring than in the generalpopulation. Darwin himself bred pigeons, and was well awareof how pigeon fanciers selected breeding pairs to produce offspringwith unusual feather patterns, beak shapes, or body sizes(see Figure 21.2). He realized that if humans could select for specifictraits in domesticated animals, the same process could operatein nature; hence the term natural selection as opposed to artificial(human-imposed) selection.How would natural selection function? Darwin postulatedthat different probabilities of survival and reproductive successwould do the job. He reasoned that the reproductive capacityof plants and animals, if unchecked, would result in unlimitedgrowth of populations, but we do not observe such growth innature; in most species, only a small percentage of offspring surviveto reproduce. Thus any trait that confers even a small increasein the probability that its possessor will survive and reproducewould be spread in the population.1.1 | WHAT IS BIOLOGY? 5(A) (B) (C)30 μm 5 μm1.2 Cells Are the Building Blocks ofLife The development of microscopesrevealed the microbial world toseventeenth-century scientists such asRobert Hooke, who proposed the conceptof cells based on his observations.(A) Hooke drew the cells of a slice ofplant tissue (cork) as he saw themunder his optical microscope. (B) Amodern optical, or “light,” microscopereveals the intricacies of cells in a leaf.(C) Transmission electron microscopes(TEMs) allow scientists to see evensmaller objects. TEMs do not visualizecolor; here color has been added to ablack-and-white micrograph of cells ina duckweed stem.Because organisms with certain traits survive and reproducebest under specific sets of conditions, natural selection leads toadaptations: structural, physiological, or behavioral traits that enhancean organism’s chances of survival and reproduction in itsenvironment (Figure 1.3). In addition to natural selection, evolutionaryprocesses such as sexual selection (selection due to matechoice) and genetic drift (the random fluctuation of gene frequenciesin a population due to chance events) contribute to the riseof diverse adaptations. These processes operating over evolutionaryhistory have led to the remarkable array of life on Earth.If all cells come from preexisting cells, and if all the diversespecies of organisms on Earth are related by descent with modificationfrom a common ancestor, then what is the source of informationthat is passed from parent to daughter cells and fromparental organisms to their offspring?Biological information is contained in agenetic language common to all organismsCells are the basic building blocks of organisms, but even a singlecell is complex, with many internal structures and manyfunctions that depend on information. The information requiredfor a cell to function and interact with other cells—the “blueprint”for existence—is contained in the cell’s genome, the sumtotal of all the DNA molecules it contains. DNA (deoxyribonucleicacid) molecules are long sequences of four different subunitscalled nucleotides. The sequence of the nucleotides containsgenetic information. Genes are specific segments of DNAencoding the information the cell uses to make proteins (Figure1.4). Protein molecules govern the chemical reactions withincells and form much of an organism’s structure.By analogy with a book, the nucleotides of DNA are likethe letters of an alphabet. Protein molecules are the sentences.Combinations of proteins that form structures and control biochemicalprocesses are the paragraphs. The structures andprocesses that are organized into different systems with specifictasks (such as digestion or transport) are the chapters of thebook, and the complete book is the organism. If you were towrite out your own genome using four letters to represent thefour nucleotides, you would write more than 3 billion letters.Using the size type you are reading now, your genome wouldfill about a thousand books the size of this one. The mechanismsof evolution, including natural selection, are the authors andeditors of all the books in the library of life.Many leaves are wide and flat, aconfiguration that presents amaximum of photosynthetic surfaceto the sun. Some trees, such as thisJapanese maple, lose their leaves inresponse to cold or dry weather.The leaves of manyevergreen conifers, suchas spruce trees, arewaxy-coated needles thatresist water loss and arenot shed on a yearly basis.These water lilies are rooted inthe pond bottom; their largeleaves are flat “pads” that floaton the surface.The leaves of pitcher plants forma vessel that holds water. Theplant receives extra nutrientsfrom the decomposing bodies ofinsects that drown in the pitcher.The ability to climb can be advantageous to aplant, enabling it to reach above other plants toobtain more sunlight. Some of the leaves of thisclimbing cucumber are tightly furled tendrils thatwrap around a stake.1.3 Adaptations to the Environment The leaves ofall plants are specialized for photosynthesis—the sunlight-powered transformation of water and carbon dioxideinto larger structural molecules called carbohydrates.The leaves of different plants, however, display many differentadaptations to their individual environments.All the cells of a multicellular organism contain the samegenome, yet different cells have different functions and formdifferent structures—contractile proteins form in muscle cells,hemoglobin in red blood cells, digestive enzymes in gut cells,and so on. Therefore, different types of cells in an organism mustexpress different parts of the genome. How cells control geneexpression in ways that enable a complex organism to developand function is a major focus of current biological research.The genome of an organism consists of thousands of genes.If the nucleotide sequence of a gene is altered, it is likely thatthe protein that gene encodes will be altered. Alterations ofthe genome are called mutations. Mutations occur spontaneously;they can also be induced by outside factors, includingchemicals and radiation. Most mutations are either harmfulor have no effect, but occasionally a mutation improves thefunctioning of the organism under the environmental conditionsit encounters. Such beneficial mutations are the raw materialof evolution and lead to adaptations.Cells use nutrients to supply energy andto build new structuresLiving organisms acquire nutrients from the environment. Nutrientssupply the organism with energy and raw materials forcarrying out biochemical reactions. Life depends on thousandsof biochemical reactions that occur inside cells. Some of thesereactions break down nutrient molecules into smaller chemicalunits, and in the process some of the energy contained in thechemical bonds of the nutrients is captured by high-energy moleculesthat can be used to do different kinds of cellular work.One obvious kind of work cells do is mechanical—movingmolecules from one cellular location to another, moving wholecells or tissues, or even moving the organism itself, as musclesdo (Figure 1.5A). The most basic cellular work is the building,or synthesis, of new complex molecules and structures fromsmaller chemical units. For example, we are all familiar with thefact that carbohydrates eaten today may be deposited in thebody as fat tomorrow (Figure 1.5B). Still another kind of workis the electrical work that is the essence of information processingin nervous systems. The sum total of all the chemicaltransformations and other work done in all the cells of an organismis its metabolism, or metabolic rate.The myriad of biochemical reactions that go on in cells areintegrally linked in that the products of one are the raw materialsof the next. These complex networks of reactions must beintegrated and precisely controlled; when they are not, the resultis disease.Living organisms regulate their internal environmentMulticellular organisms have an internal environment that is notcellular. That is, their individual cells are bathed in extracellularfluids, from which they receive nutrients and into which theyexcrete waste products of metabolism. The cells of multicellu-1.1 | WHAT IS BIOLOGY? 7TACGFour nucleotides (C, G, T, and A)are the building blocks of DNA.DNA is made up of twostrands of linked sequencesof nucleotides.A gene consists of a specificsequence of nucleotides.The nucleotide sequence in agene contains the informationto build a specific protein.DNADNAProteinOne nucleotideGene1.4 DNA Is Life’s Blueprint The instructions for life are contained inthe sequences of nucleotides in DNA molecules. Specific DNA nucleotidesequences comprise genes. The average length of a single human geneis 16,000 nucleotides. The information in each gene provides the cell withthe information it needs to manufacture molecules of a specific protein.(B)(A)1.5 Energy Can Be Used Immediately or Stored (A) Animal cellsbreak down and release the energy contained in the chemical bonds of foodmolecules to do mechanical work—in this kangaroo’s case, to jump.(B) The cells of this Arctic ground squirrel have broken down the complexcarbohydrates in plants and converted their molecules into fats, which arestored in the animal’s body to provide an energy supply for the cold months.lar organisms are specialized, or differentiated, to contribute insome way to the maintenance of the internal environment. Withthe evolution of specialization, differentiated cells lost manyof the functions carried out by single-celled organisms, andmust depend on the internal environment for essential services.To accomplish their specialized tasks, assemblages of differentiatedcells are organized into tissues. For example, a singlemuscle cell cannot generate much force, but when many cellscombine to form the tissue of a working muscle, considerableforce and movement can be generated (see Figure 1.5B). Differenttissue types are organized to form organs that accomplishspecific functions. For example, the heart, brain, and stomachare each constructed of several types of tissues. Organs whosefunctions are interrelated can be grouped into organ systems; thestomach, intestine, and esophagus, for example, are parts of thedigestive system. The functions of cells, tissues, organs, and organsystems are all integral to the multicellular organism. Wecover the biology of organisms in Parts Eight and Nine of thisbook.Living organisms interact with one anotherThe internal hierarchy of the individual organism ismatched by the external hierarchy of the biologicalworld (Figure 1.6). Organisms do not live in isolation.Agroup of individuals of the same species that interactwith one another is a population, and populationsof all the species that live and interact in the same areaare called a community. Communities together withtheir abiotic environment constitute an ecosystem.Individuals in a population interact in many differentways. Animals eat plants and other animals(usually members of another species) and competewith other species for food and other resources. Someanimals will prevent other individuals of their ownspecies from exploiting a resource, whether it be food,nesting sites, or mates. Animals may also cooperatewith members of their species, forming social unitssuch as a termite colony or a flock of birds. Such interactionshave resulted in the evolution of social behaviorssuch as communication.Plants also interact with their external environment,which includes other plants, animals, and microorganisms.All terrestrial plants depend on complexpartnerships with fungi, bacteria, and animals.Some of these partnerships are necessary to obtainnutrients, some to produce fertile seeds, and still othersto disperse seeds. Plants compete with each other8 CHAPTER 1 | STUDYING LIFEMolecules are made up ofatoms. Cells are built ofmolecules.A tissue is a group of many cellswith similar and coordinatedfunctions (such as sensing odors).An organism is a recognizable,self-contained individual. Complexmulticellular organisms are madeup of organs and organ systems.Communities consistof populations of manydifferent species.A population is a group of manyorganisms of the same species.Cells of many types are theworking components ofliving organisms.Organs combine several tissues thatfunction together. Organs formsystems, such as the nervous system.Biological communities in the same geographicallocation form ecosystems. Ecosystemsexchange energy and create Earth’s biosphere.AtomsMoleculeCell (neuron)Neural tissueOrgan (brain)Organism (fish)Population (school of fish)BiosphereCommunity (coral reef)1.6 Biology Is Studied at Many Levels of OrganizationLife’s properties emerge when DNA and other molecules areorganized in cells. Energy flows through all the biological levelsshown here.GO TO Web Activity 1.1 • The Hierarchy of LifeyourBioPortal.comfor light and water, and they have ongoing evolutionary interactionswith the animals that eat them, evolving anti-predationadaptations or ways to attract the animals that assist in their reproduction.The interactions of populations of different plantand animal species in a community are major evolutionaryforces that produce specialized adaptations.Communities interacting over a broad geographic area withdistinguishing physical features form ecosystems; examplesmight include an Arctic tundra, a coral reef, or a tropical rainforest.The ways in which species interact with one another andwith their environment in communities and in ecosystems isthe subject of ecology and of Part Ten of this book.Discoveries in biology can be generalizedBecause all life is related by descent from a common ancestor,shares a genetic code, and consists of similar building blocks—cells—knowledge gained from investigations of one type of organismcan, with care, be generalized to other organisms. Biologistsuse model systems for research, knowing that they canextend their findings to other organisms, including humans.For example, our basic understanding of the chemical reactionsin cells came from research on bacteria but is applicable to all cells,including those of humans. Similarly, the biochemistry of photosynthesis—the process by which plants use sunlight to producebiological molecules—was largely worked out from experimentson Chlorella, a unicellular green alga (see Figure 10.13). Much ofwhat we know about the genes that control plant developmentis the result of work on Arabidopsis thaliana, a relative of the mustardplant. Knowledge about how animals develop has comefrom work on sea urchins, frogs, chickens, roundworms, and fruitflies. And recently, the discovery of a major gene controlling humanskin color came from work on zebrafish. Being able to generalizefrom model systems is a powerful tool in biology.1.1 RECAPLiving organisms are made of (or depend on) cells,are related by common descent and evolve, containgenetic information and use it to reproduce, extractenergy from their environment and use it to do biologicalwork, synthesize complex molecules to constructbiological structures, regulate their internalenvironment, and interact with one another.• Describe the relationship between evolution by naturalselection and the genetic code. See pp. 6–7• Why can the results of biological research on onespecies often be generalized to very different species?See p. 9Now that you have an overview of the major features of life thatyou will explore in depth in this book, you can ask how andwhen life first emerged. In the next section we will summarizebriefly the history of life from the earliest simple life forms to thecomplex and diverse organisms that inhabit our planet today.1.2 How Is All Life on Earth Related?What do biologists mean when they say that all organisms aregenetically related? They mean that species on Earth share a commonancestor. If two species are similar, as dogs and wolvesare, then they probably have a common ancestor in the fairlyrecent past. The common ancestor of two species that are moredifferent—say, a dog and a deer—probably lived in the moredistant past. And if two organisms are very different—such asa dog and a clam—then we must go back to the very distant pastto find their common ancestor. How can we tell how far backin time the common ancestor of any two organisms lived? Inother words, how do we discover the evolutionary relationshipsamong organisms?For many years, biologists have investigated the history oflife by studying the fossil record—the preserved remains of organismsthat lived in the distant past (Figure 1.7). Geologistssupplied knowledge about the ages of fossils and the nature ofthe environments in which they lived. Biologists then inferredthe evolutionary relationships among living and fossil organismsby comparing their anatomical similarities and differences.Frequently big gaps existed in the fossil record, forcing biologiststo predict the nature of the “missing links” between twolineages of organisms. As the fossil record became more complete,those missing links were filled in.Molecular methods for comparing genomes, described inChapter 24, are enabling biologists to more accurately establishthe degrees of relationship between living organisms and to usethat information to interpret the fossil record. Molecular informationcan occasionally be gleaned from fossil specimens, suchas recently deciphered genetic material from fossil bones of Ne-1.2 | HOW IS ALL LIFE ON EARTH RELATED? 91.7 Fossils Give Us a View of Past Life This fossil, formed some150 million years ago, is that of an Archaeopteryx, the earliest known representativeof the birds. Birds evolved from the same group of reptiles asthe modern crocodiles.anderthals that led to the conclusion that even though Neanderthalsand modern humans coexisted, they did not interbreed.In general, the greater the differences between the genomesof two species, the more distant their common ancestor. Usingmolecular techniques, biologists are exploring fundamentalquestions about life. What were the earliest forms of life? Howdid simple organisms give rise to the great diversity of organismsalive today? Can we reconstruct a family tree of life?Life arose from non-life via chemical evolutionGeologists estimate that Earth formed between 4.6 and 4.5 billionyears ago. At first, the planet was not a very hospitableplace. It was some 600 million years or more before the earliestlife evolved. If we picture the history of Earth as a 30-day month,life first appeared somewhere toward the end of the first week(Figure 1.8).When we consider how life might have arisen from nonlivingmatter, we must take into account the properties of the youngEarth’s atmosphere, oceans, and climate, all of which were verydifferent than they are today. Biologists postulate that complexbiological molecules first arose through the random physicalassociation of chemicals in that environment. Experiments simulatingthe conditions on early Earth have confirmed that the generationof complex molecules under such conditions is possible,even probable. The critical step for the evolution of life, however,had to be the appearance of molecules that could reproducethemselves and also serve as templates for the synthesis of largemolecules with complex but stable shapes. The variation of theshapes of these large, stable molecules (described in Chapters 3and 4) enabled them to participate in increasing numbers andkinds of chemical reactions with other molecules.Cellular structure evolved in thecommon ancestor of lifeThe second critical step in the origin of life was the enclosure ofcomplex biological molecules by membranes that contained themin a compact internal environment separate from the surroundingexternal environment. Fatlike molecules played a criticalrole because they are not soluble in water and they form membranousfilms. When agitated, these films can form sphericalvesicles, which could have enveloped assemblages of biologicalmolecules. The creation of an internal environment that concentratedthe reactants and products of chemical reactions openedup the possibility that those reactions could be integrated andcontrolled. As described in Section 4.4, scientists postulate thatthis natural process of membrane formation resulted in the firstcells with the ability to replicate themselves—the evolution ofthe first cellular organisms.For more than 2 billion years after cells originated, all organismsconsisted of only one cell. These first unicellular organismswere (and are, as multitudes of their descendants exist in similarform today) prokaryotes. Prokaryotic cells consist of DNAand other biochemicals enclosed in a membrane.These early prokaryotes were confined to the oceans, wherethere was an abundance of complex molecules they could useas raw materials and sources of energy. The ocean shielded themfrom the damaging effects of ultraviolet light, which was intenseat that time because there was little or no oxygen (O2) inthe atmosphere, and hence no protective ozone (O3) layer.Photosynthesis changed thecourse of evolutionTo fuel their cellular metabolism, the earliestprokaryotes took in molecules directlyfrom their environment and broke thesesmall molecules down to release and usethe energy contained in their chemicalbonds. Many modern species of prokaryotesstill function this way, and very successfully.During the early eons of life onEarth, there was no oxygen in the atmosphere.In fact, oxygen was toxic to the lifeforms that existed then.10 CHAPTER 1 | STUDYING LIFE27First life?1269 327 28 29 30Each “day” representsabout 150 million years.Homo sapiens (modern humans)arose in the last 5 minutes of day30 (around 500,000 years ago).Recorded historycovers the last fewseconds of day 30.Life appeared some time around day 5,a little less than 4 billion years ago.1.8 Life’s Calendar Depicting Earth’s historyon the scale of a 30-day month providesa sense of the immensity of evolutionary time.About 2.7 billion years ago, the evolution of photosynthesischanged the nature of life on Earth. The chemical reactions ofphotosynthesis transform the energy of sunlight into a form ofbiological energy that can power the synthesis of large molecules(see Chapter 10). These large molecules are the buildingblocks of cells, and they can be broken down to provide metabolicenergy. Photosynthesis is the basis of much of life on Earthtoday because its energy-capturing processes provide food forother organisms.Early photosynthetic cells were probably similar to presentdayprokaryotes called cyanobacteria (Figure 1.9). Over time,photosynthetic prokaryotes became so abundant that vastquantities of O2, which is a by-product of photosynthesis,slowly began to accumulate in the atmosphere. Oxygen waspoisonous to many of the prokaryotes that lived at that time.Those organisms that did tolerate oxygen, however, were ableto proliferate as the presence of oxygen opened up vast newavenues of evolution. Aerobic metabolism (energy productionbased on the conversion of O2) is more efficient than anaerobic(non-O2-using) metabolism, and today it is used by the majorityof Earth’s organisms. Aerobic metabolism allowed cells togrow larger.Oxygen in the atmosphere also made it possible for life tomove onto land. For most of life’s history, ultraviolet (UV) radiationfalling on Earth’s surface was too intense to allow lifeto exist outside the shielding water. But the accumulation ofphotosynthetically generated oxygen in the atmosphere formore than 2 billion years gradually produced a layer of ozonein the upper atmosphere. By about 500 million years ago, theozone layer was sufficiently dense and absorbed enough UV radiationto make it possible for organisms to leave the protectionof the water and live on land.Eukaryotic cells evolved from prokaryotesAnother important step in the history of life was the evolutionof cells with discrete intracellular compartments, called organelles,which were capable of taking on specialized cellularfunctions. This event happened about 3 weeks into our calendarof Earth’s history (see Figure 1.8). One of these organelles,the dense-appearing nucleus (Latin nux, “nut” or “core”), cameto contain the cell’s genetic information and gives these cellstheir name: eukaryotes (Greek eu, “true”; karyon, “kernel” or“core”). The eukaryotic cell is completely distinct from the cellsof prokaryotes (pro, “before”), which lack nuclei and other internalcompartments.Some organelles are hypothesized to have originated by endosymbiosiswhen cells ingested smaller cells. The mitochondriathat generate a cell’s energy probably evolved from engulfedprokaryotic organisms. And chloroplasts—organelles specializedto conduct photosynthesis—could have originated when photosyntheticprokaryotes were ingested by larger eukaryotes. Ifthe larger cell failed to break down this intended food object, apartnership could have evolved in which the ingested prokaryoteprovided the products of photosynthesis and the host cellprovided a good environment for its smaller partner.Multicellularity arose and cells became specializedUntil just over a billion years ago, all the organisms that existed—whether prokaryotic or eukaryotic—were unicellular.An important evolutionary step occurred when some eukaryotesfailed to separate after cell division, remaining attachedto each other. The permanent association of cells made it possiblefor some cells to specialize in certain functions, such as reproduction,while other cells specialized in other functions, suchas absorbing nutrients and distributing them to neighboringcells. This cellular specialization enabled multicellular eukaryotesto increase in size and become more efficient at gatheringresources and adapting to specific environments.Biologists can trace the evolutionary tree of lifeIf all the species of organisms on Earth today are the descendantsof a single kind of unicellular organism that lived almost4 billion years ago, how have they become so different? Asimplified answer is that as long as individuals within a populationmate with one another, structural and functional changescan evolve within that population, but the population will remainone species. However, if something happens to isolatesome members of a population from the others, the structuraland functional differences between the two groups may accumulateover time. The two groups may diverge to the pointwhere their members can no longer reproduce with each otherand are thus distinct species. We discuss this evolutionaryprocess, called speciation, in Chapter 23.Biologists give each species a distinctive scientific nameformed from two Latinized names (a binomial). The first nameidentifies the species’ genus—a group of species that share a recentcommon ancestor. The second is the name of the species. For1.2 | HOW IS ALL LIFE ON EARTH RELATED? 11350 μm1.9 Photosynthetic Organisms Changed Earth’s AtmosphereThese strands are composed of many cells of cyanobacteria. Thismodern species (Oscillatoria tenuis) may be very similar to the earlyphotosynthetic prokaryotes responsible for the buildup of oxygen inEarth’s atmosphere.example, the scientific name for the human species is Homo sapiens:Homo is our genus and sapiens our species. Homo is Latin for“man”; sapiens is from the Latin for word for “wise” or “rational.”Tens of millions of species exist on Earth today. Many timesthat number lived in the past but are now extinct. Many millionsof speciation events created this vast diversity, and the unfoldingof these events can be diagrammed as an evolutionary“tree” whose branches describe the order in which populationssplit and eventually evolved into new species, as described inChapter 22. Much of biology is based on comparisons amongspecies, and these comparisons are useful precisely because wecan place species in an evolutionary context relative to one another.Our ability to do this has been greatly enhanced in recentdecades by our ability to sequence and compare the genomesof different species.Genome sequencing and other molecular techniques haveallowed systematists—scientists who study the evolution andclassification of life’s diverse organisms—to augment evolutionaryknowledge based on the fossil record with a vast array ofmolecular evidence. The result is the ongoing compilation ofphylogenetic trees that document and diagram evolutionary relationshipsas part of an overarching tree of life, the broadestcategories of which are shown in Figure 1.10. (The tree is expandedin this book’s Appendix; you can also explore the treeinteractively at http://tolweb.org/tree.)Although many details remain to be clarified, the broad outlinesof the tree of life have been determined. Its branching patternsare based on a rich array of evidence from fossils, structures,metabolic processes, behavior, and molecular analyses ofgenomes. Molecular data in particular have been used to separatethe tree into three major domains: Archaea, Bacteria, andEukarya. The organisms of each domain have been evolvingseparately from those in the other domains for more than abillion years.Organisms in the domains Archaea and Bacteria are singlecelledprokaryotes. However, members of these two groups differso fundamentally in their metabolic processes that they arebelieved to have separated into distinct evolutionary lineagesvery early. Species belonging to the third domain—Eukarya—have eukaryotic cells whose mitochondria and chloroplasts mayhave originated from the ingestion of prokaryotic cells, as describedon page 11.The three major groups of multicellular eukaryotes—plants,fungi, and animals—each evolved from a different group of theeukaryotes generally referred to as protists. The chloroplast-containing,photosynthetic protist that gave rise to plants was completelydistinct from the protist that was ancestral to both animalsand fungi, as can be seen from the branching pattern ofFigure 1.10. Although most protists are unicellular (and thussometimes called microbial eukaryotes), multicellularity hasevolved in several protist lineages.The tree of life is predictiveThere are far more species alive on Earth than biologists havediscovered and described to date. In fact, most species on Earth12 CHAPTER 1 | STUDYING LIFEEndosymbiotic bacteriabecame the mitochondriaof eukaryotes.Endosymbiotic,photosynthetic bacteriabecame chloroplasts.PlantsMitochondriaChloroplastsLifeProtistsProtistsProtistsProtistsProtistsProtistsAnimalsFungi270,00080,0001,300,00098,00026010,000Number of known(described)species400,000–500,000500,000–1 million10 million–100 million1–2 million1,000–1 millionMillionsEstimated totalnumber of livingspeciesARCHAEAEUKARYABACTERIA1.10 The Tree of Life The classification systemused in this book divides Earth’s organisms intothree domains: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya.The darkest blue branches within Eukarya representvarious groups of microbial eukaryotes, more commonlyknown as “protists.” The organisms on anyone branch share a common ancestor. In this book,we adopt the convention that time flows from left toright, so this tree (and other trees in this book) lieson its side, with its root—the common ancestor—at the left.GO TO Web Activity 1.2 • The Major Groupsof OrganismsyourBioPortal.comhave yet to be discovered by humans (see Section 32.4 for a discussionof how we know this). When we encounter a newspecies, its placement on the tree of life immediately tells us agreat deal about its biology. In addition, understanding relationshipsamong species allows biologists to make predictions aboutspecies that have not yet been studied, based on our knowledgeof those that have.For example, until phylogenetic methods were developed, ittook years of investigation to isolate and identify most newlyencountered human pathogens, and even longer to discoverhow these pathogens moved into human populations. Today,pathogens that cause diseases such as the flu are identifiedquickly on the basis of their evolutionary relationships. Placementin an evolutionary tree also gives us clues about the disease’sbiology, possible effective treatments, and the origin ofthe pathogen (see Chapters 21 and 22).1.2 RECAPThe first cellular life on Earth was prokaryotic andarose about 4 billion years ago. The complexity ofthe organisms that exist today is the result of severalimportant evolutionary events, including the evolutionof photosynthesis, eukaryotic cells, and multicellularity.The genetic relationships of all organismscan be shown as a branching tree of life.• Discuss the evolutionary significance of photosynthesis.See pp. 10–11• What do the domains of life represent? What are themajor groups of eukaryotes? See p. 12 and Figure 1.10In February of 1676, Robert Hooke received a letter from thephysicist Sir Isaac Newton in which Newton famously remarked,“If I have seen a little further, it is by standing on theshoulders of giants.” We all stand on the shoulders of giants,building on the research of earlier scientists. By the end of thiscourse, you will know more about evolution than Darwin evercould have, and you will know infinitely more about cells thanSchleiden and Schwann did. Let’s look at the methods biologistsuse to expand our knowledge of life.1.3 How Do Biologists Investigate Life?Regardless of the many different tools and methods used inresearch, all scientific investigations are based on observation andexperimentation. In both, scientists are guided by the scientificmethod, one of the most powerful tools of modern science.Observation is an important skillBiologists have always observed the world around them, buttoday our ability to observe is greatly enhanced by technologiessuch as electron microscopes, DNA chips, magnetic resonanceimaging, and global positioning satellites. These technologieshave improved our ability to observe at all levels, from the distributionof molecules in the body to the distribution of fish inthe oceans. For example, not too long ago marine biologistswere only able to observe the movement of fish in the oceanby putting physical tags on the fish, releasing them, and hopingthat a fisherman would catch that fish and send back thetag—and even that would reveal only where the fish ended up.Today we can attach electronic recording devices to fish thatcontinuously record not only where the fish is, but also howdeep it swims and the temperature and salinity of the wateraround it (Figure 1.11). The tags download this information toa satellite, which relays it back to researchers. Suddenly weare acquiring a great deal of knowledge about the distributionof life in the oceans—information that is relevant tostudies of climate change.Technologies that enable us to quantify observationsare very important in science. For example, for hundredsof years species were classified by generallyqualitative descriptions of the physical differences betweenthem. There was no way of objectively calculatingevolutionary distances between organisms, andbiologists had to depend on the fossil record for insight.Today our ability to rapidly analyze DNA sequencesenables quantitative estimates of evolutionarydistances, as described in Parts Five and Six of thisbook. The ability to gather quantitative observationsadds greatly to the biologist’s ability to make strongconclusions.1.3 | HOW DO BIOLOGISTS INVESTIGATE LIFE? 131.11 Tuna Tracking Marine biologist Barbara Block attachescomputerized data recording tags (inset) to a live bluefintuna before returning it to the ocean. Such tags make it possibleto track an individual tuna wherever it travels in the world’soceans.The scientific method combines observation and logicObservations lead to questions, and scientists make additionalobservations and do experiments to answer those questions. Theconceptual approach that underlies most modern scientific investigationsis the scientific method. This powerful tool, alsocalled the hypothesis–prediction (H–P) method, has five steps: (1)making observations; (2) asking questions; (3) forming hypotheses,or tentative answers to the questions; (4) making predictions basedon the hypotheses; and (5) testing the predictions by making additionalobservations or conducting experiments (Figure 1.12).After posing a question, a scientist uses inductive logic to proposea tentative answer. Inductive logic involves taking observationsor facts and creating a new proposition that is compatiblewith those observations or facts. Such a tentative proposition iscalled a hypothesis. In formulating a hypothesis, scientists puttogether the facts they already know to formulate one or morepossible answers to the question. For example, at the opening ofthis chapter you learned that scientists have observed the rapiddecline of amphibian populations worldwide and are asking why.Some scientists have hypothesized that a fungal disease is a cause;other scientists have hypothesized that increased exposure to ultravioletradiation is a cause. Tyrone Hayes hypothesized that exposureto agricultural chemicals could be a cause. He knew thatthe most widely used chemical herbicide is atrazine; that it ismostly applied in the spring, when amphibians are breeding; andthat atrazine is a common contaminant in the waters in whichamphibians live as they develop into adults.The next step in the scientific method is to apply a differentform of logic—deductive logic—to make predictions based on thehypothesis. Deductive logic starts with a statement believedto be true and then goes on to predict what facts would alsohave to be true to be compatible with that statement. Based onhis hypothesis, Tyrone Hayes predicted that frog tadpoles exposedto atrazine would show adverse effects of the chemicalonce they reached adulthood.Good experiments have the potential tofalsify hypothesesOnce predictions are made from a hypothesis, experiments canbe designed to test those predictions. The most informativeexperiments are those that have the ability to show that the predictionis wrong. If the prediction is wrong, the hypothesis mustbe questioned, modified, or rejected.There are two general types of experiments, both of whichcompare data from different groups or samples. Acontrolled experimentmanipulates one or more of the factors being tested;comparative experiments compare unmanipulated data gatheredfrom different sources. As described at the opening of this chapter,Tyrone Hayes and his colleagues conducted both types ofexperiment to test the prediction that the herbicide atrazine, acontaminant in freshwater ponds and streams throughout theworld, affects the development of frogs.In a controlled experiment, we start with groups or samplesthat are as similar as possible. We predict on the basis of our hypothesisthat some critical factor, or variable, has an effect on thephenomenon we are investigating. We devise some method tomanipulate only that variable in an “experimental” group andcompare the resulting data with data from an unmanipulated“control” group. If the predicted difference occurs, we then applystatistical tests to ascertain the probability that the manipulationcreated the difference (as opposed to the difference beingthe result of random chance). Figure 1.13 describes one of themany controlled experiments performed by the Hayes laboratoryto quantify the effects of atrazine on male frogs.The basis of controlled experiments is that one variable ismanipulated while all others are held constant. The variable thatis manipulated is called the independent variable, and the responsethat is measured is the dependent variable. A good controlledexperiment is not easy to design because biological variablesare so interrelated that it is difficult to alter just one.A comparative experiment starts with the prediction thatthere will be a difference between samples or groups based onthe hypothesis. In comparative experiments, however, we can-14 CHAPTER 1 | STUDYING LIFE1. Make observations.2. Speculate, ask a question.4. Make a prediction: What else wouldbe true if your hypothesis is correct?5. Design and conduct anexperiment that usesquantifiable data to testyour prediction.Reexamine theexperiment foruncontrolledvariables.Ask newquestions.Use statistical tests to evaluatethe significance of your results.Significant resultssupport hypothesis.Experiment repeated andresults verified by otherresearchers.Results do notsupport hypothesis.3. Form a hypothesis toanswer the question.Revise yourhypothesis.1.12 The Scientific Method The process of observation, speculation,hypothesis, prediction, and experimentation is the cornerstone of modernscience. Answers gleaned through experimentation lead to new questions,more hypotheses, further experiments, and expanding knowledge.not control the variables; often we cannot even identify all thevariables that are present. We are simply gathering and comparingdata from different sample groups.When his controlled experiments indicated that atrazine indeedaffects reproductive development in frogs, Hayes andhis colleagues performed a comparative experiment. They collectedfrogs and water samples from eight widely separatedsites across the United States and compared the incidence of abnormalfrogs from environments with very different levels ofatrazine (Figure 1.14). Of course, the sample sites differed inmany ways besides the level of atrazine present.The results of experiments frequently reveal that the situationis more complex than the hypothesis anticipated, thus raisingnew questions. In the Hayes experiments, for example, therewas no clear direct relationship between the amount of atrazinepresent and the percentage of abnormal frogs: there were fewerabnormal frogs at the highest concentrations of atrazine than atlower concentrations. There are no “final answers” in science.Investigations consistently reveal more complexity than we expect.The scientific method is a tool to identify, assess, and understandthat complexity.Statistical methods are essential scientific toolsWhether we do comparative or controlled experiments, at the endwe have to decide whether there is a difference between the samples,individuals, groups, or populations in the study. How do wedecide whether a measured difference is enough to support or falsifya hypothesis? In other words, how do we decide in an unbiased,objective way that the measured difference is significant?Significance can be measured with statistical methods. Scientistsuse statistics because they recognize that variation isalways present in any set of measurements. Statistical testscalculate the probability that the differences observed in anexperiment could be due to random variation. The results ofstatistical tests are therefore probabilities. Astatistical test startswith a null hypothesis—the premise that no difference exists.When quantified observations, or data, are collected, statisticalmethods are applied to those data to calculate the likelihoodthat the null hypothesis is correct.More specifically, statistical methods tell us the probabilityof obtaining the same results by chance even if the null hypothesiswere true. We need to eliminate, insofar as possible, thechance that any differences showing up in the data are merelythe result of random variation in the samples tested. Scientistsgenerally conclude that the differences they measure are significantif statistical tests show that the probability of error (that is,the probability that the same results can be obtained by merechance) is 5 percent or lower.Not all forms of inquiry are scientificScience is a unique human endeavor that is bounded by certainstandards of practice. Other areas of scholarship share withscience the practice of making observations and asking ques-1.3 | HOW DO BIOLOGISTS INVESTIGATE LIFE? 15CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE1.13 Controlled Experiments Manipulate a VariableThe Hayes laboratory created controlled environmentsthat differed only in the concentrations of atrazine in thewater. Eggs from leopard frogs (Rana pipiens) raisedspecifically for laboratory use were allowed to hatch and thetadpoles were separated into experimental tanks containingwater with different concentrations of atrazine.HYPOTHESIS Exposure to atrazine during larval developmentcauses abnormalities in the reproductivesystem of male frogs.Exposure to atrazine at concentrations aslow as 0.1 ppb induces abnormalities in themale reproductive systems of frogs. Theeffect is not proportional to the level ofexposure.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSIn the control condition,only one male hadabnormalities.Gonadal dysgenesisTesticular oogenesisMale frogs with gonadalabnormalities (%)0.0Control0.1 25Atrazine (ppb)204001. Establish 9 tanks in which all attributes are heldconstant except the water’s atrazine concentrations.Establish 3 atrazine conditions(3 replicate tanks per condition): 0 ppb (controlcondition), 0.1 ppb, and 25 ppb.2. Place Rana pipiens tadpoles from laboratoryrearedeggs in the 9 tanks (30 tadpoles perreplicate).3. When tadpoles have transitioned into adults,sacrifice the animals and evaluate theirreproductive tissues.4. Test for correlation of degree of atrazine exposurewith the presence of abnormalities in thereproductive systems of male frogs.Abnormal testesdevelopmentOocytes (eggs) innormal-size testis(sex reversal)GO TO Animated Tutorial 1.1 • The Scientific MethodyourBioPortal.comtions, but scientists are distinguished by what they do withtheir observations and how they answer their questions. Data,subjected to appropriate statistical analysis, are critical in thetesting of hypotheses. The scientific method is the most powerfulway humans have devised for learning about the worldand how it works.Scientific explanations for natural processesare objective and reliable becausethe hypotheses proposed must be testableand must have the potential of being rejectedby direct observations and experiments.Scientists must clearly describe the methodsthey use to test hypotheses so thatother scientists can repeat their results.Not all experiments are repeated, butsurprising or controversial results are alwayssubjected to independent verification.Scientists worldwide share thisprocess of testing and rejecting hypotheses,contributing to a common body ofscientific knowledge.If you understand the methods of science,you can distinguish science fromnon-science. Art, music, and literature allcontribute to the quality of human life,but they are not science. They do not usethe scientific method to establish what isfact. Religion is not science, although religionshave historically purported to explainnatural events ranging from unusualweather patterns to crop failuresto human diseases. Most such phenomenathat at one time were mysterious cannow be explained in terms of scientificprinciples.The power of science derives from theuncompromising objectivity and absolutedependence on evidence thatcomes from reproducible and quantifiableobservations. A religious or spiritual explanationof a natural phenomenon maybe coherent and satisfying for the personholding that view, but it is not testable,and therefore it is not science. To invokea supernatural explanation (such as a“creator” or “intelligent designer” withno known bounds) is to depart from theworld of science.Science describes the facts about howthe world works, not how it “ought tobe.” Many scientific advances that havecontributed to human welfare have alsoraised major ethical issues. Recent developmentsin genetics and developmentalbiology, for example, enable us to selectthe sex of our children, to use stem cellsto repair our bodies, and to modify thehuman genome. Although scientific knowledge allows us to dothese things, science cannot tell us whether or not we should dothem, or, if we choose to do so, how we should regulate them.To make wise decisions about public policy, we need to employthe best possible ethical reasoning in deciding which outcomeswe should strive for.16 CHAPTER 1 | STUDYING LIFEHYPOTHESIS Presence of the herbicide atrazine in environmental water correlateswith reproductive system abnormalities in frog populations.INVESTIGATING LIFEMETHODRESULTS1.14 Comparative Experiments Look for Differences among GroupsTo see whether the presence of atrazine correlates with reproductive systemabnormalities in male frogs, the Hayes lab collected frogs and water samples fromdifferent locations around the U.S. The analysis that followed was “blind,” meaningthat the frogs and water samples were coded so that experimenters working witheach specimen did not know which site the specimen came from.CONCLUSION Reproductive abnormalities exist in frogs from environments inwhich aqueous atrazine concentration is 0.2 ppb or above. Theincidence of abnormalities does not appear to be proportional toatrazine concentration at the time of transition to adulthood.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: The highest proportion of abnormal frogs was found at site 3,located on a wildlife reserve in Wyoming. What kind of dataand observations would you need to suggest possibleexplanations for this extremely high incidence?Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevantlinks for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.In the seven sites whereatrazine was present,abnormalities, includingtesticular oocytes andatrophied testes, wereobserved.N/AGonadal dysgenesisTesticular oogenesisAtrazine levelMale frogs with gonadalabnormalities (%)Atrazine (ppb) 21345678Site200.20.00.40.60.81.06.66.87.00406080100None1. Based on commercial sales of atrazine, select 4 sites (sites 1–4) lesslikely and 4 sites (sites 5–8) more likely to be contaminated with atrazine.2. Visit all sites in the spring (i.e., when frogs have transitioned from tadpolesinto adults); collect frogs and water samples.3. In the laboratory, sacrifice frogs and examine their reproductive tissues,documenting abnormalities.4. Analyze the water samples for atrazine concentration (the sample for site7 was not tested).5. Quantify and correlate the incidence of reproductive abnormalities withenvironmental atrazine concentrations.1.3 RECAPThe scientific method of inquiry starts with the formulationof hypotheses based on observations anddata. Comparative and controlled experiments arecarried out to test hypotheses.• Explain the relationship between a hypothesis andan experiment. See p. 14 and Figure 1.12• What is controlled in a controlled experiment?See p. 14 and Figure 1.13• What features characterize questions that can beanswered only by using a comparative approach?See pp. 14–15 and Figure 1.14• Do you understand why arguments must be supportedby quantifiable and reproducible data in orderto be considered scientific? See pp. 15–16The vast scientific knowledge accumulated over centuries ofhuman civilization allows us to understand and manipulate aspectsof the natural world in ways that no other species can.These abilities present us with challenges, opportunities, andabove all, responsibilities.How Does Biology Influence 1.4 Public Policy?Agriculture and medicine are two important human activitiesthat depend on biological knowledge. Our ancestors unknowinglyapplied the principles of evolutionary biology when theydomesticated plants and animals, and people have speculatedabout the causes of diseases and searched for methods to combatthem since ancient times. Long before the microbial causesof diseases were known, people recognized that infections couldbe passed from one person to another, and the isolation of infectedpersons has been practiced as long as written recordshave been available.Today, thanks to the deciphering of genomes and our newfoundability to manipulate them, vast new possibilities existfor controlling human diseases and increasing agricultural productivity,but these capabilities raise ethical and policy issues.How much and in what ways should we tinker with the genesof humans and other species? Does it matter whether thegenomes of our crop plants and domesticated animals arechanged by traditional methods of controlled breeding andcrossbreeding or by the biotechnology of gene transfer? Whatrules should govern the release of genetically modified organismsinto the environment? Science alone cannot provide all theanswers, but wise policy decisions must be based on accuratescientific information.Biologists are increasingly called on to advise governmentagencies concerning the laws, rules, and regulations by whichsociety deals with the increasing number of challenges that haveat least a partial biological basis. As an example of the value ofscientific knowledge for the assessment and formulation of publicpolicy, let’s return to the tracking study of bluefin tuna introducedin Section 1.3. Prior to this study, both scientists and fishermenknew that bluefins had a western breeding ground in theGulf of Mexico and an eastern breeding ground in the MediterraneanSea (Figure 1.15). Overfishing had led to declining numbersof fish in the western-breeding populations, to the point ofthese populations being endangered.1.4 | HOW DOES BIOLOGY INFLUENCE PUBLIC POLICY? 17The two populations mix freely, especially inthe heavily fished waters of the North Atlantic.Tracked fish from western spawning groundTracked fish from eastern spawning groundCanadaU.S.A.EuropeAfricaAtlantic Ocean1.15 Bluefin Tuna Do Not Recognize Boundaries It was assumedthat tuna from western-breeding populations and those from easternbreedingpopulations also fed on their respective sides of the Atlantic, soseparate fishing quotas were established on either side of 45º W longitude(dashed line) to allow the endangered western population to recover.However, tracking data shows that the two populations do not remainseparate after spawning, so in fact the established policy does notprotect the western population.Initially it was assumed by scientists, fishermen, and policymakers alike that the eastern and western populations had geographicallyseparate feeding grounds as well as separatebreeding grounds. Acting on this assumption, an internationalcommission drew a line down the middle of the Atlantic Oceanand established strict fishing quotas on the western side of theline, with the intent of allowing the western population to recover.New tracking data, however, revealed that in fact the easternand western bluefin populations mix freely on their feedinggrounds across the entire North Atlantic—a swath of oceanthat includes the most heavily fished waters in the world. Tunacaught on the eastern side of the line could just as likely be fromthe western breeding population as the eastern; thus the establishedpolicy was not achieving its intended goal.Policy makers take more things into consideration than scientificknowledge and recommendations. For example, studieson the effects of atrazine on amphibians have led one U.S.group, the Natural Resources Defense Council, to take legal actionto have atrazine banned on the basis of the EndangeredSpecies Act. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, however,must also consider the potential loss to agriculture thatsuch a ban would create and has continued to approveatrazine’s use as long as environmental levels do not exceed30 to 40 ppb—which is 300 to 400 times the levels shown to induceabnormalities in the Hayes studies. Scientific conclusionsdo not always prevail in the political world.Another reason for studying biology is to understand the effectsof the vastly increased human population on its environment.Our use of natural resources is putting stress on the abilityof Earth’s ecosystems to continue to produce the goods and serviceson which our society depends. Human activities are changingglobal climates, causing the extinctions of a large number ofspecies like the amphibians featured in this chapter, and spreadingnew diseases while facilitating the resurgence of old ones.The rapid spread of flu viruses has been facilitated by modernmodes of transportation, and the recent resurgence of tuberculosisis the result of the evolution of bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics.Biological knowledge is vital for determining the causesof these changes and for devising wise policies to deal with them.Beyond issues of policy and pragmatism lies the human“need to know.” Human beings are fascinated by the richnessand diversity of life, and most people want to know more aboutorganisms and how they interact. Human curiosity might evenbe seen as an adaptive trait—it is possible that such a trait couldhave been selected for if individuals who were motivated tolearn about their surroundings were likely to have survived andreproduced better, on average, than their less curious relatives.Far from ending the process, new discoveries and greaterknowledge typically engender questions no one thought to askbefore. There are vast numbers of questions for which we donot yet have answers, and the most important motivator ofmost scientists is curiosity.18 CHAPTER 1 | STUDYING LIFE1.1 What Is Biology?• Biology is the scientific study of living organisms, includingtheir characteristics, functions, and interactions. Cells are thebasic structural and physiological units of life. The cell theorystates that all life consists of cells and that all cells come frompreexisting cells.• All living organisms are related to one another through descentwith modification. Evolution by natural selection is responsiblefor the diversity of adaptations found in living organisms.• The instructions for a cell are contained in its genome, whichconsists of DNA molecules made up of sequences ofnucleotides. Specific segments of DNA called genes contain theinformation the cell uses to make proteins. Review Figure 1.4• Living organisms regulate their internal environment. They alsointeract with other organisms of the same and different species.Biologists study life at all these levels of organization. ReviewFigure 1.6, WEB ACTIVITY 1.1• Biological knowledge obtained from a model system may begeneralized to other species.1.2 How Is All Life on Earth Related?• Biologists use fossils, anatomical similarities and differences,and molecular comparisons of genomes to reconstruct thehistory of life. Review Figure 1.8• Life first arose by chemical evolution. Cells arose early in theevolution of life.• Photosynthesis was an important evolutionary step because itchanged Earth’s atmosphere and provided a means of capturingenergy from sunlight.• The earliest organisms were prokaryotes. Organisms calledeukaryotes, with more complex cells, arose later. Eukaryoticcells have discrete intracellular compartments, calledorganelles, including a nucleus that contains the cell’s geneticmaterial.• The genetic relationships of species can be represented as anevolutionary tree. Species are grouped into three domains:Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya. Archaea and Bacteria aredomains of unicellular prokaryotes. Eukarya contains diversegroups of protists (most but not all of which are unicellular) andthe multicellular plants, fungi, and animals. Review Figure 1.10,WEB ACTIVITY 1.21.3 How Do Biologists Investigate Life?• The scientific method used in most biological investigationsinvolves five steps: making observations, asking questions,forming hypotheses, making predictions, and testing thosepredictions. Review Figure 1.12• Hypotheses are tentative answers to questions. Predictionsmade on the basis of a hypothesis are tested with additional observations and two kinds of experiments: comparative andcontrolled experiments. Review Figures 1.13 and 1.14,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 1.1• Statistical methods are applied to data to establish whetheror not the differences observed are significant or whether theycould be the result of chance. These methods start with thenull hypothesis that there are no differences.• Science can tell us how the world works, but it cannot tellus what we should or should not do.1.4 How Does Biology Influence Public Policy?• Biologists are often called on to advise government agencieson the solution of important problems that have a biologicalcomponent.