Most people have never heard of strepsipterans,and even those who have heard of them haveprobably never seen one. They don’t knowwhat they are missing! These tiny insects—there aresome 600 species of them—parasitize hundreds of otherinsect species, including bees, wasps, ants, grasshoppers,and cockroaches. Males and females of most strepsipteranspecies parasitize the same host species, althoughin one clade males parasitize ants whereas females parasitizegrasshoppers.Strepsipteran males and females areoften so different that even determiningthat they are members of thesame species requires DNA analysis.They also have some of the strangest life cycles of anyanimals. Once grown to maturity within their hosts (whoseinternal organs they consume), the males of most speciesemerge looking like a “typical” insect. The females alsoconsume the host from within, but they usually remain insidethe host. A mature female extrudes her head and partof her body from the body of her host. The extruded bodypart contains an opening that receives sperm from a male.Much later, this opening becomes an exit for the strepsipteranlarvae. The host insects are left dead or severelydamaged and produce no offspring of their own.Strepsipterans dramatically change the behavior oftheir hosts in ways that help them complete their lifecycles at the expense of their hosts’ reproduction. Forexample, when wasps—a typical host—areparasitized by strepsipterans, the parasitesgenerate signals that induce the wasps toleave their nest and form a mating aggregation.This aggregation, however, serves thestrepsipterans, not the wasps. Once the waspsaggregate, the male strepsipterans emergefrom their hosts to search for and mate withfemale strepsiterans, whose heads are nowpoking out of the bodies of other wasps.Adult male strepsipterans live only a fewhours, during which they must find a femaleand mate. Because the protrudingpart of a female’s body isbarely visible, the maleshave unusually large eyes,Tiny parasites exert mind control32Same Parasite, Different LifestylesStrepsipterans are parasitic insects that grow tomaturity within host insects. Most male strepsipteranslook insectlike upon reaching maturity, whenthey leave their host to find and mate with a verydifferent-appearing female strepsipteran. Femalesremain inside their host.åç32.1 What Is a Protostome?You may recall from Chapter 31 that the embryos of diploblasticanimals have two cell layers: an outer ectoderm and an innerendoderm (see Section 31.1). Sometime after the origin ofthe diploblastic animals (the placozoans, ctenophores, andcnidarians), a third embryological germ layer evolved—themesoderm, which lies between the ectoderm and the endoderm.Mesoderm is found in the two major triploblastic animalclades, the protostomes and the deuterostomes. If we wereto judge solely on the basis of numbers, both of species and ofindividuals, the protostomes would emerge as by far the moresuccessful of the two groups.As noted in Chapter 31, the name protostome means “mouthfirst.” In protostomes that have an embryonic blastopore, thisopening becomes the mouth as the animal develops. In contrast,in deuterostomes (“mouth second”), the blastopore becomes theanal opening of the digestive tract (see Figure 31.2). The protostomescan be further divided into two major clades—thelophotrochozoans and the ecdysozoans—largely on the basis ofDNAsequence analysis (Figure 32.1).The protostomes are extremely varied, but they are all bilaterallysymmetrical animals whose bodies exhibit two majorderived traits:• An anterior brain that surrounds the entrance to the digestivetract• Aventral nervous system consisting of paired or fused longitudinalnerve cordsOther aspects of protostome body organization differ widelyfrom group to group (Table 32.1). Although the common ancestorof the protostomes had a coelom, subsequent modificationsof the coelom distinguish many protostome lineages. Inat least one protostome lineage (the flatworms), the coelom hasbeen lost (that is, the flatworms reverted to an acoelomate state).Some lineages are characterized by a pseudocoelom, which youmay recall is a body cavity lined with mesoderm in which theinternal organs are suspended (see Figure 31.4). In two of themost prominent protostome clades, the coelom has been highlymodified:• The arthropods lost the ancestral condition of the coelomover the course of evolution. Their internal body cavity hasbecome a hemocoel, or “blood chamber,” in which fluid froman open circulatory system bathes the internal organs beforereturning to blood vessels.IN THIS CHAPTER we will describe the characteristicsof protostome animals and describe the members of twomajor protostome clades, the lophotrochozoans and theecdysozoans. We will give particular attention to the arthropods,a species-rich group of ecdysozoans with rigidexoskeletons and jointed appendages.and about 75 percent of their brain cells are allocated tovision. This highly developed sensory system evolved asan adaptation to help the male find a female.Strepsipterans and their hosts are all insects, and insectsaccount for more than half of all described specieson Earth. Other protostome groups, such as mollusks,nematodes, crabs, spiders, and ticks, are also speciesrich.Many protostome species are parasites. Parasites oftenlive within their hosts and absorb nutrients throughtheir body walls. Some parasites, including the strepsipterans,can more technically be described as parasitoids,which consume the host’s tissues as they developfrom eggs laid on or in the host’s body, ultimately killingthe host.CHAPTER OUTLINE32.1 What Is a Protostome?32.2 What Features Distinguish the Major Groups ofLophotrochozoans?32.3 What Features Distinguish the Major Groups ofEcdysozoans?32.4 Why Are Arthropods So Diverse?A Host Insect Strepsipterans parasitize many differentinsect species; wasps of the genus Polistes (paper wasps) arecommon hosts. Three female strepsipterans (arrows) can beseen on this P. dorsalis individual.668 CHAPTER 32 | PROTOSTOME ANIMALSTardigradesOnychophoransNematodesHorsehair wormsLoriciferansKinorhynchsPriapulidsMollusksAnnelidsRibbon wormsPhoronidsBrachiopodsBryozoansRotifersFlatwormsArrow wormsLOPHOTROCHOZOANSECDYSOZOANSArthropodsCommonancestorExoskeletonmoltingPairedappendagesJointedappendagesTrochophore(subsequentlylost in severalgroups)• Most mollusks have an open circulatory system with someof the attributes of the hemocoel, but they retain vestigesof an enclosed coelom around their major organs.Cilia-bearing lophophores and trochophoresevolved among the lophotrochozoansLophotrochozoans derive their name from two different featuresthat involve cilia: a feeding structure known as alophophore and a free-living larva known as a trochophore.Neither a lophophore nor a trochophore is universal for alllophotrochozoans, however.Several distantly related groups of lophotrochozoans (includingbryozoans, brachiopods, and phoronids) have a lophophore,a circular or U-shaped ring of ciliated, hollow tentacles aroundthe mouth (Figure 32.2). This complex structure is an organfor both food collection and gas exchange. Biologists oncegrouped taxa that have lophophores together as lophophorates,but it is now clear that they are not one another’s closest relatives.The lophophore appears to have evolved independentlyseveral times, or else it is an ancestral feature of lophotrochozoansand has been lost in many groups. Nearly all animalswith a lophophore are sessile as adults. They use the tentaclesand cilia of the lophophore to capture small floating organismsfrom the water. Other sessile lophotrochozoans use less well developedtentacles for the same purpose.Some lophotrochozoans, especially in their larval form, usecilia for locomotion. The larval form known as a trochophoremoves by beating a band of cilia (see Figure 31.11A). This movementof cilia also brings plankton closer to the larva, wherethe plankton can be captured and ingested (similar in functionto the cilia of the lophophore). Trochophore larvae are foundamong many of the major groups of lophotrochozoans, includingthe mollusks, annelids, ribbon worms, and bryozoans. Thislarval form was probably present in the common ancestor oflophotrochozoans, although it has been subsequently lost in severallineages.As discussed Chapter 31, some lophotrochozoans (includingflatworms, ribbon worms, annelids, and mollusks) exhibit aform of cleavage in early development known as spiral cleavage.Some biologists group these taxa together as spiralians, althoughphylogenetic analyses of gene sequences do not support theGO TO Web Activity 32.2 • Features of the ProtostomesyourBioPortal.com32.1 Phylogenetic Tree of ProtostomesTwo major lineages, the lophotrochozoans andthe ecdysozoans, dominate the protostome tree.Some small groups are not included. The phylogeneticrelationships shown here are supportedmostly by genomic sequence data. Althoughgenomic studies are contributing greatly to ourknowledge of animal phylogeny, most species ofprotostomes have yet to be studied in detail.GO TO Web Activity 32.1Protostome ClassificationyourBioPortal.comspecies with spiral cleavage as monophyletic. Nonetheless,spiral cleavage may have been present in the lophotrochozoanancestor, with several subsequent losses of thiscleavage pattern.Many lineages of lophotrochozoans are wormlike,which means they are bilaterally symmetrical, legless,soft-bodied, and at least several times longer than theyare wide. Awormlike body form enables animals to burrowefficiently through marine sediment or soil. However,as we will describe later in this chapter, the mollusks—the most familiar of the lophotrochozoans to many people—have a very different body organization.Ecdysozoans must shed their cuticlesEcdysozoans have an external covering, or cuticle, whichis secreted by the underlying epidermis (the outermost celllayer). The cuticle provides these animals with both protectionand support. Once formed, however, the cuticlecannot grow. How, then, can ecdysozoans increase in size?They do so by shedding, or molting, the cuticle and replacingit with a new, larger one. This molting process givesthe clade its name (Greek ecdysis, “to get out of”).Arecently discovered fossil of a Cambrian soft-bodiedarthropod, preserved in the process of molting, shows thatmolting evolved more than 500 million years ago (Figure32.3A). An increasingly rich array of molecular and geneticevidence, including a set of Hox genes shared by allecdysozoans, suggests they have a single common ancestor.Thus molting of a cuticle is a trait that may have evolved onlyonce during animal evolution.Before an ecdysozoan molts, a new cuticle is already formingunderneath the old one. Once the old cuticle is shed, thenew one expands and hardens. Until it has hardened, though,the animal is vulnerable to its enemies, both because its outersurface is easy to penetrate and because an animal with a softcuticle moves slowly or not at all (Figure 32.3B).In many ecdysozoans that have wormlike bodies, the cuticleis relatively thin and flexible; it offers the animal some protectionbut provides only modest body support. A thin cuticle allowsthe exchange of gases, minerals, and water across the bodysurface, but it restricts the animal to moist habitats. Manyspecies of ecdysozoans with thin cuticles live in marine sedimentsfrom which they obtain prey, either by ingesting sedimentsand extracting organic material from them, or by capturinglarger prey using a toothed pharynx (a muscular organ at theanterior end of the digestive tract). Some freshwater species absorbnutrients directly through their thin cuticles, as do parasiticspecies that live within their hosts. Many wormlike ecdysozoansare predators, eating protists and small animals.The cuticles of other ecdysozoans, mainly arthopods, functionas external skeletons, or exoskeletons. These exoskeletonsare thickened by layers of protein and a strong, waterproof polysaccharidecalled chitin. An animal with a rigid, chitin-reinforcedexoskeleton can neither move in a wormlike manner nor usecilia for locomotion. A hard exoskeleton also impedes the passageof oxygen and nutrients into the animal, presenting new32.1 | WHAT IS A PROTOSTOME? 669TABLE 32.1Anatomical Characteristics of SomeMajor Protostome GroupsaDIGESTIVE CIRCULATORYGROUP BODY CAVITY TRACT SYSTEMArrow worms Coelom Complete NoneLOPHOTROCHOZOANSFlatworms None Dead-end sac NoneRotifers Pseudocoelom Complete NoneBryozoans Coelom Complete NoneBrachiopods Coelom Complete Openin mostPhoronids Coelom Complete ClosedRibbon worms Coelom Complete ClosedAnnelids Coelom Complete Closed or openMollusks Reduced coelom Complete Open except incephalopodsECDYSOZOANSHorsehair worms Pseudocoelom Greatly reduced NoneNematodes Pseudoceolom Complete NoneArthropods Hemocoel Complete Opena Note that all protostomes have bilateral symmetry.Plumatella repensBryozoans can oscillate, rotate, andretract their lophophore tentacles.100 μm32.2 Bryozoans Use Their Lophophore to Feed The extendedlophophore dominates the anatomy of the colonial bryozoans. Thisspecies inhabits fresh water, although most bryozoans are marine.Bryozoan colonies can grow to contain more than a million individuals,all stemming from the asexual reproduction of the colony’s founder.challenges in other areas besides growth. New mechanisms oflocomotion and gas exchange evolved in those ecdysozoanswith hard exoskeletons.To move rapidly, an animal with a rigid exoskeleton musthave body extensions that can be manipulated by muscles. Suchappendages evolved in the late Precambrian, leading to thearthropod (“jointed foot”) clade. Arthropod appendages existin an amazing variety of forms. They serve many functions,including walking and swimming, gas exchange, food captureand manipulation, copulation, and sensory perception. Arthropodsgrasp food with their mouths and associated appendagesand digest it internally. Their muscles are attached to the insideof the exoskeleton. Each segment has muscles that operate thatsegment and the appendages attached to it (Figure 32.4).The arthropod exoskeleton has had a profound influence onthe evolution of these animals. Encasement within a rigid bodycovering provides support for walking on dry land, and the waterproofingprovided by chitin keeps the animal from dehydratingin dry air. Aquatic arthropods were, in short, excellent candidatesto invade terrestrial environments. As we will see, theydid so several times.Arrow worms retain some ancestraldevelopmental featuresNearly all triploblastic animal groups can be readily classifiedas either protostomes or deuterostomes, but the evolutionaryrelationships of one small group, the arrow worms, were debatedfor many years. Although the early development of arrowworms seems similar to that of deuterostomes, it is nowknown that arrow worms merely retain developmental featuresthat are ancestral to triploblastic animals in general. Recent studiesof gene sequences clearly identify arrow worms as protostomes.There is still some question as to whether they are theclosest relatives of the lophotrochozoans (as shown in Figure32.1), or possibly the sister group of all other protostomes.The arrow worm body is divided into three compartments:head, trunk, and tail (Figure 32.5). The body is transparent ortranslucent. Most arrow worms swim in the open sea. A fewspecies live on the seafloor. Their abundance as fossils indicatesthat they were common more than 500 million years ago. The100 or so living species of arrow worms are small enough—ranging from 3 millimeters to less than 12 centimeters inlength—that their gas-exchange and waste-excretion requirementsare met by diffusion through the body surface. They lacka circulatory system; wastes and nutrients are moved aroundthe body in the coelomic fluid, which is propelled by cilia thatline the coelom. There is no distinct larval stage. Miniatureadults hatch directly from eggs that are fertilized internally followingelaborate courtship between two hermaphroditic in-670 CHAPTER 32 | PROTOSTOME ANIMALSThe newly emerged whip spider’sbody is still soft and vulnerable.Emerging animal(A)(B) Phrynus parvulusMolted exoskeletonMolted exoskeleton32.3 Molting: Past and Present (A) This 500-million-year-old fossilfrom the Cambrian captured an individual of a long-extinct arthropodspecies in the process of molting and shows that the molting process isan evolutionarily ancient trait. (B) This whip spider has just emerged fromits discarded exoskelton and will be highly vulnerable until its new cuticlehas hardened.ExoskeletonLongitudinalmuscleVentralnerve cordMuscleswithinappendageMuscles thatmove appendageDorsoventral muscleHeartHemocoelLongitudinal muscle32.4 Arthropod Skeletons Are Rigid and Jointed This cross sectionthrough a thoracic segment of a generalized arthropod illustrates thearthropod body plan, which is characterized by a rigid exoskeleton withjointed appendages.dividuals (each arrow worm produces both male and femalegametes).Arrow worms are stabilized in the water by means of one ortwo pairs of lateral fins and a tail fin. They are major predatorsof planktonic organisms in the open ocean, ranging in size fromsmall protists to young fish as large as the arrow worms themselves.An arrow worm typically lies motionless in the wateruntil water movement signals the approach of prey. The arrowworm then darts forward and uses the stiff spines adjacent toits mouth to grasp its prey.32.1 RECAPThe shared derived traits of protostomes include ablastopore that develops into a mouth, as well as thestructure of the anterior brain and ventral nervoussystem. Several lophotrochozoan groups are characterizedby a filter-feeding structure known as alophophore and/or by cilia-bearing larvae known astrochophores. Ecdysozoans, which have a body coveringknown as a cuticle, must molt periodically inorder to grow.• How does an animal’s body covering influence theway it breathes, feeds, and moves? See pp. 669–670• What features made arthropods well adapted forcolonizing terrestrial environments? See p. 670What Features Distinguish the Major 32.2 Groups of Lophotrochozoans?Lophotrochozoans come in a variety of sizes and shapes, rangingfrom relatively simple animals with a blind gut (that is, agut with only one opening) and no internal transport system toanimals with a complete gut (having separate entrance and exitopenings) and a complex internal transport system. They includesome highly species-rich groups, such as flatworms, annelids,and mollusks. Anumber of these groups exhibit wormlikebodies, but the lophotrochozoans encompass a widediversity of morphologies, including a few groups with externalshells. Some lophotrochozoan groups have only recentlybeen discovered by biologists.Bryozoans live in coloniesThe 4,500 species of bryozoans(“moss animals”) are colonialanimals that live in a “house”made of material secreted bythe external body wall. Almostall bryozoans are marine,although a few species occurin fresh or brackish water. Abryozoan colony consists ofmany small (1–2 mm) individualsconnected by strands of tissue alongwhich nutrients can be moved (Figure 32.6). The colony is createdby the asexual reproduction of its founding member, anda single colony may contain as many as 2 million individuals.Rocks in coastal regions in many parts of the world are coveredwith luxuriant growths of bryozoans. Some bryozoans createminiature reefs in shallow waters. In some species, the individualcolony members are differentially specialized for feeding,reproduction, defense, or support.32.2 | WHAT FEATURES DISTINGUISH THE MAJOR GROUPS OF LOPHOTROCHOZOANS? 671GraspingHead compartment spinesTrunk compartmentAnteriorlateral finPosteriorlateral finAnusOvaryTail compartmentTail finTestis32.5 An Arrow Worm Arrow worms have a three-part body organization.Their fins and grasping spines are adaptations for a predatorylifestyle. Individuals are hermaphroditic, producing both eggs and sperm(ovary and testis).BryozoansMollusksAnnelidsRibbon wormsPhoronidsBrachiopodsRotifersFlatwormsSertella septentrionalis32.6 A Bryozoan Colony The rigid orange tissue of this bryozoancolony connects and supplies nutrients to thousands of individual animals(see Figure 32.2).Individual bryozoans in a colony are able to oscillate theirlophophore to increase contact with prey. They can also retractit into their “house” (see Figure 32.2). Bryozoans can reproducesexually by releasing sperm into the water, which carries thesperm to other individuals. Eggs are fertilized internally; developingembryos are brooded before they exit as larvae to seeksuitable sites for attachment to the substratum.Flatworms and rotifers are structurally diverse relativesFlatworms and rotifers compose a structurallydiverse group, and only recentlyhave their relationships to oneanother been hypothesized. Beforegene sequences wereavailable for phylogeneticanalysis, biologists consideredthe structure of the body cavityto be a critical feature in animalclassification. If recent genomicstudies prove correct, however, thismonophyletic animal group includes both acoelomate subgroups(e.g., the flatworms) and pseudocoelomate subgroups (e.g., therotifers), and yet the closest relatives of these two groups—thebryozoans—are coelomate. Thus, systematists today concludethat body cavity forms have undergone considerable convergencein the course of animal evolution (see Table 32.1).Flatworms lack specialized organs for transporting oxygento their internal tissues. Lacking a gas transport system, eachcell must be near a body surface, a requirement met by thedorsoventrally flattened body form. The digestive tract of a flatwormconsists of a mouth opening into a blind sac. The sac isoften highly branched, forming intricate patterns that increasethe surface area available for the absorption of nutrients. Somesmall free-living flatworms are cephalized, with a head bearingchemoreceptor organs, two simple eyes, and a tiny brain composedof anterior thickenings of the longitudinal nerve cords.Free-living flatworms glide over surfaces, powered by broadbands of cilia (Figure 32.7A).Although many flatworms are free-living, most of the speciesare parasites. Of the parasitic species, most are internal parasites.There are also flatworms that feed externally on animaltissues (living or dead), and some graze on plants. Alikely evolutionarytransition was from feeding on dead organisms tofeeding on the body surfaces of dying hosts to invading andconsuming parts of healthy hosts.Most of the 25,000 species of living flatworms are tapewormsand flukes; members of these two groups are internal parasites,particularly of vertebrates (Figure 32.7B). Because they absorbdigested food from the digestive tracts of their hosts, many parasiticflatworms lack digestive tracts of their own. Some causeserious human diseases, such as schistosomiasis, which is commonin parts of Asia, Africa, and South America. The speciesthat causes this devastating disease has a complex life cycleinvolving both freshwater snails and mammals as hosts. Membersof another flatworm group, the monogeneans, are externalparasites of fishes and other aquatic vertebrates. The turbellariansinclude most of the free-living species.Most rotifers are tiny (50–500 μm long)—smaller than someciliate protists—but they have specialized internal organs (Figure32.8). A complete gut passes from an anterior mouth to aposterior anus; the body cavity is a pseudocoel that functionsas a hydrostatic skeleton. Rotifers typically propel themselvesthrough the water by means of rapidly beating cilia rather thanby muscular contraction.The most distinctive organ of rotifers is a conspicuous ciliatedorgan called the corona, which surmounts the head of manyspecies. Coordinated beating of the cilia sweeps particles of672 CHAPTER 32 | PROTOSTOME ANIMALSBryozoansMollusksAnnelidsRibbon wormsPhoronidsBrachiopodsRotifersFlatwormsThe gut has asingle openingto the exterior,which serves asboth “mouth”and “anus.”This parasiticflatworm’s bodyis filled primarilywith sex organs.GutPharyngealopeningYolkglandOvaryVaginaTestisSeminalreceptacle(A) Eurylepta californica, a free-living flatworm (B) Diagram of a typical parasitic flatwormAnteriorPosteriorEggcapsule32.7 Flatworms May Live Freely orParasitically (A) Some flatwormspecies, such as this Pacific marineflatworm, are free-living. (B) The flukediagrammed here lives parasitically inthe gut of sea urchins and is representativeof parasitic flatworms. Becausetheir hosts provide all the nutrition theyneed, these internal parasites do notrequire elaborate feeding or digestiveorgans and can devote most of theirbodies to reproduction.organic matter from the water into the animal’s mouth anddown to a complicated structure called the mastax, in whichfood is ground into small pieces. By contracting muscles aroundthe pseudocoel, a few rotifer species that prey on protists andsmall animals can protrude the mastax through their mouth andseize small objects with it.Most of the 1,800 known species of rotifers live in fresh water.Some species rest on the surfaces of mosses or lichens in adesiccated, inactive state until it rains. When rain falls, they absorbwater and become mobile, feeding in the films of waterthat temporarily cover the plants. Most rotifers live no longerthan a few weeks.Both males and females are found in some species of rotifers,but only females are known among the bdelloid rotifers (the b inbdelloid is silent). Biologists have concluded that the bdelloid rotifersmay have existed for tens of millions of years without regularsexual reproduction. In general, lack of genetic recombinationleads to the buildup of deleterious mutations, so long-termasexual reproduction typically leads to extinction (see Section21.4). Recent studies, however, have indicated that bdelloidrotifers may avoid this problem by picking up fragments ofgenes from their environment during the desiccation–rehydrationcycle, which allows genetic recombination among individualsin the absence of direct sexual exchange.Ribbon worms have a long, protrusible feeding organRibbon worms (nemerteans) have simplenervous and excretory systemssimilar to those of flatworms.Unlike flatworms, however, theyhave a complete digestivetract with a mouth at one endand an anus at the other. Smallribbon worms move slowly bybeating their cilia. Larger onesemploy waves of muscle contractionto move over the surface of sedimentsor to burrow into them.Within the body of nearly all of the 1,000 species of ribbonworms is a fluid-filled cavity called the rhynchocoel, withinwhich lies a hollow, muscular proboscis. The proboscis, which isthe worm’s feeding organ, may extend much of the length ofthe body. Contraction of the muscles surrounding the rhynchocoelcauses the proboscis to evert explosively through an anteriorpore (Figure 32.9A). The proboscis may be armed withsharp stylets that pierce prey and discharge paralysis-causingtoxins into the wound.32.2 | WHAT FEATURES DISTINGUISH THE MAJOR GROUPS OF LOPHOTROCHOZOANS? 673A complete gutpasses from ananterior mouth toa posterior anus.MouthMastaxDigestiveglandPseudocoelStomachIntestineCiliaCoronaGonadAnteriorPosterior“Foot” with “toes”Anus(A) Philodina roseola (B) Stephanoceros fimbriatus100 μm32.8 Rotifers (A) The individual diagrammed here reflects the generalstructure of many rotifers. (B) A micrograph reveals the internal complexityof a rotifer that has ingested photosynthetic protists. This species, one ofthe larger rotifers, is found in the Great Lakes of North America.BryozoansMollusksAnnelidsRibbon wormsPhoronidsBrachiopodsRotifersFlatwormsFloating in a cavity called the rhynchocoel,the proboscis can be everted rapidly.The tip of the everted proboscisbears a sharp, nail-shaped stylet.Proboscisretractor muscleRhynchocoelAnusProboscispore IntestineMouth(A)(B) Tubulanus sexlineatusProboscisAnterior(mouth)Posterior(anus)32.9 Ribbon Worms (A) The proboscis is the ribbon worm’s feedingorgan. (B) This large marine nemertean is found in harbors and baysalong the Pacific Coast of North America. Its proboscis is not everted inthis photograph.Ribbon worms are largely marine, although there are speciesthat live in fresh water or on land. Most species are less than20 centimeters long, but individuals of some species reach 20meters or more. Some genera feature species that are conspicuousand brightly colored (Figure 32.9B). Recent molecularanalyses suggest that ribbon worms may be most closely relatedto the phoronids and brachiopods.Phoronids and brachiopods use lophophoresto extract food from the waterRecall that the bryozoans use a lophophoreto feed. Phoronids and brachiopodsalso feed using a lophophore,but this structure mayhave evolved more than onceamong these groups. Althoughneither the phoronids nor thebrachiopods are represented bymany living species, the brachiopods(which have shells andthus leave an excellent fossil record)are known to have been much more abundant during the Paleozoicand Mesozoic eras.The 20 known species of phoronids are small (5–25 cm long),sessile worms that live in muddy or sandy sediments or attachedto rocky substrata. Phoronids are found in marine waters,from the intertidal zone to about 400 meters deep. They secretetubes made of chitin, within which they live (Figure 32.10).Their cilia drive water into the top of the lophophore, and thewater exits through the narrow spaces between the tentacles.Suspended food particles are caught and transported to themouth by ciliary action. Some species release eggs into the water,where they are fertilized, but other species produce largeeggs that are fertilized internally and retained in the parent’sbody, where they are brooded until they hatch.Brachiopods are solitary marine animals. They have a rigidshell that is divided into two parts connected by a ligament (Figure32.11). The two halves can be pulled shut to protect the softbody. Brachiopods superficially resemble bivalve mollusks, butshells have evolved independently in the two groups. The twohalves of the brachiopod shell are dorsal and ventral, rather thanlateral as in bivalves. The lophophore is located within the shell.The beating of cilia on the lophophore draws water into theslightly opened shell. Food is trapped in the lophophore anddirected to a ridge, along which it is transferred to the mouth.Most brachiopods are 4–6 centimeters long.Brachiopods live attached to a solid substratum or embeddedin soft sediments. Most species are attached by means of ashort, flexible stalk that holds the animal above the substratum.Gases are exchanged across body surfaces, especially the tentaclesof the lophophore. Most brachiopods release their gametesinto the water, where they are fertilized. The larvae remainamong the plankton for only a few days before they settle anddevelop into adults.Brachiopods reached their peak abundance and diversityin Paleozoic and Mesozoic times. More than 26,000 fossil specieshave been described. Only about 335 species survive, but theyremain common in some marine environments.Annelids have segmented bodiesThe bodies of annelids are clearly segmented. As discussed inSection 31.2, segmentation allows an animal to move differentparts of its body independently of one another, giving it muchbetter control of its movement. The earliest segmented worms,preserved as fossils from the middle Cambrian, were burrowingmarine annelids.674 CHAPTER 32 | PROTOSTOME ANIMALSBryozoansMollusksAnnelidsRibbon wormsPhoronidsBrachiopodsRotifersFlatwormsTentaclesThe anus isoutside the ringMouth of tentacles.LophophoretentaclesAnteriorPosteriorAnusGutOutercovering(chitinoustube)(B)The lophophore is a ring oftentacles that surrounds the mouth.(A) Phoronis australis32.10 Phoronids (A) The tentacles of this phoronid’s lophophore forma spiral. (B) The phoronid gut is U-shaped, as seen in this generalizeddiagram.Laqueus sp.TentaclesLophophorering32.11 A Brachiopod’s Lophophore The lophophore of this NorthPacific brachiopod can be seen between the valves of its shell.In most large annelids, the coelom in eachsegment is isolated from thosein other segments (Figure 32.12).Aseparate nerve center called aganglion controls each segment;nerve cords that connectthe ganglia coordinate theirfunctioning. Most annelids lacka rigid external protective covering;instead, they have a thin,permeable body wall that serves asa general surface for gas exchange. Most annelids are thus restrictedto moist environments because they lose body waterrapidly in dry air. The approximately 16,500 described specieslive in marine, freshwater, and moist terrestrial environments.POLYCHAETES More than half of all annelid species are commonlyknown as polychaetes (“many hairs”), although this is adescriptive term rather than the name of a single clade. Mostpolychaetes are marine, and many live in burrows in soft sediments.Most of them have one or more pairs of eyes and oneor more pairs of tentacles, with which they capture prey or filterfood from the surrounding water, at the anterior end of thebody (Figure 32.13A; see also Figure 31.6A). In some species,the body wall of most segments extends laterally as a series ofthin outgrowths called parapodia. The parapodiafunction in gas exchange, and some species usethem to move. Stiff bristles called setae protrudefrom each parapodium, forming temporary contactwith the substratum and preventing the animalfrom slipping backward when its musclescontract. Recent molecular studies indicate thatpolychaetes are paraphyletic with respect to theremaining annelids.Members of one polychaete clade, thepogonophorans, secrete tubes made of chitin andother substances, in which they live (Figure32.13B). Pogonophorans have lost their digestivetract (they have no mouth or gut). So howdo they obtain nutrition? Part of the answer isthat pogonophorans can take up dissolved organicmatter directly from the sediments inwhich they live or from the surrounding water.Much of their nutrition, however, is provided byendosymbiotic bacteria that live in a specializedorgan known as the trophosome. These bacteriaoxidize hydrogen sulfide and other sulfur-containing compounds,fixing carbon from methane in the process. The uptakeof the hydrogen sulfide, methane, and oxygen used by the bacteriais facilitated by hemoglobin in the pogonophorans’ tentacles.It is this hemoglobin that gives the tentacles their red coloration(see Figure 32.13B).Pogonophorans were not discovered until early in the twentiethcentury, when the first species were discovered at depthsof up to a few hundred meters. In recent decades, deep-sea explorershave found them living many thousands of meters belowthe ocean surface. In these deep oceanic sediments, they mayreach densities of many thousands per square meter. About 160species have been described. The largest and most remarkablepogonophorans are 2 meters or more in length and live neardeep-sea hydrothermal vents—volcanic openings in the seafloorthrough which hot, sulfide-rich water pours. The methane andhydrogen sulfide from these vents provide the raw materials forcarbon fixation by the pogonophorans’ endosymbiotic bacteria.CLITELLATES The approximately 3,000 described species of thiswell-supported clade within the annelids are found in freshwater,marine, or terrestrial environments. The clitellates appear tobe phylogenetically nested among various groups of polychaetes,although the exact relationships are not yet clear. There are twomajor groups of clitellates, the oligochaetes and the leeches.Oligochaetes (“few hairs”) have no parapodia, eyes, or anteriortentacles, and they have only four pairs of setae bundles persegment. Earthworms—the most familiar oligochaetes—burrowin and ingest soil, from which they extract food particles. Alloligochaetes are hermaphroditic; that is, each individual is bothmale and female. Sperm are exchanged simultaneously betweentwo copulating individuals (Figure 32.13C). Eggs and sperm aredeposited in a cocoon outside the adult’s body. Fertilization occurswithin the cocoon after it is shed, and when developmentis complete, miniature worms emerge and immediately beginindependent life.32.2 | WHAT FEATURES DISTINGUISH THE MAJOR GROUPS OF LOPHOTROCHOZOANS? 675Ring vesselsof circulatorysystemSegmentsCircularmuscleLongitudinalmuscleCross sectionExcretoryorganTestes andsperm sacsSeminal OvaryreceptacleSetae(bristles)Ventralnerve cordNerve cordBlood vesselCoelomIntestineBrain PharynxEsophagusSeptum between segmentsCrop Gizzard Intestine32.12 Annelids Have ManyBody Segments The segmentedstructure of the annelids is apparentboth externally and internally.Many organs of this earthwormare repeated serially.BryozoansMollusksAnnelidsRibbon wormsPhoronidsBrachiopodsRotifersFlatwormsLeeches, like oligochaetes, lack parapodia and tentacles. Thecoelom of leeches is not divided into compartments; the coelomicspace is largely filled with undifferentiated tissue. Groups of segmentsat each end of the body are modified to form suckers,which serve as temporary anchors that aid the leech in movement.With its posterior sucker attached to a substratum, theleech extends its body by contracting its circular muscles. Theanterior sucker is then attached, the posterior one detached, andthe leech shortens itself by contracting its longitudinal muscles.Leeches live in freshwater or terrestrial habitats.Aleech makes an incision in its host, from which blood flows.It can ingest so much blood in a single feeding that its body mayenlarge several-fold. The leech secretes an anticoagulant into thewound that keeps the host’s blood flowing. For centuries, medicalpractitioners employed leeches to draw blood to treat diseasesthey believed were caused by an excess of blood or by “badblood.” Although most leeching practices (such as inserting aleech in a person’s throat to alleviate swollen tonsils) have beenabandoned, Hirudo medicinalis (the medicinal leech; Figure32.13D) is used today to reduce fluid pressure and prevent bloodclotting in damaged tissues, to eliminate pools of coagulatedblood, and to prevent scarring. The anticoagulants of certainother leech species that also contain anesthetics and blood vesseldilators are being studied for possible medical uses.Mollusks have undergone a dramaticevolutionary radiationMollusks are the most diversegroup of lophotrochozoans,both in numbers of species andin environments they occupy.Although the major groups ofmollusks differ dramatically inmorphology, they all share thesame three major body components:a foot, a visceral mass, anda mantle (Figure 32.14).• The molluscan foot is a large, muscular structure that originallywas both an organ of locomotion and a support forthe internal organs. In squids and octopuses, the foot hasbeen modified to form arms and tentacles borne on a headwith complex sensory organs. In other groups, such asclams, the foot is a burrowing organ. In some groups thefoot is greatly reduced.• The heart and the digestive, excretory, and reproductive organsare concentrated in a centralized, internal visceral mass.• The mantle is a fold of tissue that covers the organs of thevisceral mass. The mantle secretes the hard, calcareous shellthat is typical of many mollusks.In most mollusks, the mantle extends beyond the visceral massto form a mantle cavity. Within this cavity lie gills that are usedfor gas exchange. When cilia on the gills beat, they create a cur-676 CHAPTER 32 | PROTOSTOME ANIMALS(A) Eudistylia sp.(B) Riftia sp. (D) Hirudo medicinalis(C) Lumbricus terrestris 32.13 Diversity among theAnnelids (A) “Fan worms” or“feather duster worms” are sessilemarine polychaetes that grow inmasses, filtering food from the waterwith their tentacles. This individualhas been removed from its chitinoustube. (B) Pogonophorans live aroundhydrothermal vents deep in theocean. Their tentacles can be seenprotruding from their chitinous tubes.(C) Earthworms are hermaphroditic;when they copulate, each individualdonates and receives sperm. (D) Themedicinal leech has been a tool ofphysicians and healers for centuries.Even today, leeches have uses inmodern clinical practice.BryozoansMollusksAnnelidsRibbon wormsPhoronidsBrachiopodsRotifersFlatwormsrent of water. The tissue of the gills, which is highly vascularized(containing many blood vessels), takes up oxygen from the waterand releases carbon dioxide. Many mollusk species use theirgills as filter-feeding devices, whereas others feed using a raspingstructure known as the radula to scrape algae from rocks. Insome mollusks, such as the marine cone snails, the radula hasbeen modified into a drill or poison dart.Molluscan blood vessels do not form a closed system. Bloodand other fluids empty into a large, fluid-filled hemocoel, throughwhich fluids move around the animal and deliver oxygen to theinternal organs. Eventually, the fluids reenter the blood vesselsand are moved by a heart.Monoplacophorans were the most abundant mollusks duringthe Cambrian period, 500 million years ago, but only a fewspecies survive today. Unlike in all other living mollusks, inmonoplacophorans the gas exchange organs, muscles, and excretorypores are repeated over the length of the body.Figure 32.15 illustrates the four major clades of living mollusks:chitons, bivalves, gastropods, and cephalopods. Thespecies shown here are a tiny sample of the approximately100,000 living species of mollusks.CHITONS Eight overlapping calcareous plates, surrounded by astructure known as the girdle, protect the internal organs andmuscular foot of chitons (Figure 32.15A). The chiton body is bilaterallysymmetrical, and the internal organs, particularly thedigestive and nervous systems, are relatively simple. Most chitonsare marine omnivores that scrape algae, bryozoans, andother organisms from rocks with their sharp radula. An adultchiton spends most of its life clinging tightly to rock surfaceswith its large, muscular, mucus-covered foot. It moves slowlyby means of rippling waves of muscular contraction in the foot.Fertilization in most chitons takes place in the water, but in a fewspecies fertilization is internal and embryos are brooded withinthe body. There are approximately 1,000 living species of chitons.BIVALVES Clams, oysters, scallops, and mussels are all familiarbivalves. The 30,000 living species are found in both marine andfreshwater environments. Bivalves have a very small head anda hinged, two-part shell that extends over the sides of the bodyas well as the top (Figure 32.15B). Many clams use their foot toburrow into mud and sand. Bivalves feed by taking in waterthrough an opening called an incurrent siphon and filtering foodfrom the water with their large gills, which are also the main sitesof gas exchange. Water and gametes exit through the excurrentsiphon. Fertilization takes place in open water in most species.GASTROPODS Gastropods are the most species-rich and widelydistributed mollusks, with nearly 70,000 living species. Snails,whelks, limpets, slugs, nudibranchs (sea slugs), and abalones32.2 | WHAT FEATURES DISTINGUISH THE MAJOR GROUPS OF LOPHOTROCHOZOANS? 677In all mollusk lineages, a mantle coversthe internal organs of the visceral mass.The radula is a unique molluscan feedingstructure modified for scraping.In bivalve mollusks, the footis modified for burrowing.In cephalod mollusks, the foot ismodified into arms and tentacles.CephalopodsGeneralized molluscan body planChitonsGastropodsBivalvesStomachRadulaMouthDigestive glandMantleMantlecavityHeart Foot GillsShellRadulaMouthDigestive glandAnusFootGills in mantle cavityHeadShell platesBeakRadulaSiphonHeadStomachMantleHeartIntestineArmsMantlecavityGillShellCephalictentaclesSiphonHeadMouthShellHeartStomachFootAnusSalivaryglandMantle cavityAnusSiphonsMantlecavityTentacleIntestineAnusStomachIntestineGillIntestine MantleHeartIntestineShellMouthGillStomachDigestiveglandMantleDigestivegland32.14 Organization of Molluscan Bodies The major molluscangroups display different variations on a general body plan thatincludes three major components: a foot, a visceral mass of internalorgans, and a mantle. The mantle may secrete a calcareous shell,as in the gastropods and bivalves.are all gastropods. Most species move by gliding on their muscularfoot, but in a few species—the sea butterflies and heteropods—the foot is a swimming organ with which the animalmoves through open ocean waters. Nudibranchs have losttheir protective shell over the course of evolution. Their sometimesbrilliant coloration is aposematic, meaning it serves to warn678 CHAPTER 32 | PROTOSTOME ANIMALS(A) Tonicella lineata(C) Flabellina iodinea(E) Octopus bimaculoides(B) Tridacna gigas(F) Nautilus belauensis(D) Oxychilus draparnaudi32.15 Diversity among the Mollusks (A) Chitons are common in theintertidal zone of temperate-zone coasts. (B) The giant clam of Indonesiais among the largest of the bivalve mollusks. (C) This shell-less nudibranch(“naked gills”), or sea slug, is brightly colored, a signal of its toxicity.(D) Pulmonate land snails, such as this dark-bodied glass snail, have avascularized lung that allows them to survive in terrestrial environments.(E) Cephalopods such as the octopuses are active predators. (F) Theboundaries of chambers are clearly visible on the outer surfaces of thisshelled cephalopod, one of the chambered nautiluses.potential predators of toxicity (Figure 32.15C). Other nudibranchspecies exhibit camouflaged coloration.Shelled gastropods have one-piece shells. The only mollusksthat live in terrestrial environments—land snails and slugs—are gastropods (Figure 32.15D). In these terrestrial species, themantle tissue is modified into a highly vascularized lung.CEPHALOPODS The cephalopods—squids, octopuses, and nautiluses—first appeared near the beginning of the Cambrianperiod. By the Ordovician period a variety of types were present.Today there are about 800 living species.In the cephalopods, the excurrent siphon is modified to allowthe animal to control the water content of the mantle cavity.The modification of the mantle into a device for forciblyejecting water from the cavity through the siphon enables theseanimals to move rapidly by “jet propulsion” through the water.With their greatly enhanced mobility, cephalopods became themajor predators in the open waters of the Devonian oceans.They remain important marine predators today.Cephalopods capture and subdue prey with their tentacles; octopusesalso use their tentacles to move over the substratum (Figure32.15E). As is typical of active, rapidly moving predators,cephalopods have a head with complex sensory organs, most notablyeyes that are comparable to those of vertebrates in their abilityto resolve images. The head is closely associated with a large,branched foot that bears the tentacles and a siphon. The large, muscularmantle provides a solid external supporting structure. Thegills hang in the mantle cavity. Many cephalopods have elaboratecourtship behavior, which may involve striking color changes.Many early cephalopods had a chambered shell divided bypartitions penetrated by tubes through which gases and liquidscould be moved to control the animal’s buoyancy. Nautiluses(genus Nautilus) are the only surviving cephalopods that havesuch external chambered shells (Figure 32.15F).32.2 RECAPLophotrochozoans include animals with diversebody types. Wormlike forms include some flatworms,ribbon worms, phoronids, and annelids.There has been convergent evolution of lophophores(in bryozoans versus brachiopods and phoronids)and of external two-part shell coverings (in brachiopodsversus bivalve mollusks).• Can you explain how flatworms can survive without agas transport system? See p. 672 and Figure 32.7• Do you know why most annelids are restricted tomoist environments? See p. 675• Briefly describe how the basic body organization ofmollusks has been modified to yield a wide diversity ofanimals. See pp. 676–679 and Figure 32.14The second of the two major protostome clades, the ecdysozoans,contains the vast majority of Earth’s animal species. Whatevolutionary innovations led to this massive diversity?What Features Distinguish the Major 32.3 Groups of Ecdysozoans?Many ecdysozoans are wormlike in form, although the arthropods,onychophorans, and tardigrades have limbs. In this sectionwe will look at the two clades of wormlike ecdysozoans: the priapulids,kinorhynchs, and loriciferans in one group, and thehorsehair worms and nematodes in the other. Section 32.4 is devotedto the most diverse ecdysozoans—the arthropods andtheir relatives—and the many forms their appendages take.Several marine groups have relatively few speciesMembers of several species-poorgroups of wormlike marine ecdysozoans—the priapulids, kinorhynchs,and loriciferans—haverelatively thin cuticles that aremolted periodically as the animalsgrow to full size. In 2004, embryosof a fossil species related tothese ecdysozoans were discovered insediments laid down in China about 500million years ago. This remarkable discovery showsthat the ancestors of these animals developed directly from anegg to the adult form, as their modern descendants do.The 16 species of priapulids are cylindrical, unsegmented,wormlike animals with a three-part body plan consisting of aproboscis, trunk, and caudal appendage (“tail”). It should beclear from their appearance why they were named after theGreek fertility god Priapus (Figure 32.16A). Priapulids range inlength from 0.5 millimeters to 20 centimeters. They burrow infine marine sediments and prey on soft-bodied invertebratessuch as polychaetes, which they capture with a toothed, muscularpharynx that they evert through their mouth and thenwithdraw into their body together with the grasped prey. Fertilizationis external, and most species have a larval form thatalso lives in the mud.About 150 species of kinorhynchs have been described. Theylive in marine sands and muds and are virtually microscopic;no kinorhynchs are longer than 1 millimeter. Their bodies aredivided into 13 segments, each with a separate cuticular plate(Figure 32.16B). These plates are periodically molted duringgrowth. Kinorhynchs feed by ingesting sediments through theirretractable proboscis (the name means “movable snout”). Theythen digest the organic material found in the sediment, whichmay include living algae as well as dead matter. Kinorhynchshave no distinct larval stage; fertilized eggs develop directlyinto juveniles, which emerge from their egg cases with 11 of the13 body segments already formed.Loriciferans are also minute animals less than 1 millimeterlong. They were not discovered until 1983. About 100 livingspecies are known to exist, although many of these are still beingdescribed. The body is divided into a head, neck, thorax,and abdomen and is covered by six plates, from which the loriciferansget their name (Latin lorica, “corset”). The plates aroundthe base of the neck bear anterior-directed spines of unknown32.3 | WHAT FEATURES DISTINGUISH THE MAJOR GROUPS OF ECDYSOZOANS? 679TardigradesOnychophoransNematodesHorsehair wormsKinorhynchsLoriciferansPriapulidsArthropodsfunction (Figure 32.16C). Loriciferans live incoarse marine sediments. Little is knownabout what they eat, but some species apparentlyeat bacteria.Nematodes and their relatives areabundant and diverseNematodes (roundworms) have a thick, multilayeredcuticle that gives their unsegmentedbody its shape (Figure 32.17). As a nematodegrows, it sheds its cuticle four times. Nematodesexchange oxygen and nutrients withtheir environment through both the cuticleand the gut, which is only one cell layer thick.Materials are moved through the gut byrhythmic contraction of a highly muscular organ,the pharynx, at the worm’s anterior end.Nematodes move by contracting their longitudinalmuscles.Nematodes are probably the most abundantand universally distributed of all animalgroups. Many are microscopic; thelargest known nematode, which reaches alength of 9 meters, is a parasite in the placentasof sperm whales. About 25,000 specieshave been described, but the actual numberof living species may be more than a million.Countless nematodes live as scavengersin the upper layers of the soil, on the bottomsof lakes and streams, and in marinesediments. The topsoil of rich farmland maycontain from 3 to 9 billion nematodes peracre. A single rotting apple may contain asmany as 90,000 individuals.680 CHAPTER 32 | PROTOSTOME ANIMALSCaudal appendage (“tail”)(A) Priapulus caudatus ProboscisTrunk(B) Pycnophyes kielensis (C) Nanaloricus mysticusProboscisSpinesCuticularplatesCuticularplatesNematodes shed theircuticle four times.The large gut (blue) and testis(orange) fill most of the bodyof a male Trichinella spiralis.TestisBrainAnusExcretory tubeVentral nervePharynxDorsal nerve(A) (B)(C)Cuticle32.17 Nematodes (A) Trichinella spiralis, a parasitic nematode that causes trichinosis.(B) This polarized light micrograph shows a cyst of T. spiralis in the muscle tissue of ahost. (C) This free-living nematode lives in freshwater environments.32.16 Wormlike Marine Ecdysozoans Members of these groups are marine bottomdwellers.(A) Most priapulid species live in burrows on the ocean floor, extending the proboscisfor feeding. (B) Kinorhynchs are virtually microscopic. The cuticular plates that cover their bodiesare molted periodically. (C) Six cuticular plates form a “corset” around the minute loriciferan body.One soil-inhabiting nematode, Caenorhabitis elegans, servesas a model organism in the laboratories of geneticists and developmentalbiologists. It is ideal for such research because it iseasy to cultivate, matures in 3 days, and has a fixed number ofbody cells. Its genome has been completely sequenced.Many nematodes are predators, feeding on protists and smallanimals (including other roundworms). Most significant to humans,however, are the many species that parasitize plants andanimals. The nematodes that parasitize humans (causing seriousdiseases such as trichinosis, filariasis, and elephantiasis),domestic animals, and economically important plants have beenstudied intensively in an effort to find ways of controlling them.The structure of parasitic nematodes is similar to that of freelivingspecies, but the life cycles of many parasitic species havespecial stages that facilitate the transfer of individuals amonghosts. Trichinella spiralis, the species that causes the human diseasetrichinosis, has a relatively simple life cycle. Aperson maybecome infected by eating the flesh of an animal (usually a pig)that has Trichinella larvae encysted in its muscles (see Figure32.17B). The larvae are activated in the person’s digestive tract,emerge from their cysts, and attach to the intestinal wall, wherethey feed. Later, they bore through the intestinal wall and arecarried in the bloodstream to muscles, where they form newcysts. If present in great numbers, these cysts can cause severepain or death.About 320 species of the unsegmented horsehair worms havebeen described. As their name implies, these animals are extremelythin in diameter; horsehair worms range from a fewmillimeters up to a meter in length. Most adult worms live infresh water, among leaf litter and algal mats near the edges ofstreams and ponds. Afew species live in damp soil.Horsehair larvae are internal parasites of freshwater crayfishand of terrestrial and aquatic insects (Figure 32.18). An adulthorsehair worm has no mouth, and its gut is greatly reducedand probably nonfunctional. Some species may feed only as larvae,absorbing nutrients from their hosts across the body wall.But other species continue to grow after they have left theirhosts, shedding their cuticles, suggesting that adult worms mayalso absorb nutrients from their environment.32.3 RECAPPriapulids, kinorhynchs, and loriciferans are relativelysmall, poorly known groups of wormlike marineecdysozoans. Horsehair worms and nematodesare also wormlike. Nematodes are probably the mostabundant and universal animal group. The biology ofsome nematodes has been studied extensively, particularlythat of Caenorhabitis elegans, which servesas a model laboratory organism.• Describe at least three different ways in which nematodeshave a significant impact on humans. See pp.680–681We now turn to the animals that not only dominate the ecdysozoanclade but are also the most diverse animals on Earth.32.4 Why Are Arthropods So Diverse?Arthropods and their relatives are ecdysozoanswith paired appendages.Arthropods are the most diversegroup of animals in numbers ofspecies (about a million havebeen described, and many moreremain to be discovered). Furthermore,the number of individualarthropods alive at any one time is estimatedto be about 1018, or a billionbillion. Among the animals, only the nematodesare thought to exist in greater numbers.Several key features have contributed to the success of thearthropods. Their bodies are segmented, and their muscles areattached to the inside of their rigid exoskeletons. Each segmenthas muscles that operate that segment and the jointed appendagesattached to it (see Figure 32.4). Jointed appendagespermit complex movements, and different appendages are specializedfor different functions. Encasement of the body withina rigid exoskeleton provides the animal with support for walkingin the water or on dry land and provides some protectionagainst predators. The waterproofing provided by chitin keepsthe animal from dehydrating in dry air.Representatives of the four major arthropod groups living todayare all species-rich: the crustaceans (including shrimps, crabs,and barnacles), hexapods (insects and their relatives), myriapods(millipedes and centipedes), and chelicerates (including the arachnids—spiders, scorpions, mites, and their relatives). Phylogeneticrelationships among arthropod groups are currently being32.4 | WHY ARE ARTHROPODS SO DIVERSE? 681An adult horsehair worm exits the wood cricketit parasitized during its larval development.32.18 Horsehair Worm Larvae Are Parasitic Like the strepsipteraninsects described at the start of this chapter, the larvae of this horsehairworm (Paragordius tricuspidatus) can manipulate its host’s behavior. Thehatching worm causes the cricket to jump into water, where the worm willcontinue its life cycle as a free-living adult. The insect, having delivered itsparasitic burden, drowns.TardigradesOnychophoransNematodesHorsehair wormsKinorhynchsLoriciferansPriapulidsArthropodsreexamined in light of a wealth of new information, much of itbased on gene sequences. These studies show close relationshipsbetween the myriapods and chelicerates in one clade and betweenthe crustaceans and hexapods in another, with strong supportfor the monophyly of arthropods as a whole.The jointed appendages of arthropods gave the clade itsname, from the Greek words arthron, “joint,” and podos, “foot”or “limb.” Arthropods evolved from ancestors with simple, unjointedappendages. The exact forms of those ancestors are unknown,but some arthropod relatives with segmented bodiesand unjointed appendages survive today. Before we describethe modern arthropods, we will discuss those arthropod relatives,as well as an early clade that went extinct but left an importantfossil record.Arthropod relatives have fleshy, unjointed appendagesUntil fairly recently, biologists debated whether the onychophorans(velvet worms) were more closely related to annelidsor arthropods, but molecular evidence clearly links them to thelatter. Indeed, with their soft, fleshy, unjointed, claw-bearing legs,onychophorans may be similar in appearance to the ancestorsof arthropods (Figure 32.19A). The 150 species of onychophoranslive in leaf litter in humid tropical environments. They have soft,segmented bodies that are covered by a thin, flexible cuticle thatcontains chitin. They use their fluid-filled body cavities as hydrostaticskeletons. Fertilization is internal, and the large, yolkyeggs are brooded within the body of the female.Tardigrades (water bears) also have fleshy, unjointed legs anduse their fluid-filled body cavities as hydrostatic skeletons (Figure32.19B). Tardigrades are extremely small (0.1–0.5 millimeterslong) and lack both a circulatory system and gas-exchangeorgans. The 800 known extant species live in marine sands andon temporary water films on plants. When these films dry out,the animals also lose water and shrink to small, barrel-shapedobjects that can survive for at least a decade in a dormant state.Tardigardes have been found in densities as high as 2 millionper square meter of moss.Jointed appendages first appeared in the trilobitesThe trilobites flourished in Cambrian and Ordovician seas, butthey disappeared in the great Permian extinction at the closeof the Paleozoic era (251 mya). Because they had heavy exoskeletonsthat readily fossilized, they left behind an abundantrecord of their existence (Figure 32.20). About 10,000 specieshave been described.The body segmentation and appendages of trilobites followeda relatively simple, repetitive plan, but some of their682 CHAPTER 32 | PROTOSTOME ANIMALS(A) Peripatus sp.(B) Echiniscus sp. 50 μm32.19 Arthropod Relatives with Unjointed AppendagesA) Onychophorans have unjointed legs and use the body cavity as ahydrostatic skeleton. (B) Tardigrades can be abundant on the wet surfacesof mosses and plants, and in temporary pools of water.Acanthopyge sp.32.20 A Trilobite The relatively simple, repetitive segments of the nowextincttrilobites are illustrated by a fossil trilobite from the shallow seas ofthe Devonian period, some 400 million years ago.jointed appendages were modified for different functions. Thisspecialization of appendages is a theme in the continuing evolutionof the arthropods.Myriapods have many legsMembers of two arthropod groups, the myriapods and the chelicerates,have a body with just two regions: a head and a trunk.This contrasts with the hexapods and crustaceans, most of whichhave a three-part body, with a head, thorax, and abdomen.The myriapods comprise the centipedes, millipedes, and theirclose relatives. Centipedes and millipedes have a well-formedhead and a long, flexible, segmented trunk that bears many pairsof legs (Figure 32.21). Centipedes, which have one pair of legsper segment, prey on insects and other small animals. In millipedes,two adjacent segments are fused so that each fused segmenthas two pairs of legs. Millipedes scavenge and eat plants.More than 3,000 species of centipedes and 11,000 species of millipedeshave been described; many more species probably remainunknown. Although most myriapods are less than a fewcentimeters long, some tropical species are ten times that size.Most chelicerates have four pairs of legsIn the two-part body of chelicerates, the head bears two pairsof appendages modified to form mouthparts. In addition, manychelicerates have four pairs of walking legs. The 98,000 describedspecies are usually placed in three major clades: pycnogonids,horseshoe crabs, and arachnids.The pycnogonids, or sea spiders, are a poorly known group ofabout 1,000 marine species (Figure 32.22A). Most are small, withleg spans less than 1 centimeter, but some deep-sea species haveleg spans up to 60 centimeters. A few pycnogonids eat algae,but most are carnivorous, eating a variety of small invertebrates.There are four living species of horseshoe crabs, but many closerelatives are known from fossils. Horseshoe crabs, which havechanged very little morphologically during their long fossil history,have a large horseshoe-shaped covering over most of thebody. They are common in shallow waters along the eastern32.4 | WHY ARE ARTHROPODS SO DIVERSE? 683(A) Scolopendra heros(B) Sigmoria trimaculata32.21 Myriapods (A) Centipedes have modified appendages thatfunction as poisonous fangs for capturing active prey and one pair of legsper segment. (B) Millipedes, which are scavengers and plant eaters, havesmaller jaws and legs than centipedes do. They have two pairs of legsper segment.(B) Limulus polyphemus(A) Endeis sp.32.22 Two Small Chelicerate Groups (A) Although theyare not spiders, it is easy to see why sea spiders were giventheir common name. (B) This spawning aggregation of horseshoecrabs was photographed on a sandy beach of DelawareBay. Horseshoe crabs are an ancient group that has changedvery little in morphology over time; such species are sometimesreferred to as “living fossils.”coast of North America and the southern and eastern coasts ofAsia, where they scavenge and prey on bottom-dwelling animals.Periodically they crawl into the intertidal zone in largenumbers to mate and lay eggs (Figure 32.22B).Arachnids are abundant in terrestrial environments. Mostarachnids have a simple life cycle in which miniature adultshatch from internally fertilized eggs and begin independentlives almost immediately. Some arachnids retain their eggs duringdevelopment and give birth to live young.The most species-rich and abundant arachnids are the spiders,scorpions, harvestmen, mites, and ticks (Figure 32.23).More than 50,000 described species of mites and ticks live insoil, leaf litter, mosses, and lichens, under bark, and as parasitesof plants and animals. Mites are vectors for wheat and ryemosaic viruses; they cause mange in domestic animals and skinirritation in humans.Spiders, of which 38,000 species have been described, are importantterrestrial predators. Some have excellent vision thatenables them to chase and seize their prey. Others spin elaboratewebs made of protein threads in which they snare prey. Thethreads are produced by modified abdominal appendages connectedto internal glands that secrete the proteins, which solidifyon contact with air. The webs of different groups of spidersare strikingly varied, and this variation enables the spidersto position their snares in many different environments formany different types of prey.Crustaceans are diverse and abundantCrustaceans are the dominant marine arthropods today, andthey are also common in freshwater and some terrestrial environments.The most familiar crustaceans are the shrimps, lobsters,crayfishes, and crabs (all decapods; Figure 32.24A) and thesow bugs (isopods; Figure 32.24B). Additional species-rich groupsof crustaceans include amphipods, ostracods, and branchiopods (Figure32.24C), all of which are found in freshwater and marine environments.(Don’t confuse the branchiopods with the similarlynamed brachiopods, described in Section 32.2.) Krill are smallbut abundant oceanic crustaceans that are important food itemsfor a variety of large vertebrates, including baleen whales. Also684 CHAPTER 32 | PROTOSTOME ANIMALS(B) Pseudouroctonus minimus(C) Leiobunum rotundum (D) Brevipalpus phoenicis(A) Poecilotheria metallica32.23 Arachnid Diversity (A) “Tarantulas” encompass many freelivingspecies as well as several hundred species of hairy, ground-dwellingspiders, some of which can grow to the size of a dinner plate. Their venomousbite, although painful, is not usually dangerous to humans. (B)Scorpions are nocturnal predators. (C) Harvestmen, also called daddylonglegs, are scavengers. (D) Mites include many free-living species aswell as blood-sucking external parasites.Appendages are specialized for chewing,sensing, walking, and swimming.Carapace coveringhead and thorax AbdomenMaxilliped(helps holdfood)Pereiopods (walking andgathering food)Pleopods(swimming)Antennae(sensing)included in the crustacean clade are the small copepods (Figure32.24D), which are also abundant in the open oceans.Barnacles are unusual crustaceans that are sessile as adults(Figure 32.24E). Adult barnacles look more like mollusks thanlike other crustaceans, but as the zoologist Louis Agassiz remarkedmore than a century ago, a barnacle is “nothing morethan a little shrimp-like animal, standing on its head in a limestonehouse and kicking food into its mouth.”Recent molecular studies suggest that crustaceans may notbe monophyletic. In analyses of DNA sequences, the branchiopods(which include brine shrimp, fairy shrimp, water fleas,and tadpole shrimp; see Figure 32.24D) appear to be moreclosely related to the hexapods than to other crustaceans.Most of the 52,000 described species of crustaceans have abody that is divided into three regions: head, thorax, and abdomen(Figure 32.25). The segments of the head are fused together,and the head bears five pairs of appendages. Each of themultiple thoracic and abdominal segments usually bears one pairof appendages. The appendages on different parts of the bodyare specialized for different functions, such as gas exchange,chewing, capturing food, sensing, walking, and swimming. Insome cases, the appendages are branched, with different branches32.4 | WHY ARE ARTHROPODS SO DIVERSE? 685(A) Randallia ornata(D) Cyclopoid copepod(B) Armadillium vulgare(E) Lepas pectinata(C) Triops longicaudatus32.25 Crustacean Body Plan The bodies of crustaceans are dividedinto three regions: the head, thorax, and abdomen. Each region bearsspecialized appendages, and a shell-like carapace covers the head andthorax.32.24 Crustacean Diversity (A) This decapod crustacean, a purple sand crab, isalso referred to as a “globe crab” based on its globelike body shape. (B) Isopods aresometimes referred to as “rock lice,” a name derived from their preferred habitat. (C) Thistadpole shrimp, a branchiopod, is common in seasonal pools of the southwesternUnited States. Molecular studies suggest that branchiopods may be more closely relatedto hexapods than to other crustaceans. (D) This minute copepod from a freshwater pondis brooding eggs. (E) Gooseneck barnacles attach to a substratum by their muscularstalks and feed by protruding and retracting their feeding appendages.serving different functions. In many species, a fold of the exoskeleton,the carapace, extends dorsally and laterally back fromthe head to cover and protect some of the other segments.The fertilized eggs of most crustacean species are attached tothe outside of the female’s body, where they remain during theirearly development. At hatching, the young of some species arereleased as larvae; those of other species are released as juvenilesthat are similar in form to the adults. Still other species releaseeggs into the water or attach them to an object in the environment.The typical crustacean larva, called a nauplius, has threepairs of appendages and one central eye (see Figure 31.11B).Insects are the dominant terrestrial arthropodsDuring the Devonian period, more than 400 million years ago,some arthropods colonized terrestrial environments. Of the severalgroups that successfully colonized the land, none is moreprominent today than the six-legged hexapods: the insects andtheir relatives (Table 32.2). Insects are abundant and diversein terrestrial and freshwater environments; only a few live insalt water.Insects, like crustaceans, have a body with three regions—head, thorax, and abdomen. In addition, insects have a uniquemechanism for gas exchange in air: a system of air sacs and tubularchannels called tracheae (singular trachea) that extend fromexternal openings called spiracles inward to tissues throughoutthe body. Insects have a single pair of antennae on the headand three pairs of legs attached to the thorax (Figure 32.26). Unlikethe other arthropods, insects have no appendages growingfrom their abdominal segments. Insects can be distinguishedfrom other hexapods by their external mouthparts and pairedantennae that contain a motion-sensitive receptor called Johnston’sorgan.The wingless relatives of the insects—the springtails (Figure32.27), two-pronged bristletails, and proturans—are probablythe most similar of living forms to insect ancestors. These relativesof insects have a simple life cycle; they hatch from eggsas miniature adults. They differ from insects in having inter-686 CHAPTER 32 | PROTOSTOME ANIMALSTABLE 32.2The Major Insect GroupsaAPPROXIMATENUMBER OFDESCRIBEDGROUP LIVING SPECIESJumping bristletails (Archaeognatha) 300Silverfish (Thysanura) 370PTERYGOTE (WINGED) INSECTS (PTERYGOTA)Mayflies (Ephemeroptera) 2,000Dragonflies and damselflies (Odonata) 5,000Neopterans (Neoptera) bIce-crawlers (Grylloblattodea) 25Gladiators (Mantophasmatodea) 15Stoneflies (Plecoptera) 1,700Webspinners (Embioptera) 300Angel insects (Zoraptera) 30Earwigs (Dermaptera) 1,800Grasshoppers and crickets (Orthoptera) 20,000Stick insects (Phasmida) 3,000Cockroaches (Blattodea) 3,500Termites (Isoptera) 2,750Mantids (Mantodea) 2,300Booklice and barklice (Psocoptera) 3,000Thrips (Thysanoptera) 5,000Lice (Phthiraptera) 3,100True bugs, cicadas, aphids, leafhoppers (Hemiptera) 80,000Holometabolous neopterans (Holometabola) cAnts, bees, wasps (Hymenoptera) 125,000Beetles (Coleoptera) 375,000Strepsipterans (Strepsiptera) 600Lacewings, ant lions, dobsonflies (Neuropterida) 4,700Scorpionflies (Mecoptera) 600Fleas (Siphonaptera) 2,400True flies (Diptera) 120,000Caddisflies (Trichoptera) 5,000Butterflies and moths (Lepidoptera) 250,000a The hexapod relatives of insects include the springtails (Collembola;3,000 spp.), two-pronged bristletails (Diplura; 600 spp.), and proturans(Protura; 10 spp.). All are wingless and have internal mouthparts.b Neopteran insects can tuck their wings close to their bodiesc Holometabolous insects are neopterans that undergo complete metamorphosis.Head Thorax AbdomenExoskeletonBrainAntennaeVentralnerve cordOvaryDorsal circulatoryvesselsWingsGut DigestivececaSpiracles OvipositorVaginaSeminalreceptacle32.26 Body Plan of an Insect Insects, like crustaceans, have a threepartbody plan with a head, thorax, and abdomen. The middle region, thethorax, bears three pairs of legs and, in most groups, two pairs of wings.Unlike other arthropods, the abdomen of an insect bears no appendages(see Figure 20.8).nal mouthparts. Springtails can be extremely abundant (up to200,000 per square meter) in soil, leaf litter, and on vegetation,and are the most abundant hexapods in the world in terms ofnumber of individuals (rather than number of species).Insects use nearly all species of plants and many species ofanimals as food. Herbivorous insects can consume massiveamounts of plant matter. Gypsy moth caterpillars, for example,have been known to denude entire forests of their hardwoodtree leaves, and the cyclical depredations wrought by locusthordes can be of biblical proportions. Many insects are predatory,feeding on small animals or on other insects. Detritivorousinsects such as dung beetles are important in the recycling ofchemicals through ecosystems. Some insects are internal parasitesof plants or animals; others suck their host’s blood or consumesurface body tissues.As recently as the 1980s, most biologists thought that abouthalf of existing insect species had been described, but today theythink that the approximately 1 million species of described insectsare a small fraction of the total number of living species.Why did they change their minds?A simple but important field study published in 1988 suggestedthat the number of existing insect species had been significantlyunderestimated. Knowing that the insects of tropicalforests (the most species-rich habitat on Earth) were poorlyknown, entomologist Terry Erwin decided to make a comprehensivesample of beetles in the canopies of a single species oftropical forest tree, Luehea seemannii. Erwin fogged the canopiesof 19 large L. seemannii trees with a pesticide and collected theinsects that fell from the trees in collection nets (Figure 32.28).His sample contained about 1,000 species of beetles—many ofthem undescribed—from this one species of tree. He then useda set of assumptions to estimate the total number of insectspecies in tropical evergreen forests. Erwin’s assumptions includedestimates of the number of species of host trees in theseforests, the proportion of beetles that specialized on a specificspecies of host tree, the proportion of beetles relative to otherinsect groups, and the proportion of beetles that live in trees versusleaf litter, among several other factors. From this and similarstudies, Erwin estimated that there may be as many as 50million species of insects on Earth! This estimate was surprisingto many biologists, since it is about 50 times higher than theknown species diversity of insects.The assumptions Erwin used to make his calculations areopen to debate, and Erwin did not intend for his calculations toprovide more than a rough estimate of undiscovered biodiversity.If different assumptions are used, estimates of the numberof species of insects change dramatically. For example, one of Erwin’sassumptions involved an estimate of the proportion of insectspecies thought to be specialists—species that specialize ona particular host plant (in this case, Luehea seemannii). If the proportionof specialist species was overestimated, then the totalnumber of species was likely overestimated; if the proportion ofspecialists was underestimated, the total number of species mayhave been underestimated. Erwin’s extrapolations also assumedthat his samples were representative of other forest trees, andthat his sampling areas were representative of other tropicalforests, among many other assumptions. But even if his estimateswere off by several fold, Erwin’s pioneering study highlightedthe fact that we live on a poorly known planet, most of whosespecies have yet to be named and described.Two groups of insects—the jumping bristletails and silverfish—are wingless and have simple life cycles, like the springtailsand other close insect relatives. The remaining insects are thepterygote insects. Pterygotes have two pairs of wings, except in32.4 | WHY ARE ARTHROPODS SO DIVERSE? 687Sminthurides aquaticus32.28 Erwin’s Research Project In an important study, entomologistTerry Erwin fogged tree canopies in a Panamanian rainforest with insecticide.Using the number of species represented among the fallen insectsas a base, he extrapolated to estimate the total number of insect specieson Earth.32.27 Wingless Hexapods The wingless hexapods, such as thisspringtail, have a simple life cycle. They hatch looking like miniatureadults, then grow by successive molts of the cuticle.some groups where one or both pairs of wings have been secondarilylost. Secondarily wingless groups include the parasitic liceand fleas, some beetles, and the worker individuals in many ants.Hatchling pterygote insects do not look like adults, and theyundergo substantial changes at each molt. The immature stagesof insects between molts are called instars. As Section 31.4 describes,a substantial change that occurs between one developmentalstage and another is called metamorphosis. If the changesbetween its instars are gradual, an insect is said to have incompletemetamorphosis. If the change between at least some instarsis dramatic, an insect is said to have complete metamorphosis.The most familiar examples of species with complete metamorphosisare butterflies (see Figure 31.10). The wormlike butterflylarva, called a caterpillar, transforms itself during a specializedphase, the pupa, in which larval tissues are broken downand the adult form develops. In many insects with completemetamorphosis, the different life stages are specialized for differentenvironments and use different food sources. In manyspecies, the larvae are adapted for feeding and growing, whereasthe adults are specialized for reproduction and dispersal.Pterygote insects were the first animals in evolutionary historyto achieve the ability to fly. Flight opened up many newlifestyles and feeding opportunities that only the insects could688 CHAPTER 32 | PROTOSTOME ANIMALS(A) Libellula semifasciata (B) Brachystola magna(E) Eupholus magnificus(C) Lygaeus kalmii(D) Limnephilus sp. (larva) (F) Argema mittrei(G) Phaenicia sericata(H) Vespula vulgaris32.29 Diverse Winged Insects (A) Unlike most flying insects, a dragonflycannot fold its wings over its back. (B) The plains lubber, a grasshopper,is an orthopteran. (C) Milkweed bugs are true bugs (hemipterans).The plants they feed on (Asclepias spp.) are toxic to many species; itscoloring serves as a signal to predators that the bug also toxic. (D–H)Holometabolous insects undergo complete metamorphosis. (D) A larvalcaddisfly (right) emerges from its dark pupal case. (E) Coleopterans (beetles)such as this New Guinean weevil account for more than half of allholometabolous species and are the largest insect group. (F) The cometmoth of Madagascar is a lepidopteran. (G) Flies such as this green bottlefly are dipterans. (H) Many hymenopteran genera, such as these yellowjacketwasps, are social.exploit, and it is almost certainly one of the reasons for the remarkablenumbers of insect species and individuals, and fortheir unparalleled evolutionary success.The adults of most flying insects have two pairs of stiff, membranouswings attached to the thorax. True flies, however, haveone pair of wings and a pair of stabilizers called haltares. Inwinged beetles, one pair of wings—the forewings—formsheavy, hardened wing covers. Flying insects are important pollinatorsof flowering plants.Two groups of pterygotes, the mayflies and dragonflies (Figure32.29A), cannot fold their wings against their bodies. Thisis the ancestral condition for pterygote insects, and these twogroups are not closely related to one another. Members of thesegroups have predatory or herbivorous aquatic larvae that transforminto flying adults after they crawl out of the water. Dragonflies(and their relatives the damselflies) are active predatorsas adults. In contrast, adult mayflies lack functionaldigestive tracts. Mayflies live only about a day, just long enoughto mate and lay eggs.All other pterygote insects—the neopterans—can tuck theirwings out of the way upon landing and crawl into crevices andother tight places. Some neopteran groups undergo incompletemetamorphosis, so hatchlings of these insects are sufficientlysimilar in form to adults to be recognizable. Examples includethe grasshoppers (Figure 32.29B), roaches, mantids, stick insects,termites, stoneflies, earwigs, thrips, true bugs (Figure32.29C), aphids, cicadas, and leafhoppers. They acquire adultorgan systems, such as wings and compound eyes, graduallythrough several juvenile instars.More than 80 percent of all insects belong to a subgroup ofthe neopterans called the holometabolous insects (see Table 32.2),which undergo complete metamorphosis (Figure 32.29D). Themany species of beetles account for almost half of this group(Figure 32.29E). Also included are lacewings and their relatives;caddisflies; butterflies and moths (Figure 32.29F); sawflies; trueflies (Figure 32.29G); and bees, wasps, and ants, some speciesof which display unique and highly specialized social behaviors(Figure 32.29H).Molecular data suggest that insects began to diversify about450 million years ago, about the time of the appearance of thefirst land plants. These early hexapods evolved in a terrestrialenvironment that lacked any other similar organisms, which inpart accounts for their remarkable success. But the success ofthe insects is also due to their wings. Homologous genes controlthe development of insect wings and crustacean appendages,suggesting that the insect wing evolved from a dorsalbranch of a crustacean-like limb (Figure 32.30). The dorsallimb branch of crustaceans is used for gas exchange. Thus theinsect wing probably evolved from a gill-like structure that hada gas exchange function.32.4 RECAPAll arthropods have segmented bodies. Muscles ineach segment operate that segment and the appendagesattached to it. These jointed, specializedappendages permit complex patterns of movement,including, in insects, the ability to fly. With flight, insectstook advantage of new feeding and lifestyleopportunities, which contributed to the unparalleledevolutionary success of this group.• What features have contributed to making arthropodsamong the most abundant animals on Earth, both innumber of species and number of individuals?See p. 681• Describe the difference between incomplete andcomplete metamorphosis. See p. 688• Can you think of some possible reasons why there areso many species of insects? See pp. 688–689The protostomes encompass the majority of Earth’s animalspecies, so it is not surprising that the different protostomegroups display a huge variety of different characteristics.An Overview of Protostome EvolutionThe myriad species of protostomes encompass a staggeringnumber of different body forms and life styles. The followingaspects of protostome evolution have contributed to this enormousdiversity:• The evolution of segmentation permitted some groups ofprotostomes to move different parts of the body independentlyof one another. Species in some groups graduallyevolved the ability to move rapidly over and through thesubstratum, through water, and through air.32.4 | WHY ARE ARTHROPODS SO DIVERSE? 689Development of appendagesin the crayfish is governed bythe pdm gene.Development of the insectwing is governed by theexpression of the same gene.(A) Ancestralmultibranchedappendage(B) Modern (C) DrosophilacrayfishDorsalbranchespdm gene product32.30 The Origin of Insect Wings? Insect wings may haveevolved from an ancestral appendage similar to that of modern crustaceans.(A) A diagram of the ancestral, multibranched arthropod limb.(B, C) The pdm gene, a Hox gene, is expressed throughout the dorsallimb branch and walking leg of the thoracic limb of a crayfish (B) and inthe wings and legs of Drosophila (C).• Complex life cycles with dramatic changes in form betweenone stage and another allow individuals of different stagesto specialize on different resources.• Parasitism has evolved repeatedly, and many protostomegroups parasitize plants and animals.• The evolution of diverse feeding structures allowed protostomesto specialize on many different food sources. Specializationon food sources undoubtedly contributed tospecies isolation and further diversification.• Predation was a major selection pressure favoring the developmentof hard external body coverings (exoskeletons andshells). Such coverings evolved independently in manylophotrochozoan and ecdysozoan groups. In addition toproviding protection, these coverings became key elementsin the development of new systems of locomotion.• Better locomotion permitted prey to escape from predators,but also allowed predators to pursue their prey more effectively.Thus the evolution of animals has been, and continuesto be, a complex “arms race” among predators and prey.Many major evolutionary trends among the protostomes areshared by the deuterostomes, which includes the chordates, thegroup to which humans belong. We turn to the deuterostomesin the next chapter.690 CHAPTER 32 | PROTOSTOME ANIMALS32.1 What Is a Protostome?• Protostomes (“mouth first”) are bilaterally symmetrical animalswith an anterior brain that surrounds the entrance to the digestivetract and a ventral nervous system. The blastopore of protostomes(when present in development) develops into amouth. Protostomes comprise two major clades, the lophotrochozoansand the ecdysozoans. Review Figure 32.1, WEBACTIVITIES 32.1 and 32.2• Lophotrochozoans include a wide diversity of animals. Withinthis group evolved lophophores (a complex organ for bothfood collection and gas exchange), free-living trochophore larvae,and spiral cleavage. Some of these features were subsequentlylost in some lineages.• Ecdysozoans have a body covering known as the cuticle, whichthey must molt in order to grow. Some ecdysozoans have a relativelythin cuticle. Others, especially the arthropods, have arigid cuticle reinforced with chitin. This rigid cuticle functions asan exoskeleton. New mechanisms of locomotion and gasexchange evolved among the arthropods. Review Figure 32.432.2 What Features Distinguish the Major Groups ofLophotrochozoans?• Lophotrochozoans range from animals having only oneentrance to the digestive tract and no oxygen transport systemto animals with complete digestive tracts and complex internaltransport systems.• Lophophores, wormlike body forms, and external shells areeach found in many unrelated groups of lophotrochozoans.• The most species-rich groups of lophotrochozoans are theflatworms, annelids, and mollusks.• Annelids are a diverse group of segmented worms that live inmoist terrestrial and aquatic environments. Review Figure32.12• Mollusks underwent a dramatic evolutionary radiation based ona body plan consisting of three major components: a foot, amantle, and a visceral mass. The four major living molluscanclades—chitons, bivalves, gastropods, and cephalopods—demonstrate the diversity that evolved from this three-partbody plan. Review Figure 32.1432.3 What Features Distinguish the Major Groups ofEcdysozoans?• Many ecdysozoan groups are wormlike in form. Members ofseveral species-poor groups of wormlike marine ecdysozoans—priapulids, kinorhynchs, and loriciferans—have thin cuticles.• Horsehair worms are extremely thin; many are internal parasitesas larvae.• Nematodes, or roundworms, have a thick, multilayered cuticle.Nematodes are among the most abundant and universally distributedof all animal groups. Review Figure 32.17• One major ecdysozoan clade, the arthropods, has evolved jointed,paired appendages that have a wide diversity of functions.Collectively, arthropods are the dominant animals on Earth innumber of described species, and among the most abundant innumber of individuals.32.4 Why Are Arthropods So Diverse?• Encasement within a rigid exoskeleton provides arthropodswith support for walking as well as some protection from predators.The waterproofing provided by chitin keeps arthropodsfrom dehydrating in dry air.• Jointed appendages permit complex movement patterns. Eacharthropod segment has muscles attached to the inside of theexoskeleton that operate that segment and the appendagesattached to it.• Two groups of arthropod relatives, the onychophorans and thetardigrades, have simple, unjointed appendages. Trilobiteswere early marine arthropods that disappeared in the Permianextinction.• The bodies of myriapods have only two regions, a head, and along trunk with many segments, each of which carriesappendages. Chelicerates also have a two-part body; mostchelicerates have four pairs of walking legs.• Crustaceans are the dominant marine arthropods, and are alsofound in many freshwater and some terrestrial environments.Their segmented bodies are divided into three regions (head,thorax, and abdomen) with different, specialized appendages ineach region. Review Figure 32.25• Hexapods—insects and their relatives—are the dominant terrestrialarthropods. They have the same three body regions ascrustaceans, but no appendages form in their abdominal segments.Wings and the ability to fly first evolved among theinsects, allowing them to exploit new lifestyles. Review Figure32.26CHAPTER SUMMARY
32.1 What Is a Protostome?• Protostomes (“mouth first”) are bilaterally symmetrical animalswith an anterior brain that surrounds the entrance to the digestivetract and a ventral nervous system. The blastopore of protostomes(when present in development) develops into amouth. Protostomes comprise two major clades, the lophotrochozoansand the ecdysozoans. Review Figure 32.1, WEBACTIVITIES 32.1 and 32.2• Lophotrochozoans include a wide diversity of animals. Withinthis group evolved lophophores (a complex organ for bothfood collection and gas exchange), free-living trochophore larvae,and spiral cleavage. Some of these features were subsequentlylost in some lineages.• Ecdysozoans have a body covering known as the cuticle, whichthey must molt in order to grow. Some ecdysozoans have a relativelythin cuticle. Others, especially the arthropods, have arigid cuticle reinforced with chitin. This rigid cuticle functions asan exoskeleton. New mechanisms of locomotion and gasexchange evolved among the arthropods. Review Figure 32.432.2 What Features Distinguish the Major Groups ofLophotrochozoans?• Lophotrochozoans range from animals having only oneentrance to the digestive tract and no oxygen transport systemto animals with complete digestive tracts and complex internaltransport systems.• Lophophores, wormlike body forms, and external shells areeach found in many unrelated groups of lophotrochozoans.• The most species-rich groups of lophotrochozoans are theflatworms, annelids, and mollusks.• Annelids are a diverse group of segmented worms that live inmoist terrestrial and aquatic environments. Review Figure32.12• Mollusks underwent a dramatic evolutionary radiation based ona body plan consisting of three major components: a foot, amantle, and a visceral mass. The four major living molluscanclades—chitons, bivalves, gastropods, and cephalopods—demonstrate the diversity that evolved from this three-partbody plan. Review Figure 32.1432.3 What Features Distinguish the Major Groups ofEcdysozoans?• Many ecdysozoan groups are wormlike in form. Members ofseveral species-poor groups of wormlike marine ecdysozoans—priapulids, kinorhynchs, and loriciferans—have thin cuticles.• Horsehair worms are extremely thin; many are internal parasitesas larvae.• Nematodes, or roundworms, have a thick, multilayered cuticle.Nematodes are among the most abundant and universally distributedof all animal groups. Review Figure 32.17• One major ecdysozoan clade, the arthropods, has evolved jointed,paired appendages that have a wide diversity of functions.Collectively, arthropods are the dominant animals on Earth innumber of described species, and among the most abundant innumber of individuals.32.4 Why Are Arthropods So Diverse?• Encasement within a rigid exoskeleton provides arthropodswith support for walking as well as some protection from predators.The waterproofing provided by chitin keeps arthropodsfrom dehydrating in dry air.• Jointed appendages permit complex movement patterns. Eacharthropod segment has muscles attached to the inside of theexoskeleton that operate that segment and the appendagesattached to it.• Two groups of arthropod relatives, the onychophorans and thetardigrades, have simple, unjointed appendages. Trilobiteswere early marine arthropods that disappeared in the Permianextinction.• The bodies of myriapods have only two regions, a head, and along trunk with many segments, each of which carriesappendages. Chelicerates also have a two-part body; mostchelicerates have four pairs of walking legs.• Crustaceans are the dominant marine arthropods, and are alsofound in many freshwater and some terrestrial environments.Their segmented bodies are divided into three regions (head,thorax, and abdomen) with different, specialized appendages ineach region. Review Figure 32.25• Hexapods—insects and their relatives—are the dominant terrestrialarthropods. They have the same three body regions ascrustaceans, but no appendages form in their abdominal segments.Wings and the ability to fly first evolved among theinsects, allowing them to exploit new lifestyles.