56Familiar sights in Neotropical forest communities,“leaf-cutter” or “parasol” ants owe their name to theirhabit of clipping bits of leaf material from trees andcarting them off to their nests. The leaves they collect,however, are not for their own consumption. Leaf-cutterants are fungus farmers: they use the cut leaves as a substratefor growing the fungi on which they feed.When a new queen ant is ready to leave the nest whereshe grew up, she packs her cheek pockets with a pelletcontaining pieces of the fungal mass that dominates herhome. After mating, she lands, sheds her wings, and digsinto the soil to form a tunnel with an enlarged end. Thereshe ejects the fungal pellet and defecates in it. As the fungusbegins to grow, the female lays eggs in it. With time,her eggs are engulfed by fungus, on which the hatchingant grubs feed. These first hatchlings develop into pintsizedworkers that leave the nest to collect leaf material to“feed” the growing fungus.As the colony increases in size, more nest chambers areconstructed, and the fungus garden expands; by its thirdyear, the total number of chambers in a colony can exceedseveral hundred. Colony size is one factor accountingfor the reputation of leaf-cutters as pests; it takesmore than 2 kg of plant material per day to maintain theenormous fungal garden that nourishes the colony, sothese ants can easily strip an area of vegetation.The ants diligently care for the fungi. In addition to supplyingleaves to the garden, they add fertilizer (in the formof their own feces) and regulate the humidity of thechambers. They are even able to distinguish and excludeleaves containing chemicals with fungus-killing properties.The fungal gardens, however, are vulnerableto invasion by undesirable microbes, particularlythe virulent green moldEscovopsis. To guard againstmold invasion, the ants carryaround a supply of bacteria inspecial organs on their exoskeletons,called crypts. Thesebacteria manufacture powerfulantibiotics that suppress theunwelcome mold, but do noharm to the cultivated fungusin the nest.In the first written descriptionof leaf-cutter ants, theAnty bioticsFeeding a Partner CentralAmerican leaf-cutter ants ( Attacephalotes) transport leaf fragmentsto their nest. The leaveswill serve as food for the fungusthey grow.What Types of Interactions 56.1 Do Ecologists Study?One of life’s certainties is that, at some point between birthand death, every individual organism will encounter and interactwith individuals of other species. These interactions haveconsequences that can affect the individual’s fitness. Thus theycan influence the densities of populations, the distributions ofspecies, and, over the long term, lead to evolutionary change inone or both of the interacting species.Interactions among species can be grouped intoseveral categoriesAlthough the actual number of interactions that take placeamong living things on Earth is essentially limitless, ecologistsgroup interactions between species into a few basic categories.These categories reflect whether the outcome of the interactionsis positive (+), negative (–), or neutral (0) for each of the speciesinvolved (Figure 56.1). The five broad categories of species interactionsthat we introduce in this chapter are antagonistic interactions,mutualism, competition, commensalism, and amensalism.Antagonistic interactions are those in which one species benefitsand the other is harmed. Antagonistic interactions includepredation, in which an individual of one species kills and consumesmultiple individuals of other species during its lifetime;herbivory, in which an individual of another species consumespart or, more rarely, all of a plant; and parasitism, in which onespecies consumes only certain tissues in one or a few individualsof another species without necessarily killing those individuals—known as hosts. Some parasites are pathogens, whichcause symptoms of disease in their hosts.Mutualism is a type of interaction between species that benefitsboth species. The interaction between leaf-cutter ants andfungi described at the opening of this chapter is an example ofmutualism: the ants feed and cultivate the fungi, and the fungi,in turn, serve as food for the ants. Mutualisms exist betweenwidely varied pairs of partners, including not only animals andfungi, but also fungi and plants, animals and plants, animalsand animals, and microbes and all other kinds of organisms.Competition between species refers to interactions in whichtwo or more species use the same resource. The outcomes ofthese interactions depend on resource availability. Competitioncan occur along with almost any other kind of interaction: betweenpredators that depend on the same prey species, betweenherbivores that depend on the same host plant, or between pathogenicmicrobes attacking the same host. The limiting resourceneed not be food; species may compete for water, for space, oreven, in the case of plants, for sunlight.IN THIS CHAPTER we will examine how antagonisticinteractions benefit one species at the expense of another,how mutualistic interactions benefit two or more interactingspecies, and how competition for the sameresources affects the species involved. Throughout thesediscussions, we will see not only how these interactions influencethe lives of these organisms, but how they shapespecies over the long range of evolution.Spanish priest Bartolome de la Casas decried their assiduousleaf gathering and massive nests, “white as snow,”as impediments to the cultivation of citrus and cassavain Hispaniola in 1559. The notion that these ants actuallycultivate and eat the white fungus in their nests did notoccur to anyone until the naturalist Thomas Belt introducedthe idea in 1874. The existence and roles of the intrusivegreen mold and friendly bacteria were not documenteduntil 1999, after another 125 years. It is notbeyond the realm of possibility that even more interactionsbetween species are involved in this system and remainto be revealed.CHAPTER OUTLINE56.1 What Types of Interactions Do Ecologists Study?56.2 How Do Antagonistic Interactions Evolve?56.3 How Do Mutualistic Interactions Evolve?56.4 What Are the Outcomes of Competition?A Fungal Garden Cutaway view of a South Americanleaf-cutter ant nest chamber filled with fungus. Several wingedants (Atta colombica) can be seen in the crevices of thefungal mass.Predation, mutualism, and competition all affectthe fitness of both participants, but there are twoother types of interactions that affect only one participant.Commensalism is a type of interaction inwhich one participant benefits, but the other is apparentlyunaffected. Most examples of commensalism (from theLatin, “eating together”) involve one species feeding in, on, oraround another species. For example, one species may associatewith another species that, by virtue of its own feeding behavior,makes food more accessible. The brown-headed cowbirdowes its name to its habit of following herds of grazingcattle, foraging on insects flushed from the vegetation by theirhooves and teeth (in years past, it was called the buffalo birdbecause it followed the bison that were once abundant acrossthe North American continent).Another form of commensalism involves association for thepurpose of transport, often to reach food resources that are rareand short-lived. Piles of mammal dung, for example, are a valuableresource for some detritivores, but they can be hard to findand never last long. Many kinds of detritivores that cannot fly—mites, nematodes, and even fungi—attach themselves to thebodies of dung beetles, which not only can fly but are also verygood at locating fresh dung (as described in the opening storyof Chapter 54). These hitchhikers have no effect on the dungbeetle’s fitness, nor do cowbirds have any on the cattle that flushinsects for them.Amensalism is a type of interaction in which one participantis unaffected while the other is harmed. A herd of elephantsmoving through a forest crushes insects and plants with eachstep, but the elephants are unaffected by this carnage. Amensalinteractions tend to be more random, and thus less predictable,than other types of interactions.Although ecologists find it useful to group interactions betweenspecies into a few basic categories, the boundaries betweencategories are not always clear. For example, sea anemones in thePacific Ocean sting and eat small fish, but a select few fish species(mostly in the genus Amphiprion) live inside sea anemones andare unaffected by their stings. These anemonefish move freelyamong the stinging tentacles to scavenge the cnidarians’ leavingsand even steal their prey (Figure 56.2).Anemonefish must acclimate to the anemone’s venom, andthe anemone, in turn, must acclimate to the fish. The acclimationprocess appears to involve a change in the mucus coat ofthe fish; wiping off the mucus of an acclimated fish results inimmediate stinging, whereas anemones will not attack fish withintact mucus. Although the benefit to the anemonefish is clear—it escapes its own predators by hiding behind the anemone’s56.1 | WHAT TYPES OF INTERACTIONS DO ECOLOGISTS STUDY? 1187(A)AntagonisticinteractionsCompetitionThe grizzly bear is attemptingto take over the wolves’ kill.PredationCarnivores such astimberwolves hunt andkill herbivorous mammals.(B)Parasitism, Predation, MutualismThe buffalo’s hide is infested withparasitic ticks. Oxpecker birds eatthe ticks, to the mutual benefit ofthe birds and the buffalo.Amensalism, CommensalismThe large mammal unwittingly destroys insectsand their nests. The white cattle egrets feed oninsects disturbed by the buffalo’s passage.HerbivoryThe African buffalofeeds on the grassesof the savanna.56.1 Types of Interactions (A) Interactions amongspecies can be grouped into categories based on whethertheir influence on each of the interacting species is positive(+), negative (–), or neutral (0). These interactions can bebroadly grouped as antagonistic or mutualistic.(B) Even a small scene can encompass many differentspecies interactions.GO TO Web Activity 56.1 • Ecological InteractionsyourBioPortal.comnematocysts, and it has no need to forage widely for food—the anemones may benefit from the association as well. By defecatingwhile in residence, the anemonefish may provide nitrogen-rich nutrients to the anemones.The interaction types described in this section are in realitypart of a continuum, and their outcomes depend on both ecologicaland evolutionary circumstances, including the presenceand influence of other interacting parties.Some types of interactions result in coevolutionAll types of interactions have the potential to influence the populationdensities of the interacting species. By contributing to thedifferential survival or reproduction of genotypes, they can alsoalter gene frequencies within the populations over time. Thusthese interactions have ecological consequences, as when theyaffect the distribution and abundance of individuals within aspecies, as well as evolutionary consequences, as when they leadto adaptations. In some cases, an adaptation in one species maylead to the evolution of an adaptation in a species it interactswith, a process known as reciprocal adaptation or coevolution.Darwin saw the fitness of an organism as a measure ofwhether it gains or loses from interactions with other species.He noted, too, that evolutionary change occurs not only in responseto physical conditions, as we saw in Section 54.2, but alsoin response to interactions among organisms. In his introductionto The Origin of Species, Darwin pointed out that woodpeckershave feet, tails, beaks, and tongues “admirably adapted to catchinsects under the bark of trees” as a result of their long-standinginteractions with their insect prey. Organisms can thus influencethe evolution of the organisms with which they interact.While abiotic factors also act as agents of selection, they differin a fundamental way from biotic agents of selection in thatthey do not themselves undergo change as a result of the interaction.Snow and ice cannot increase their killing power as aresult of encountering cold-resistant organisms, but predatorscan, over evolutionary time, become swifter, more powerful, ormore efficient at capturing their prey. In response, prey speciescan, over evolutionary time, become swifter, tougher, less conspicuous,or more poisonous to decrease the likelihood of beingconsumed. The insect prey of Darwin’s woodpeckers, forexample, might evolve features that make them more difficultfor the woodpeckers to find and capture.A series of reciprocal adaptations can lead to what has beendubbed a coevolutionary arms race. The arms race analogy, firstused in the context of interactions between herbivores andplants, can be applied to most antagonistic interactions. The evolutionof traits that increase the fitness of a predator or parasitespecies exerts selection pressure on its prey or host species tocounter the consumer’s adaptation. The prey or host adaptation,in turn, exerts selection pressure on the consumer to improve itsfitness, resulting in an escalating arms race. The types of interactionsmost likely to lead to coevolution, then, are those that occurpredictably with high frequency over time and that have astrong effect on the interacting species; thus most amensal andcommensal interactions are less likely to coevolve than are manyplant–herbivore, predator–prey, and mutualistic interactions.56.1 RECAPSpecies interactions can be grouped into five categoriesbased on whether they benefit or harm thespecies involved. Some species interactions canlead to reciprocal adaptations, or coevolution.• Describe the five categories of interactions betweenspecies. See pp. 1186–1187 and Figure 56.1• Explain the concept of a coevolutionary arms race.See p. 1188Now let’s take a closer look at antagonistic interactions. In Section31.3 we looked at a number of feeding strategies from theconsumer’s point of view. In this section we will see how theinteractions of consumers with their resource species influenceboth species.How Do Antagonistic Interactions 56.2 Evolve?Every species serves as a food resource, in one way or another,for at least one other species. Consumers can increase their fitnessby acquiring food, whereas resource species can increasetheir fitness by avoiding being consumed. Thus the interestsof consumer and resource species set up an antagonistic relationshipthat can lead to a coevolutionary arms race. These consumptiverelationships need not, however, be fatal; organismsmake meals of one another in many different ways.1188 CHAPTER 56 | SPECIES INTERACTIONS AND COEVOLUTIONAmphiprion ocellaris56.2 Interactions between Species Are Not Always Clear-CutEcologists long believed that the relationship between sea anemones andanemonefish was a commensalism: that the fish, by living among theanemone’s stinging tentacles, gained protection from its predators. Butcould it also be considered a mutualism—if the fish’s feces provide theanemone with beneficial nutrients—or competition—if the fish occasionallysteals the anemone’s prey?Predator–prey interactions result in a rangeof adaptationsPredator–prey interactions are probably the most familiar, andthe most dramatic, type of antagonistic interaction. Predatorsinvariably kill the individuals they consume—referred to astheir prey—and over its lifetime, a predator kills and consumesmany prey individuals. Predators tend to be less specializedthan other types of consumers.The fitness of predators depends on balancing the cost ofpursuing, subduing, and handling prey against the energeticreturn from consuming it. Thus many predators are larger thantheir prey, and many of them use strength or swiftness to captureprey. This is true of predators of all sizes: tigers pursuingdeer and tiger beetles pursuing smaller insects are both swift,powerful, and equipped with strong jaws (Figure 56.3A,B). Thefew predators that are smaller than their prey rely on otherstrategies that increase their efficiency. Spiders, for example,capture their prey in webs. The short-tailed shrew, among thesmallest mammalian predators, produces venomous saliva thatparalyzes not only earthworms and snails, but also prey muchlarger than itself, including mice and small birds.Prey species have many different kinds of defenses againstpredators. Many animal species can escape from predators simplyby running away. Others have morphological defenses.Tough skin, shells, spines, or hair can foil even a determinedpredator. A coevolutionary arms race between predators andprey can explain why the lumpy-clawed crabs with the greatestclaw strength are found in the vicinity of snail prey with thethickest, most crush-resistant shells (Figure 56.3C).CHEMICAL DEFENSES Many animals use chemical defenses toescape or repel their predators. Chemical defenses are generallythe province of animal prey that are small, weak, sessile, orotherwise unprotected. Among the mollusks, for example, theweaker a species’ shell, the more likely it is to use chemical defenses(see Figure 56.4B). Some vertebrates also rely on chemicalsto repel their predators.Many insects produce sprays, oozes, or froths when attacked.Bombardier beetles, for example, possess a pair of glands nearthe anal opening. Each gland has two compartments lined witha protective cuticle. The inner compartment contains a mix ofrelatively nontoxic chemicals, along with hydrogen peroxide.The outer compartment contains enzymes. When the beetle isdisturbed, it discharges the contents of the inner compartmentinto the outer compartment, which leads to an instant, energyreleasingchemical reaction. Oxygen is one of the end productsgenerated by this reaction, and the resulting pressure dischargesthe mixture with an audible “pop.” Due to the energy of the reaction,the temperature of the spray is approximately 100°C.The reaction of predators—including humans—to this hot, explosivesecretion is predictable, and bombardier beetles havevery few enemies.But predators may evolve to overcome their prey’s chemicaldefenses, as we saw in the case of the rough-skinned newt andthe garter snakes that have become insensitive to its protectivetoxin (see Figure 21.22). Some predators are not only undeterredby their prey’s defensive chemicals, but ingest them and sequesterthem in their bodies as defenses against their own predators.Some sea slug species, for example, acquire their defensivechemicals from the toxic sponges they can eat withimpunity. Many prey species that defend themselves with toxicityadvertise that fact, a phenomenon called aposematism.APOSEMATISM Some prey species exploit the fact that predatorscan learn to avoid certain warning signals. Many toxic preysport bright colors or striking patterns. Such warning coloration,or aposematism, increases the probability that a predator will56.2 | HOW DO ANTAGONISTIC INTERACTIONS EVOLVE? 1189(A) Panthera tigris(C) Platythelphusa sp.(B) Cicindela campestris 56.3 Predators Use ManyWeapons (A) Tigers embodymost people’s image of a predator—a large animal that usesspeed, strength, teeth, and clawsto capture prey. (B) The 1.3-cmgreen tiger beetle is also formidableto its prey, including caterpillars. Itshuge jaws account for most of itsbody length, and it is among theswiftest runners among the insects.(C) Platythelphusa crabs of LakeTanganyika have tremendouslystrong “toothed” claws with whichthey crush their snail prey. In anevolutionary arms race, thick shellshave evolved in the snails.learn to recognize and avoid a toxic species (Figure 56.4). Certainvisually hunting predators, particularly among the vertebrates,can learn quickly to associate certain color patterns withan unpleasant dining experience. Thus aposematic species arecharacteristically tough enough to survive a brief encounterwith a predator. Any encounter that results in the death of theaposematic individual is unlikely to result in selection for thataposematic pattern. Aposematic butterflies in the field oftensport beak marks, an indication of having survived a taste byan uneducated avian predator. And, as it turns out, even nontoxicspecies can benefit by mimicking warning coloration.MIMICRY SYSTEMS We have seen that some prey species avoidconsumption by mimicking inedible objects. Others do so bymimicking aposematic species. This strategy has led to the evolutionof mimicry systems of two types. In Batesian mimicry, anontoxic species (the mimic) resembles a toxic species (the model)and benefits from the avoidance behavior learned by the predatorin response to the toxic model species. For example, venomousbees and wasps sport distinctive yellow and black stripesthat are models for harmless hover flies (Figure 56.5A). Mimicrymay extend beyond physical appearance; many mimics also simulatedistinctive behaviors of their models. Some hover flies, forexample, vibrate their wings to buzz in beelike fashion.In Müllerian mimicry, a number of aposematic species convergeon a common color pattern; all benefit from providing astronger recognition signal to predators. Many of the Neotropicalzebra butterflies, which feed on toxic passionflower plantsand incorporate their toxins into their bodies, are Müllerianmimics (Figure 56.5B).AVOIDING DETECTION Many prey species escape predators byhiding. One form of hiding is camouflage, or backgroundmatching, also called crypsis (Figure 56.6A). Some animalscan even change their coloration to match the substrate theyfind themselves on. The camouflage of some species not onlyhides them but allows them to resemble objects their predatorsconsider inedible, a strategy called homotypy (Figure56.6B). The dead-leaf butterfly looks very much like a dead leaf,even down to the likeness of a spot of fungal decay, and swallowtailcaterpillars look like bird droppings.Because the vision of many types of predators is adapted tospot moving prey, many prey species simply stop moving ifthey are being pursued. “Playing possum,” a term that is sometimesapplied to this strategy, refers to the ability of the opossum(Didelphus virginianus) to “play dead.”Herbivory is a widespread interactionThe most ubiquitous interaction on Earth is that between plantsand the herbivores that eat them. Herbivores have a relativelyeasy time acquiring food: plants are sessile and cannot bite,scratch, or run away. Aconservative estimate puts the numberof herbivore species (the vast majority of which are insects) at1190 CHAPTER 56 | SPECIES INTERACTIONS AND COEVOLUTION(A)Danaus plexippus larva Tetraopes tetraophthalamus Aphis nerii56.4 Some Prey Come with Warning (B) Chromodoris sp. (C) Dendrobates reticulatusLabels (A) Milkweed plants are toxic, andmany of the insects that feed on them—including monarch butterfly larvae, milkweedbeetles, and aphids—incorporate the plant’stoxic chemicals into their systems. (B)Nudibranchs (sea slugs) are mollusks withoutprotective shells, however, they may possessstinging nematocysts (acquired from theirhydrozoan prey), and their bright colorationwarns predators away. (C) Dart poison frogsof Central and South American sequesterhighly toxic chemicals in their brightly coloredskin.400,000 and the number of plant species they consume at over300,000. Every major class of vertebrates includes at least afew herbivores. In marine systems, organisms that feed onplants and algae include mollusks, crustaceans, echinoderms,and annelids.In terms of numbers of individuals as well as numbers ofspecies, most of the world’s herbivores are insects. Over 90 percentof these insects are oligophagous: specialists that dine on justone or a few, often taxonomically related, plant species.Polyphagous species, in contrast, feed on as many as dozens ofunrelated plant species. Vertebrate herbivores are generallypolyphagous; a cow grazing in a pasture, for example, can consumemany different plant species in a single afternoon. Thereare exceptions to this pattern, however; Australian koalas famouslyfeed exclusively on the foliage of eucalyptus trees, andthe diet of giant pandas is made up almost entirely of bamboo.Herbivores, particularly insects, generally consume onlyparts of their food plants, and usually do not kill them. In mostnatural ecosystems, insects rarely remove more than 20 percentof plant biomass. For that reason, questions occasionally ariseas to the ability of insects to act as selective agents on plant traits.Mortality is not, however, the only form of selection that leadsto evolutionary change; herbivores can reduce plant fitness ifthe plants they attack produce fewer offspring.PLANT DEFENSES AGAINST HERBIVORES The defenses of plantsagainst their diverse consumers are necessarily highly diverse.For most plant species, chemistry is the principal defense mechanism.As we saw at the opening of this chapter, the leaves ofsome trees contain chemicals that prevent them from being consumedby fungi—and thus, incidentally, from being harvestedby leaf-cutter ants. The amazing variety of secondary metabolitesproduced by plants to defend themselves against herbivoresis the topic of Section 39.2. Many plants, however, haveadditional defenses.56.2 | HOW DO ANTAGONISTIC INTERACTIONS EVOLVE? 1191(A) Batesian mimics(B) Müllerian mimicsThis harmless hoverfly... ...mimics a stinging wasp.In each pair, Heliconius melpomeneappears on top, H. erato is below.Both species are toxic.The appearances ofboth species varygeographically butare always linked.Episyrphus balteatus Vespula vulgaris56.5 What You See Is What You Get—Sometimes(A) Batesian mimics are harmless species that gain protection from mimickingdangerous ones. (B) The shared aposematic coloration of Müllerianmimics is an honest advertisement of their toxicity. All the zebra butterflies(genus Heliconius) of South America feed on toxic passionflower plantsand incorporate the toxins into their bodies. Heliconius species living in aparticular area have similar warning colors.(B) Mimetica sp.(A) Hyla versicolor56.6 Avoiding Consumption by Avoiding Detection (A) The gray tree frog can changeits coloration to blend in with its substrate, an example of crypsis. (B) Homotypy—resemblanceto an inedible object—can be an effective defense against visually hunting predators.Birds searching for insect prey are likely to pass by a katydid that looks like a leaf.Some plants protect themselves by being physically difficultto ingest. Thorns and spines are effective deterrents to browsingvertebrate herbivores. Smaller herbivores, including manyinsects, can be deterred by small hooked hairs on leaf surfaces.The soft bodies of leafhoppers can be pierced by these hairs,which fix the insect in place until it eventually dies from starvationor loss of blood. The cuticle may also act as a physicalbarrier. Most grasses contain silica, which wears down sharpedges of herbivore teeth. Insects that feed only on grasses tendto have chisel-like mandibles to slice through the leaf tissue;moreover, their heads are larger to accommodate the larger jawmuscles needed to process their food.RECIPROCAL ADAPTATIONS IN HERBIVORES AND PLANTS The conceptof reciprocal adaptation was first described in the contextof interactions between herbivores and plants. In 1959, the entomologistGottfried Fraenkel reached the conclusion aftermany years of study that all green plants are essentially nutritionallyequivalent for insects. Why, then, are so many insectssuch picky eaters? Fraenkel proposed the novel hypothesis thatecological factors underlie the diversity of secondary metabolitesthat deter insect herbivores. A few years later, entomologistPaul Ehrlich and botanist Peter Raven proposed the followingevolutionary scenario to account for patterns of host plantuse among herbivorous insects (specifically, in their case, butterflyfamilies):• Certain plants, by mutation or recombination, evolve anovel secondary metabolite.• If the chemical reduces the plant’s appeal to herbivores,then plant genotypes producing the chemical are favored.• Freed from mortality associated with herbivory, plants possessingthe novel chemical undergo an adaptive radiation.• Certain herbivores, by mutation or recombination, evolveresistance to the chemical, and these resistant herbivoresundergo their own adaptive radiation.• With sufficient selection pressure, a resistant herbivore canevolve to use the chemical as a defense against its ownpredators.This stepwise coevolutionary process explains not only the biochemicaldiversity of flowering plants, but also the tremendousdiversity of herbivorous insects. The ecological scenario outlinedby Ehrlich and Raven is an example of the type of coevolutionaryarms race described earlier in the chapter.Atremendous diversity of adaptations to plant defenses haveevolved in herbivores. Many herbivores circumvent plant defensesby behavioral means. For example, the secondarymetabolites produced by a plant called Saint-John’s-wort (Hypericumperforatum) require exposure to sunlight for optimal toxicity,so insects that feed on this plant roll its leaves into a lightimperviouscylinder and feed in comfort in the dark. Thelaticifer-cutting beetles described in Section 39.2 have a differentmethod of detoxifying their food plant. Many largepolyphagous herbivores, such as deer, horses and the like, grazeon a wide variety of plant species, minimizing their exposureto any particular defensive chemical. Long-lived and with relativelygood memories, they can learn to avoid plants with anunpleasant taste.Unlike large mammalian herbivores, caterpillars and manyother insect herbivores may spend their entire lives feeding ona single individual plant. Such oligophagous diets are associatedwith highly specialized detoxification systems. The diamondbackmoth caterpillar eats plants in the cabbage familythat are rich in toxic mustard oil glycosides. In its gut is an enzymethat breaks down the glycosides into harmless by-products,allowing it to eat these plants with impunity.Some herbivores take resistance a step further by storing, orsequestering, plant toxins in specialized organs or tissues that areinsensitive to those toxins. In this way, they can accumulate largequantities of toxins in their bodies with no ill effects. This strategyalso makes the expropriated chemicals available for defenseagainst the herbivores’ own enemies. Caterpillars of the monarchbutterfly, for example, are insensitive to the neurotoxic glycosidesin their milkweed host plants, but most of their enemies,including insect-eating birds, cannot tolerate these compounds.Yet the plants continue their side of the coevolutionary armsrace. As we have seen, the principal consumers of passionflowerplants are zebra butterflies. These oligophagous butterflies layeggs only on passionflower plants, and their larvae sequesterhost plant toxins in their bodies as they feed on the leaves. Somepassionflower species, however, have modified leaf structuresthat resemble the eggs of butterflies. Female butterflies will notlay eggs on plants already containing eggs, so the egg mimicsreduce the plant’s probability of being consumed (Figure 56.7).Microparasite–host interactions may be pathogenicMicroparasites, such as viruses, bacteria, and protists, are manyorders of magnitude smaller than their hosts and generally liveand reproduce inside their hosts. Multiple generations of mi-1192 CHAPTER 56 | SPECIES INTERACTIONS AND COEVOLUTIONSpots on the leavesof Passiflora mimicbutterfly eggs.56.7 A Plant Uses Mimicry to Avoid Herbivory Passionflower leavesare modified to resemble the eggs of their principal herbivores, zebra butterflies(Heliconius spp.), which will not lay eggs on a plant already containingeggs. The egg mimics deter the female from laying eggs, thus protectingthe plant from being eaten by hatchling caterpillars.croparasites may reside within a single host individual, and ahost may harbor thousands or millions of them. Many microparasites,in the process of acquiring nutrients at the expenseof their host, cause symptoms of disease—that is, they arepathogens. Section 39.1 describes the array of secondary metabolitesthat plants produce to defend themselves againstpathogens, and Chapter 42 describes the defenses of animals.Infection by pathogens may in some cases result in the deathof the host, but death is by no means an inevitable outcome ofthese interactions. If a pathogen strain is to persist in a host population,the pathogens must continually infect new host individuals.A less deadly strain that kills a smaller proportion ofhost individuals may succeed in infecting a larger number ofnew hosts. Thus pathogen and host may reach a state of coexistenceas increased host resistance (ability to withstand the effectsof a pathogen) and decreased pathogen virulence (abilityto cause disease) evolve. Yet new, virulent strains may also arise,reminding us that the arms race goes on.Hosts of pathogens fall into three classes: susceptible (capableof being infected), infected, or recovered (and thus, in manycases, immune; see Chapter 42). Apathogen can readily invadea host population dominated by susceptible individuals, but asthe infection spreads, fewer susceptible individuals remain tobe infected. Eventually a point is reached at which most infectedindividuals no longer transmit the infection to susceptible individuals.Thus rates of infection typically rise, then fall, and donot rise again until a sufficiently large population of susceptiblehost individuals has reappeared.Most ectoparasites have adaptations for holdingonto their hostsWhile microparasites generally live and reproduce inside theirhosts, larger parasites, called macroparasites, are associated withtheir hosts in a slightly less intimate way. Although macroparasitesrarely cause the same kinds of disease symptoms thatpathogenic microparasites cause, they may nevertheless affecthost survival and reproduction and can thereby act as selectiveagents on their hosts.Some ectoparasites (external parasites)—leeches, mosquitoes,and the like—are only casually associated with their hosts,interacting with them just long enough to eat their fill and thenmoving on. Others spend their entire lives in or on their hosts.These ectoparasites have a number of attributes designed tokeep them attached to their hosts. Crab lice, ectoparasites thatare generally found in the pubic region of their human hosts,have claws on the tips of their legs that clamp around pubichairs with great precision (Figure 56.8). Pulling off a crab lousewill often leave the leg behind, still firmly attached to the hair.Ectoparasites have other adaptations designed to reduce theability of irritated hosts to remove them, such as flattened bodiesand a thick, tough cuticle. Many ectoparasites also haveadaptations to a sedentary existence, such as loss of sensory organsand wings. Most ectoparasitic insects are highly specialized,sometimes feeding on only a single host species.Most hosts actively work to rid themselves of their ectoparasites.The Japanese macaque, for example, is prone to infestationby two species of lice, which tend to lay their eggs on theouter surfaces of the host’s back, arms, and legs. An individualmacaque may harbor more than 500 louse eggs, and wouldfind it difficult to reach and eliminate all of them. To keep lousepopulations in check, macaques must form and maintain socialbonds in order to ensure the consistent presence of groomingpartners. Grooming behavior—an important component of thesocial interactions of many primates—may have evolved inresponse to ectoparasites. Some biologists believe that humanhairlessness and bipedal posture (which freed the hands for manipulatingsmall objects), as well as the opposable thumb, wereevolutionary responses to ectoparasites.56.2 RECAPPredator–prey, herbivore–plant, and parasite–hostinteractions are all antagonistic. Consumers haveadaptations for finding and utilizing their resourcespecies with greater efficiency. The resource speciesin turn have adaptations that reduce their probabilityof being discovered, captured, and eaten.• What are some of the adaptations that help preyspecies to avoid consumption by predators?See pp. 1189–1190• How are aposematism and mimicry related?See pp. 1189–1190 and Figures 56.4 and 56.5• Explain the scenario for coevolution between insectherbivores and their host plants proposed by Ehrlichand Raven. See p. 119256.2 | HOW DO ANTAGONISTIC INTERACTIONS EVOLVE? 1193Phthirus pubis0.5 μm56.8 Ectoparasites Can Make a Host Crabby Ectoparasites suchas the human pubic (or “crab”) lice in this scanning electron micrographtend to be tiny, wingless, flattened, and equipped with strong claws forgripping their host.Like antagonistic interactions, mutually beneficial interactionsbetween species can result in reciprocal adaptation. Amutuallybeneficial exchange of goods or services can ensure the predictabilityand frequency of such interactions over evolutionarytime; thus many mutualistic interactions are tightly coevolved.How Do Mutualistic 56.3 Interactions Evolve?There are few, if any, taxonomic limits on the formation of mutualisms;animals, for example, can form mutualistic associationswith other animals, with plants, and with a wide range ofmicroorganisms. Mutualistic interactions often arise in environmentswhere resources are in short supply. Consequently, manymutualisms involve an exchange of food for housing or defense.In another type of mutualism, many sessile organisms, particularlyflowering plants, rely on more mobile species for matingor dispersal.Many mutualisms are asymmetrical—in other words, oneparty benefits more than the other. One or both partners mayevolve adaptations that ensure that the exchange benefits bothof them. Reciprocal adaptations are most likely to arise in mutualisticinteractions if an increase in dependency on a partnerprovides an increase in the benefits realized from the interaction.If increased dependence provides no selective advantage,mutualists (particularly those in asymmetrical mutualisms) mayevolve into parasites, give up their partners for an independentexistence, or even go extinct.Plants and pollinators exchange food for pollen transportFor about three-quarters of the planet’s 250,000 flowering plantspecies, reproduction requires the transport of pollen by an animalpartner. Amutualistic pollination system requires severalfeatures:• An attractant or reward that entices a pollinator to visit theplant• Behavior that ensures that a pollinator visits more than oneindividual of a plant species• Anatomical features that allow a pollinatorto transport the plant’s pollenFlowers entice pollinators in many ways. Themost direct reward for pollinators is thepollen itself, which sometimes serves as food.Pollen was probably the original attractant inthe evolutionary history of plant–pollinatorinteractions. Plant reproduction would notbe served, however, if pollinators were to eatall of a plant’s pollen; thus plants haveevolved various adaptations to ensure thatthey benefit from the exchange. For example,some plants have two types of anthers: feedinganthers to produce pollen for pollinators,and fertilization anthers to produce pollenfor reproduction. These two types of anthersare shaped and positioned differently, so that as the pollinatordines on pollen from the feeding anthers, the fertilization anthersdeposit pollen on a part of its body that will transfer it tothe stigma of another flower of the same species.Plants, like pollinators, may take advantage of their partners.Some species have evolved flowers that bear a striking resemblanceto females of a particular wasp species (in some caseseven producing the same chemical substance that the femalewasp uses as a sexual attractant pheromone). Male wasps, in afutile effort to copulate with the flower, get pollen on their bodies,which they deliver to the next flower they visit in their effortto locate a genuine mate (Figure 56.9).Compared with pollen, nectar, a sugar-rich solution producedby some angiosperms, is a relatively new evolutionary development.Of all floral rewards, nectar has the greatest appeal andis consumed by the widest range of animal pollinators, includingnot only insects but also birds (such as hummingbirds) andmammals (such as bats). While nectar serves to attract potentialpollinators, it is prone to removal by thieves: flower visitorssuch as ants that can reach and consume the nectar without56.9 Plants Sometimes Take Advantage of Their Pollinators Thisorchid (Ophrys insectifera) has flowers that look and smell like a femalewasp. Male wasps (Argogorytes mystaceus) will pollinate the flower whiletrying to mate with it.TABLE 56.1Pollination Syndromes Resulting from Diffuse CoevolutionSUITE OF ANATOMICAL TRAITSaPREFERRED FLOWER FLOWERPOLLINATOR SHAPE COLOR REWARD ODORBees Irregular Many Nectar, pollen SweetFlesh flies Irregular Purplish None CarrionBeetles Bowl White or pale Pollen FaintButterflies Tubular platforms Many Nectar FaintMoths Often pendant White or pale Nectar HeavyHummingbirds Tubular Red Nectar ImperceptibleBats Cuplike White or pale Copious nectar Mustya In many plant groups, diffuse coevolution has led to suites of traits (as opposed to a single trait)that are characteristic of the interactions between the plants and their preferred pollinators.1194 CHAPTER 56 | SPECIES INTERACTIONS AND COEVOLUTIONtransporting pollen. Nectar thieves lower plant fitness by depletingnectar that would otherwise attract actual pollinators.Plants not only need to attract pollinators, but must alsoensure that those pollinators carry their pollen to other membersof the same species. Repeat visits by a pollinator to differentindividuals of a particular plant species increase the likelihoodthat the pollen will end up on the appropriate stigma; thussome plants have adaptations to limit the diversity of their animalvisitors. The depth and width of a flower can restrict thesize and shape of the pollinator mouthparts that can gain accessto their nectar. Timing of flowering can also restrict the numberof potential pollinators and encourage pollinator fidelity. Floralcharacteristics influence the type of pollinator attracted initially.Ultraviolet wavelengths, for example, are highly attractive tobees (Figure 56.10) but invisible to most birds.Most flowers can be successfully pollinated by a number ofanimal species. The evolution of broad suites of floral characteristicsthat attract certain groups of pollinators is an example ofdiffuse coevolution: the evolution of similar traits in suites ofspecies experiencing similar selection pressures (Table 56.1).Scarlet gilia (Ipomopsis aggregata), a common wildflower in theRocky Mountains, has successfully combined two strategies.Early in its growing season, it produces red flowers that attracthummingbirds; later in the season, the gilia shifts to producingwhite flowers because by then the most abundant pollinators arehawkmoths, which cannot see red but are attracted to white.A few plant–pollinator relationships are much more exclusive;these lead to hightly specific, rather than diffuse, coevolution.Yucca plants are pollinated only by a group of moths collectivelyknown as yucca moths, whose larvae feed exclusivelyon yucca seeds. The stigma of the yucca flower is located fairlydeep within the pistil, and fertilization will not occur unlesspollen is physically placed there. The specialized mouthpartsof female yucca moths have distinctive long tentacles, whichthe moths use to pack masses of pollen from one yucca flowerinto transportable balls that they then carry to another flower.The moth pushes the pollen ball deep into the recess in whichthe flower’s stigma is tucked, then turns around and depositsher eggs inside the flower’s ovule (Figure 56.11). When the eggshatch, the caterpillars will consume some—but not all—of the(A) 1195(B)Taraxacum officinale56.10 See Like a Bee To normal human vision, a dandelion appearssolid yellow. Ultraviolet photography reveals the patterns that attract beesto the region of the flower where pollen and nectar will be found. Thesepatterns are invisible to humans and birds.Yucca filamentosa Tegeticula yuccasellaThis female moth is laying eggs inthe yucca’s ovary. Her anatomy isadapted to the plant’s shape.The female moth collectsand stores pollen grainsin specialized mouthparts.56.11 Pistil-PackingMama Yucca flowersare pollinated only byyucca moths, and the larvaeof yucca moths feedonly on the seeds ofyucca plants. The mothTegeticula yuccasella isthe exclusive pollinator ofthe Yucca filamentosa.flower’s developing seeds. Neither of these species can reproducein the absence of the other.Plants and frugivores exchange food for seed transportMany animals that eat fruits provide a valuable service to theplants that produce them by dispersing seeds. Seed dispersalby animals offers plants the advantage of delivery to potentialgermination sites and comes with the bonus of organic fertilizerfor the seeds. Interactions between plants and frugivores,however, are not always reciprocal; in many cases, one partybenefits more than the other. Whereas the frugivore is paid “inadvance” for transportation services, the seeds may never reachan appropriate destination for germination (your windshield,for example, will not do). From the plant’s perspective, a partnershipwith frugivores requires a delicate balance between discouragingfrugivores from eating fruits before the seeds arecapable of germinating and attracting them when the seeds areready. In addition, the plant must protect the seeds from destructionin the frugivore’s digestive tract and defend themagainst inappropriate consumers that damage the seeds or failto disperse them at all.The chemical process of fruit ripening ensures that fruits aremost attractive to frugivores when the seeds are mature andready for dispersal. In many fruits, ripening is accompanied bya decrease in organic acids, which make many unripe fruits sour.Color changes, which result from loss of chlorophyll and the accumulationof other pigments (the conversion of peppers fromgreen to red during ripening is an example), have enormous signalvalue to many frugivores. Green, unripe fruits are generallydifficult for vertebrate frugivores to see against green foliage;red and bicolored red and black fruits contrast with foliage. Fruitsoftens as it ripens to allow for gentle processing by the frugivoreand rapid passage through its gut. Another conspicuouschange in ripening fruits is an increase in sugar content—the “reward”most sought by frugivores. Seed coats, fruit pulp, and epidermismay all contain secondary chemicals designed to discourageinappropriate frugivores from consuming the fruit.Because of the often asymmetrical nature of the mutualismbetween frugivores and plants, relatively few highly specializedfrugivores exist. One apparently reciprocal interaction isbetween mistletoes—parasitic plants that grow on trees—andthe mistletoe birds that serve as the plants’ primary dispersalagents in Asia and Australia (Figure 56.12). These birds dinelargely on the fleshy berries of mistletoe. The seeds, coveredwith a gluelike outer coat, experience little enzymatic or mechanicaldamage as they pass through the thin-walled guts ofthe birds that swallow them. When the seeds are voided withthe bird’s droppings, the sticky outer coat causes the seeds toadhere to the bird’s vent feathers, prompting it to wipe its bottomacross the tree branch on which it is perched. Once the seedis wiped on the branch, the gluey coat keeps it there—in an ideallocation for a mistletoe seed to germinate.Some mutualistic partners exchange foodfor care or transportSome organisms, such as the leaf-cutter ants described at theopening of this chapter, get their food by “farming” fungus.Fungus farming has been documented in a wide variety ofspecies, including bark beetles, termites, and even a snail. Inmost cases, the farmers provide housing, nutrition, and care forthe fungal partner; the fungal species, in turn, provides food forthe host. The fungus produces enzymes that can degrade plantproteins and cellulose, converting plant materials that the farmerscannot digest for themselves into an edible form.Over the past 50 years, one fungus farmer, the southern pinebark beetle (Dendroctonus frontalis), has destroyed over a billiondollars’ worth of pine forests in the southeastern United States(Figure 56.13). The beetle owes much of its efficiency to its mutualisticpartners. Masses of adult beetles attack a pine tree at once,overwhelming the tree’s ability to defend itself (the tree’s defenseis to release large quantities of resin under pressure to force outthe beetles). The beetles then excavate a series of galleries throughthe vascular tissue underneath the bark, in which females lay theireggs. Female beetles also carry spores of their partner fungus intothe galleries. The fungus grows on and breaks down the gallerywalls; the beetles feed directly on the fungus and the partially digestedwood. The beetles also transport a bacterium that producesan antibiotic to keep harmful bacteria from attaching the fungus.This insect–fungus–bacteria partnership can overcome the trees’antiherbivore defenses, to their mutual benefit.Some mutualistic partners exchange foodor housing for defenseSome plants are not only resources, they are also mutualistic partnersfor insects. The best-known of these interactions is that betweenants and acacia trees in Central America. In 1874, inNicaragua, the naturalist Thomas Belt observed a peculiar inter-1196 CHAPTER 56 | SPECIES INTERACTIONS AND COEVOLUTIONDicaeum hirundinaceum56.12 A Frugivore Plants and Fertilizes A Seed at the Same TimeAfter a mistletoe bird eats the fruit of the parasitic mistletoe plant, theseeds inside the fruit pass through the bird’s digestive tract intact. As theseeds are voided, their sticky outer coat makes them stick to the bird’sfeathers. As the bird wipes itself clean on a branch, the seed sticks to thebranch, where it germinates.action between bull’s horn acacia (Acacia cornigera) and Pseudomyrmexants, known as acacia ants because they are found onlyin association with acacias. Bull’s horn acacias have enlarged hollowthorns in which the ants build nests. The trees produce nectarin specialized extrafloral structures and modified leaflet tipsthat are rich in oil and protein, on which the ants feed. These structureshave no apparent purpose other than providing food for ants.Belt suggested that the notoriously aggressive acacia ants defendthe plants against their herbivores and competitors in exchangefor food and shelter. But his idea was not tested untilDaniel Janzen conducted an experiment in 1966. By removingants from some acacias with insecticide, Janzen demonstratedthat trees without ants suffered a reduction in growth and anincrease in mortality (Figure 56.14). Ants also clipped weedsfrom around the base of the plants, presumably reducing competitionfor nutrients.(A) Dendroctonus frontalis 56.3 | HOW DO MUTUALISTIC INTERACTIONS EVOLVE? 1197(C)(B)Galleriesin the barkvasculartissueCONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE56.14 Are Ants and Acacias Mutualists?Bull’s horn acacia trees (Acacia cornigera) grow numerousstructures that provide food and shelter for ants of the genusPseudomyrmex (acacia ants). Daniel Janzen’s experimentsdemonstrated that the trees benefit greatly from their associationwith these ants, and that the energy expended in growing antattractivestructures is repaid with increased growth and survival.HYPOTHESIS Acacia cornigera trees deprived of their Pseudomyrmexant populations will not thrive incomparison with trees populated by ant colonies.Pseudomyrmex ants provide substantialsurvival benefits to Acacia cornigera trees.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSTrees surviving for10 months (%)AntspresentAntsabsent200406080100Growth increments over10 months (cm)AntspresentAntsabsent102030405060708001. Define a population of A. cornigera trees;designate some of them as untreated controlsand the rest as experiment subjects.2. Fumigate the experimental A. cornigera treeswith insecticide to eliminate all Pseudomyrmexants.3. Apply Tanglefoot® (a sticky material) to the baseof the fumigated experimental trees to preventthe ants from recolonizing them.4. Record the survival and growth rates of thetrees in both groups over a 10-month period.After 10 months, control trees (with ants) hadconsiderably higher survival rates and greatergrowth than did trees without ant populations.The “bull’s horns” of these Acaciatrees are enlarged, hollow thornsin which the ants build nests.56.13 A Mutualistic Interaction Brings Death to Pine Trees (A)The southern pine bark beetle has a mutualistic relationship with a fungus,which it “farms” within the vascular tissue of pine trees. (B) The bark beetleexcavates galleries inside the trees’ vascular tissue. Here they lay eggsand farm fungus; the fungus overcomes the trees’ defenses against thebeetle and provides nutrition for the larvae. (C) Masses of bark beetlesoverwhelm pine forests, resulting in widespread death of pine trees.GO TO Animated Tutorial 56.1 • MutualismyourBioPortal.com56.3 RECAPMutualistic interactions involve an exchange ofbenefits. Most plants rely on mutualisms with mobileanimals for fertilization and seed dispersal.• Give examples of benefits that are exchanged in atleast two mutualisms between plants and animals.• What three features are required by a plant–pollinatormutualism? See p. 1194• How are pollinator-plant interactions different fromfrugivore-fruit interactions? See pp. 1194–1195• Describe some adaptations in plants that help tomaintain the balance in their relationships withfrugivores. See p. 1196From our discussion of interactions between species that benefitboth, we move to a type of interaction that benefits neither: competition.This type of interaction is widespread because it can arisewherever two or more species require the same resources.What Are the Outcomes 56.4 of Competition?The antagonistic interactions can be quite attention-getting; thescene of a lion stalking a gazelle is almost emblematic of theAfrican savanna. But at the same time a predator is interactingwith its prey, it may also be interacting with other predators thathunt the same prey species. Lions are not the only predators ofgazelles; cheetahs, hyenas, and even crocodiles hunt and killgazelles, potentially reducing the supply available for lions.Whenever any resource is not sufficiently abundant to meetthe needs of all the organisms with an interest in that resource,organisms must compete with one another to gain enough ofthat resource to survive. Competition not only influences theevolution of species, but also plays an important role in determiningthe structure and composition of communities, as wewill see in the next chapter.Competition is widespread because all species shareresourcesVirtually no species enjoys exclusive access to any given resource;the vast majority must share at least some resources withother species. As we saw in Section 55.3, populations do notgrow indefinitely, largely because resources are limited. In theabsence of sufficient resources, individuals in the populationcompete for those resources. Such intraspecific competition—competition among individuals of the same species—may resultin reduced growth and reproductive rates for some individuals,may exclude some individuals from better habitats, andmay cause the deaths of others. Interspecific competition—competitionamong individuals of different species—affects individualsin much the same way. In addition, it can influence thepersistence and evolution of species.The principle of competitive exclusion holds that no two speciescan long coexist sharing the same limiting resource. If onespecies can prevent all members of another species from utilizinga resource, the inferior competitor may go locally extinct,a result called competitive exclusion. In other cases, selectionpressures resulting from interspecific competition cause changesin the ways in which the competing species use the limitingresource. If those changes allow them to coexist, the result iscalled resource partitioning.Whether it is interspecific or intraspecific, competition occursby two major mechanisms. Interference competition occurswhen a competitor interferes with another competitor’s accessto a limiting resource. Exploitation competition occurs when alimiting resource is available to all competitors and the outcomeof competition depends on the relative efficiency with whichthe competitors use up the resource.Interference competition may restrict habitat useInterference competition can take many forms. Agraphic exampleinvolves the desert ant Conomyrma bicolor and the honeypotant Myrmecocystus mexicanus. These two ant species occupy thesame type of habitat—arid areas containing little vegetation—and feed on similar foods—the sugary excretions of aphids andother sap-feeding insects and occasional arthropods, none ofwhich is in great supply. When C. bicolor workers find the entranceof a honeypot ant nest, they pick up small stones in theirmandibles, carry them to the rim of the nest opening, and dropthem down the hole—up to 200 stones in a 5-minute interval.This activity is enough to stop the honeypot ants from goingout foraging. Some honeypot ant colonies, under constant stonedroppingattack for several weeks, may be almost entirely deprivedof food.Even microorganisms interfere with one another’s use of resources.In the highly structured environment of the rhizosphere,or “root-world,” of the soil, competitive interactions canbe locally intense. Many soil bacteria produce substances thatsubdue their microbial competitors. Actinomycetes, for example,produce chemicals that interfere with essentially everylife process in a bacterium. Many of the chemicals these remarkablywell-defended microbes produce to defeat their competitorsare used as antibiotics by mutualistic partners, such asthe bark beetles described in Section 56.3, as well as in humanpharmacology.Exploitation competition may lead to coexistenceExploitation competition may lead to coexistence, provided thatthe species relying on the same resource evolve ways to divideup, or partition, the resource. Resource partitioning can leadto the formation of guilds: groups of species that exploit thesame resource, but in slightly different ways, making the resourceless likely to be preempted. For example, in many RockyMountain communities, at least three species of bees consumethe nectar of the shindagger agave (Agave schottii). The three beespecies differ in where and when they collect shindagger nectar.Honey bees tend to forage in places with the greatest num-1198 CHAPTER 56 | SPECIES INTERACTIONS AND COEVOLUTIONbers of shindagger flowers, bumble bees in places with intermediatenumbers of flowers, and carpenter bees where flowersare few and far between. Honey bees also tend to be most activewhen nectar output is greatest. With their larger nests andgreater numbers of offspring to support, honey bees requiregreater efficiency and greater energy intake. Foraging sites thatare not worth their while are left to the other bees.Sometimes organisms respond to competition by leaving theircompetitors behind and finding new resources. Robert Dennoexamined a guild of seven sap-sucking insects called planthoppersliving on salt marsh grass in marshes in New Jersey. Six ofthe seven species partition the resource by feeding on differentparts of the plant or by feeding at different times during the season.All but one of the species are wingless and cannot fly. Wheneverconditions become crowded in a particular patch of saltmarsh grass, the seventh species—the only one with functionalwings—flies away to find a new patch in which to feed.Sometimes individuals within a species display different behaviorsor morphologies depending on whether they are competingfor resources with another species. Darwin remarked inThe Origin of Species that “Natural Selection leads to divergenceof character; for more living beings can be supported on the samearea the more they diverge in structure, habits, and constitutions.”This “divergence of character,” today called characterdisplacement, is most dramatic in cases in which the morphologicalattributes of a species vary depending on the presence orabsence of a competitor. In some of the islands of the Galápagosarchipelago, certain cactus species are pollinated exclusivelyby finches (Figure 56.15). On other islands, a carpenter bee (Xylocopadarwinii) competes with the finches for cactus nectar; thebirds consequently feed more heavily on seeds and insects. Onthe islands where bees are absent, finches feed on nectar moreoften, and have significantly smaller wingspans, than finches onislands where they share cacti with bees. On the bee-free islands,a smaller wingspan means a smaller body size, which allows thebirds to reach the nectar of the cactus flowers more easily.Species may compete indirectly for a resourceSpecies may compete indirectly for a resource even when theyare not present in the same habitat at the same time. Sometimesa species so alters the quality of a resource that it is renderedless usable by other species that may encounter it afterward. Forexample, feeding by sap-sucking leafhoppers on potato plantsearly in the growing season can cause leaf curling and chlorosis(loss of chlorophyll); potato beetles that consume these damagedleaves later in the growing season suffer reduced growthand survival rates. Even though these two herbivores do notfeed at the same time, one species influences the use of theshared food resource by its competitor.Consumers may influence the outcome of competitionIndirect competition can also result when two species share acommon predator. For example, the parasitoid wasp Venturiacanescens is a consumer of two different species of caterpillars thatinfest stored food products such as flour: the Indianmeal mothcaterpillar (Plodia interpunctella) and the Mediterranean flourmoth caterpillar (Ephestia kuehniella). The two species can coexistin a flour bin, but when the wasp is present it preferentiallyattacks and kills the flour moth caterpillars. Thus, in the presenceof the wasp, the competitive balance between the two caterpillarspecies is altered in the meal moth’s favor. This type of competitionis indirect because the outcome of competition depends noton how the two competitors utilize the shared resource, but onhow the two competitors interact with a shared predator.Competition may determine a species’ nicheCompetition is important in determining where a species canbe found. A species’ niche is the set of physical and biologicalconditions it requires to survive, grow, and reproduce. Thus a56.4 | WHAT ARE THE OUTCOMES OF COMPETITION? 1199Geospiza fuliginosa Xylocopa darwinii on Opuntia flower56.15 Competition with Carpenter Bees Influences FinchMorphology On islands in the Galápagos archipelago where finchesare the sole pollinators of cactus flowers, a small wingspan increasestheir ability to negotiate the flowers. On islands where carpenter beescompete with finches for cactus nectar, the birds have a larger wingspanand can also feed on other foods.species’ niche is partly defined by the resources available in theenvironment. Although a species might be physiologically ableto live under a wide range of resource conditions, competitorsmay restrict its use of resources in a particular location. Thusevery species has a fundamental niche, defined by its physiologicalcapabilities, and a realized niche, defined by interactionswith other species.Two species of barnacles, the rock barnacle (Semibalanus balanoides)and Poll’s stellate barnacle (Chthamalus stellatus), competefor space on the rocky shorelines of the North AtlanticOcean (Figure 56.16). The planktonic larvae of both species settlein the intertidal zone and metamorphose into sessile adults.The smaller stellate barnacles generally live higher at higherlevels in the intertidal zone, where they face longer periods ofexposure and desiccation (drying out) than do rock barnacles.There is little overlap between the areas occupied by adults ofthe two species. What explains their distinct distributions in theintertidal zone?In a famous study conducted 50 years ago, Joseph Connellexperimentally removed one or the other species from its characteristiczone and observed the response of the other species.Stellate barnacle larvae normally settle in large numbersthroughout much of the intertidal zone, including the lower levelswhere rock barnacles are found, but they thrived at thoselower levels only when rock barnacles were not present. Therock barnacles grow so fast that they smother, crush, or undercutthe stellate barnacle larvae. In contrast, removing stellatebarnacles from their spots higher in the intertidal zone did notlead to their replacement by rock barnacles; the rock barnaclesare less tolerant of desiccation and fail to thrive there even whenstellate barnacles are not around. The result of the competitiveinteraction between the two species is a pattern of intertidal zonation,with stellate barnacles restricted in their distribution bycompetition and rock barnacles restricted in their distributionby their physiological limitations.56.4 RECAPCompetition occurs when two or more speciesrequire a resource that is in limited supply. No twospecies can long coexist sharing a limiting resource.The outcome of competition may be competitive exclusion,in the form of local extinction, or coexistence,in the form of resource partitioning or characterdisplacement.• How does exploitation competition differ from interferencecompetition? See pp. 1198–1199• How can competition lead to character displacement?See p. 1199 and Figure 56.15• Explain the difference between an organism’s fundamentalniche and its realized niche. See pp.1199–1200 and Figure 56.16The study of interactions among the species in a community isa large part of community ecology—the topic of the next chapter.Every kind of interaction we have studied in this chapter influencesthe nature and structure of communities. Competitionhelps determine which species persist and which go extinct, aswell as dictating how many different species can be supportedby a particular resource. Similarly, antagonistic interactions haveimportant effects on the distribution and abundance of consumerand resource species, and the presence of mutualisticpartners may dictate whether a particular species can exist ina particular community.1200 CHAPTER 56 | SPECIES INTERACTIONS AND COEVOLUTIONStellate barnacles are moreresistant to desiccation, butare outcompeted by rockbarnacles lower in theintertidal zone.There is little overlap inthe distribution of adultsof the two species.Rock barnacles can live overa broad range of depths, butare more sensitive todesiccation than stellatebarnacles.Springhigh tideLarvalsettlementzone(potentialadultdistribution)ActualadultdistributionKilled bydesiccationLarvalsettlementzone(potentialadultdistribution)ActualadultdistributionKilled bydesiccationSpringlow tideMeantidallevelRock barnacles(Semibalanus balanoides)Stellate barnacles(Chthamalus stellatus)56.16 Interspecific Competition CanRestrict Range Interspecific competitionwith rock barnacles (brown bars) restrictsstellate barnacles to a smaller portion of theintertidal zone (light blue bar) than theycould otherwise occupy (their potentialrange; long, darker blue bar).
56.1 What Types of Interactions Do Ecologists Study?• Species interactions can be grouped into five categories.Antagonistic interactions benefit a consumer while harmingthe species that is consumed. A mutualism benefits both participants,whereas competition harms both. Commensal interactionsbenefit one participant with no effect on the other; amensalinteractions have no effect on one participant but harm theother. Review Figure 56.1, WEB ACTIVITY 56.1• The evolution of an adaptation in one species may lead to theevolution of an adaptation in a species with which it interacts, aprocess known as reciprocal adaptation or coevolution. Aseries of reciprocal adaptations can lead to a coevolutionaryarms race.56.2 How Do Antagonistic Interactions Evolve?• Chemically defended animals often advertise their toxicity withaposematism, or warning coloration. Review Figure 56.4• In Batesian mimicry, a palatable species mimics an unpalatablespecies. In Müllerian mimicry, two or more unpalatable speciesconverge to resemble one another. Review Figure 56.5• Some prey species avoid detection by means such as crypsis orhomotypy. Others defend themselves by physical or chemicalmeans. Review Figure 56.6• Secondary metabolites are the principal defenses used byplants against herbivores, but many plants have physicaldefenses as well. Many herbivores have evolved resistance toplant secondary metabolites, and some have incorporatedthem into their own defenses against predators.• The hosts of pathogenic microparasites fall into three classes:susceptible, infected, and recovered (and thus, in many cases,immune to another infection). Ectoparasites are less intimatelyassociated with their hosts than are microparasites but can neverthelessaffect host fitness.56.3 How Do Mutualistic Interactions Evolve?• Mutualistic interactions involve an exchange of benefits. Manymutualisms arise in environments where resources are in shortsupply.• Reciprocal adaptations are most likely to arise when an increasein dependency on a partner provides an increase in the benefitsrealized from the interaction.• Many mutualisms between plants and mobile animals involvean exchange of food for transport. In plant–pollinator interactions,animals that collect and transport pollen are rewardedwith pollen, nectar, or other food rewards.• Broad suites of floral characteristics that are attractive to certaintypes of pollinators exemplify diffuse coevolution. Someplant–pollinator mutualisms, however, are much more specificand exclusive. Review Table 56.1 and Figure 56.11• Plants that depend on frugivores for seed dispersal must balancediscouraging frugivores from eating fruits before theseeds are mature, attracting frugivores when the seeds aremature, and protecting the seeds from destruction in an animal’sdigestive tract.• Some insects extract energy from plants by “farming” fungalspecies that possess the enzymes needed to digest plant material.Other mutualisms involve an exchange of food or housingfor defense. Review Figure 56.13 and 56.14, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 56.156.4 What Are the Outcomes of Competition?• Competition occurs whenever a resource is not sufficient tomeet the needs of all individuals with an interest in thatresource.• Competition may result in local extinction of the inferior competitor,an outcome called competitive exclusion. Alternatively,selection pressures resulting from competition may change theways in which different species use a limiting resource, an outcomecalled resource partitioning.• Interference competition occurs when an individual interfereswith a competitor’s access to a limiting resource. Exploitationcompetition occurs when a limiting resource is available to allcompetitors and the outcome depends on the relative efficiencywith which competitors use up the resource.• Competition may lead to character displacement, in whichmorphological attributes of a species vary geographicallydepending on whether a competitor is present or absent.Review Figure 56.15• A species’ niche is the set of physical and biological conditionsit requires to persist. Although a species may be able to persistunder a wide range of resource conditions (its fundamentalniche), competitors may restrict its use of resources in a particularlocation (its realized niche). Review Figure 56.16