The tsunami of December 26, 2004, struck the coastaltown of Kalmunai, Sri Lanka, with such force that 4-month-old Abilass Jeyarajah was torn from hismother’s arms and swept away. Hours later, while his parentsdesperately searched the devastated town, their tinyson washed up on the beach a kilometer away, alive. A localschoolteacher found him and brought him to the hospital—the eighty-first patient admitted that day. The hospitalwas overwhelmed with 1,000 dead bodies, many ofthem children. Since Abilass was alive and healthy, he wasdubbed “Baby 81, the miracle baby” and became an instantcelebrity among the staff as they went about theirgrim duties of caring for the injured and dying.Meanwhile, the parents kept looking. Two days later,they met the schoolteacher, who told them about thebaby he had found. Rushing to the hospital, the Jeyarajahswere elated to find their son, but were in for a rudeshock. Eight other couples who had also lost infants wereclaiming Baby 81 as theirs. The baby remained in the hospitalwhile the case went to court.Judge M. P. Mohaideen faced a situation not unlikeone faced by King Solomon 3,000 years ago, who wasasked to decide which of two women was the mother ofan infant. Solomon’s method of determining parentage istold in a famous biblical passage—he ordered the babycut in two, and the real mother indicated that she wouldrather give the baby away than have the baby killed. TheSri Lankan judge had a different method: he called in molecularbiologists.With 6 billion base pairs of DNA packaged in 46 chromosomes,each one of us is unique. Although our proteincodingsequences are similar (after all, our phenotypes aresimilar), only 1.5 percent of the DNA in the humangenome actually codes for proteins. The eukaryoticgenome contains many repeated sequences, and the repeatfrequencies may differ between individuals, offeringone way to differentiate one individual from another. Abase pair at a particular site may also vary between individuals,due to DNA replication errors or random muta-Baby 8115After the Tsunami In December of 2004, a tsunami originatingin the Indian Ocean struck a broad region that encompassedmany nations in Southeast Asia. The result was anunprecedented humanitarian disaster that left almost a quarterof a million people dead and many more homeless.15.1 What Are Mutations?In Chapter 12, we described mutations as inherited changes ingenes, and we saw that different alleles may produce differentphenotypes (short pea plants versus tall, for example). Now thatwe understand the chemical nature of genes and how they areexpressed as phenotypes (in particular, proteins) we can returnto the concept of mutations for a more specific definition. Wecan now state that mutations are changes in the nucleotide sequenceof DNA that are passed on from one cell, or organism,to another.As an example of just one cause of mutations, recall fromChapter 13 that DNA polymerases make errors. Repair systemssuch as proofreading are in place to correct them. Butsome errors escape being corrected and are passed on to thedaughter cells.Mutations in multicellular organisms can be divided into twotypes:• Somatic mutations are those that occur in somatic (body)cells. These mutations are passed on to the daughter cellsduring mitosis, and to the offspring of those cells in turn,but are not passed on to sexually produced offspring. Forexample, a mutation in a single human skin cell could resultin a patch of skin cells that all have the same mutation,but it would not be passed on to the person’s children.• Germ line mutations are those that occur in the cells of thegerm line—the specialized cells that give rise to gametes. Agamete with the mutation passes it on to a new organism atfertilization.In either case, the mutations may or may not have phenotypiceffects.Mutations have different phenotypic effectsPhenotypically, we can understand mutations in terms of theireffects on proteins and their function (Figure 15.1).• Silent mutations do not affect protein function. They can bemutations in noncoding DNA, such as the repeat sequencesthat were used to identify Baby 81 in the opening story ofthis chapter. Or they can be in the coding portion of DNAbut not have any effect on the protein.• Loss of function mutations affect protein function. Thesemutations may lead to nonfunctional proteins that nolonger work as structural proteins or enzymes. They almostIN THIS CHAPTER we will discuss the nature and detectionof mutations at the molecular and chromosomal levels.We will describe how abnormal proteins can cause humangenetic diseases, and how these diseases and thealleles that produce them can be detected. Finally, we’ll seehow this knowledge of mutations has been applied in thedevelopment of new treatments.tions. Both of these types of differences are mutations,defined as inherited changes in DNA.It is now possible to analyze these differences in DNAsequences (amplified by PCR) to identify people, in aprocess called DNA fingerprinting. The most commonDNA fingerprinting technique used today involves thedetection of variations in repeat sequences at differentloci throughout the genome. When DNA samples fromthe nine sets of contesting parents were analyzed andcompared with a sample from Baby 81, only one pair ofparents carried sequences that were the same as thoseof the baby. On February 14, 2005, the judge ruled thatthe Jeyarajahs were the biological parents, and Baby 81got his real name and parents back.CHAPTER OUTLINE15.1 What Are Mutations?15.2 How Are DNA Molecules and Mutations Analyzed?15.3 How Do Defective Proteins Lead to Diseases?15.4 What DNA Changes Lead to Genetic Diseases?15.5 How Is Genetic Screening Used to DetectDiseases?15.6 How Are Genetic Diseases Treated?Baby 81 Abilass Jeyarajah survived the tsunami and wasreunited with his parents by court order after DNA testingproved that he is indeed their son.always show recessive inheritance in a diploid organism,because the presence of one wild-type allele will usually resultin sufficient functional protein for the cell. For example,the familiar wrinkled-seed allele in pea plants, originallystudied by Mendel (see Figure 12.3), is due to a mutation inthe gene SBE1 (starch branching enzyme). Normally theprotein made by this gene catalyzes the branching of starchas seeds develop. In the mutant, the SBE1 protein is notfunctional and that leads to osmotic changes, causing thewrinkled appearance.• A gain of function mutation leads to a protein with an alteredfunction. This kind of mutation usually shows dominantinheritance, because the presence of the wild-type alleledoes not prevent the mutant allele from functioning.This is common in cancer. For example, a receptor for agrowth factor normally requires binding of the growth factor(the ligand) to activate the cell division cycle. Somecancers are caused by mutations in genes coding for thesereceptors such that they no longer require stimulation bytheir particular ligands. The mutant receptors are “alwayson,” leading to the unrestrained cell proliferation that ischaracteristic of cancer cells.• Conditional mutations cause their phenotypes only undercertain restrictive conditions. They are not detectable underother, permissive conditions. Many conditional mutants aretemperature-sensitive; that is, they show the altered phenotypeonly at a certain temperature (recall the rabbit in Figure12.11). The mutant allele in such an organism may codefor an enzyme with an unstable tertiary structure that isaltered at the restrictive temperature.All mutations are alterations in the nucleotide sequenceof DNA. At the molecular level, we can divide mutationsinto two categories:• Apoint mutation results from the gain, loss, or substitutionof a single nucleotide. After DNA replication,the altered nucleotide becomes a mutant base pair. Ifa point mutation occurs within a gene (rather than ina noncoding DNA sequence), then one allele of thatgene (usually dominant) becomes another allele (usuallyrecessive).• Chromosomal mutations are more extensive thanpoint mutations. They may change the position or orientationof a DNA segment without actually removingany genetic information, or they may cause a segmentof DNA to be duplicated or irretrievably lost.Point mutations change single nucleotidesPoint mutations result from the addition or subtraction ofa nucleotide base, or the substitution of one base for another.Point mutations can arise due to errors in DNAreplication that are not corrected during proofreading,or they may be caused by environmental mutagens (substancesthat cause mutations, such as radiation or certainchemicals).Point mutations in the coding regions of DNA usually resultin changes in the mRNA, but changes in the mRNA may or maynot result in changes in the protein. Silent mutations by definitionhave no effect on the protein. Missense and nonsense mutationsresult in changes in the protein, some of them drastic(Figure 15.2).SILENT MUTATIONS Silent mutations have no effect on aminoacid sequences. This is because they are often found in noncodingDNA. Also, because of the redundancy of the genetic code,a base substitution in a coding region will not always causea change in the amino acid sequence when the altered mRNAis translated. Silent mutations are quite common, and theyresult in genetic diversity that is not expressed as phenotypicdifferences.MISSENSE MUTATIONS Some base substitutions change the geneticcode such that one amino acid substitutes for another in aprotein. These changes are called missense mutations. A specificexample of a missense mutation is the one that causessickle-cell disease, a serious heritable blood disorder. The diseaseoccurs in people who carry two copies of the sickle alleleof the gene for human β-globin (a subunit of hemoglobin, theprotein in human blood that carries oxygen). The sickle allelediffers from the normal allele by one base pair, resulting in apolypeptide that differs by one amino acid from the normal protein.Individuals who are homozygous for this recessive allelehave defective, sickle-shaped red blood cells (Figure 15.3).A missense mutation may result in a defective protein, butoften it has no effect on the protein’s function. For example, a318 CHAPTER 15 | GENE MUTATION AND MOLECULAR MEDICINEDNANormal allele:Codes for a functional proteinmRNAProteinMutationSilent mutation:Codes for a functional proteinLoss of function mutation:Codes for a nonfunctional proteinGain of function mutation:Codes for a protein with new function15.1 Mutation and Phenotype Mutations may or may not affect theprotein phenotype.hydrophilic amino acid may be substituted for another hydrophilicamino acid, so that the shape of the protein is unchanged.Or a missense mutation might reduce the functionalefficiency of a protein rather than completely inactivating it.Therefore, individuals homozygous for a missense mutation ina protein essential for life may survive if enough of the protein’sfunction is retained.In some cases, a gain of function missense mutation occurs.An example is a mutation in the human TP53 gene, which codesfor a tumor suppressor; that is, the TP53 protein normally functionsto inhibit the cell cycle. Certain mutations of the TP53 genecause this protein to no longer inhibit cell division, but to promoteit and prevent programmed cell death. So a TP53 proteinmutated in this way has a gain of oncogenic (cancer-causing)function.NONSENSE MUTATIONS A nonsense mutation involves a basesubstitution that causes a stop codon (for translation) to formsomewhere in the mRNA. A nonsense mutation results in ashortened protein, since translation does not proceed beyond15.1 | WHAT ARE MUTATIONS? 319T A C A C C G A G G G A C T A A T TA U G U G G C U C C C U G A U U A ADNAtemplatestrandMutation at position 12 in DNA: A instead of CResult: No change in amino acid sequencemRNASilent mutationPolypeptideTranscriptionTranslationMet Trp Leu Pro Asp Stop3′ 5′5′ 3′T A C A C C G A G G G C C A A A T TA U G U G G C U C C C G G U U U A ADNAtemplatestrandMutation at position 14 in DNA: A instead of TResult: Amino acid change at position 5; Val instead of AspmRNAMissense mutationPolypeptide Met Trp Leu Pro Val StopTranscriptionTranslation3′ 5′5′ 3′T A C A T C G A G G G C C T A A T TA U G U A G C U C C C G G A U U A ADNAtemplatestrandMutation at position 5 in DNA: T instead of CResult: Only one amino acid translated; no protein mademRNAPolypeptideNonsense mutationMet StopTranscriptionTranslation3′ 5′5′ 3′A C A C C G A G G G C C T A A T TT A C A C C G A G G G C C T A A T TT TA U G U G G A C U C C C G G A U U A ANormalDNAtemplatestrandMutantDNAtemplatestrandMutation by insertion of T between bases 6 and 7 in DNAResult: All amino acids changed beyond the point of insertionmRNAFrame-shift mutationPolypeptide Met Trp Thr Pro Gly LeuTranscriptionTranslation3′ 5′3′ 5′5′ 3′15.2 Point Mutations When they occur in the coding regions of proteins,single-base pair changes can cause missense, nonsense, or frameshiftmutations. Some of these mutations are silent, while others affectthe protein’s amino acid sequence.15.3 Sickled and Normal Red Blood Cells The misshapen redblood cell on the left is caused by a missense mutation and an incorrectamino acid in one of the two polypeptides of hemoglobin.the point where the mutation occurred. For example, a commonmutation causing thalassemia (another blood disorder affectinghemoglobin) in Mediterranean populations is a nonsense mutationthat drastically shortens the α-globin subunit. Shortenedproteins are usually not functional; however, if the nonsensemutation occurs near the 3′ end of the gene, it may have no effecton function.FRAME-SHIFT MUTATIONS Not all point mutations are base substitutions.Single or double bases may be inserted into or deletedfrom DNA. Such mutations in coding sequences are known asframe-shift mutations because they interfere with the translationof the genetic message by throwing it out of register. Thinkagain of codons as three-letter words, each corresponding to aparticular amino acid. Translation proceeds codon by codon; ifa base is added to the mRNA or subtracted from it, translationproceeds perfectly until it comes to the one-base insertion ordeletion. From that point on, the three-letter words in the geneticmessage are one letter out of register. In other words, suchmutations shift the “reading frame” of the message. Frame-shiftmutations almost always lead to the production of nonfunctionalproteins.Chromosomal mutations are extensive changesin the genetic materialChanges in single nucleotides are not the most dramatic changesthat can occur in the genetic material. Whole DNA moleculescan break and rejoin, grossly disrupting the sequence of geneticinformation. There are four types of such chromosomal mutations:deletions, duplications, inversions, and translocations. Thesemutations can be caused by severe damage to chromosomes resultingfrom mutagens or by drastic errors in chromosome replication.• Deletions result from the removal of part of the genetic material(Figure 15.4A). Like frame-shift point mutations, theirconsequences can be severe unless they affect noncodingDNAor unnecessary genes, or are masked by the presenceof normal alleles of the deleted genes in the same cell. It iseasy to imagine one mechanism that could produce deletions:a DNA molecule might break at two points and thetwo end pieces might rejoin, leaving out the DNA betweenthe breaks.• Duplications can be produced at the same time as deletions(Figure 15.4B). Aduplication would arise if homologouschromosomes broke at different positions and then reconnectedto the wrong partners. One of the two chromosomesproduced by this mechanism would lack a segment ofDNA(it would have a deletion), and the other would havetwo copies (a duplication) of the segment that was deletedfrom the first chromosome.• Inversions can also result from breaking and rejoining ofchromosomes. Asegment of DNA may be removed andreinserted into the same location in the chromosome, but“flipped” end over end so that it runs in the opposite direction(Figure 15.4C). If the break site includes part of a DNAsegment that codes for a protein, the resulting protein willbe drastically altered and almost certainly nonfunctional.• Translocations result when a segment of a chromosomebreaks off and is inserted into a different chromosome.Translocations may involve reciprocal exchanges of chromosomesegments, as in Figure 15.4D. Translocations oftenlead to duplications and deletions and may result in sterilityif normal chromosome pairing in meiosis cannot occur.Mutations can be spontaneous or inducedIt is useful to distinguish two types of mutations in terms oftheir causes:• Spontaneous mutations are permanent changes in the geneticmaterial that occur without any outside influence. Inother words, they occur simply because cellular processesare imperfect.• Induced mutations occur when some agent from outside thecell—a mutagen—causes a permanent change in DNA.320 CHAPTER 15 | GENE MUTATION AND MOLECULAR MEDICINEDuplication and deletion result when homologouschromosomes break at different points……and swapsegments.Inversion results when a broken segment isinserted in reverse order.Deletion is the loss of a chromosome segment.Reciprocal translocation results when nonhomologous chromosomesexchange segments.(lost)(A)(B)(C)(D)DGA B C D E F G A B E F GCA B C D E F G A B E F GA B C D E F G A B C D C D E FA B C D E F G A B E D C F GA B C D E F G A B L M N OH I J K L M N O H I J K C D E F G15.4 Chromosomal Mutations Chromosomes may break duringreplication, and parts of chromosomes may then rejoin incorrectly. Theletters on these chromosome illustrations represent large segments of thechromosomes. Each segment may include anywhere from zero to hundredsor thousands of genes.Spontaneous mutations may occur by several mechanisms:• The four nucleotide bases of DNA can have different structures.Each can exist in two different forms (called tautomers), oneof which is common and one rare. When a base temporarilyforms its rare tautomer, it can pair with the wrong base. Forexample, C normally pairs with G, but if C is in its rare tautomerat the time of DNA replication, it pairs with (andDNApolymerase will insert) an A. The result is a point mutation:G →A (Figure 15.5A and C).• Bases in DNA may change because of a chemical reaction—forexample, loss of an amino group in cytosine (a reactioncalled deamination). If this occurs in a DNA molecule, the errorwill usually be repaired. However, since the repairmechanism is not perfect, the altered nucleotide will sometimesremain during replication. Then, DNA polymerasewill add an A(which base-pairs with U) instead of G(which normally pairs with C).• DNA polymerase can make errors in replication (see Section13.4)—for example, inserting a T opposite a G. Most ofthese errors are repaired by the proofreading function ofthe replication complex, but some errors escape detectionand become permanent.• Meiosis is not perfect. Nondisjunction—failure of homologouschromosomes to separate during meiosis—can occur,leading to one too many or one too few chromosomes(aneuploidy; see Figure 11.21). Random chromosomebreakage and rejoining can produce deletions, duplications,inversions, or translocations.Induced mutations result from alterations of DNAby mutagens:• Some chemicals can alter the nucleotide bases. For example, nitrousacid (HNO2) and similar molecules can react with cytosineand convert it to uracil by deamination. More specifically,they convert an amino group on the cytosine (—NH2)into a keto group (—C==O). This alteration has the same resultas spontaneous deamination: instead of a G, DNApolymerase inserts an A(Figure 15.5B and C).• Some chemicals add groups to the bases. For instance, benzopyrene,a component of cigarette smoke, adds a large chemicalgroup to guanine, making it unavailable for base pairing.When DNA polymerase reaches such a modifiedguanine, it inserts any one of the four bases; of course,three-fourths of the time the inserted base will not be cytosine,and a mutation results.• Radiation damages the genetic material. Radiation can damageDNAin two ways. First, ionizing radiation (including Xrays, gamma rays, and radiation from unstable isotopes)produces highly reactive chemicals called free radicals. Freeradicals can change bases in DNA to forms that are not recognizedby DNA polymerase. Ionizing radiation can also15.1 | WHAT ARE MUTATIONS? 321A spontaneous or inducedmutation of C occurs.This C cannot hydrogenbondwith G but insteadpairs with A.This base cannotpair with G butinstead pairs with A.1The mutated C pairswith A instead of G.2Although the mutated C usuallyreverts to normal C, eitherspontaneously or by DNA repairmechanisms…3…the "mispaired" Aremains, propagatinga mutated sequence.4HOHHHCytosine(common tautomer)Original sequenceNewly replicatedstrandsTemplatestrandTemplatestrandReplicationis normalMutated sequenceCytosine(rare tautomer)Deaminated formof cytosine (= uracil)Deamination byN NCNOHC*N NNOHHCN NNOUN NOHNO2(A) A spontaneous mutation(C) The consequences of either mutation(B) An induced mutationAATGCTGTTACGACAATGCTGTTACGACAATGCTGTTACAAC AATGTTGTTACAACAATGCTGTTACGACAATGCTGTTACGAC15.5 Spontaneous and Induced Mutations (A) All four nitrogenousbases in DNA exist in both a prevalent (common) form and a rare form.When a base spontaneously forms its rare tautomer, it can pair with a differentbase. (B) Mutagens such as nitrous acid can induce changes in thebases. (C) The results of both spontaneous and induced mutations arepermanent changes in the DNA sequence following replication.break the sugar–phosphate backbone of DNA, causingchromosomal abnormalities. Second, ultraviolet radiation(from the sun or a tanning lamp) can damage DNA in anotherway. It is absorbed by thymine, causing it to form covalentbonds with adjacent bases. This, too, plays havocwith DNA replication by distorting the double helix.Some base pairs are more vulnerable than othersto mutationDNA sequencing has revealed that mutations occur most oftenat certain base pairs. These “hot spots” are often locatedwhere cytosine has been methylated to 5-methylcytosine.As we discussed above, unmethylated cytosine can lose itsamino group, either spontaneously or because of a chemicalmutagen, to form uracil (see Figure 15.5B). This type of error isusually detected by the cell and repaired. The DNA repairmechanism recognizes uracil as inappropriate for DNA (sinceuracil occurs only in RNA) and replaces it with cytosine.However, when 5-methylcytosine loses its amino group, theproduct is thymine, a natural base for DNA. The DNA repairmechanism ignores this thymine (Figure 15.6). During replication,however, the mismatch repair mechanism recognizes thatG-T is a mismatched pair, although it cannot tell which basewas incorrectly inserted into the sequence. So half of the timeit matches a new C to the G, but the other half of the time itmatches a new A to the T, resulting in a mutation. It is notsurprising that 5-methylcytosine residues are hot spots formutation.Mutagens can be natural or artificialMany people associate mutagens with materials made by humans,but just as there are many human-made chemicals thatcause mutations, there are also many mutagenic substances thatoccur naturally. Plants (and to a lesser extent animals) makethousands of small molecules that they use for their own purposes,such as defense against pathogens (see Chapter 39). Someof these are mutagenic and potentially carcinogenic. Examplesof human-made mutagens are nitrites, which are used to preservemeats. Once in mammals, nitrites get convertedby the smooth endoplasmic reticulum(ER) to nitrosamines, which are strongly mutagenicbecause they cause deamination of cytosine(see above). An example of a naturally occurringmutagen is aflatoxin, which is made by the moldAspergillus. When mammals ingest the mold, theaflatoxin is converted by the ER into a productthat, like benzopyrene from cigarette smoke,binds to guanine; this also causes mutations.Radiation can also be human-made or natural. Some of theisotopes made in nuclear reactors and nuclear bomb explosionsare certainly harmful. For example, extensive studies haveshown increased mutations in the survivors of the atom bombsdropped on Japan in 1945. You probably know that natural ultravioletradiation in sunlight also causes mutations, in this caseby affecting thymine and, to a lesser extent, other bases in DNA.Biochemists have estimated how much DNA damage occursin the human genome under normal circumstances: among thegenome’s 2.3 billion base pairs there are about 16,000 DNA-damagingevents per cell per day, of which 80 percent are repaired.Mutations have both benefits and costsWhat is the overall effect of mutation? For an organism, thereare benefits and costs.• Mutations are the raw material of evolution.Without mutation,there would be no evolution. As we will see in Part Seven ofthis book, mutation alone does not drive evolution, but itprovides the genetic diversity that makes natural selectionpossible. This diversity can be beneficial in two ways. First,a mutation in somatic cells may benefit the organism immediately.Second, a mutation in germ line cells may have noimmediate selective advantage to the organism but maycause a phenotypic change in offspring. If the environmentchanges in a later generation, that mutation may be advantageousand thus selected for under these conditions.• Germ line and somatic mutations can be harmful. Mutations ingerm line cells that get carried to the next generation are oftendeleterious, especially if the offspring are homozygousfor a harmful recessive allele. In their extreme form, suchmutations produce phenotypes that are lethal. Lethal mutationscan kill an organism during early development, or theorganism may die before maturity and reproduction.In Chapter 11 we described how genetic changes in somaticcells can lead to cancer. Typically these are mutations in oncogenes(the “gas pedal”) that result in the stimulation of cell division,or mutations in tumor suppressor genes (the “brakes”)that result in a lack of inhibition of cell division. These muta-322 CHAPTER 15 | GENE MUTATION AND MOLECULAR MEDICINEWhen 5-methylcytosine loses its amino group, thymine results.Since thymine is a normal DNA base, it is not removed.When DNA replicates, halfthe daughter DNA is mutantand half is normal.5-Methylcytosine ThymineReplication50%50%GGATCACTCCCTAGTGAGGGAT ACTCCCTA TGAGGGATTACTCCCTAATGAGGGATCACTCCCTAGTGAGOHHN NNCH3OOHN NCH3G15.6 5-Methylcytosine in DNA Is a “Hot Spot” for TMutations If cytosine has been methylated to 5-methylcytosine, the mutation is unlikely to be repairedand a C-G base pair is replaced with a T-A pair.tions can occur by either spontaneous or induced mutagenesis.While spontaneous mutagenesis is not in our control, we cancertainly try to avoid mutagenic substances and radiation. Notsurprisingly, many things that cause cancer (carcinogens) arealso mutagens. A good example is benzopyrene (discussedabove), which is found in coal tar, car exhaust fumes, and charbroiledfoods, as well as in cigarette smoke.A major environmental issue is the effect of both humanmadeand natural mutagens on public health. Identifying mutagensto which people are exposed, and estimating their riskfor both mutagenesis and carcinogenesis, is a major public policygoal. Here are two recent examples:• The Montreal Protocol is the only international environmentalagreement signed and adhered to by all nations. Itbans chlorofluorocarbons and other substances that causedepletion of the ozone layer in the upper atmosphere ofEarth. Such depletion can result in increased ultraviolet radiationreaching Earth’s surface. This would cause more somaticmutations which lead to skin cancer.• Bans on cigarette smoking have rapidly spread throughoutthe world. Cigarette smoking causes cancer due to increasedexposure of somatic cells in the lungs and throat tobenzopyrene and other carcinogens.15.1 RECAPMutations are alterations in the nucleotide sequenceof DNA. They may be changes in single nucleotidesor extensive rearrangements of chromosomes. Ifthey occur in somatic cells, they will be passed on todaughter cells; if they occur in germ line cells, theywill be passed on to offspring.• What are the various kinds of point mutations? See pp.318–320 and Figure 15.2• What distinguishes the various kinds of chromosomalmutations: deletions, duplications, inversions, andtranslocations? See p. 320 and Figure 15.4• Explain the difference between spontaneous and inducedmutagenesis. Give an example of each. See pp.320–322 and Figure 15.5• Why do many mutations involve G-C base pairs?See p. 322 and Figure 15.6We have seen that there are many different ways in which DNAcan be altered, in terms of both the types of changes and themechanisms by which they occur. We turn now to the ways thatbiologists detect mutations in DNA.How Are DNA Molecules and 15.2 Mutations Analyzed?Once biologists understood the connections between phenotypeand proteins, and between genes and DNA, they were facedwith the important challenge of precisely describing the specificDNA changes that lead to specific protein changes—an area ofresearch called molecular genetics. To begin this work, biologistsneeded tools to analyze DNA molecules for mutations. In thissection we will see how some of the numerous naturally occurringenzymes that cleave DNA have now become one of the mostimportant tools used in molecular genetics laboratories.Restriction enzymes cleave DNA at specific sequencesAll organisms, including bacteria, must have ways of dealingwith their enemies. As we saw in Section 13.1, bacteria are attackedby viruses called bacteriophage. These viruses inject theirgenetic material into the host cell and turn it into a virus-producingfactory, eventually killing the cell. Some bacteria defendthemselves against such invasions by producing restriction enzymes(also known as restriction endonucleases), which cut double-stranded DNA molecules—such as those injected by bacteriophage—into smaller, noninfectious fragments (Figure 15.7).These enzymes break the bonds of the DNA backbone betweenthe 3′ hydroxyl group of one nucleotide and the 5′ phosphategroup of the next nucleotide. This cutting process is called restrictiondigestion.There are many such restriction enzymes, each of whichcleaves DNA at a specific sequence of bases called a recognitionsequence or a restriction site. Most recognition sequences are4–6 base pairs long. The sequence is recognized through theprinciples of protein–DNA interactions (see Section 13.2). Thatis, the base pairs inside the DNA double helix vary slightly inshape, so that a particular short sequence of base pairs will fita specific three-dimensional structure on an enzyme.Why doesn’t a restriction enzyme cut the DNA of the bacterialcell that makes it? One way that the cell protects itself is bymodifying the restriction sites on its own DNA. Specific modifyingenzymes called methylases add methyl (—CH3) groups tocertain bases at the restriction sites on the host’s DNA after ithas been replicated. The methylation of the host’s bases makes15.2 | HOW ARE DNA MOLECULES AND MUTATIONS ANALYZED? 32321 A restriction enzyme cleavesthe incoming phage DNAat restriction sites.3 Methyl groups at the restriction sites blockthe restriction enzyme and protect thebacterial DNA from being cleaved.Other enzymes degrade the phageDNA into smaller fragments.Host DNABacterialhost cell15.7 Bacteria Fight Invading Viruses by Making RestrictionEnzymesthe recognition sequence unrecognizable to the restriction enzyme.But unmethylated phage DNA is efficiently recognizedand cleaved.Bacterial restriction enzymes can be isolated from the cellsthat make them and used as biochemical reagents in the laboratoryto give information about the nucleotide sequences ofDNAmolecules from other organisms. If DNA from any organismis incubated in a test tube with a restriction enzyme (alongwith buffers and salts that help the enzyme to function), thatDNAwill be cut wherever the restriction site occurs. Aspecificsequence of bases defines each restriction site. For example, theenzyme EcoRI (named after its source, a strain of the bacteriumE. coli) cuts DNA only where it encounters the following pairedsequence in the DNA double helix:Note that this sequence is palindromic, like the word “mom,”in that the opposite strands have the same sequences when theyare read from their 5′ ends. The EcoRI enzyme has two identicalactive sites on its two subunits, which cleave the two strandssimultaneously between the G and the Aof each strand.The EcoRI recognition sequence occurs, on average, aboutonce in every 4,000 base pairs in a typical prokaryotic genome,or about once per four prokaryotic genes. So EcoRI can chop alarge piece of DNA into smaller pieces containing, on average,just a few genes. Using EcoRI in the laboratory to cut smallgenomes, such as those of viruses that have tens of thousandsof base pairs, may result in a few fragments. For a huge eukaryoticchromosome with tens of millions of base pairs, a very largenumber of fragments will be created.Of course, “on average” does not mean that the enzyme cutsall stretches of DNA at regular intervals. For example, the EcoRIrecognition sequence does not occur even once in the 40,000base pairs of the T7 phage genome—a fact that is crucial to thesurvival of this virus, since its host is E. coli. Fortunately for E.coli, the EcoRI recognition sequence does appear in the DNAof other bacteriophage.Hundreds of restriction enzymes (all with unique recognitionsequences) have been purified from various microorganisms.In the laboratory, different restriction enzymes can be usedto cut samples of DNA from the same source. Thus restrictionenzymes can be used to cut a sample of DNA in many different,specific places. The fragments formed can be used to createa physical map of the intact DNA molecule. Before DNAsequencingtechnology became automated and widely available,this was the principal way that DNA from different organismswas mapped and characterized.Restriction enzyme digestion is used very widely today tomanipulate DNA in the laboratory, and to identify and analyzepoint mutations. Fragments of DNA from different organismscan be amplified using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR; seeSection 13.5). Even between closely related individuals, theseamplified fragments often contain variations in DNA sequences(due in most cases to silent mutations). If these variations affectrestriction sites, then digestion of the fragments with restrictionenzymes can be used to distinguish between the samples. Restrictionenzymes are also used to cut DNA for use in geneticengineering experiments, and in many other types of experimentsaimed at understanding how organisms function at themolecular level.Gel electrophoresis separates DNA fragmentsAfter a laboratory sample of DNA has been cut with a restrictionenzyme, the DNA is in fragments, which must be separatedto identify (map) where the cuts were made. Because the recognitionsequence does not occur at regular intervals, the fragmentsare not all the same size, and this property provides away to separate them from one another. Separating the fragmentsis necessary to determine the number and molecular sizes(in base pairs) of the fragments produced, or to identify and purifyan individual fragment for further analysis or for use inan experiment.A convenient way to separate or purify DNA fragments isby gel electrophoresis. Samples containing the fragments areplaced in wells at one end of a semisolid gel (usually made ofagarose or polyacrylamide polymers) and an electric field is appliedto the gel (Figure 15.8). Because of its phosphate groups,DNAis negatively charged at neutral pH; therefore, because oppositecharges attract, the DNA fragments move through thegel toward the positive end of the field. Because the spaces betweenthe polymers of the gel are small, small DNA moleculescan move through the gel faster than larger ones. Thus, DNAfragments of different sizes separate from one another and canbe detected with a dye. This gives us three types of information:• The number of fragments. The number of fragments producedby digestion of a DNA sample with a given restrictionenzyme depends on how many times that enzyme’srecognition sequence occurs in the sample. Thus gel electrophoresiscan provide some information about the presenceof specific DNA sequences in the DNA sample.• The sizes of the fragments. DNA fragments of known size areoften placed in one well of the gel to provide a standard forcomparison. This tells us how large the DNA fragments inthe other wells are. By comparing the fragment sizes obtainedwith two or more restriction enzymes, the locationsof their recognition sites relative to one another can beworked out (mapped).• The relative abundance of a fragment. In many experiments,the investigator is interested in how much DNA is present.The relative intensity of a band produced by a specific fragmentcan indicate the amount of that fragment.After separation on a gel, a fragment with a specific DNA sequencecan be revealed with a single-stranded DNA probe (aswe will see later in this chapter; see Figure 15.16). The gel regioncontaining the desired fragment (in size or sequence) can becut out as a lump of gel, and the pure DNA fragment can thenbe removed from the gel by diffusion into a small volume of water.This fragment can then be analyzed in terms of sequence oramplified and used experimentally.5′. . . GAATTC . . . 3′3′. . . CT TAAG . . . 5′324 CHAPTER 15 | GENE MUTATION AND MOLECULAR MEDICINEDNA fingerprinting uses restrictionanalysis and electrophoresisThe two methods we have just described—restriction digestion to cut DNA into fragmentsand gel electrophoresis to separatethem by size—are techniques used in DNAfingerprinting, which identifies individualsbased on their DNA profiles. DNA fingerprintingworks best with sequences that arehighly polymorphic—that is, sequences thathave multiple alleles (due to many point mutationsduring the evolution of the organism)and are therefore likely to be different in differentindividuals. Two types of polymorphismsare especially informative:• Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs;pronounced “snips”) are inherited variationsinvolving a single nucleotide base(so SNPs are point mutations). Thesepolymorphisms have been mapped formany organisms. If one parent is homozygousfor Aat a certain point on thegenome, and the other parent has a G atthat point, the offspring will be heterozygous:one chromosome will have Aatthat point and the other will have G. If aSNP occurs in a restriction enzymerecognition site, such that one variant isrecognized by the enzyme and the otherisn’t, then individuals can be distinguishedfrom one another by amplifyinga DNA fragment containing that sitefrom a sample of total DNA isolatedfrom each individual. The fragments arethen cut with the restriction enzyme andanalyzed by gel electrophoresis.• Short tandem repeats (STRs) are short,repetitive DNA sequences that occur sideby side on the chromosomes, usually inthe noncoding regions. These repeat patterns,which contain 1–5 base pairs, arealso inherited. For example, at a particularlocus on chromosome 15 there may bean STR of “AGG.” An individual may inheritan allele with six copies of the repeat(AGGAGGAGGAGGAGGAGG)from her mother and an allele with twocopies (AGGAGG) from her father.Again, PCR is used to amplify DNA fragmentscontaining these repeat sequences,and the fragments are distinguished bygel electrophoresis (Figure 15.9).The method of DNA fingerprinting used most commonly todayinvolves STR analysis. When several different STR loci, eachwith numerous alleles, are analyzed, an individual’s unique pat-15.2 | HOW ARE DNA MOLECULES AND MUTATIONS ANALYZED? 325TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE15.8 Separating Fragments of DNA by Gel ElectrophoresisA mixture of DNA fragments is placed in a gel and an electric field is applied acrossthe gel. The negatively charged DNA moves toward the positive end of the field,with smaller molecules moving faster than larger ones. After minutes to hours forseparation, the electric power is shut off and the separated fragments canbe analyzed.–+1 A gel is made up ofagarose polymersuspended in abuffer. It sits in achamber betweentwo electrodes.6 After enzymeincubation, eachsample is loadedinto one well inthe gel.7 As fragments of DNA move toward the positiveelectrode, shorter fragments move faster (andtherefore farther) than longer fragments.2 Depressions in the gel (wells)are filled with DNA solutions.3 Restriction enzyme 1cuts the DNA once,resulting in fragmentsA and B.4 Restriction enzyme 2cuts the DNA once,at a differentrestriction sequence.5 If both restrictionenzymes are used,two cuts are made inthe DNA.A E DA BEnzyme 1 Enzyme 2DNAsolutionEnzymes1 + 2C DBuffersolution1 2 1+ 2 1 2 1+ 2GelLongerfragmentsShorterD fragmentsCABDAEGO TO Animated Tutorial 15.1 • Separating Fragments of DNAby Gel ElectrophoresisyourBioPortal.comtern becomes apparent. The Federal Bureau of Investigation inthe United States uses 13 STR loci in its Combined DNA IndexSystem (CODIS) database.DNAfingerprinting can be used in forensics (crime investigation)to help prove the innocence or guilt of a suspect. It hasother uses, as well.A fascinating example demonstrates the use of DNA fingerprintingin the analysis of historical events. Three hundredyears of rule by the Romanov dynasty in Russia ended on July16, 1918, when Tsar Nicholas II, his wife, and their five childrenwere executed by a firing squad during the Communist revolution.A report that the bodies had been burned to ashes wasnever questioned until 1991, when a shallow grave with severalskeletons was discovered several miles from the presumed executionsite. DNA fingerprinting of bone fragments found inthis grave indicated that they came from an older man, awoman, and three female children, who all were clearly relatedto one another (Figure 15.10) and were also related to severalliving descendants of the Tsar. The accuracy and specificity ofthese methods gave historical and cultural closure to a majorevent in the twentieth century.The DNA barcode project aims to identifyall organisms on EarthOne of the most exciting aspects of DNA technology for biologistsis its potential to identify species, varieties, and even individualorganisms from their DNA. In order to repeat experimentsand report scientific results, it is essential that biologistsknow exactly what species or varieties they are studying. However,different organisms can sometimes look very much alikein nature. About 1.7 million species have been named and described,but about ten times that number probably have yet tobe identified. A proposal to use DNA technology to identifyknown species and detect the unknown ones has been endorsedby a large group of scientific organizations known as the Consortiumfor the Barcode of Life (CBOL).Evolutionary biologist Paul Hebert at the University ofGuelph in Ontario, Canada was walking down the aisle of a supermarketin 1998 when he noticed the barcodes on all the packagedfoods. This gave him an idea to identify each species witha “DNA barcode” that is based on a short sequence from a sin-326 CHAPTER 15 | GENE MUTATION AND MOLECULAR MEDICINEThere are two repetitivesequences between thetwo restriction sites.There are six repetitivesequences between thetwo restriction sites.Gel electrophoresisof parent’s DNAshows two alleles.Gel electrophoresisof offspring’s DNAshows a heterozygote.DNA has both parentalalleles (6 repeats,2 repeats).Mom DadOffspringMother’schromosomeDNAFather’schromosomeDNA15.9 DNA Fingerprinting with Short Tandem Repeats A particular STRlocus can be analyzed to determine the number of repeat sequences that wereinherited by an individual from each parent. The two alleles can be identified inan electrophoresis gel on the basis of their sizes. When several STR loci areanalyzed, the pattern can constitute a definitive identification of an individual.No remains exist forthese two children.These are the genotypesof three of the children.These arethe parentalgenotypes.Tsarina Alexandra Tsar Nicholas IISTR-1 15,i16 15,i16STR-2 8,i8 7,i10STR-3 3,i5 7,i7STR-4 12,i13 12,i12STR-5 32,i36 11,i3215,i168,i105,i712,i1311,i3215,i167,i85,i712,i1311,i3615,i168,i103,i712,i1332,i36STR-1STR-2STR-3STR-4STR-5Number of repeats15.10 DNA Fingerprinting of the Russian Royal Family The skeletalremains of Tsar Nicholas II, his wife Alexandra, and three of their childrenwere found in 1991 and subjected to DNA fingerprinting. Five STRswere tested. The results can be interpreted by looking at the inheritanceof alleles from each parent in the children. In STR-2, for example, the parentshad genotypes 8,8 (homozygous) and 7,10 (heterozygous). Thethree children all inherited type 8 from Alexandra and either type 7 or type10 from Nicholas.gle gene. The gene he chose is thecytochrome oxidase gene, a componentof the respiratory chain thatis present in most organisms. Becausethis gene mutates readily,there are many allelic differencesbetween species. A fragment of650–750 base pairs in this gene isbeing sequenced for all organisms,and so far sufficient variation hasbeen detected to make it diagnosticfor each species (Figure 15.11).Once the DNA of the targeted gene fragment has been sequencedfor all known species, a simple device for conductingfield analyses can be developed. The barcode project has the potentialto advance biological research on evolution, to trackspecies diversity in ecologically significant areas, to help identifynew species, and even to detect undesirable microbes orbioterrorism agents.15.2 RECAPLarge DNA molecules can be cut into smaller piecesby restriction digestion and then sorted by gel electrophoresis.PCR is used to amplify sequences of interestfrom complex samples. These techniques areused in DNA fingerprinting to analyze DNA polymorphismsfor the purpose of identifying individuals.Scientists hope to identify all species using DNAanalysis.• How does a restriction enzyme recognize a restrictionsite on DNA? See p. 323• How does gel electrophoresis separate DNA fragments?See p. 324 and Figure 15.8• What are STRs and how are they used to identify individuals?See pp. 325–326We have seen that molecular methods can be used to identifyindividuals because of mutations in their DNA. Many of theSTRs and SNPs used in these analyses do not occur in proteincodingregions, and so probably do not affect the phenotype.Nevertheless, they are mutations—inherited changes in theDNA. We now turn to mutations that affect phenotype, usinghumans as our model organism.How Do Defective Proteins Lead 15.3 to Diseases?The biochemistry that relates genotype (DNA) and phenotype(proteins) has been most completely described for model organisms,such as the prokaryote E. coli and the eukaryotes yeastand Drosophila. While the details vary, there is great similarity inthe fundamental processes among these forms of life. These similaritieshave permitted the application of knowledge and methodsdiscovered using these model organisms to the study of humanbiochemical genetics. Of particular interest are the effects ofmutations on human phenotypes, sometimes leading to diseases.Genetic mutations may make proteins dysfunctionalGenetic mutations are often expressed phenotypically as proteinsthat differ from normal (wild-type) proteins. Abnormalitiesin enzymes, receptor proteins, transport proteins, structuralproteins, and most of the other functional classes of proteinshave all been implicated in genetic diseases.DYSFUNCTIONAL ENZYMES In 1934, the urine of two mentally retardedyoung siblings was found to contain phenylpyruvic acid,an unusual by-product of the metabolism of the amino acidphenylalanine. It was not until two decades later, however, thatthe complex clinical phenotype of the disease that afflicted thesechildren, called phenylketonuria (PKU), was traced back to its molecularcause. The disease resulted from an abnormality in a singleenzyme, phenylalanine hydroxylase (Figure 15.12). This enzymenormally catalyzes the conversion of dietary phenylalanineto tyrosine, but it was not active in the livers of PKU patients.Lack of this conversion led to excess phenylalanine in the bloodand explained the accumulation of phenylpyruvic acid. Later,the amino acid sequence of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH)in normal people was compared with the amino acid sequences15.3 | HOW DO DEFECTIVE PROTEINS LEAD TO DISEASES? 3270333667 694332666695-bp region of cytochrome oxidase geneDNA barcodePCR, nucleotidesequencingDNA15.11 A DNA Barcode A 650- to 750-base-pair region of the cytochrome oxidasegene can be amplified by PCR from anyorganism and then sequenced. This knowledgeis used to make a bar code in whicheach of the four DNA bases is representedas a different color. Such a species barcodepermits accurate and rapid identification ofa particular species for experimental, ecologicalor evolutionary studies.from individuals with PKU. Many people with PKU had tryptophaninstead of arginine at position 408 of this long polypeptidechain of 452 amino acids (Table 15.1).The exact cause of mental retardation in PKU remains elusive,although, as we will see later in this chapter, it can be prevented.We can, however, understand why most people withPKU have light skin and hair color. The pigment melanin, whichis responsible for dark skin and hair, is made from tyrosine,which people with PKU cannot synthesize adequately.Hundreds of human genetic diseases that result from enzymeabnormalities have been discovered, many of which leadto mental retardation and premature death. Most of these diseasesare rare; PKU, for example, shows up in one out of every12,000 newborns. But these diseases are just the tip of the mutationiceberg. Some mutations result in amino acid changes thathave no obvious clinical effects. In fact, amino acid differencesamong individuals have been detected in at least 30 percent ofall human proteins whose sequences are known. Thus polymorphismdoes not necessarily mean disease. There can be numerousalleles of a gene, some producing proteins that function normally,while others produce variants that cause disease—as wewill now see for hemoglobin.ABNORMAL HEMOGLOBIN The first human genetic diseaseknown to be caused by an amino acid sequence abnormalitywas sickle-cell disease. This blood disordermost often afflicts people whose ancestors came from the tropicsor from the Mediterranean. About 1 in 655 African-Americansare homozygous for the sickle allele and have the disease.The abnormal allele produces abnormal hemoglobin that resultsin sickle-shaped red blood cells (see Figure 15.3). These cellstend to block narrow blood capillaries, especially when the oxygenconcentration of the blood is low. The result is tissue damageand eventually death by organ failure.Recall that human hemoglobin is a protein with quaternarystructure, containing four globin subunits—two α chains andtwo β chains—as well as the pigment heme (see Figure 3.10). Insickle-cell disease, one of the 146 amino acids in the β-globinchain is abnormal: at position 6, the normal glutamic acid hasbeen replaced by valine. This replacement changes the chargeof the protein (glutamic acid is negatively charged and valineis neutral), causing it to form long, needle-like aggregates in thered blood cells. The phenotypic result is anemia, a deficiency ofnormal red blood cells and an impaired ability of the blood tocarry oxygen.Because hemoglobin is easy to isolate and study, its variationsin the human population have been extensively documented(Figure 15.13). Hundreds of single amino acid alterations in β-globin have been reported. For example, at the same positionthat is mutated in sickle-cell disease (resulting in hemoglobin S),the normal glutamic acid may be replaced by lysine, causing hemoglobinC disease. In this case, the resulting anemia is usuallynot severe. Many alterations of hemoglobin do not affect theprotein’s function. That is fortunate, because about 5 percent ofall humans are carriers for one of these variants.There are hundreds of inherited diseases in humans in whichthe primary phenotypes are caused by specific mutations leadingto protein abnormalities. Some of the more common examplesare listed in Table 15.2. These mutations can be domi-328 CHAPTER 15 | GENE MUTATION AND MOLECULAR MEDICINEBecause conversionto tyrosine is blocked,phenylalanine andphenylpyruvic acidaccumulate.The enzymethat convertsphenylalanineto tyrosine isnonfunctional.12CH2NH2PhenylalanineTyrosinePhenylpyruvic acidCH COOHOH CH2NH2CH COOHCH2OC COOHBreakdownof proteinsPhenylketonuria(PKU)15.12 One Gene, One Enzyme Phenylketonuria is causedby an abnormality in a specific enzyme that metabolizes theamino acid phenylalanine. Knowing the molecular causes ofsuch single-gene, single-enzyme metabolic diseases can aidresearchers in developing screening tests as well as treatments.TABLE 15.1Two Common Mutations That Cause PhenylketonuriaMUTANT CODON 408 MUTANT CODON 280NORMAL CODON 408 (20% OF PKU CASES) NORMAL CODON 280 (2% OF PKU CASES)Length of PAH protein 452 amino acids 452 amino acids 452 amino acids 452 amino acidsDNA at codon xxCGGxx xxTGGxx xxGAAxx xxAAAxxxxGCCxx xxACCxx xxCTTxx xxTTTxxmRNA at codon xxCGGxx xxUGGxx xxGAAxx xxAAAxxAmino acid at codon Arginine Tryptophan Glutamic acid LysineActive PAH enzyme? Yes No Yes Nonant, codominant, or recessive, and some are sex-linked. Beforewe examine how these diseases can be analyzed at the molecularlevel, we turn briefly to a fascinating exception to the associationbetween genes and proteins.Prion diseases are disorders of protein conformationTransmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) are degenerativebrain diseases that occur in many mammals, including humans.The brain gradually develops holes, making it look like asponge. Scrapie is a TSE that has been known for 250 years. Itcauses affected sheep and goats to show the abnormal behaviorof rubbing (“scraping”) the wool off their bodies (as well ascausing more severe neurological problems). In the 1980s, a TSEthat appeared in cows in Britain was traced to the cows havingeaten products from sheep that had scrapie. These cowswould shake and rub their bodies against fences, and their staggeringled farmers to dub them “mad cows.” In the 1990s, somepeople who ate beef from these cows got a human version ofthe disease, dubbed “mad cow disease” by the media. Thosewith the disease eventually died.At first, viruses were suspected to cause TSEs. But when TikvaAlper at Hammersmith Hospital, London, treated infectious extractswith high doses of ultraviolet light to inactivate nucleicacids, they still caused TSEs. She proposed that the causativeagent was a protein, not a virus. Later, Stanley Prusiner at theUniversity of California purified the protein responsible andshowed it to be free of DNA or RNA. He called it a proteinaceousinfective particle, or prion. This is a violation of the centraldogma of molecular biology (DNA→RNA→protein; see Chapter14), because in this case the protein was “doing it all.” Therewas no genetic material involved.This is a rare case of a mutant phenotype without a mutantgene. Normal brain cells contain a membrane protein calledPrPc. A protein with the same amino acid sequence is present inTSE-affected brain tissues, but that protein, called PrPsc, has adifferent three-dimensional shape (Figure 15.14). Thus TSEs arenot caused by a mutated gene (the primary structures of the twoproteins are the same), but are somehow caused by an alterationin protein conformation. The altered three-dimensional structureof the protein has profound effects on its function in thecell. PrPsc is insoluble, and it piles up as fibers in brain tissue,causing cell death.How can the exposure of a normal cell to material containingPrPsc result in a TSE? The abnormal PrPsc protein seems toinduce a conformational change in the normal PrPc protein sothat it, too, becomes abnormal. Just how this conversion occurs,and how it causes a TSE, is unclear.To try to understand how TSEs develop, scientists are asking“What is the normal role of the prion protein?” Recently, it wasshown that in the brain the prion protein blocks a key enzymein the synthesis of a protein called β-amyloid. This is the proteinthat accumulates in the brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease.People with early-onset Alzheimer’s (age 40) have less PrPcin their brains than people who age normally. So the PrPc pro-15.3 | HOW DO DEFECTIVE PROTEINS LEAD TO DISEASES? 329TABLE 15.2Some Human Genetic DiseasesINHERITANCE PATTERN; GENE MUTATED;DISEASE NAME FREQUENCY PROTEIN PRODUCT CLINICAL PHENOTYPEFamilial hypercholesterolemia Autosomal codominant; LDLR; low-density lipoprotein High blood cholesterol,1 in 500 heterozygous receptor heart diseaseCystic fibrosis Autosomal recessive; CFTR; chloride ion channel Immune, digestive, and respiratory1 in 4000 in membrane illnessDuchenne muscular dystrophy Sex-linked recessive; DMD; the muscle membrane Muscle weakness1 in 3500 males protein dystrophinHemophilia A Sex-linked recessive; HEMA; factor VIII blood Inability to clot blood after injury,1 in 5000 males clotting protein hemorrhageOnly three hemoglobin variants(S, C, and E) lead to clinicalproblems.TokuchiA (Wild type) His Glu Glu Gly GlyAmino acid position (of 146)Glu Gly His Lys2 6 7 16 24 26 56 63 95SCG GlyJ BaltimoreSavannahVariants of β-globinEBangkokZürichM SaskatoonN BaltimoreAspArgTyrGluTyrAspValValLysLys15.13 Hemoglobin Polymorphism Each of these mutant allelescodes for a protein with a single amino acid change in the 146-aminoacid chain of β-globin. Only three of the hundreds of known variants ofβ-globin, shown on the left, are known to lead to clinical abnormalities.“S” is the sickle-cell anemia allele.tein appears to play a role in protecting against Alzheimer’s disease.Other functions for this protein are also being discovered,but the mechanism by which it appears to spread TSE disease isnot yet understood.Prions are an unusual phenomenon in human disease. Thevast majority of inherited diseases are caused by mutations ingenes that reduce the levels of their protein products, or makethe proteins dysfunctional. But the expression of these genes,like that of all genes, is influenced by the environment.Most diseases are caused by multiple genesand environmentThe human diseases for which clinical phenotypes can be tracedto a single altered protein and its altered gene may number inthe thousands. Taken together, these diseases have a frequencyof about one percent in the human population.Far more common, however, are diseases that are multifactorial;that is, diseases that are caused by the interactions of manygenes and proteins with one or more factors in the environment.When studying genetics, we tend to call individuals either normal(wild type) or abnormal (mutant); however, in reality everyindividual contains thousands or millions of genetic variationsthat arose through mutations. Our susceptibility to disease is oftendetermined by complex interactions between these genotypesand factors in the environment, such as the foods we eator the pathogens we encounter. For example, a complex set ofgenotypes determine who among us can eat a high-fat diet andnot experience a heart attack, or will succumb to disease whenexposed to infectious bacteria. Estimates suggest that up to 60percent of all people are affected by diseases that are geneticallyinfluenced. Identifying these genetic influences is a major taskof molecular medicine and human genome sequencing.15.3 RECAPMany genetic mutations are expressed as nonfunctionalenzymes, structural proteins, or membraneproteins. Human genetic diseases may be inheritedin dominant, codominant, or recessive patterns, andthey may be sex-linked.• Describe an example of an abnormal protein in humansthat results from a genetic mutation and causesa disease. See pp. 327–328• Describe an example of an abnormal protein in humansthat results from a genetic mutation and doesnot cause a disease. See p. 328• How is the brain cell membrane protein PrPc related todiseases caused by prions? See p. 329The abnormal proteins that cause disease result (with the exceptionof TSEs) from genetic mutations. We now turn to theidentification of such mutations, an important task for molecularmedicine.What DNA Changes Lead to 15.4 Genetic Diseases?We have seen for diseases such as PKU and sickle-cell anemiathat the clinical phenotype of inherited diseases could be tracedto individual proteins, and that the genes could then be identified.With the advent of new ways to identify DNA variations,a new pattern of human genetic analysis has emerged. In thesecases, the clinical phenotype is first related to a DNA variation,and then the protein involved is identified. This pattern ofdiscovery is called reverse genetics, because it proceeds in theopposite direction to genetic analyses done before the mid-1980s. For example, in sickle-cell anemia, the protein abnormalityin hemoglobin was described first (a single amino acidchange), and then the gene for β-globin was isolated and theDNAmutation was pinpointed.clinical phenotype →protein phenotype →geneOn the other hand, for cystic fibrosis (see Table 15.2), a mutantversion of the gene CFTR was isolated first, and then the proteinwas characterized:clinical phenotype →gene →protein phenotypeWhichever approach is used, final identification of the protein(s)involved in a disease is important in designing specific therapies.Genetic markers can point the way to important genesTo identify a mutant gene by reverse genetics, close linkage toa marker sequence is used. To understand this linkage, imaginean astronaut looking down from space, trying to find her sonon a park bench on Chicago’s North Shore. The astronaut firstpicks out reference points—landmarks that will lead her to thepark. She recognizes the shape of North America, then movesto Lake Michigan, then the Willis Tower, and so on. Once she330 CHAPTER 15 | GENE MUTATION AND MOLECULAR MEDICINEThe normal protein (PrPc)has many α helix regions(green) and is relativelysoluble.The abnormal protein(PrPsc) has manyβ pleated sheet regions(yellow) and is insoluble.15.14 Prion Diseases are Disorders of Protein Conformation A normalmembrane protein in brain cells (PrPc, left) can be converted to the diseasecausingform (PrPsc, right), which has a different three-dimensional structure.has zeroed in on the North Shore Park, she can use advancedoptical instruments to find her son. The reference points for geneisolation are the genetic markers.• Knowledge of at least two mutations is needed. One mutationdetermines the disease phenotype and the other mutationis a closely linked “marker mutation” that does not affectthe disease phenotype but is easy to identify. In earlygenetic studies, markers that produced visible phenotypeswere used to follow the inheritance of important traits. Today,single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) or STRs areusually used.• Genetic linkage is the co-inheritance of the marker and thedisease-causing allele. If they are always together, theymust be close together on the chromosome.A key requirement for a genetic marker is that it has allelicpolymorphisms (differences in sequence) that are identifiableby current methods of rapid DNA analysis. As we saw in Section15.2, an STR can have varying numbers of a short repeatsequence, and thus there are multiple alleles of these markers.We also saw in Section 15.2 that restriction enzymes can be usedto identify SNPs, provided the SNP occurs within a restrictionsite. Restriction enzymes can also be used to identify mutationssuch as insertions or deletions if the affected sequences containrestriction sites. We will examine in more detail the use of restrictionenzymes to identify genetic polymorphisms, and otherSNP markers, before returning to the discussion of human genesand their abnormalities.RESTRICTION FRAGMENT LENGTH POLYMORPHISMSAs Section 15.2 describes, restriction enzymescut DNA molecules at specific recognition sequences.On a particular human chromosome,a given restriction enzyme may make thousandsof cuts, producing many DNA fragments. Theenzyme EcoRI, for example, cuts DNA at5′… GAATTC … 3′Suppose this recognition sequence exists in acertain stretch of human chromosome 7. Therestriction enzyme will cut this stretch onceand make two fragments of DNA. Now supposethat, in some people, this sequence containsa SNP and is mutated as follows:5′… GAGTTC … 3′This sequence will not be recognized by the restrictionenzyme; thus it will remain intact andyield one larger fragment of DNA.Differences in DNA sequences due to mutationsin restriction sites are called restriction fragmentlength polymorphisms (RFLPs) (Figure15.15). They can be easily visualized as bandson an electrophoresis gel. An RFLP band patternis inherited in a Mendelian fashion and can befollowed through a pedigree. Thousands of suchmarkers have been described for humans andmany other organisms.Before the advent of PCR technology, theonly way to analyze RFLPs was by digestingtotal genomic DNA samples with restriction enzymes.These samples contain thousands ofDNAfragments of various sizes. In order to visualizea particular fragment, the DNA fromthe gel is transferred (blotted) onto a nylonmembrane, denatured to separate the doublestrandedmolecules, and mixed with a singlestrandedDNA fragment (a probe) containing atleast part of the sequence within the RFLP fragmentof interest (Figure 15.16). The probe hybridizes(by base pairing) with the DNA bandcontaining the RFLP. Because the probe is “la-15.4 | WHAT DNA CHANGES LEAD TO GENETIC DISEASES? 331TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE15.15 RFLP MarkersRestriction fragment length polymorphisms are differences in DNA sequencesthat serve as genetic markers. Linkage studies can be used to isolate genesinvolved with diseases.1 Allele A:A restriction enzyme cuts theDNA fragment in two at itsrecognition sequence.3 RFLP is revealedby electrophoresis,probing, and blotting.5 This gel shows the RFLP patterns ofthe members of this family.4 A pedigree isconstructed.2 Allele a:There is no recognitionsequence, so the DNAis not cut.GAATTCCTTAAGGAGTTCCTCAAGGAGTTCCTCAAGLong fragmentShort fragmentsType 1homozygote(AA)Type 2homozygote(aa)Heterozygote(Aa)1 21 23Aa Aa4 5 6 7 8 93 4 5 6 7 8 9aa Aa Aa AA Aa aa AaG AATTCCTTAA GGO TO Web Activity 15.1 • Allele-Specific CleavageyourBioPortal.combeled” with a radioactive isotope or a chemical tag, the DNAfragment containing the RFLP can be seen among the thousandsof other fragments on the blot. This technology was used tocreate “RFLP maps” of the human genome and of genomes ofmany other organisms.SINGLE NUCLEOTIDE POLYMORPHISMS As noted in Section 15.2,single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are widespread in eukaryoticgenomes. There is roughly one SNP for every 1,330 basepairs in the human genome. Not all SNPs occur within restrictionsites, but those that don’t can still be used as markers. SNPscan be detected by direct sequence comparisons, or by PCR amplificationusing primers that contain one version of the SNP,so that only one allele will be amplified efficiently. SNPs canalso be detected using sophisticated chemical methods such asmass spectrometry (see Section 17.5).Genetic markers such as STRs, RFLPs, and SNPs can be usedas landmarks to find genes of interest if the genes also have allelesand are polymorphic. The key to this method is the wellknownobservation that if two genes are locatednear each other on the same chromosome, theyare usually passed on together from parent to offspring.The same holds true for any pair of geneticmarkers. The idea is to find markers that areclose by on the chromosome to get to the geneof interest.To narrow down the location of a gene, a scientistmust find a marker and a gene that are alwaysinherited together. To do this, family medicalhistories are taken and pedigrees are constructed.If a genetic marker and a genetic disease are inheritedtogether, then they must be near eachother on the same chromosome. Unfortunately,“near each other” still might be as much as severalmillion base pairs apart. The process of locatinga gene is thus similar to that of the astronautlooking for her son: the first landmarks leadto only an approximate location.How are markers identified that are moreclosely linked to the gene of interest? Now thatthe human genome has been fully sequenced(see Chapter 17), the task is much easier thanit was just a decade ago. Sequence informationfrom the chromosomal region near the linkedmarker is used to develop additional SNPbasedor STR markers. These are tested to identifymarkers that are tightly linked to the diseasephenotype. Eventually, the region of DNAcontaining the gene can be narrowed down toa few hundred thousand base pairs.Once a linked DNA region is identified,many methods are available to identify the actualgene responsible for a genetic disease. Thecomplete sequence of the region can be searchedfor candidate genes, using information availablefrom databases of genome sequences. With lucka scientist can make an educated guess, basedon biochemical or physiological information about the disease,along with information about the functions of candidate genes,as to which gene is responsible for the disease. The identificationof DNA polymorphisms within candidate genes, betweendiseased and healthy individuals, can also help to narrow downthe search. A variety of techniques, such as analyzing mRNAlevels of candidate genes in diseased and healthy individuals,are used to confirm that the correct gene has been identified.The isolation of genes responsible for genetic diseases hasled to spectacular advances in the understanding of human biology.For example, the gene responsible for cystic fibrosis wasfirst identified by its close association with a SNP marker. Afterthe gene sequences of people with the disease and people withoutthe disease were compared, a mutation was identified inmost patients. This provided a way to test for the presence ofthat mutation in people, by extracting DNA from cells or tissuesthat could be easily sampled. Moreover, knowing the gene sequenceled to the identification of the protein it codes for anda characterization of the abnormal protein. Treatments that332 CHAPTER 15 | GENE MUTATION AND MOLECULAR MEDICINETOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE15.16 Analyzing DNA Fragments by DNA Gel BlottingA probe can be used to locate a specific DNA fragment on anelectrophoresis gel.1 A gel is placed in a basic solutionthat denatures the DNA.2 A nylon filter picks up the DNAfrom the gel, creating a blot.3 The filter is placed in asolution and a labeledsingle-stranded DNAprobe is added.4 The probe hybridizes with itsunique target sequence onthe denatured DNA attachedto the filter.Basic solutionGelDNANylonfilterDNAprobeTargetsequenceProbespecifically target this protein are now being devised. Researchon the protein in normal people has led to an understandingof its role in the body. So reverse genetics can lead to diagnosis,treatment, and biological understanding.Disease-causing mutations may involve anynumber of base pairsDisease-causing mutations may involve a single base pair (aswe saw in the case of hemophilia), a long stretch of DNA (as incases of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which we will discussshortly), multiple segments of DNA (as in fragile-X syndrome),or even entire chromosomes (as we saw with Down syndromein Section 11.5).POINT MUTATIONS There are many examples of point mutationsin human genetic diseases. In some cases, all of the people withthe disease have the same genetic mutation. This is the case withsickle-cell anemia, where a single base pair change in the β-globin gene causes a single amino acid change, which leads tothe abnormal protein and phenotype. This is not the situationwith most other genetic diseases. For example, over 500 differentmutations in the PAH (phenylalanine hydroxylase) genehave been discovered in different patients with phenylketonuria(PKU; see Table 15.1). This makes sense if you think about thethree-dimensional structure of an enzyme protein and the manyamino acid changes that could affect its activity.LARGE DELETIONS Larger mutations may involve many basepairs of DNA. For example, deletions in the X chromosomethat include the gene for the protein dystrophin result inDuchenne muscular dystrophy. Dystrophin is important in organizingthe structure of muscles, and people who have onlythe abnormal form have severe muscle weakness. Sometimesonly part of the dystrophin gene is missing, leading to an incompletebut partly functional protein and a mild form ofthe disease. In other cases, however, deletions span the entiresequence of the gene, so that the protein is missing entirely, resultingin a severe form of the disease. In yet other cases, deletionsinvolve millions of base pairs and cover not only the dystrophingene but adjacent genes as well; the result may beseveral diseases simultaneously.CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES Chromosomal abnormalitiesalso cause human diseases. Such abnormalities include the gainor loss of one or more chromosomes (aneuploidy) (see Figure11.21), loss of a piece of chromosome (deletion), and the transferof a piece of one chromosome to another chromosome (translocation)(see Figure 15.4). About one newborn in 200 has a chromosomalabnormality. While some of these abnormalities are inheritedas preexisting aberrations from one or both parents, othersare the result of meiotic events, such as nondisjunction, that occurredduring the formation of gametes in one of the parents.One common cause of mental retardation is fragile-X syndrome(Figure 15.17). About one male in 1,500 and one femalein 2,000 are affected. These people have a constriction near thetip of the X chromosome. Although the basic pattern of inheritanceis that of an X-linked recessive trait, there are departuresfrom this pattern. Not all people with the fragile-X chromosomalabnormality are mentally retarded, as we will see.Expanding triplet repeats demonstrate the fragilityof some human genesAbout one-fifth of all males that have the fragile-X chromosomalabnormality are phenotypically normal, as are most of theirdaughters. But many of those daughters’ sons are mentally retarded.In a family in which the fragile-X syndrome appears,later generations tend to show earlier onset and more severesymptoms of the disease. It is almost as if the abnormal alleleitself is changing—and getting worse. And that’s exactly whatis happening.The gene responsible for fragile-X syndrome (FMR1) containsa repeated triplet, CGG, at a certain point in the promoterregion. In normal people, this triplet is repeated 6 to 54 times(the average is 29). In mentally retarded people with fragile-Xsyndrome, the CGG sequence is repeated 200 to 2,000 times.Males carrying a moderate number of repeats (55–200) showno symptoms and are called premutated. These repeats becomemore numerous as the daughters of these men pass the chromosomeon to their children (Figure 15.18). With more than 200 repeats,increased methylation of the cytosines in the CGG tripletsis likely, accompanied by transcriptional inactivation of the FMR1gene. The normal role of the protein product of this gene is tobind to mRNAs involved in neuron function and regulate theirtranslation at the ribosome. When the FMR1 protein is not madein adequate amounts, these mRNAs are not properly translated,and nerve cells die. Their loss often results in mental retardation.This phenomenon of expanding triplet repeats has been foundin over a dozen other diseases, such as myotonic dystrophy(involving repeated CTG triplets) and Huntington’s disease (inwhich CAG is repeated). Such repeats, which may be foundwithin a protein-coding region or outside it, appear to be presentin many other genes without causing harm. How the repeatsexpand is not known; one theory is that DNA polymerase mayslip after copying a repeat and then fall back to copy it again.15.4 | WHAT DNA CHANGES LEAD TO GENETIC DISEASES? 333The constriction at the lower tip of this chromosomeis the location of the fragile-X abnormality.15.17 A Fragile-X Chromosome at Metaphase The chromosomalabnormality associated with fragile-X syndrome shows up under themicroscope as a constriction in the chromosome. This occurs duringpreparation of the chromosome for microscopy.15.4 RECAPGenes involved in disease can be identified by firstdetecting the abnormal DNA sequence and then theprotein that the wild-type allele encodes. Unusualfeatures such as expanding triplet repeats havebeen detected in the human genome.• How can a gene be identified before its protein productis known? See pp. 330–331 and Figure 15.15• How do expanding repeats cause genetic diseases?See p. 333 and Fig. 15.18The determination of the precise molecular phenotypes andgenotypes of various human genetic diseases has made it possibleto diagnose these diseases even before symptoms first appear.Let’s take a detailed look at some of these genetic screeningtechniques.How Is Genetic Screening Used 15.5 to Detect Diseases?Genetic screening is the use of a test to identify people whohave, are predisposed to, or are carriers of a genetic disease. Itcan be done at many times of life and used for many purposes.• Prenatal screening can be used to identify an embryo or fetuswith a disease so that medical intervention can be appliedor decisions can be made about whether or not to continuethe pregnancy.• Newborn babies can be screened so that proper medicalintervention can be initiated quickly for those babies whoneed it.• Asymptomatic people who have a relative with a geneticdisease can be screened to determine whether they arecarriers of the disease or are likely to develop the diseasethemselves.Genetic screening can be done at the level of either the phenotypeor the genotype.Screening for disease phenotypes involvesanalysis of proteinsAt the level of the phenotype, genetic screening involves examininga protein relevant to the phenotype for abnormal structureor function. Since many proteins are enzymes, low enzymeactivity is strongly suggestive of a mutation, as we saw in Section15.1. Perhaps the best example of this kind of proteinscreening is a test for phenylketonuria (PKU), which has madeit possible to identify the disease in newborns, so that treatmentof the disease can be started. It is very likely that you werescreened for PKU.Initially, babies born with PKU have a normal phenotype becauseexcess phenylalanine in their blood before birth diffusesacross the placenta to the mother’s circulatory system. Since themother is almost always heterozygous, and therefore has adequatephenylalanine hydroxylase activity, her body metabolizesthe excess phenylalanine from the fetus. After birth, however,the baby begins to consume protein-rich food (milk) and tobreak down some of his or her own proteins. Phenylalanine entersthe baby’s blood and accumulates. After a few days, thephenylalanine level in the baby’s blood may be ten times higherthan normal. Within days, the developing brain is damaged,and untreated children with PKU become severely mentally retarded.If detected early, PKU can be treated with a special dietlow in phenylalanine to avoid the brain damage that would otherwiseresult. Thus, early detection is imperative.Newborn screening for PKU and other diseases began in1963 with the development of a simple, rapid test for the presenceof excess phenylalanine in blood serum (Figure 15.19). Thismethod uses dried blood spots from newborn babies and canbe automated so that a screening laboratory can process manysamples in a day.Screening using newborn babies’ blood is now done for upto 25 genetic diseases. Some are rare, such as maple syrup urinedisease, which occurs once in 185,000 births. This disease iscaused by a defect in an enzyme that metabolizes certain aminoacids, and results in sweet-smelling urine and severe brain damage.Other genetic diseases are more common, such as congenitalhypothyroidism, which occurs about once in 4,000births, and causes reduced growth and mental retardation dueto low levels of thyroid hormone. With early intervention, manyof these infants can be successfully treated. So it is not surprisingthat newborn screening is legally mandatory in many countries,including the United States and Canada.334 CHAPTER 15 | GENE MUTATION AND MOLECULAR MEDICINEA normal allele has 6–54 CGG repeats.Premutated allele: There are not enoughtriplets to cause fragile-X syndrome, butthey may expand in the next generation.Fragile-X allele: There are many moretriplets than normal; this conditioncauses mental retardation.CGGCGGCGG...GCCGCCGCC...CGGCGGCGGCGGCGGCGG...GCCGCCGCCGCCGCCGCC...CGGCGGCGGCGGCGGCGGCGGCGGCGG....GCCGCCGCCGCCGCCGCCGCCGCCGCC....Normalallele6–54CGG repeatsDefectiveallele55–200CGG repeatsPremutatedalleleParent DNAOffspring DNA200–2,000CGG repeats15.18 The CGG Repeats in the FMR1 Gene Expand with EachGeneration The genetic defect in fragile-X syndrome is caused by 200or more repeats of the CGG triplet.DNA testing is the most accurate way todetect abnormal genesThe level of phenylalanine in the blood is an indirect measureof phenylalanine hydroxylase activity in the liver. But how canwe screen for genetic diseases that are not detectable by bloodtests? What if blood is difficult to obtain, as it is in a fetus? Howare genetic abnormalities in heterozygotes, who express the normalprotein at some level, identified?DNA testing is the direct analysis of DNA for a mutation, andit offers the most direct and accurate way of detecting an abnormalallele. Now that the mutations responsible for many humandiseases have been identified, any cell in the body can beexamined at any time of life for mutations. With the amplificationpower of PCR, only one or a few cells are needed for testing.These methods work best for diseases caused by only oneor a few different mutations.Consider, for example, two parents who are both heterozygousfor the cystic fibrosis allele, who have had a child with thedisease, and want a normal child. If treated with the appropriatehormones, the mother can be induced to “superovulate,”releasing several eggs. An egg can be injected with a singlesperm from her husband and the resulting zygote allowed todivide to the 8-cell stage. If one of these embryonic cells is removed,it can be tested for the presence of the cystic fibrosis allele.If the test is negative, the remaining 7-cell embryo can beimplanted in the mother’s womb where with luck, it will developnormally.Such preimplantation screening is performed only rarely. Moretypical are analyses of fetal cells after normal fertilization andimplantation in the womb. Fetal cells can be analyzed at aboutthe tenth week of pregnancy by chorionic villus sampling, orduring the thirteenth to seventeenth weeks by amniocentesis.In either case, only a few fetal cells are necessary to performDNAtesting.DNA testing can also be performed with newborns. Theblood samples used for screening for PKU and other disorderscontain enough of the baby’s blood cells to permit DNA analysisusing PCR-based techniques. Screening tests using DNAanalysis are now being used for sickle-cell disease and cystic fibrosis;similar tests for other diseases will surely follow.Of the numerous methods of DNA testing available, two arethe most widespread. We will describe their use to detect the mutationin the β-globin gene that results in sickle-cell disease.SCREENING FOR ALLELE-SPECIFIC CLEAVAGE DIFFERENCES Thefirst method uses RFLP analysis, as we described earlier. Thereis a difference between the normal and the sickle allele of theβ-globin gene, with respect to a restriction enzyme recognitionsequence. Around the sixth codon in the normal gene is thesequence5′… CCTGAGGAG… 3′This sequence is recognized by the restriction enzyme MstII,which will cleave DNA at5′… CCTNAGGAG… 3′where N is any base. In the sickle allele, the DNA sequence is5′… CCTGTGGAG… 3′The point mutation at codon 6 makes this sequence unrecognizableby MstII. The sequence surrounding the mutant site canbe amplified by PCR and digested with MstII. Gel electrophoresisis used to distinguish between PCR products derived fromthe normal allele, which are cut by the enzyme, and productsfrom the sickle allele, which are not cut (Figure 15.20).This allele-specific cleavage method of DNA testing works onlyif a restriction enzyme exists that can recognize the sequence ofeither the normal or the mutant allele.SCREENING BY ALLELE-SPECIFIC OLIGONUCLEOTIDE HYBRIDIZATIONThe allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization method uses shortsynthetic DNA strands called oligonucleotide probes that will hybridizewith denatured PCR products from either the normalor the mutant allele. Usually, an oligonucleotide probe of at leasta dozen bases is needed to form a stable double helix with thetarget DNA. If the probe is radioactively or fluorescently labeled,hybridization can be readily detected (Figure 15.21).Detection of a mutation by either DNA screening method canbe used for diagnosis of a genetic disease, so that appropriatetreatment can begin. In addition, identification provides a personwith important information about his or her genome.15.5 | HOW IS GENETIC SCREENING USED TO DETECT DISEASES? 335The newborn’s heelis pricked to obtainblood samples.Drops of blood are placed on aspecial card and then analyzedfor phenylalanine content.15.19 Genetic Screening ofNewborns for Phenylketonuria Ablood test is used to screen newbornsfor phenylketonuria. Small samples ofblood are taken from a newborn’s heel.The samples are placed in a machinethat measures the phenylalanine concentrationin the blood. Early detectionmeans that the symptoms of the conditioncan be prevented by putting thebaby on a therapeutic diet.336 CHAPTER 15 | GENE MUTATION AND MOLECULAR MEDICINETOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE15.20 DNA Testing by Allele-Specific CleavageAllele-specific cleavage can be used to detect mutations such as the one that causes sickle-cell disease.1 DNA from the normal b-globin allelehas a recognition sequence for therestriction enzyme Mstll.2 Normal b-globin DNA is cutinto two fragments.3 DNA from the sickle b-globin allelelacks an Mstll recognition sequence.4 Sickle b-globin DNA is not cut,and a larger fragment results.5 The fragments can beidentified by gelelectrophoresis on thebasis of their sizes.5′3′3′5′Normal SickleNormal β-globin alleleSickle alleleCut withMstIICCTGAGGAG112233GGACTCCTC5′3′3′5′CCTGTGGAGGGACACCTCTOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE15.21 DNA Testing by Allele-Specific Oligonucleotide HybridizationTesting of this family reveals that three of them are heterozygous carriers of the sickle allele. The first child, however, hasinherited two normal alleles and is neither affected by the disease nor a carrier.1 DNA from individuals to be testedis dotted to filters and denatured.2 Single-stranded DNA is synthesizedfrom the normal β-globin allele (A)and from the sickle allele (S).3 The probes are labeled andhybridized to the DNA samples.4 The probes will hybridize to theDNA samples if complementarysequences are present.The red color indicateshybridization.The blue color indicateslack of hybridization.Spot containingDNA sampleNormalprobeProbeMother Father Child FetusAS AS AA ASProbe fornormal alleleGenotypes of family members(deduced from allele-specific hybridization)Probe forsickle alleleDNA sampleSickleprobeCCTGTGGAGCCTGTGGAGGGACACCTCCCTGAGGAGCCTGAGGAGGGACTCCTCGO TO Animated Tutorial 15.2 • DNA Testing by Allele-Specific CleavageyourBioPortal.com15.5 RECAPGenetic screening can be used to identify peoplewho have, are predisposed to, or are carriers of, geneticdiseases. Screening can be done at the phenotypelevel by identifying an abnormal protein such asan enzyme with altered activity. It can also be doneat the genotype level by direct testing of DNA.• How are newborn babies screened for PKU?See p. 334 and Figure 15.19• What is the advantage of screening for genetic mutationsby allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridizationrelative to screening for allele-specific cleavage differences?See p. 335 and Figures 15.20 and 15.21Ongoing research has resulted in the development of increasinglyaccurate diagnostic tests and a better understanding ofvarious genetic diseases at the molecular level. This knowledgeis now being applied to the development of new treatments forgenetic diseases. In the next section we will survey various approachesto treatment, including modifications of the mutantphenotype and gene therapy, in which the normal version of amutant gene is supplied.15.6 How Are Genetic Diseases Treated?Most treatments for genetic diseases simply try to alleviate thepatient’s symptoms. But to effectively treat these diseases—whether they affect all cells, as in inherited disorders such asPKU, or only somatic cells, as in cancer—physicians must beable to diagnose the disease accurately, understand how the diseaseworks at the molecular level, and intervene early, beforethe disease ravages or kills the individual. There are two mainapproaches to treating genetic diseases: modifying the diseasephenotype, or replacing the defective gene.Genetic diseases can be treated by modifyingthe phenotypeAltering the phenotype of a genetic disease so that it no longerharms an individual is commonly done in one of three ways:by restricting the substrate of a deficient enzyme, by inhibitinga harmful metabolic reaction, or by supplying a missing proteinproduct (Figure 15.22).RESTRICTING THE SUBSTRATE Restricting the substrate of a deficientenzyme is the approach taken when a newborn is diagnosedwith PKU. In this case, the deficient enzyme is phenylalaninehydroxylase, and the substrate is phenylalanine. Theinfant’s inability to break down phenylalanine in food leads toa buildup of the substrate, which causes the clinical symptoms.So the infant is immediately put on a special diet that containsonly enough phenylalanine for immediate use. Lofenelac, amilk-based product that is low in phenylalanine, is fed to theseinfants just like formula. Later, certain fruits, vegetables, cereals,and noodles low in phenylalanine can be added to the diet.Meat, fish, eggs, dairy products, and bread, which contain highamounts of phenylalanine, must be avoided, especially duringchildhood, when brain development is most rapid. The artificialsweetener aspartame must also be avoided because it ismade of two amino acids, one of which is phenylalanine.People with PKU are generally advised to stay on a lowphenylalaninediet for life. Although maintaining these dietaryrestrictions may be difficult, it is effective. Numerous follow-upstudies since newborn screening was initiated have shown thatpeople with PKU who stay on the diet are no different from therest of the population in terms of mental ability. This is an impressiveachievement in public health, given the severity ofmental retardation in untreated patients.METABOLIC INHIBITORS In Section 11.7, we described how drugsthat are inhibitors of various cell cycle processes are used to treatcancer. Drugs are also used to treat the symptoms of many geneticdiseases. As biologists have gained insight into the molec-15.6 | HOW ARE GENETIC DISEASES TREATED? 33715.22 Strategies for Treating Genetic DiseasesNormally, a wild-typegene codes for afunctional enzyme.Restriction of substrate:Less substrate resultsin less severe diseasesymptoms.In genetic disease, amutant allele codesfor a nonfunctionalenzyme and thepileup of substrateleads to disease.Restoration of themissing enzyme:The wild-type proteinsubstitutes for themutant enzyme.Addition of metabolicinhibitor: An inhibitorblocks the harmfuleffects of accumulatedsubstrate.Cause of diseaseNormalSubstrate ProductDNAEnzymeTreatmentHarmLess harmLess harmDiseaseXXXXXXDNAEnzymeProductProteinular characteristics of these diseases and the specific proteinsinvolved, a more specific approach to treatment is taking shape.This is called molecular medicine.An example of this approach is the treatment of chronicmyelogenous leukemia. In this cancer, certain white blood cellsundergo a gain-of-function mutation, making a totally new proteinthat is not made in any other cells. This new protein wasisolated and a drug was made that specifically targets and inactivatesthe protein, thereby preventing the proliferation of thecancerous cells. The result has been greatly improved survivalin these patients.SUPPLYING THE MISSING PROTEIN An obvious way to treat a diseasephenotype in which a functional protein is missing is tosupply that protein. This approach is the basis of treatment forhemophilia, in which the missing blood factor VIII is suppliedto the patient. At first this protein was obtained from blood andwas sometimes contaminated with viruses or other pathogens.Now, however, the production of human clotting proteins byrecombinant DNA technology (see Chapter 18) has made it possibleto provide the protein in a much purer form.Unfortunately, the phenotypes of many diseases caused bygenetic mutations are very complex. In these cases, simple interventionslike those we have just described do not work. Indeed,a recent survey of 351 diseases caused by single-gene mutationsshowed that current therapies increased patients’ lifespans by only 15 percent.Gene therapy offers the hope of specific treatmentsClearly, if a cell lacks a functional allele, it would be optimal toprovide that allele. This is the aim of gene therapy. Diseasesranging from rare inherited disorders caused by single-genemutations to cancer are under intensive investigation, in an effortto develop gene therapy treatments.The object of gene therapy is to insert a new gene that willbe expressed in the host. The new DNA must be attached to apromoter that will be active in human cells. The physicians whoare developing such treatments are confronted by numerouschallenges. They must find an effective way for the new geneto be taken up by the patient’s cells, for the gene to be preciselyinserted into the host DNA, and for the gene to be expressed.Which human cells should be the targets of gene therapy?The best approach would be to replace the nonfunctional allelewith a functional one in every cell of the body. But deliveryof a gene to every cell poses a formidable challenge. Until recently,attempts at gene therapy have used ex vivo techniques.That is, physicians have taken cells from the patient’s body,added the new gene to those cells in the laboratory, and then returnedthe cells to the patient in the hope that the correct geneproduct would be made (Figure 15.23). A successful exampledemonstrates this technique.Adenosine deaminase is needed for the maturation of whiteblood cells, and a genetic disease results when a person is homozygousfor a mutant allele for this enzyme. People withoutthis enzyme have severe immune system deficiencies. The wildtypegene for adenosine deaminase has been isolated and in-338 CHAPTER 15 | GENE MUTATION AND MOLECULAR MEDICINECONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE15.23 Gene Therapy: The Ex Vivo ApproachNew genes are added to somatic cells taken from a patient’sbody. These cells are then returned to the body to make themissing gene product.HYPOTHESIS The introduction and expression of a normalallele can help a patient with two defectivealleles for an important gene.Gene therapy can be effective in relievingsymptoms caused by a genetic disease.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTS1 Isolated somaticcells from thepatient arehomozygousfor thedefective allele.2 A copy of the normalallele is inserted intoviral DNA.3 Isolated somatic cells areinfected with the viruscontaining the wild-type DNA.4 The viral DNA carrying the normalallele is inserted into the patient’ssomatic cell chromosome.5 Somatic cellscontaining the normalallele are cultured.6 Cultured cellsare injected intothe patient.7 Symptoms are relievedby expression of thenormal allele.Well patientSomaticcellViral DNAVirusNormalalleleRecombinantDNASick patientserted into a virus that can carry the gene into white blood cellsof a patient lacking the enzyme. The recombinant virus lacks thegenes for reproduction inside cells, but retains the genes codingfor cell uptake and insertion into the host DNA. The recombinantvirus was added to white blood cells from a patient thathad inherited the mutant form of adenosine deaminase. Thewild-type adenosine deaminase gene became inserted into thecells’ chromosomes, along with viral DNA. When these transformedwhite blood cells with the wild-type gene were put backinto the patient, the cells made adenosine deaminase and the patient’scondition improved.The other approach to gene therapy is to insert the gene directlyinto cells in the body of the patient. This in vivo approachis being attempted for various types of cancer. Lung cancer cells,for example, are accessible to such treatment if the DNA is givenas an aerosol through the respiratory system. Several thousandpatients, over half of them with cancer, have undergone thistreatment. In preliminary clinical trials, people are given thetherapy to see whether it has any toxicity and whether the newgene is actually incorporated into the patients’ genomes. Inmore ambitious trials, larger numbers of patients receive thetherapy with the hope that their disease will disappear, or atleast improve.15.6 RECAPTreatment of a human genetic disease may involvean attempt to modify the abnormal phenotype by restrictingthe substrate of a deficient enzyme, inhibitinga harmful metabolic reaction, or supplying amissing protein. On the other hand, gene therapyaims to address a genetic defect by inserting a normalallele into a patient’s cells.• How do metabolic inhibitors used in chemotherapyfunction in treating cancer? See pp. 337–338 and Figure5.22• How does ex vivo gene therapy work? Can you give anexample? See p. 338 and Figure 15.23In this chapter, we dealt with mutations in general, focusing onDNA changes that affect phenotypes through specific proteinproducts. But there is much more to molecular genetics thangenes and proteins. Determining which genes will be expressedwhen and where is a major function of the genome. In Chapter16 we turn to gene regulation.15.6 | HOW ARE GENETIC DISEASES TREATED? 33915.1 What Are Mutations?• Mutations are heritable changes in DNA. Somatic mutationsare passed on to daughter cells, but only germ line mutationsare passed on to sexually produced offspring.• Point mutations result from alterations in single base pairs ofDNA. Silent mutations can occur in noncoding DNA or in codingregions of genes and do not affect the amino acidsequences of proteins. Missense, nonsense, and frame-shiftmutations all cause changes in protein sequences. ReviewFigure 15.2• Chromosomal mutations (deletions, duplications, inversions,or translocations) involve large regions of chromosomes.Review Figure 15.4• Spontaneous mutations occur because of instabilities in DNAor chromosomes. Induced mutations occur when a mutagendamages DNA. Review Figure 15.5• Mutations can occur in hot spots where cytosine has beenmethylated to 5-methylcytosine. Review Figure 15.6• Mutations, although often detrimental to an individual organism,are the raw material of evolution.15.2 How Are DNA Molecules and Mutations Analyzed?• Restriction enzymes, which are made by microorganisms as adefense against viruses, bind to and cut DNA at specific recognitionsequences (also called restriction sites). These enzymescan be used to produce small fragments of DNA for study, atechnique known as restriction digestion. Review Figure 15.7• DNA fragments can be separated by size using gel electrophoresis.Review Figure 15.8, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 15.1• DNA fingerprinting is used to distinguish between specific individuals,or to reveal which individuals are most closely relatedto one another. It involves the detection of DNA polymorphisms,including single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) andshort tandem repeats (STRs). Review Figure 15.9• The goal of the DNA barcoding project is to sequence a singleregion of DNA in all species for identification purposes.15.3 How Do Defective Proteins Lead to Diseases?• Abnormalities in nearly all classes of proteins, includingenzymes, transport proteins, receptor proteins, and structuralproteins, have been implicated in genetic diseases.• While a single amino acid difference can be the cause of disease,amino acid variations have been detected in many functionalproteins. Review Figure 15.13• Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) are degenerativebrain diseases that can be transmitted from one animal toanother by consumption of infected tissues. The infective agentis a prion, a protein with an abnormal conformation.• Multifactorial diseases are caused by the interactions of manygenes and proteins with the environment. They are much morecommon than diseases caused by mutations in a single gene.• Predictable patterns of inheritance are associated with somehuman genetic diseases. Autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant,and sex-linked patterns are common.15.4 What DNA Changes Lead to Genetic Diseases?• It is possible to isolate both the mutant genes and the abnormalproteins responsible for human diseases. Review Figure15.15, WEB ACTIVITY 15.1• The effects of fragile-X syndrome worsen with each generation.This pattern is the result of an expanding triplet repeat. ReviewFigure 15.18CHAPTER SUMMARY
15.1 What Are Mutations?• Mutations are heritable changes in DNA. Somatic mutationsare passed on to daughter cells, but only germ line mutationsare passed on to sexually produced offspring.• Point mutations result from alterations in single base pairs ofDNA. Silent mutations can occur in noncoding DNA or in codingregions of genes and do not affect the amino acidsequences of proteins. Missense, nonsense, and frame-shiftmutations all cause changes in protein sequences. ReviewFigure 15.2• Chromosomal mutations (deletions, duplications, inversions,or translocations) involve large regions of chromosomes.Review Figure 15.4• Spontaneous mutations occur because of instabilities in DNAor chromosomes. Induced mutations occur when a mutagendamages DNA. Review Figure 15.5• Mutations can occur in hot spots where cytosine has beenmethylated to 5-methylcytosine. Review Figure 15.6• Mutations, although often detrimental to an individual organism,are the raw material of evolution.15.2 How Are DNA Molecules and Mutations Analyzed?• Restriction enzymes, which are made by microorganisms as adefense against viruses, bind to and cut DNA at specific recognitionsequences (also called restriction sites). These enzymescan be used to produce small fragments of DNA for study, atechnique known as restriction digestion. Review Figure 15.7• DNA fragments can be separated by size using gel electrophoresis.Review Figure 15.8, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 15.1• DNA fingerprinting is used to distinguish between specific individuals,or to reveal which individuals are most closely relatedto one another. It involves the detection of DNA polymorphisms,including single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) andshort tandem repeats (STRs). Review Figure 15.9• The goal of the DNA barcoding project is to sequence a singleregion of DNA in all species for identification purposes.15.3 How Do Defective Proteins Lead to Diseases?• Abnormalities in nearly all classes of proteins, includingenzymes, transport proteins, receptor proteins, and structuralproteins, have been implicated in genetic diseases.• While a single amino acid difference can be the cause of disease,amino acid variations have been detected in many functionalproteins. Review Figure 15.13• Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) are degenerativebrain diseases that can be transmitted from one animal toanother by consumption of infected tissues. The infective agentis a prion, a protein with an abnormal conformation.• Multifactorial diseases are caused by the interactions of manygenes and proteins with the environment. They are much morecommon than diseases caused by mutations in a single gene.• Predictable patterns of inheritance are associated with somehuman genetic diseases. Autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant,and sex-linked patterns are common.15.4 What DNA Changes Lead to Genetic Diseases?• It is possible to isolate both the mutant genes and the abnormalproteins responsible for human diseases. Review Figure15.15, WEB ACTIVITY 15.1• The effects of fragile-X syndrome worsen with each generation.This pattern is the result of an expanding triplet repeat. ReviewFigure 15.18
15.5 How Is Genetic Screening Used to DetectHuman Diseases?• Genetic screening is used to detect human genetic diseases,alleles predisposing people to those diseases, or carriers ofthose diseases.• Genetic screening can be done by looking for abnormal proteinexpression. Review Figure 15.19• DNA testing is the direct identification of mutant alleles. Anycell can be tested at any time in the life cycle.• The two predominant methods of DNA testing are the allelespecificcleavage method and allele-specific oligonucleotidehybridization method. Review Figures 15.20 and 15.21,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 15.215.6 How Are Genetic Diseases Treated?• There are three ways to modify the phenotype of a genetic disease:restrict the substrate of a deficient enzyme, inhibit a harmfulmetabolic reaction, or supply a missing protein. ReviewFigure 15.22• Cancer is treated with metabolic inhibitors.• In gene therapy, a mutant gene is replaced with a normal gene.Both ex vivo and in vivo therapies are being developed. ReviewFigure 15.23
