Charles Whitman was a normal and responsiblechild. He became the youngest Eagle Scout inthe country. He was a fine son and husband andreceived commendations as a U.S. Marine. While in theservice, however, he began having unexplained fits ofanger and other personality disorders. He was dischargedfrom the Marines and entered the University of Texas.Several times he visited campus doctors and complainedabout having violent thoughts. Then, on August 1, 1966,after killing his wife and mother, Whitman barricadedhimself inside the top floor of the clock tower on campusalong with several high-powered rifles. From this vantagepoint, he killed 14 people and wounded 38 others beforebeing shot and killed by Austin police. In his suicide note,he requested that proceeds from his insurance be donatedto a mental health foundation. He also requestedan autopsy, and that autopsy revealed a tumor pressingon his amygdala.The amygdala (Latin for “almond”) is the brain’s centerfor the emotion and memory of fear. When the cells ofthis structure are activated, your heart beats faster, yourbreathing becomes rapid and shallow, and your handsget cold and clammy. If you encounter a threatening situation,your amygdala is activated. If you are alone at nightand hear a strange noise, your amygdala is activated. Ifyou are faced with attempting something physically dangerous,your amygdyla is activated. Without an amygdala,you would never be scared—and not being scared couldbe hazardous to your health.A rare case of brain damage left a woman without afunctional amygdala. When shown pictures of faces registeringdifferent emotions, she could not pick out the onesthat were threatening or scary. She couldnot recall ever having a frightening experience.In tests where she was administeredmild electrical shocks, she developedno anticipatory fear; even thoughshe knew that seeing a red card meantshe was about to receive a shock, shenever reacted to the red card. In real life,she would not have the reflex to pullaway from a threat.People with a damaged amygdala frequentlyhave trouble engaging in normalsocial relationships. They cannot “read”the nature, mood, or intentions of otherpeople by looking at their faces. The pres-Fear and survival in the brain45Fear Factor The fear response—muscletension, racing heart, cold sweat—kicks inwhen you are faced with potential pain, evenif that experience ultimately will bebeneficial.What Cells Are Unique to the 45.1 Nervous System?Nervous systems are composed of two types of cells: nerve cells,or neurons, and glial cells, or glia (see Figure 40.6). Neurons areexcitable: they can generate and transmit electrical signals,which are known as nerve impulses, or action potentials. Manyneurons have a long extension called an axon that enables themto conduct action potentials over long distances. Glia do notconduct action potentials; rather, they support neurons physically,immunologically, and metabolically. Anerve (as distinctfrom a neuron) is a bundle of axons that come from many differentneurons. Many axons are wrapped by glia to electricallyisolate them and increase their speed of conduction of actionpotentials.Nervous systems can process information because their neuronsare organized into neural networks. These networks includethree functional categories of neurons, which can be thought ofas being involved with input, output, and integration:• Afferent neurons carry sensory information into the nervoussystem. That information comes from specialized sensoryneurons that transduce (convert) various kinds of sensorystimuli (e.g., light, heat, pressure) into action potentials.• Efferent neurons carry commands to physiological and behavioraleffectors such as muscles and glands.• Interneurons integrate and store information and communicatebetween afferent and efferent neurons.Neural networks can be simple, like the one that causes yourleg to kick when a physician taps your knee; or they can be exceedinglycomplex, like the network that enables you to readand remember this chapter.Neural networks range in complexitySimple animals such as cnidarians (e.g., sea anemones) canprocess information with simple neural networks that do littlemore than provide direct lines of communication from sensorycells to effectors; there is little or no integration or processingof signals (Figure 45.1A). The cnidarian’s nerve net is mostdeveloped around the tentacles and the oral opening, where itfacilitates detection of food or danger and causes tentacles toextend or retract.Animals that are more complex and actively move about insearch for food and mates need to process and integrate largeramounts of information. Even earthworms fit this description,and their increased need for information processing is met byhigher numbers of neurons organized into clusters called ganglia.Ganglia serving different functions may be distributedaround the body, as in earthworms or squid (Figure 45.1B,C).IN THIS CHAPTER we will first describe the cells thatmake up nervous systems—neurons and glia —and explainhow neurons process and transmit information by generatingand transmitting electrical signals called action potentials.We will examine the membrane properties and eventsunderlying action potentials and the mechanisms of cell-tocellcommunication where neurons come together. Finally,we will consider how changes in the properties of neuronsmight explain learning and memory.sure on Charles Whitman’s amygdala may have been afactor in the emotions that drove him to mass murder;this diagnosis remains a matter for medical speculation.Our nervous systems enable us to experience theworld around us and to react to it. But in between sensingand reacting, there is much interpretation based onmemory, learning, emotions, and beliefs—all of whichare based on the activities of cells in the nervous system.To understand how our eyes see, how our fingers playthe piano, or how our emotions affect our behavior, wehave to understand how cells in different parts of ournervous systems work and interact.CHAPTER OUTLINE45.1 What Cells Are Unique to the Nervous System?45.2 How Do Neurons Generate and Transmit ElectricalSignals?45.3 How Do Neurons Communicate with Other Cells?Source of the Fear Response Frightening situations—oreven memories of such a situation—activate a brain regioncalled the amygdala, as shown in this functional magneticresonance image (fMRI) of the brain of a person experiencingfear.In animals that are bilaterally symmetrical, ganglia frequentlycome in pairs, one on each side of the body. Also, as animals increasein complexity, some ganglia may become enlarged orfused together at the anterior end, forming a larger, centralizedintegrative center, or brain. The small nervous systems of invertebratescan be remarkably complex. Consider the nervous systemsof spiders, which have programmed within them the thousandsof precise movements necessary to construct a beautifulweb without prior experience or opportunities to learn the specificweb architecture of their species.In vertebrates, most cells of the nervous system are found inthe brain and the spinal cord, the sites of most information processing,storage, and retrieval (Figure 45.1D). Therefore, thebrain and spinal cord are called the central nervous system(CNS). Information is transmitted from sensory cells to the CNSand from the CNS to effectors via neurons that extend or resideoutside the brain and the spinal cord; these neurons and theirsupporting cells are called the peripheral nervous system (PNS).Vertebrates differ greatly in their behavioral complexity and intheir physiological specializations, and their nervous systemsreflect this diversity. Figure 45.2 shows the brains of four vertebratespecies of similar body mass drawn to the same scale.The human nervous system contains an estimated 1011 neurons.Information is passed from one neuron to another wherethey come into close proximity at structures called synapses.The neuron sending the information is the presynaptic neuron,and the neuron receiving the information is the postsynapticneuron. A given neuron in the brain can have 1,000 or moresynapses. Thus the human brain can contain 1014 synapses (1011neurons × 103 synapses per neuron).Synapses are not constant but instead can be highly plastic.They can increase or decrease in number and size. They can becomemore or less sensitive. Therein lies the incredible ability ofthe human brain to process information, to learn, to do complextasks, to remember, and to have emotions. The astronomical numberof neurons and synapses is divided into thousands of distinctbut interacting networks that function in parallel. Before we canunderstand how even one of these circuits works, however, wemust understand the properties of individual neurons.Neurons are the functional units of nervous systemsNervous systems of different species vary enormously in structureand function, but neurons behave similarly in animals asdifferent as squid and humans. Their plasma membranes generateaction potentials and conduct these signals from one lo-45.1 | WHAT CELLS ARE UNIQUE TO THE NERVOUS SYSTEM? 945A nerve net servessimple behaviors such ascontraction and relaxation.In squid, more complex behaviorsare served by collections of neurons inspecialized ganglia that process andintegrate information.The human brain andspinal cord are thecentral nervous system……which communicates to thecells and organs of the body viathe peripheral nervous system.In the earthworm, ganglia in eachsegment coordinate movementand anterior ganglia controlmore complex behavior.Visual gangliaStellateganglionNerves tomusclesNervenetAnterior gangliaSegmentalnerveGanglionin ventralnerve cord(A) Sea anemone(D) Human(B) Earthworm (C) SquidStellate nervewith giant axon45.1 Nervous Systems Vary inSize and Complexity In animalspecies with increasingly complexsensory and behavioral abilities,information processing is increasinglycentralized in ganglia (collections ofneurons) or in a brain.cation on a neuron to the most distant reaches of that cell—adistance that can be more than a meter in a human and manymeters in a whale. Moreover, this transmission of action potentialscan be rapid—up to 100 meters/sec, which is 360 km/hr—making it possible to sense, process, and act on informationvery quickly.Most neurons have four regions—a cell body, dendrites, oneor more axons, and axon terminals (Figure 45.3A)—but the variationamong different types of neurons is considerable (Figure45.3B). The cell body contains the nucleus and most of the cell’sorganelles. Many projections may sprout from the cell body.Most of these projections are shrublike dendrites (from theGreek dendron, “tree”), which bring information from other neu-A shark has littlecomplex behavior. Itsbrain deals primarilywith sensory andmotor information.The brain region thatprocesses olfactoryinformation is relativelymore developed in thepig than in the human.In humans, much ofthe brain is given overto integration ofcomplex behaviors,learning, and memory.Brain stemstructuresserve basicphysiologicalfunctions.The cerebellumintegrates sensory andmotor information.PigSharkHumanCerebrumOlfactorylobeCerebellumBrainstemAlligatorOlfactorylobe45.2 Brains Vary in Size and Complexity The brains of four vertebratespecies—all of which may have a similar body mass—showimmense differences. Note that the brainstem, which is involved in physiologicalregulation and stereotypic behavior, differs less among thesespecies than does the cerebrum, which in higher vertebrates is responsiblefor complex behavior and learning.Dendrites receive informationfrom other neurons.The cell body containsthe nucleus and mostcell organelles.The axon hillock integratesinformation collected bydendrites and initiatesaction potentials.The axon conductsaction potentials awayfrom the cell body.Axon terminals synapsewith a target cell.Bushy dendrites collect informationfrom many other cells.Neurons with fewerdendrites processfewer inputs. Some communicate longdistances via long axons.Some neuronsbranch over abroad area.(A) Generalized neuronal anatomy(B) Specialized neuronsRetina (bipolar cell) Cerebral cortex (pyramidal cell)Cell bodyAxonAxonCell bodyDendritesAxonDendritesCell bodyCerebellum(Purkinje cell)45.3 Neurons (A) A generalized diagram of a neuron. (B) Neurons fromdifferent parts of the mammalian nervous system are specifically adaptedto their functions.946 CHAPTER 45 | NEURONS AND NERVOUS SYSTEMSrons or sensory cells to the cell body. The degree of branchingof the dendrites differs among different types of neurons.In most neurons, one projection—the axon—is much longerthan the others. Axons usually carry action potentials awayfrom the cell body. The length of the axon also differs amongdifferent types of neurons—some axons are remarkably long,such as those that run from the spinal cord to the toes. Axonsare the “telephone lines” of the nervous system. Information receivedby dendrites can cause the axon to generate an action potentialthat is conducted down the axon toward its target cell.At the target cell, the axon divides into a spray of fine nerve endings.At the tip of each of these tiny nerve endings is a swelling,called an axon terminal, that comes very close to the membraneof the target cell to form a synapse.As we will discuss in Section 45.3, synapses can be eitherchemical or electrical. Most synapses in vertebrates are chemicalsynapses. At chemical synapses a space only about 25nanometers wide (about 1/2000th of a human hair) separatesthe presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes. An action potentialarriving at an axon terminal causes it to release chemical messengermolecules called neurotransmitters. The neurotransmittersdiffuse across the space and bind to receptors on theplasma membrane of the postsynaptic or target cell. This bindingalters the activity of the postsynaptic neuron. Some neurotransmitter–receptor combinations inhibit activity of the postsynapticneuron, and other neurotransmitter–receptorcombinations excite it. Neurons integrate information by summingexcitatory and inhibitory inputs.Glia are also important components ofnervous systemsGlia are another class of nervous system cells. There are manymore glia than neurons in the human brain. Like neurons, gliacome in several forms and have diverse functions. They donot generate or transmit electrical signals, but they can releaseneurotransmitters. Some glia physically support and orient theneurons and help them make the right contacts during embryonicdevelopment. Others supply neurons with nutrients, maintainthe extracellular environment, and insulate axons. Still othersconsume debris and foreign particles and provide immunefunctions for the nervous system.In the CNS, glia called oligodendrocytes wrap around theaxons of neurons, covering them with concentric layers of insulatingplasma membrane. In the PNS, glia called Schwanncells perform this function (Figure 45.4). Myelin is the coveringproduced by oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells, and it givesmany parts of the nervous system a glistening white appearance.Not all axons are myelinated, but those that are can conductaction potentials more rapidly than axons that are notmyelinated.Diseases that affect myelin can be devastating because theyimpair conduction of action potentials. The most common demyelinatingdisease is multiple sclerosis—meaning literally “multiplescars”—which occurs in about 1 in 700 people in theUnited States. Individuals with this autoimmune disease produceantibodies to proteins in the myelin in the CNS. The symptomsand damage from the disease depend on where in the CNSthe antibody attacks take place. Motor impairment is common.An example of a demyelinating disease that affects the PNS isGuillain-Barre Syndrome. Environmental factors such as pesticideexposure can also damage myelin. There are no knowncures for demyelinating diseases.Glia called astrocytes (because they look like stars; see Figure40.6B) contribute to the blood–brain barrier, which protectsthe brain from toxic chemicals in the blood. Blood vesselsthroughout the body are very permeable to many chemicals,including toxic ones, which would reach the brain if this barrierdid not exist. Astrocytes help form the blood–brain barrierby surrounding the smallest, most permeable blood vesselsin the brain. The barrier is not perfect, however. Since itconsists of plasma membranes, it is permeable to fat-solublesubstances such as anesthetics and alcohol, which explainswhy these substances have such rapid and marked effects onthe nervous system.The blood–brain barrier usually prevents antibodies in thegeneral circulation from entering the CNS. To provide the CNSwith immune defenses, microglia, which originate during developmentfrom stem cells in the bone marrow, come to reside45.1 | WHAT CELLS ARE UNIQUE TO THE NERVOUS SYSTEM? 947Multiple layers ofmyelin insulatethe axon.Site anddirectionof myelingrowthMyelin-producingSchwann cellsNucleus ofSchwann cellNodes of RanvierAxon(A)(B) Mitochondria0.1 μm45.4 Wrapping Up an Axon (A) Schwann cells produce layers of myelin, a type of plasma membranethat provides electrical insulation to the axon. At the intervals between Schwann cells—thenodes of Ranvier—the axon is exposed. Action potentials travel along the axon by “jumping” fromnode to node. (B) A myelinated axon, seen in cross section through an electron microscope.in the CNS and act as macrophages and mediators of inflammatoryresponses.45.1 RECAPNervous systems consist of neurons and glia. Neuronsare arranged in circuits. Sensory neurons convertinformation from the external or internal environmentinto electrical signals; interneurons integrateand process information; and efferent neurons carrycommands to target tissues. Glia have a wide varietyof supporting roles, including contributing to theblood–brain barrier.• Comparing nervous systems of anemones, worms,fishes, and humans, what trends seem to reflect increasingcomplexity? See pp. 945–946 and Figures45.1 and 45.2• Describe the different parts of neurons and theirfunctions. See pp. 946–947 and Figure 45.3• What are some types of glia, and what are theirfunctions? See p. 947The one feature common to all nervous systems is that theyprocess information in the form of action potentials. In the nextsection we will focus on how action potentials are generatedand transmitted by nervous systems.How Do Neurons Generate and 45.2 Transmit Electrical Signals?All animal cells have more potassium ions (K+) inside and moresodium ions (Na+) in the extracellular fluid. Both inside and outsidethe cell, the positive charges of these ions are balanced bynegatively charged ions so that, individually, the cell interior andthe extracellular fluid are both electrically neutral. However,across the cell membrane there is an electrical charge difference,with the inside being negative to the outside. Why is this so?The reason is that there are leak currents in the cell membranedue to channels that allow only certain ions—mostly K+—to“leak” passively across. Because there are more potassium ionsinside the cell than outside, K+ diffuses out of the cell down aconcentration gradient. But when K+ leaks out of the cell, itleaves behind an unbalanced negative charge that tends to pullK+ back into the cell. An equilibrium is reached when the tendencyfor K+ to diffuse out is countered by the electrical chargepulling K+ back in. The result is an electric charge difference—a membrane potential—across the plasma membrane, with theinside of the cell negative to the outside.Membrane potentials exist in all cells. In neurons, the steadystate membrane potential is called the resting potential, becauseneurons can also be active, generating rapid, large changes inmembrane potential. These sudden large shifts are called actionpotentials (sometimes referred to as nerve impulses). An actionpotential is generated by sudden openings and rapid closingsof ion channels. Before describing the properties of ion channelsand action potentials in detail, a review of some simple conceptsof electricity may be useful.Simple electrical concepts underlie neural functionVoltage (electric potential difference) is a force that causes electricallycharged particles to move between two points. Voltageis to the flow of electrically charged particles as pressure is tothe flow of water. If the negative and positive poles of a batteryare connected by a wire, an electric current will flow throughthe wire because there is a voltage difference between the twopoles. This flow of electric current can be used to do work, justas a current of water can be used to do work.In wires, electric current is carried by electrons, but in solutionsand across cell membranes, electric current is carried byions. The major ions that carry electric charges across the plasmamembranes of neurons are sodium (Na+), potassium (K+), calcium(Ca2+), and chloride (Cl–). Recall that ions with oppositecharges attract one another and that those with like chargesrepel one another. How do these basic principles of bioelectricityestablish the resting potential of the neural plasma membrane?And how is the flow of ions through membrane channelsturned on and off to generate action potentials? We addressthese questions next.Membrane potentials can be measured with electrodesWe can record electrical events in a cell using electrodes. Figure45.5 shows how this technique is applied across an unstimulatedaxon to measure the resting potential, which is usually between–60 and –70 mV. The minus sign indicates that the insideof the cell is electrically negative compared with the outside.The resting potential provides a means for neurons to respondto a stimulus. Because of the voltage difference across themembrane, and the different ion concentrations on either sideof the membrane, ions would cross the membrane if they could.For example, Na+ ions are more abundant outside the cell thaninside and the inside of the resting cell is negatively charged.Therefore, if the membrane suddenly became permeable to Na+,those positively charged ions would rush into the cell. Anychemical or physical stimulus that changes the permeability ofthe plasma membrane to ions will produce a change in the cell’smembrane potential. The most extreme change in membranepotential is the action potential, a sudden and rapid reversalin the voltage across a portion of the plasma membrane. For oneor two milliseconds, positively charged ions flow into the cell,making the inside of the cell more positive than the outside.Ion transporters and channels generatemembrane potentialsThe plasma membranes of neurons, like those of all other cells,are lipid bilayers that are impermeable to ions but contain many948 CHAPTER 45 | NEURONS AND NERVOUS SYSTEMSGO TO Animated Tutorial 45.1 • The Resting Membrane PotentialyourBioPortal.comprotein molecules that serve as ion transporters and channels.Ion transporters and channels are responsible for the distributionof charges across the membrane that create resting andaction potentials.Ion transporters require energy to move ions against theirconcentration or electrical gradients and are therefore called ionpumps. A major ion transporter in the plasma membranes ofneurons (and all other cells) is the sodium–potassium pump, socalled because it actively expels Na+ ions from inside the cell,exchanging them for K+ ions from outside the cell (Figure45.6A). The Na+–K+ pump is an antiporter (see Section 6.3) andis also known as sodium–potassium ATPase, a term emphasizingthat it is an enzyme complex requiring ATP to do its work.The Na+–K+ pump keeps the concentration of K+ inside the cellgreater than that of the extracellular fluid, and the concentrationof Na+ inside the cell less than that of the extracellular fluid.The concentration differences established by this antiportermean that K+ would diffuse out of the cell and Na+ would dif-45.2 | HOW DO NEURONS GENERATE AND TRANSMIT ELECTRICAL SIGNALS? 949TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE45.5 Measuring the Membrane PotentialAn electrode can be made from a glass pipette with a very sharp tip filled with a solution that conducts electric charges. If one electrode isplaced inside the plasma membrane of an axon and another is placed just outside the axon, the difference in voltage can be measured.Two electrodes, one insideand one outside the axon,detect the difference involtage.An electrode madefrom a glass pipette(pulled to a sharp tipand open at the end)is filled with anelectrically conductingsolution…1…and connected witha wire to an amplifier.2The small differenceis amplified…3 4In an unstimulated neuron,constant difference of –60 mVbetween outside and inside isthe resting potential.6…and displayed on anoscilloscope screen.5– – – – – – – –– – – – – – – – –+ + + + + + + + + ++ + + + + + + + +––+––+––+Inside axonOutside axonOutside axon Time0–60mVAmplifierAxonOutsideaxonInsideaxonPlasmamembraneOutside of cell(A) Na+–K+ pump (ATPase)(B) Na+–K+ channelsInside of cellOutside of cellInside of cellATP ATPADPNa+Na+K+K+ K+SodiumpotassiumpumpPiPiVoltage-gatedNa+ channelClosedOpenLeakK+ channel45.6 Ion Transporters and Channels (A) The sodium–potassiumpump is in an antiporter that actively moves K+ to the inside of a neuronand Na+ to the outside. (B) Ion channels allow specific ions to diffuse downtheir concentration gradients; K+ tends to leave neurons when potassiumchannels are open, and Na+ tends to enter neurons when sodium channelsare open. Leak channels like the K+ channel shown are always open andcreate the resting membrane potential. Gated channels like the Na+ channelsshown are opened by chemical or electrical stimulation.fuse in if the ions could cross the lipid bilayer. How do theseconcentration gradients relate to the electric gradients we discussedabove?Ion channels permit the diffusion of ions across membranes.These channels are water-filled pores formed by proteins thatcross the lipid bilayer and are generally selective—they allowsome types of ions to pass through more easily than others (Figure45.6B). Thus, there are potassium channels, sodium channels,chloride channels, and calcium channels, and there are differentkinds of each. Ions can diffuse through these channels in950 CHAPTER 45 | NEURONS AND NERVOUS SYSTEMSTOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE45.7 Using the Nernst EquationThe Nernst equation calculates membrane potential when only one type of ion can cross a membranethat separates solutions with different concentrations of that ion.2.3RTzFlog[ion]o[ion]iEion =2.3RTzFlog[ion]o[ion]iEion =log[ion]o[ion]ilog[ion]o[ion]i1. Measure concentrations of ions inside and outside a neuron.To measure the concentration of ions in a neuron, the neuron (and its axon) must be big. Squid have giant neurons thatcontrol their escape response (see Figure 45.1C). It is possible to sample the cytoplasm of these axons, which are about1 mm in diameter.2. Use the Nernst equation to calculate what the membrane potential would be if it were permeable to each of theions that are differently concentrated on the two sides of the membrane: Na+, K+, Ca2+, and Cl–.The Nernst equation predicts the membrane potential resulting from membrane permeability to a single type of ion thatdiffers in concentration on the two sides of the membrane. The equation is writtenwhere E is the equilibrium (resting) membrane potential (the voltage across the membrane in mV ), R is the universal gasconstant, T is the absolute temperature, z is the charge on the ion (+1, +1, +2, or –1), and F is the Faraday constant. Thesubscripts o and i indicate the ion concentrations outside and inside the cell, respectively.At this point you could just “plug and play,” but do you understand this equation?A concentration difference of ions across a membrane creates a chemical force that pushes the ions across the membrane;however, the resulting unbalanced electrical charges will pull the ions back the other way. At equilibrium, the work donemoving ions in each direction will be the same.The chemical energy pushing the ions will equal 2.3 RT log [ion]o/[ion]iThe electrical energy pulling the ions will equal zEF. So, at equilibrium:Rearranging the equation to solve for E, we get the Nernst equation:We can simplify the equation by picking a temperature—let’s use “room temperature,” or 20ºC—and solving for 2.3 RT/F.At 20ºC, 2.3 RT/F equals 58. Thus:Squid axon1 mmCytoplasmElectrodezEF = 2.3 RTEion = 58/z3. Measuring ion concentrations in squid giant axon cytoplasm and in seawater, then solving the Nernst equationfor each ion, we find:K+ 400 20 –75Na+ 50 460 +56Ca2+ 0.5 10 +38Cl– 50 560 –60IonPredicted membranepotential (mV)Ion concentration (mM)in squid axon in seawaterPlasma membrane4. Since the measured membrane potential is –66 mV, it is clear that the resting potential of the axon is due topermeability of the membrane to more than just one type of ion.either direction. The direction and magnitude of the net movementof ions through a channel depend on the concentration gradientof that ion type across the plasma membrane, as well as onas the voltage difference across that membrane. These two motiveforces acting on an ion are termed its electrochemical gradient.Although the electrochemical gradient drives the movementof ions through channels across bilayers, movementthrough channels can be modified by gates that open and closechannels.Potassium channels are the most common open, or leak, channelsin the plasma membranes of resting (non-stimulated) neurons.As a consequence, resting neurons are more permeable toK+ than to any other ion. Thus, open potassium channels arelargely responsible for the resting membrane potential. Becausethe potassium channels make the plasma membranepermeable to K+, and because the Na+–K+ pump keepsthe concentration of K+ inside the cell much higher thanthat outside the cell, K+ tends to diffuse down its electrochemicalgradient, out of the cell, through the channels.As these positively charged potassium ions diffuseout of the cell, they leave behind unbalanced negativecharges, generating an electric potential across the membranethat tends to pull K+ back into the cell.The membrane potential at which the net diffusionof K+ out of the cell ceases (that is, the point at which K+diffusion out due to the concentration gradient is balancedby its movement in due to the negative electricpotential) is the potassium equilibrium potential. Thevalue of the potassium equilibrium potential can be calculatedfrom the concentrations of K+ on the two sidesof the membrane using the Nernst equation (Figure45.7). This equation, developed in the late 1800s, illustratesthat the nature of ion channels in neural membraneswas hypothesized long before their specificstructures and properties were described.In the late 1940s, A. L. Hodgkin and A. F. Huxley atthe University of Cambridge set out to study the electricalproperties of axonal membranes. With the techniquesavailable at that time, the necessary measurementscould be made only if you had a very large axonto work with. Such an axon exists in nature, in the hugeneuron that controls the escape response of squid.Hodgkin and Huxley used electrodes to measure thevoltage across the plasma membrane of this large axon,as seen in Figure 45.7, and to pass electric current intoit to change its resting potential. They also changed theconcentrations of Na+ and K+ both inside and outsidethe squid axon and measured the resulting changes inmembrane potential. On the basis of their many carefulexperiments, Hodgkin and Huxley developed virtuallyall of our basic concepts about the electrical propertiesof neurons, and received the Nobel prize in 1963.We now know that, in general, the resting potentialis less negative than the Nernst equation predicts becauseresting neurons are also slightly permeable toother ions, such as Na+ and Cl–. Another equation,called the Goldman equation, takes all of the ions thatcan cross the membrane into account and therefore can calculatethe membrane potential accurately.Ion channels and their properties can nowbe studied directlyBecause Hodgkin and Huxley were working long before therewere laboratory techniques that could investigate ion channels,they could only hypothesize their properties. These hypothesescould not be tested until the late 1970s, when B. Sakmann andE. Neher developed a technique called patch clamping, forwhich they won the Nobel prize in 1991. Patch clamping, describedin Figure 45.8, is widely used by neurobiologists, en-45.2 | HOW DO NEURONS GENERATE AND TRANSMIT ELECTRICAL SIGNALS? 951TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE45.8 Patch ClampingThe patch clamp is a glass micropipette filled with an electrically conductivesolution that has the same composition as extracellular fluids. When thispipette/electrode is positioned against the membrane of a cell and slightsuction is applied, a seal forms. If a single ion channel (or a few ion channels)are within the patch of membrane bounded by the seal, the openings andclosings of individual channels can be recorded by the electrode. If thepipette is retracted, it can tear the patched membrane away from the cell, andthe activities of the ion channels in the patch can continue to be recorded.A recording pipette filledwith an electricallyconductive solution isplaced in contact with aneuron’s membrane.Retracting the pipette removesthe membrane patch, often withone or more ion channels in it.The opening and closing of ion channelscan be recorded through the pipette.Slight suction creates a sealbetween the pipette tip anda patch of the membrane.Recording pipetteNeuronClosedOpenOscilloscope tracing of ionic currentMildsuctionabling them to record in real time the tiny electrical currentscaused by the openings and closings of single ion channels.Gated ion channels alter membrane potentialThe ion channels called leak channels are always open, but otherion channels in the plasma membranes of neurons behave as ifthey contain “gates”; they are open under some conditions andclosed under other conditions. Voltage-gated channels open orclose in response to a change in the voltage across the plasmamembrane. Chemically gated channels open or close dependingon the presence or absence of a specific molecule that binds tothe channel protein, or to a separate receptor that in turn altersthe channel protein. Mechanically gated channels open or closein response to mechanical force applied to the plasma membrane.Gated channels play important roles in neural function.Openings and closings of gated channels alter the resting potential.Imagine what happens, for example, if sodium channelsin the plasma membrane open. Na+ diffuses into the neurondown its electrochemical gradient. As a result, the inside of thecell becomes less negative. When the inside of a neuron becomesless negative (or more positive) in comparison to its resting condition,its plasma membrane is depolarized (Figure 45.9).An opposite change in the resting potential occurs if gatedK+ channels open. When K+ efflux from the neuron increasesover the normal leak current (the movement of K+ throughthe leak channels), the membrane potential becomes even morenegative, and the plasma membrane is hyperpolarized.The openings and closings of ion channels, which result inchanges in the voltage across the plasma membrane, are thebasic mechanisms by which neurons respond to stimuli, bethey electrical, chemical, or mechanical. How do such localchanges in membrane potential get communicated to otherparts of the cell?Alocal change in membrane potential causes a flow of ionsthat spreads the change in membrane potential to adjacent regionsof the membrane. For example, when Na+ enters a neuronthrough open sodium channels at one location, those positivelycharged ions are attracted to adjacent areas on the insideof the membrane that are more negative, and thus there is arapid flow of electric current (movement of ions) away from thesite of the open Na+ channels. However, this local flow of electriccurrent decays as it spreads and therefore does not spreadvery far. Electric currents do not spread far in cells because cellmembranes are not completely impermeable to ions. An electriccurrent traveling along a membrane is like water flowingthrough a leaky hose.Graded changes in membrane potential canintegrate informationEven though the flow of electric current along plasma membranescan only extend over short distances, it can cause gradedchanges in membrane potentials locally. A graded membrane952 CHAPTER 45 | NEURONS AND NERVOUS SYSTEMSNa+ flowing into thecell depolarizes it.More K+ flowing out ofthe cell hyperpolarizes it.Resting potentialOnly K+ channel openK+ channelK+ channel openNa+ channel open More K+ channels openOutside of cellInside of cellOpen Closed Closed–300–60–90TimeDepolarizedVoltage-gated Na+ channel openHyperpolarizedChemically gated K+ channel openOpen Open Closed Open Closed OpenMembrane potential (mV)Resting potentialDepolarizedHyperpolarizedVoltage-gatedNa+ channelChemically gatedK+ channel+ +– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + ++ +K+Na+45.9 Membranes Can Be Depolarized or Hyperpolarized The restingpotential is produced by leak K+ channels. A shift from the restingpotential to a less negative membrane potential, as occurs when Na+enters the cell through a gated sodium channel, is called depolarization.Hyperpolarization occurs when the membrane potential becomes morenegative, as when additional K+ leaves the cell through gated K+ channels,which occurs extensively in your brain when you fall asleep.potential is a change from the resting potential. Such changescan be due to chemical or mechanical influences on ion channels.Graded potentials are a means of integrating inputs to acell because the membrane can respond to those inputs withproportional amounts of depolarization or hyperpolarization.Graded potentials can transmit signals over very short distancesand play an important role at the neuromuscular junction(see Section 45.3). In the next chapter we will learn howthey play important roles in sensory systems. However, axonsare too long to transmit information as a continuous flow ofelectric current (as telephone wires do). Therefore axons codeinformation as discrete action potentials that travel along theirmembranes. Graded potentials, however, play an important rolein the generation of action potentials.Sudden changes in Na+ and K+ channels generateaction potentialsAction potentials are sudden, transient, large changes in membranepotential. In unmyelinated axons they can be conductedat speeds of up to 2 meters per second, but in myelinated axonsthe conduction velocity can be 100 meters per second. Thinkof running the 100-meter dash—the world record is slightly under10 seconds.If we place the tips of a pair of electrodes on either side ofthe plasma membrane of a resting axon and measure the voltagedifference, the reading might be about –60 mV, as we sawin Figure 45.5. If these electrodes are in place when an actionpotential travels down the axon, they register a rapid change inmembrane potential, from –60 mV to about +50 mV. The membranepotential then rapidly returns to its resting level of –60mV as the action potential passes (Figure 45.10).The action potential is generated by the actions of voltagegatedNa+ and K+ channels in the plasma membrane of the axon.At the resting potential, most of these channels are closed (balloon1 in Figure 45.10). Depolarization of the membrane causesthem to open. For example, if a neuron is stimulated sufficiently45.2 | HOW DO NEURONS GENERATE AND TRANSMIT ELECTRICAL SIGNALS? 953All gated channels close. The cell returns to itsresting potential. Na+ inactivation gates reopen.5The action potential is a sudden,brief reversal of polarity of themembrane potential.The membrane potential at anygiven time depends on how manyand which channels are open.Additional voltage-gated Na+channel activation gates open,causing a rapid spike ofdepolarization—an action potential.Activation gates of some Na+ 3channels open, depolarizing thecell to threshold.2 Na+ channel inactivation gatesclose; gated K+ channels open,repolarizing and evenhyperpolarizing the cell.Leak K+ channels create 4the resting potential. Gatedchannels are closed.1Voltage-gatedK+ channelVoltage-gatedNa+ channelsK+ channelOutside of cellInside of cellActivation gateInactivation gateOscilloscope screen50–50–40030–60–70RestingpotentialThreshold1 2 3 4Membrane potential (mV)Time (msec)Amplifier– – – – – – –– – – – – – – – –+ + + + + + + + + ++ + + + + + + + +––+––+––+Inside axonOutside axonOutside axon1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10Undershoot45.10 The Course of an Action Potential Actionpotentials result from rapid changes in voltage-gatedNa+ and K+ channels.GO TO Animated Tutorial 45.2 •The Action PotentialyourBioPortal.comto cause the plasma membrane of its cell body to depolarize, thatdepolarization can spread by local current flow to the axonhillock, the region of the cell body at the base of the axon (seeFigure 45.3). Voltage-gated Na+ channels are concentrated in theaxon hillock. When the plasma membrane in this area depolarizes,some of these voltage-gated channels open briefly—for lessthan a millisecond (balloon 2 in Figure45.10). When these channels open, Na+rushes into the axon and depolarizes themembrane even more, causing more Na+channels to open—a positive feedback effect.When the membrane is depolarized about5 to 10 mV above the resting potential, athreshold is reached; a large number ofsodium channels open (balloon 3 in Figure45.10), and the membrane potential becomespositive—an action potential. Therising phase of the action potential haltsabruptly in 1 to 2 milliseconds, and themembrane potential rapidly becomes negativeonce again.What causes the axon to return to restingpotential? There are two contributing factors:the voltage-gated Na+ channels close,and voltage-gated K+ channels open (balloon4 in Figure 45.10). The voltage-gated K+channels open more slowly than the Na+channels and stay open longer, allowing K+to carry excess positive charges out of theaxon. As a result, the membrane potentialreturns to a negative value and usually becomeseven more negative than the restingpotential until the voltage-gated K+ channelsclose (balloon 5 in Figure 45.10).Another feature of the voltage-gated Na+channels is that once they open and close,they have a refractory period of 1 to 2 millisecondsduring which they cannot openagain. This property can be explained bythe channels having two gates, an activationgate and an inactivation gate (see Figure45.10). Under resting conditions, the activationgate is closed and the inactivation gateis open. Depolarization of the membrane tothe threshold level causes both gates tochange state, but the activation gate respondsfaster. As a result, the channel isopen for a brief time between the openingof the activation gate and the closing of theinactivation gate. Inactivation gates remainclosed for 1 to 2 milliseconds before theyspontaneously open again, thus explainingwhy the membrane has a refractory periodbefore it can fire another action potential. Bythe time the inactivation gate reopens, theactivation gate is closed, and the membraneis poised to generate another action potential.Another contribution to the refractory period is the durationof the opening of the voltage-gated K+ channels, as we saw above.The dip in the membrane potential following an action potentialis called the after-hyperpolarization or undershoot.The difference in the concentration of Na+ across the plasmamembrane and the negative resting potential constitute the “bat-954 CHAPTER 45 | NEURONS AND NERVOUS SYSTEMS1 Voltage-gated Na+ channels open inresponse to the electrical stimulus,generating an action potential.2 A depolarizingcurrent spreadsdown the axon.3 Upstream Na+ channelsinactivate, making themembrane refractory.4 Voltage-gated K+ channelsopen, hyperpolarizing theaxon, then close.5 As it travels down the axon, the actionpotential stimulates more Na+ channels toopen in a self-extending forward stream.– – – – – – –– – – – – – – – –+ + + + + + + + + ++ + + + + + + + +––+––+––+Inside axonOutside axonOutside axon– – – – – – –– – – – – – – – –+ + + + + + + + + ++ + + + + + + + +––+––+––+Inside axonOutside axonOutside axonElectricalstimulus(A)(B) Time 1(C) Time 2AmplifierAmplifierPoint APoint A Point BPoint APoint BPoint APoint BPoint APoint BPoint BOscilloscope screenTime1 245.11 Action Potentials Travel along Axons (A) There is no loss of signal as an action potentialtravels along an axon. (B) When an action potential is stimulated in one region of membrane,electric current flows to adjacent areas of membrane and depolarizes them. (C) The advancingwave of depolarization causes more Na+ channels to open, and the action potential is generatedanew in the next section of membrane. Meanwhile, in the region where the action potential has justfired, the Na+ channels are inactivated and the voltage-gated K+ channels are still open, renderingthis section of the axon refractory. Hence the action potential cannot “back up,” but moves continuouslyforward along the axon, regenerating itself as it goes.tery” that drives action potentials. How rapidly does the batteryrun down? It might seem that a substantial number of ionswould have to cross the membrane for the membrane potentialto change from –60 mV to +50 mV and back to –60 mV again. Infact, only a vanishingly small percentage of the Na+ concentratedoutside the plasma membrane moves through the channels duringthe passage of an action potential. Thus the effect of a singleaction potential on the concentration gradients of Na+ and K+ isvery small, and it is possible in most cases for the sodium–potassiumpump to keep the “battery” charged, even when the neuronis generating many action potentials every second.Action potentials are conducted along axonswithout loss of signalAction potentials can travel over long distances with no lossof signal. If we place two pairs of electrodes at two differentlocations along an axon, we can record an action potential atthose two locations as it travels along the axon(Figure 45.11A). The magnitude of the actionpotential does not change between the tworecording sites. This constancy is possible becausean action potential is an all-or-none,self-regenerating event.• An action potential is all-or-none becauseof the interaction between the voltagegatedNa+ channels and the membranepotential. If the membrane is depolarizedslightly, some voltage-gated Na+ channelsopen. Some sodium ions cross the plasmamembrane and depolarize it even more,opening more voltage-gated Na+ channels,and so on, until the membranereaches threshold and generates an actionpotential. This positive feedback mechanismensures that action potentials alwaysrise to their maximum value.• An action potential is self-regenerating becauseit spreads by local current flow toadjacent regions of the plasma membrane.The resulting depolarization brings thoseneighboring areas of membrane to threshold.So when an action potential occurs atone location on an axon, it stimulates theadjacent region of axon to generate an actionpotential, and so on down the lengthof the axon.We can use an electrode to stimulate an axon,causing it to depolarize and to fire an actionpotential that is then conducted along theaxon. Figure 45.11B shows the changes in theion channels in the membrane that are responsiblefor conducting the action potentialalong the axon without a reduction in amplitude.Normally, an action potential is propagatedin only one direction—away from thebody. It cannot reverse itself because the voltage-gated Na+channels in the region of the membrane it came from are still intheir refractory period.Action potentials do not travel along all axons at the samespeed. They travel faster in large-diameter axons than in smalldiameteraxons because the resistance to current flow decreasesas an axon’s diameter gets bigger. They travel faster in myelinatedthan in nonmyelinated axons because they can “jump”from one node to another without traversing the interveningspace (Figure 45.12). Invertebrates mostly depend on increasedaxon diameter for fast conduction, but vertebrates mostly dependon myelination of axons to increase conduction velocity.Action potentials can jump along axonsIn vertebrate nervous systems, increasing the speed of action potentialsby increasing the diameter of axons is not feasible becauseof the huge number of axons involved. Each of our eyes,45.2 | HOW DO NEURONS GENERATE AND TRANSMIT ELECTRICAL SIGNALS? 955Na+ channels open, generatingan action potential.1 Spreading current from the upstream node bringsthe membrane at the next node to threshold.2The action potential jumpsquickly to the new node and…45 …continues from node to node.Upstream Na+ channels inactivate, makingthe membrane refractory. Voltage-gated K+channels open, repolarizing the axon.3Nodes of RanvierMyelin-encasedSchwann cells45.12 Saltatory Action Potentials Action potentials appear to jump from node to node inmyelinated axons.for example, has about a million axons connecting it to the brain.These axons conduct action potentials at about the same speedas does the squid giant axon—about 20 meters per second—yet the diameter of each is 200 times smaller than the squidaxon’s diameter. Vertebrates have evolved a different way of increasingconduction velocity of axons, and that adaptation ismyelination.When glia wrap themselves around axons, covering themwith concentric layers of myelin (see Figure 45.4), they leaveregularly spaced gaps, called nodes of Ranvier, where the axonis not covered (see Figure 45.12). The leakage of ions acrossthe regions of the plasma membrane that are wrapped in myelinis reduced, so electric current can spread farther along the insideof a myelinated axon than it can along a nonmyelinatedaxon. Additionally, voltage-gated ion channels are clustered atthe nodes of Ranvier. Thus an axon can fire action potentialsonly at nodes, and those action potentials cannot be propagatedthrough the adjacent patch of membrane covered with myelin.The positive charges that flow into the axon at the node do,however, flow down the inside of the axon in the form of electriccurrent. When the current reaches the next node, the plasmamembrane at that node is depolarized to threshold and fires anotheraction potential. Action potentials therefore appear tojump from node to node along the axon.The speed of conduction is increased in these myelinwrappedaxons because electric current flows much fasterthrough the cytoplasm than ion channels can open and close.This form of rapid impulse propagation is called saltatory conduction(Latin saltare, “to jump”).45.2 RECAPNeurons have membrane potentials due to ionicconcentration differences across their membranesand because leak channels make the membranedifferentially permeable to ions. Changes in ionchannel permeabilities cause graded changes inmembrane potentials. Sudden openings and closingsof gated ion channels in the membrane produceaction potentials. Action potentials are rapid,all-or-none changes in membrane potential that areconducted along axons from the neuron body tothe axon terminals.• How are membrane resting potentials generated andaltered? See pp. 949–950 and Figures 45.6 and 45.9• How are action potentials generated? See pp. 953–955and Figure 45.10• How are action potentials transmitted along axons?See pp. 955–956 and Figures 45.11 and 45.12Now that we understand how action potentials are generatedand transmitted along axons, let’s address the question of whathappens when the action potential gets to the axon terminals.How is it communicated to the next cell, which could be anotherneuron, a muscle cell, or perhaps a secretory cell?How Do Neurons Communicate 45.3 with Other Cells?Neurons communicate with each other and with other cells atsynapses. The most common type of synapse in the nervous systemis the chemical synapse, in which neurotransmitters releasedfrom a presynaptic cell induce changes in a postsynapticcell. In electrical synapses the action potential spreadsdirectly from presynaptic to postsynaptic cell. We will begin thissection with a discussion of the synapses between neurons andmuscle cells. We will then consider the diversity in synapses,how they integrate information, and how they are involved inlearning and memory.The neuromuscular junction is a modelchemical synapseNeuromuscular junctions are synapses between neurons andthe skeletal muscle cells they innervate. They are excellentmodels for how chemical synaptic transmission works. Likeother neurons, a motor neuron has only one axon, but close toits target cell that axon can branch into numerous axon terminalsthat form many synapses with muscle cells. At eachaxon terminal an enlarged knob or buttonlike structure containsvesicles filled with neurotransmitter molecules. The neurotransmitterused by all vertebrate neuromuscular synapsesis acetylcholine (ACh). ACh is released by exocytosis when themembrane of a vesicle fuses with the presynaptic membraneof the axon terminal.Where does the neurotransmitter come from? Some neurotransmitters,such as ACh, are synthesized in the axon terminaland packaged in vesicles. The enzymes required for AChbiosynthesis, however, are produced in the cell body of the motorneuron and are transported along microtubules down theaxon to the terminals. In contrast, peptide neurotransmitters areproduced in the cell body and packaged into membrane-boundvesicles by the Golgi apparatus. These vesicles are rapidly transporteddown the axon to the terminals.The postsynaptic membrane of the neuromuscular junctionis a modified part of the muscle cell plasma membrane calleda motor end plate (Figure 45.13). It appears as a depression inthe muscle cell membrane, and the terminals of the motor neuronsit in the depression. The space between the presynapticmembrane and the postsynaptic membrane is the synaptic cleft,which in chemical synapses is about 20 to 40 nanometers wide.ACh released into the cleft by the presynaptic cell diffuses acrossto the postsynaptic membrane.The arrival of an action potential causes the releaseof neurotransmitterNeurotransmitter is released when an action potential arrivesat the axon terminal and causes the opening of voltage-gatedCa2+ channels in the presynaptic membrane. Because the Ca2+concentration is greater outside the cell than inside, Ca2+ entersthe axon terminal near the sites of vesicle exocytosis. The increasein Ca2+ inside the axon terminal causes the vesicles con-956 CHAPTER 45 | NEURONS AND NERVOUS SYSTEMStaining neurotransmitter to fuse with the presynaptic membraneand empty their contents into the synaptic cleft.In neuromuscular synapses, vesicle fusion and emptying isall-or-none. The vesicle membrane is incorporated into the presynapticmembrane, which actually gets larger as a result—at leastuntil the extra membrane is recycled through endocytosis. Therecycled membrane is processed through endosomes to becomenew vesicles that are then refilled with neurotransmitter.Synaptic functions involve many proteinsThe description above of the release of neurotransmitter fromthe presynaptic membrane may seem simple, but it involveshundreds of proteins that are responsible for various aspects ofthe process: vesicle formation, transport of neurotransmitterinto vesicles, anchoring of vesicles to cytoskeletal elements,docking of the vesicles with the presynaptic membrane, fusionof the vesicular and cell membranes, and endocytosis ofthe vesicle membrane for recycling.Some of these proteins are the targets of toxins. For example,toxins from bacteria of the genus Clostridium are proteasesthat destroy several of the proteins necessary for the docking ofvesicles to the presynaptic membrane. These toxins cause botulismand tetanus, frequently fatal diseases that involve muscleimpairment because of loss of transmitter release. Poisons canalso become medicines, however. You have surely heard aboutthe use of botulinum toxin (Botox) for decreasing muscle spasmsfor cosmetic (removal of wrinkles) or therapeutic purposes.The postsynaptic membrane respondsto neurotransmitterWhen ACh is released at a synapse, some of it diffuses acrossthe synaptic cleft and binds to ACh receptors on the postsynapticmembrane (Figure 45.14). The postsynaptic membrane ofthe motor end plate is highly folded. ACh receptors are on thecrests of the folds, and voltage-gated cation channels are at thebottoms of the folds and in the surrounding muscle cell membrane(see Figure 45.13). The ACh receptors are channels thatallow both Na+ and K+ to flow through, but since the electrochemicalgradients favor a net influx of Na+, the response of themotor end plate to ACh is to depolarize. That graded potentialreflecting the number of receptors activated spreads to thedepths of the folds of the motor end plate membrane and to sur-957Acetylcholine is broken down andthe components are taken back upby the presynaptic cell. Acetylcholineand vesicles are recycled.7Na+ channels open;depolarization causesvoltage-gated Ca2+channels to open.2Action potentialarrives at axonterminal.1Ca2+ enters the cell andtriggers fusion ofacetylcholine vesicleswith the presynapticmembrane.3When receptors bindacetylcholine, they opentheir cation channels anddepolarize the postsynapticmembrane.5The spreadingdepolarization fires anaction potential in thepostsynaptic membrane.6Acetylcholine moleculesdiffuse across the synapticcleft and bind to receptors onthe postsynaptic membrane.4Presynaptic cell(motor neuron)Postsynaptic cell(muscle cell)AxonAxon terminalAcetylcholinereceptorSynaptic cleftAcetylcholinemolecules invesicleMuscle fiberMotor neuronNa+Na+Action potentialCa2+45.13 Chemical Synaptic Transmission Begins with the Arrival ofan Action Potential The neuromuscular junction is a typical chemicalsynapse. The events shown here for release of acetylcholine are similarfor other neurotransmitters.GO TO Animated Tutorial 45.3 • Synaptic TransmissionyourBioPortal.comrounding muscle cell membrane, which contain voltage-gatedNa+ channels.If the axon terminal of a motor neuron releases sufficientamounts of ACh to adequately depolarize a motor end plate,that spreading depolarization will activate the voltage-gatedNa+ channels and cause the firing of an action potential. Thisaction potential is then conducted throughout the muscle cell’ssystem of membranes, causing the cell to contract. We discussmuscle membrane action potentials and the contraction of musclecells in greater detail in Section 48.1.How much neurotransmitter is enough? Neither a singleACh molecule nor the contents of an entire vesicle (about 10,000ACh molecules) will bring the plasma membrane of a musclecell to threshold. However, a single action potential in an axonterminal releases the contents of about 100 vesicles, which ismore than enough to fire an action potential in the muscle celland cause it to contract.Synapses between neurons can be excitatoryor inhibitoryIn vertebrates, the synapses between motor neurons and musclecells are always excitatory; that is, motor end plates alwaysrespond to ACh with a graded potential that is less negativethan the resting potential. However, synapses between neuronscan also be inhibitory. For example, recall that there are morechloride ions (Cl–) outside the cell than inside it. If the receptoron the postsynaptic membrane is a Cl– channel opened by aneurotransmitter, the effect of that neurotransmitter will be tocause Cl– ions to enter the postsynaptic cell and hyperpolarizeit. Hyperpolarization will take the membrane farther from thethreshold potential for the voltage-gated Na+ channels, andtherefore make it less likely that the cell will fire action potentials.Asynapse that causes hyperpolarization of the postsynapticmembrane is inhibitory.Recall that a neuron may have many dendrites. Axon terminalsfrom many other neurons may form synapses with thosedendrites and with the cell body. The axon terminals of differentpresynaptic neurons may store and release different neurotransmitters,and the plasma membrane of the dendrites andcell body of a postsynaptic neuron may have receptors for a varietyof neurotransmitters. The mix of synaptic activity impingingon a cell will cause it to have a graded membrane potentialthat may be either more positive or more negative than its restingpotential.The postsynaptic cell sums excitatory andinhibitory inputWhat determines when an individual neuron will fire an actionpotential? As we just learned, the sum of excitatory and inhibitorypostsynaptic potentials creates a graded membrane potentialin the postsynaptic cell body. This summation ability isthe major mechanism by which the nervous system integratesinformation. Each neuron may receive 1,000 or more synapticinputs, but it has only one output: an action potential in a singleaxon. At any one time, the information from all of the activeinputs are translated into the rate at which that neuron generatesaction potentials in its axon.For most neurons, summation takes place in the axon hillockat the base of the axon. The plasma membrane of the axonhillock is not insulated by glia and has many voltage-gated Na+channels. Excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials fromsynapses anywhere on the dendrites or the cell body mayspread to the axon hillock by local current flow. If the resultinggraded potential depolarizes the axon hillock to threshold, itfires an action potential. Because postsynaptic potentials decreasein strength as they spread from the site of the synapse, asynapse at the tip of a dendrite has less influence than a synapseon the cell body, near the axon hillock.Excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials aresummed over space and over time. Spatial summation addsup the simultaneous influences of synapses at different sites onthe postsynaptic cell (Figure 45.15A). Temporal summation addsup postsynaptic potentials generated at the same site in a rapidsequence (Figure 45.15B).Synapses can be fast or slowMost neurotransmitter receptors induce changes in postsynapticcells by opening or closing ion channels. How they do so isthe basis for grouping receptors into two general categories:• Ionotropic receptors are ion channels themselves. Neurotransmitterbinding to an ionotropic receptor causes a direct958 CHAPTER 45 | NEURONS AND NERVOUS SYSTEMSThe acetylcholinereceptor-mediatedchannel is normallyclosed.When ACh binds at specificsites on the receptor, thechannel opens, allowing Na+to enter the postsynaptic cell.Acetylcholinesterasebreaks down ACh,causing the channelto close once again.ACh receptorAChNa+ AcetylcholinesteraseOutsideof cellInside of cell45.14 Chemically Gated Channels The motor end plate containsacetylcholine receptors, which are chemically gated ion channels. Whenone of these receptors binds ACh, its channel pore opens and Na+ ionsmove into the postsynaptic cell, depolarizing its plasma membrane. Theenzyme acetylcholinesterase breaks down ACh in the synapse, closing thechannel; the breakdown products (acetate and choline) are then taken upby the presynaptic membrane and resynthesized into more ACh.change in ion movement across the plasma membrane ofthe postsynaptic cell. These proteins enable fast, short-livedresponses.The ACh receptor of the motor end plate is an example of anionotropic receptor. It consists of five subunits, each of whichextends through the plasma membrane. When assembled, thesubunits create a central pore that allows ions to pass through(see Figure 45.14). Of several different kinds of subunits, onlyone kind has the ability to bind ACh. Each functional receptorhas two of the ACh-binding subunits and three other subunits.• Metabotropic receptors are not ion channels, but they inducesignaling cascades in the postsynaptic cell that secondarilylead to changes in ion channels (see Figure 7.10A).Postsynaptic cell responses mediated by metabotropic receptorsare generally slower and longer-lived than those inducedby ionotropic receptors.Metabotropic receptors are also transmembrane proteins, butinstead of acting as ion channels, they initiate an intracellularsignaling process that can result in the opening or closing ofan ion channel. An example is shown in Figure 7.19.Electrical synapses are fast but do not integrateinformation wellElectrical synapses are different from chemical synapses becausethey couple neurons electrically. Electrical synapses contain numerousgap junctions (see Figure 7.21A). At these synapses, thepresynaptic and postsynaptic cell membranes are separated bya space of only 2 to 3 nanometers, and membrane proteins calledconnexons link the two neurons by forming pores that connectthe cytoplasm of the two cells. Ions and small molecules canpass directly from cell to cell through these pores. Transmissionat electrical synapses is very fast and can proceedin either direction, whereas transmissionat chemical synapses is slower and unidirectional.Electrical synapses are less common in thenervous systems of vertebrates than are chemicalsynapses for several reasons. First, electricalcontinuity between neurons does not allowtemporal summation of synaptic inputs.Second, an effective electrical synapse requiresa large area of contact between thepresynaptic and postsynaptic cells. This conditionrules out the possibility of thousandsof synaptic inputs to a single neuron—whichis the norm in complex nervous systems.Third, electrical synapses cannot be inhibitory.Thus, electrical synapses are useful for rapidcommunication, but they are less useful for processes of integrationand learning.The action of a neurotransmitter depends on thereceptor to which it bindsMore than 50 neurotransmitters are now recognized, and morewill surely be discovered. ACh, as we have seen, is an importantneurotransmitter because it is how the nervous system commandsmuscles to contract. ACh also plays roles in certain synapses betweenneurons in the CNS, but it accounts for only a small percentageof the total neurotransmitter content of the CNS.The workhorse neurotransmitters of the CNS are simpleamino acids: glutamate (excitatory) and glycine and γ-aminobutyrate(GABA) (inhibitory). Another important group of neurotransmittersin the CNS is the monoamines, which are derivativesof amino acids. They include dopamine and norepinephrine(derivatives of tyrosine) and serotonin (a derivative of tryptophan).Peptides also function as neurotransmitters; for example,endorphins and enkephalins are the body’s opiates and modulatethe sensation of pain. Another peptide, substance P, transmitspain sensations. Even a gas, nitric oxide, is used by neurons asan intercellular messenger (see Figure 7.17).Neurotransmission is complex in part because each neurotransmitterhas multiple receptor types. ACh, for example, hastwo receptor types: nicotinic receptors, which are ionotropic, andmuscarinic receptors, which are metabotropic. Both types of AChreceptors are found in the CNS, where nicotinic receptors tendto be excitatory and muscarinic receptors tend to be inhibitory.ACh actions can differ outside the CNS as well. ACh actingthrough nicotinic receptors causes the smooth muscle of the gutto increase its motility, but ACh acting through muscarinic receptorscauses cardiac muscle to hyperpolarize and therefore toslow down. We could give many more examples of neurotrans-45.3 | HOW DO NEURONS COMMUNICATE WITH OTHER CELLS? 959Spatial summation occurswhen several excitatorypostsynaptic potentials(EPSPs) arrive at the axonhillock simultaneously.Temporal summationmeans that postsynapticpotentials created at thesame synapse in rapidsuccession can be summed.ExcitatorysynapsesAxon hillock1234(A) (B)–50EPSPs ThresholdSynapse numberMembrane potential (mV)1 2 3 4 1 + 2 1 + 2 + 3+600–60Time (msec)1 1 11 11 111ActionpotentialResting potential45.15 The Postsynaptic Neuron Sums Information Individual neuronssum excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials over space (A)and time (B). When the sum of the potentials depolarizes the axon hillockto threshold, the neuron generates an action potential.mitters that have different effects in different tissues, but the importantthing to remember is that the action of a neurotransmitterdepends on the receptor to which it binds.Glutamate receptors may be involved in learningand memoryGlutamate is a neurotransmitter that can bind to a variety of receptors,including both metabotropic and ionotropic receptors.The glutamate receptors are divided into several classes becausethey can be differentially activated by other chemicals thatmimic the action of glutamate. One class of ionotropic glutamatereceptors is the NMDA receptors, which can be activatedby the chemical N-methyl-D-aspartate. Another class ofionotropic glutamate receptors is activated by a different chemical,abbreviated as AMPA (which stands for α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionate, demonstrating why biologistsare fond of abbreviations).Glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter, so activation ofionotropic glutamate receptors always results in Na+ entry intothe neuron and depolarization. But the timing of the response toactivation by these different types of receptors differs significantly.The AMPA receptors allow a rapid influx of Na+ into the postsynapticcell, whereas the NMDA receptors allow a slower andlonger-lasting influx of Na+. The NMDA receptors require thatthe cell be somewhat depolarized through the action of otherreceptors before their pores will open and permit Na+ influx.When they do open, these receptors also allow Ca2+ as well asNa+ to enter the cell. Calcium ions act as second messengers inthe cell and can trigger a variety of cellularchanges, such as activation of certainprotein kinases.Figure 45.16 shows how the AMPAand NMDAreceptors can work in concert.At resting potential, the NMDAreceptor is blocked by a magnesiumion (Mg2+). Strong depolarization ofthe neuron due to other inputs—suchas the activation of AMPAreceptors—displaces Mg2+ from the NMDAreceptorsand allows Na+ and Ca2+ to passthrough them when they are activatedby glutamate. These special propertiesof the NMDAreceptor are probably involvedin learning and memory.Most of the synaptic events wehave studied so far happen very quickly. It is therefore a specialchallenge to understand how the messages carried by actionpotentials can result in long-term events such as learning andmemory. Our understanding of these processes has been greatlyenhanced by investigation of a phenomenon called long-termpotentiation (LTP), which has been studied extensively by neurobiologistsworking with slices of brain kept alive in dishes ofculture medium. Using these brain slice preparations, it is possibleto stimulate and record from specific brain regions, andeven specific neurons.In the studies leading to the discovery of LTP, experimentersrepeatedly stimulated synaptic inputs to a particular neuronand observed the usual action potential response. When theneuron was stimulated many times in rapid succession, however,they found that the properties of the neuron changed. Themagnitude of the postsynaptic response was enhanced, or potentiated,and this change lasted for days or weeks.How does potentiation of a synapse occur? The answer, at leastfor some areas of the brain, now seems clear. With low-frequencystimulation, the glutamate released by presynaptic cells activatesonly AMPA receptors, and the postsynaptic membrane simplyresponds with action potentials. With higher frequency stimulation,however, NMDAreceptors are also activated, allowing bothNa+ and Ca2+ ions to enter the postsynaptic neuron. The Ca2+ ionsinduce long-term changes in the postsynaptic membrane thatmake it more sensitive to synaptic input (Figure 45.17).To turn off responses, synapses must be clearedof neurotransmitterTurning off the action of neurotransmitters is as important asturning it on. If released neurotransmitter molecules simply re-960 CHAPTER 45 | NEURONS AND NERVOUS SYSTEMSAMPA receptorsallow rapidinflux of Na+.Strong depolarization of thecell by Na+ influx displacesMg2+, which was blockingthe NMDA receptor……which then isopen to both Na+and Ca2+.Ca2+ acts as a secondmessenger, triggeringlong-term cellular change.123Na+Mg2+ Mg2+GlutamatePresynapticcell terminalAMPAreceptorsNMDAreceptor(A) (B)PostsynapticcellNa+ Na+ Ca2+GO TO Web Activity 45.1 • NeurotransmittersyourBioPortal.com. c o m45.16 Two Ionotropic Glutamate Receptors (A) AMPAreceptors allow rapid influx of Na+ into the postsynaptic cell.(B) NMDA receptors allow both Na+ and Ca2+ to enter thecell, but respond to synaptic input more slowly. Strong activationof the AMPA receptor leads to unblocking of theNMDA receptor, which results in longer-term effects on thecell because of Ca2+ entry.mained in the synaptic cleft, the postsynapticmembrane would become saturated withneurotransmitter, and receptors would beconstantly activated. As a result, the postsynapticcell would remain hyperpolarized ordepolarized and would be unresponsive toshort-term changes in the presynaptic cell.The more rapidly neurons can respond to input,the more information they can processin a given time. Thus, neurotransmitter mustbe cleared from the synaptic cleft shortly afterit is released by the axon terminal.Neurotransmitter action may be terminatedin several ways. First, enzymes may destroythe neurotransmitter. ACh, for example,is rapidly destroyed by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase,which is present in the synapticcleft in close association with the ACh receptorson the postsynaptic membrane (seeFigure 45.14). Some of the most deadly nervegases developed for chemical warfare workby inhibiting acetylcholinesterase. As a result,ACh lingers in the synaptic cleft, causing thevictim to die of spastic (contracted) muscleparalysis. Some agricultural insecticides, suchas malathion, also inhibit acetylcholinesteraseand can poison farm workers if used withoutsafety precautions.Neurotransmitter also may simply diffuseaway from the cleft, or be taken up viaactive transport by nearby cell membranes.The drug commonly prescribed under thebrand name Prozac to treat depression slowsthe reuptake of the neurotransmitter serotonin,thus enhancing its activity at thesynapse.The diversity of receptors makesdrug specificity possibleMany drugs used to treat the nervous systemact by modulating specific synaptic interactions.Drugs that mimic or potentiatethe effect of a neurotransmitter are called agonists;those that block the actions of neurotransmittersare called antagonists. For example,morphine is an agonist at the endorphinreceptor and therefore blocks pain. Propranolol,known as a β-blocker, is an antagonistof certain adrenergic receptors and thereforedecreases panic attacks and anxiety. A majoremphasis in neurobiology is to identifyneurotransmitter receptor subtypes and designdrugs that selectively bind to them tohave highly specific effects on nervous systemactivity.45.3 | HOW DO NEURONS COMMUNICATE WITH OTHER CELLS? 961HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODRESULTSINVESTIGATING LIFEHigh-frequency stimulation of synapses can result in a long-lastingchange in the sensitivity of these synapses (long-term potentiation,or synaptic memory).45.17 Repeated Stimulation Can Cause Long-Term PotentiationWhen a cell receives low-frequency synaptic input, the resulting postsynaptic responseremains constant. If that same synaptic pathway is stimulated briefly at a high frequency,however, the subsequent sensitivity of the postsynaptic cell to the original level ofsynaptic inputis potentiated for a longer period.Repeated stimulation can change the properties of a synapse.Stimulate a cell through two separate input pathways (two sourcesof stimulus) and record responses.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevantlinks for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.RecordingelectrodeStimulated cellStimulatingelectrode 1The cell responds similarly to the samelow-frequency stimulation from eitherelectrode. (Dots represent responsesrecorded 30 seconds apart.)1When low-frequencystimulation resumes, the cellhas a long-lasting increasedsensitivity to that stimulation.3The sensitivity of the cell tostimulation through electrode 2remains unchanged.4High-frequency stimulation is giventhrough stimulating electrode 1.2TimeSensitivity tostimulationSensitivity tostimulationTimeElectrode 1Electrode 2Stimulatingelectrode 2
45.1 What Cells Are Unique to the Nervous System?• Nervous systems include neurons and glia. Neurons are organizedin circuits with sensory inputs, integration, and outputs to effectors.Glia serve support functions. Review Figures 45.1 and 45.3• In vertebrates, the brain and spinal cord form the central nervoussystem (CNS), which communicates with the rest of thebody via the peripheral nervous system (PNS). The CNSincreases in complexity from invertebrates to vertebrates andfrom fishes to mammals. Review Figures 45.1 and 45.2• Neurons generally receive information via their dendrites, ofwhich there can be many, and transmit information via theirsingle axons, which end in axon terminals. Review Figure 45.3• Where neurons and their target cells meet, information is transmittedacross specialized junctions called synapses.• Glia include Schwann cells and oligodendrocytes, both ofwhich generate myelin sheets on axons. Glia also include astrocytes,which support neurons metabolically and contribute tothe blood–brain barrier. Review Figure 45.445.2 How Do Neurons Generate and Transmit ElectricalSignals?SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 45.1• Neurons have an electric charge difference across their plasmamembranes, the membrane potential. The membrane potentialis created by ion transporters and channels. When a neuron isnot active, its membrane potential is a resting potential.Review Figures 45.5 and 45.6• The sodium–potassium pump concentrates K+ on the inside ofa neuron and Na+ on the outside. Potassium channels allow K+to diffuse out of the neuron, leaving behind unbalanced negativecharges. Review Figures 45.6 and 45.7• Patch clamping allows the study of single ion channels. ReviewFigure 45.8• The resting potential is perturbed when ion channels open orclose, changing the permeability of the plasma membrane tocharged ions. Through this mechanism, the plasma membranecan become depolarized or hyperpolarized and thereforehave a graded membrane potential response to input. ReviewFigure 45.9• An action potential is a rapid reversal in charge across a portionof the plasma membrane resulting from the sequential openingand closing of voltage-gated channels of Na+ and K+. Thesechanges in voltage-gated channels occur when the plasmamembrane depolarizes to a threshold level. Review Figure45.10, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 45.2• Action potentials are all-or-none, self-regenerating events. Theyare conducted down axons because local current flow depolarizesadjacent regions of membrane and brings them to threshold.Review Figure 45.11• In myelinated axons, action potentials appear to jump betweennodes of Ranvier, patches of axonal plasma membrane that arenot covered by myelin. Review Figure 45.1245.3 How Do Neurons Communicate with Other Cells?• Neurons communicate with each other and with other cells bytransmitting information over chemical synapses (with neurotransmitters)or electrical synapses.• The neuromuscular junction is a well-studied chemical synapsebetween a motor neuron and a skeletal muscle cell. Its neurotransmitteris acetylcholine (ACh), which causes depolarizationof the postsynaptic membrane when it binds to its receptor.Review Figure 45.13, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 45.3• When an action potential reaches an axon terminal, it causesthe release of neurotransmitters, which diffuse across thesynaptic cleft and bind to receptors on the postsynaptic membrane.Review Figures 45.13 and 45.14• Synapses between neurons can be either excitatory orinhibitory. A postsynaptic neuron integrates information bysumming excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials inboth space and time. Review Figure 45.15• Ionotropic receptors are ion channels or directly influence ionchannels. Metabotropic receptors influence the postsynapticcell through various signal transduction pathways and result inthe opening or closing of ion channels. The actions of ionotropicsynapses are generally faster than those of metabotropicsynapses.• There are many different neurotransmitters and even moretypes of receptors. The action of a neurotransmitter depends onthe receptor to which it binds. SEE WEB ACTIVITY 45.1• With repeated stimulation, a neuron can become more sensitiveto its inputs through long-term potentiation (LTP). The propertiesof the NMDA glutamate receptor appear to explain LTP.Review Figures 45.16 and 45.17
