59By the time the U.S. Congress passed the EndangeredSpecies Act in 1973, Blackburn’s sphinx moth (Manducablackburni) was already believed to be extinct.The largest native insect in the Hawaiian Islands, with awingspan of over 120 mm, this species was once widespreadthroughout the islands, occurring in dry forestsfrom sea level up to 760 m elevation. As a caterpillar, it fedon native shrubs in the tomato family. Nobody knew exactlywhat led to its disappearance, but one suspect was aparasitoid wasp imported to the islands for the biologicalcontrol of the tobacco hornworm (Manduca sexta), a closerelative of Blackburn’s sphinx moth that itself had beenaccidentally introduced to the islands and had become apest in commercial tomato fields.Miraculously, a population of Blackburn’s sphinx mothswas discovered on Maui in 1984, in an area used by theHawaii National Guard for military training. Since thattime, several other populations have been found on theisland of Hawaii and on Kaho’olawe, an island adjacent toMaui. In February 2000, Blackburn’s sphinx moth becamethe first Hawaiian insect species to be protected under theU.S. Endangered Species Act.To date, no Blackburn’s sphinx moths have been rediscoveredon the islands of Kauai or Niihau. These islands,however, are home to another endangered species, theHawaiian alula plant (Brighamia insignis). This odd-shapedshrub, one of several species called by the Hawaiian nameof “haha,” is found in dry forests ranging from sea level to480 m on sheer cliffs and rocky outcrops. Its bulbous stem,typically 1–2 m long, produces a whorl of leaves at the top,along with clusters of yellow flowers with petals that arefused into a trumpet-shaped tube up to 14 cm in length.Today the species persists only with the assistance of dedicatedbotanists and conservation biologists who hand-pollinatethe flowers, often rappellingdown steep cliff faces to do so. Itsmost important (and possiblyonly) native pollinator likely wentextinct.The long, tubular flowers aretypical of those pollinated bylong-tongued moths in thehawk moth family. Short oftraveling back in time, thereis no sure way to identify theNo laughing matterExtinction and Back The largeBlackburn’s sphinx moth (Manducablackburni ) was believed to beextinct, possibly the victim of mortalitydue to a parasitoid wasp importedto Hawaii to control the tobaccohornworm (M. sexta)— anotherimported insect. A population of M.blackburni was rediscovered in 1984.59.1 What Is Conservation Biology?Virtually all natural ecosystems on Earth have been altered byhuman activities. Many habitats have disappeared completely,and many others have been greatly modified. Even Earth’s climateand its great biogeochemical cycles have been altered. Oneconsequence of these changes has been a rapid increase in therate at which species go extinct. Conservation biology is an appliedscientific discipline devoted to protecting and managingEarth’s biodiversity. The discipline draws heavily upon principlesof ecology, ethology, and evolutionary biology, particularlywith respect to elucidating the factors that determinewhether a given population will persist.Early conservation efforts were characterized by tensions betweenthose whose principal goal was to conserve natural resourcesfor their economic benefits and those who believed thatnature has intrinsic value independent of human economic interests.Today conservation biologists study the full array ofgoods and services that humans derive from species and ecosystems,including aesthetic and psychological benefits. Understandingthe global ecosystem and the effects of human activitieson that system is now understood to be essential to thelong-term well-being of Homo sapiens.Conservation biology is an applied scientific discipline, whichis to say that it involves the practical application of knowledgeto solve problems. Workers in this field are guided by threebasic principles:• Evolution is the process that unites all of biology. To be effectivein protecting and managing biodiversity, it is essential tounderstand the evolutionary processes that generate andmaintain it.• The ecological world is dynamic. Because populations andcommunities change continuously over time, there is nostatic “balance of nature” that can serve as a goal of conservationactivities.• Humans are a part of ecosystems. Human interests andactivities must be incorporated into conservation goals andpractices.Conservation biology aims to protect andmanage biodiversityThe term “biodiversity” has multiple meanings. We may speakof biodiversity as the degree of genetic variation within aspecies. Genetic variation can be measured as the number of allelesat a locus, the number of polymorphic loci in a genome, orIN THIS CHAPTER we will describe the rapidly expandingfield of conservation biology, which is devoted toprotecting biodiversity. We will show how conservationbiologists predict changes in biodiversity and see how somehuman activities are causing those changes. Finally, wewill describe the strategies conservation biologists use toreduce extinction rates, protect species from threats to theirpersistence, and help populations of endangered speciesrecover.native pollinator of B. insignis, but evidence points toBlackburn’s sphinx moth—whose existence today hangsby a thread on islands many kilometers away, where noalula plants remain. It is no coincidence that both speciesare endangered.This contemporary example of the unanticipated effectsof species loss is far from unique. Given what we’velearned about species interactions, it’s not surprisingthat the loss of one species from a community can resultin the endangerment of another. While the effects ofbiodiversity losses can be difficult to predict, anticipatingthose effects is a high priority in view of today’s escalatingrates of species extinctions.CHAPTER OUTLINE59.1 What Is Conservation Biology?59.2 How Do Biologists Predict Changes inBiodiversity?59.3 What Factors Threaten Species Persistence?59.4 What Strategies Do Biologists Use to ProtectBiodiversity?One Extinction May Lead to Another The endangeredHawaiian shrub alula (Brighamia insignis), also known as“haha,” persists only because humans hand-pollinate theflowers; its natural pollinators may have gone extinct.the number of individuals in a population that are polymorphicat given loci. As we have seen throughout this book, geneticvariation allows organisms to adapt to environmental change.Biodiversity can also be defined in terms of species richness ina particular community. At a larger scale, biodiversity also embracesecosystem diversity—the complex interactions withinand between ecosystems. While we may study these componentsof biodiversity separately, in life they are intimately interconnected.The most conspicuous manifestation of biodiversity loss isspecies extinction. Extinction is a constant theme in the historyof life; most of the species that have lived on Earth over the agesare extinct today. Consider, for example, the anaerobic organismsthat were lost as early photosynthetic prokaryotes and eukaryotesadded oxygen to Earth’s atmosphere, as described inSection 25.2. Extinctions have occurred throughout Earth’s historyat what is referred to as a “background” rate, as changesin environmental conditions favor some species and negativelyaffect others. But the rate of extinctions taking place today rivalsthose of the five great mass extinctions of life’s history (seeTable 25.1 and Figure 25.12). Those historical extinction episodeswere the result of cataclysmic natural disturbances, whereas themajority of modern extinctions can be attributed to effects of thehuman population.Humans have a tremendous capacity to alter ecosystemsand, accordingly, to cause extinctions. When humans first arrivedin North America from Siberia about 14,000 years ago,they encountered a diverse and spectacular fauna of large mammals,including saber-toothed cats, dire wolves, mammoths,mastodons, giant ground sloths, and giant beavers (Figure 59.1).Most of this megafauna went extinct within a few thousandyears after humans arrived. Although several hypotheses havebeen advanced to account for the geologically rapid, simultaneousdisappearance of so many large animals, overhunting byhumans is widely embraced as the principal cause. Losses ofmegafauna coinciding with the arrival of humans have alsobeen documented in Australia and Hawaii.As Chapter 25 described, several mass extinctions have occurredon Earth, each providing ecological opportunities forother groups, which subsequently underwent adaptive radiations.These extinction events occurred relatively far apart overthe course of the history of life (see Figure 25.12). Over the past400 years, increasing industrialization and urbanization haveaccelerated the rate of species extinctions astronomically. Therenowned evolutionary biologist Edward O. Wilson estimatesthat Earth is losing on the order of 30,000 species per year, puttingus in the midst of a sixth mass extinction. Protecting Earth’sbiodiversity requires maintaining the processes that generatenew species as well as providing conditions that bring extinctionrates closer to background levels.Biodiversity has great value to human societyConservation biologists are concerned about the escalating lossof Earth’s biodiversity for many reasons:• Losing species can threaten the functioning of ecosystems. Thepreceding chapters have all described the complex interactionsamong species. When species are lost, entire communitiesand ecosystems may change or be lost completely.When that happens, humans may lose thegoods and services those ecosystems provide (seeSection 58.4).• Humans depend on thousands of other species for food,fiber, and medicine. Over 2,000 species of plants areused for fiber worldwide, and countless morehave been domesticated as a source of food. In Indiaalone, over 7,000 species of plants are utilizedin traditional medicine, and in the United Statesmore than a quarter of all medical prescriptionscontain or are based on plant products. Hundredsof animal species also supply us with food, clothing,and medicine. In addition to goods provided,many organisms provide important services; awide variety of microbes, for example, providethe fermentation services that render many foodsmore nutritious and palatable (see Section 51.2).• Humans derive enormous psychological benefits, includingaesthetic pleasure, from interacting with otherorganisms. Aesthetic benefits actually confer economicvalue on biodiversity. Trees growing on aresidential lot, for example, can increase the lot’sproperty value to a point where this added valuemay be greater than the lumber from the treescould provide.1244 CHAPTER 59 | CONSERVATION BIOLOGY59.1 Extinct North American Megafauna The extinction of some Pleistocenemegafauna in North America may have been partially driven by the arrival of Homosapiens. This reconstruction of California’s La Brea Tar Pits shows a dire wolfe (Canisdirus, left) and a sabertooth tiger (Smilodon sp).• Extinctions deprive the scientific community of opportunities tostudy and understand ecological relationships among organisms.The more species that are lost, the more difficult it will be tounderstand the structure and functioning of ecologicalcommunities and ecosystems.• Living in ways that cause the extinction of other species raisesethical issues. Losses of biodiversity increasingly concernphilosophers, ethicists, and religious leaders because insuch circles species are judged to have intrinsic value.All of these concerns, to varying degrees, may be integrated byconservation biologists into strategies for protecting biodiversity.59.1 RECAPConservation biology is an applied scientific disciplineaimed at protecting and managing biodiversity,which is rapidly decreasing due to extinctionscaused by human activities.• Explain the distinctions among the multiple meaningsof the term “biodiversity.” See pp. 1243–1244• What are some of the ways in which biodiversity isvaluable to humans? See pp. 1244–1245To protect biodiversity, conservation biologists must understandbiodiversity as it exists today as well as the ways in which it ischanging. Thus one important enterprise for conservation biologistsis to predict rates of species extinctions.How Do Biologists Predict 59.2 Changes in Biodiversity?How many, and which, species will go extinct will dependboth on human activities and on natural events.Conservation biologists attempt to track the extinctionsthat are occurring and to predict the number that will occurduring the coming century.Our knowledge of biodiversity is incompletePredicting extinctions is difficult for a number of reasons.First, we do not know how many species are living onEarth today. Many of the species that may go extinct inthe near future have not even been named and described.Insects provide a case in point: although over 900,000species have been described, estimates of the number ofspecies yet to be discovered range from about 2 million tomore than 50 million (see Section 32.4). Even in the caseof larger organisms, our understanding of biodiversityis far from complete. For example, in an 18-month periodin 2005–2006, over 50 species of animals and plants previouslyunknown to science were discovered in rainforestsin Borneo.Second, we do not know where species live. Theranges of most described species, particularly those thatare small, reclusive, and rare to start with, are poorly known.One tiny North American true bug, Corixidea major (so rare thatit has no common name), had been found in only one locationnear Clarksville, Tennessee, until entomologists collecting insectsattracted to lights at night discovered it in Virginia andFlorida, extending its known range by over 1,000 km.Third, it is difficult to determine whether a species is trulyextinct. Rarely is the death of the last surviving member of aspecies recorded with certainty, as it was in the case of the lastpassenger pigeon (Ectopistes migratorius), a female namedMartha who died in the Cincinnati Zoo on September 1, 1914.The status of rare, reclusive species with poorly known life historiesis much more difficult to determine, as has been the casewith the ivory-billed woodpecker (Campephilus principalis) inthe United States (Figure 57.2A). Pygmy tarsiers (Tarsiuspumilus, tiny primates weighing less than 60 grams) werethought to have gone extinct from their native cloud forests onthe island of Sulewesi in Indonesia. In 2008—85 years after thelast live specimen had been sighted—a research team fromTexas A&M University discovered individuals of this speciesliving in one of the island’s national parks (Figure 57.2B).Fourth, we rarely know all of the connections among species.At the beginning of this chapter, we saw that the extinction ofa hawk moth species put at risk the survival of a plant speciesdependent upon the hawk moth as a pollinator. How manyother species have been placed at risk by the extinction of thehawk moth is unknown because the ecological associations ofthis species were not thoroughly documented before its extinction.59.2 | HOW DO BIOLOGISTS PREDICT CHANGES IN BIODIVERSITY? 1245(A) Campephilus principalis (B) Tarsius pumilus59.2 Is It Really Extinct? (A) The ivory-billed woodpecker (shown here in anineteenth-century John James Audubon print) was presumed to be extinct untilreports of sightings in 2004. Clear proof of the living bird has so far eluded watchers.(B) Among vertebrates, pygmy tarsiers were recently rediscovered in Indonesiaafter having been declared extinct.We can predict the effects of human activitieson biodiversityDespite these gaps in our understanding of biodiversity, methodsexist for estimating probable rates of extinction resultingfrom human activities. To make such predictions, conservationbiologists have applied the principles of the species–arearelationship and the theory of island biogeography, which wediscussed in Section 57.3. When they have measured the rate atwhich species richness decreases with decreasing habitat patchsize, they have found that, on average, a 90 percent loss of habitatarea results in the loss of half of the species that live in anddepend on that habitat.Similar calculations can be made for the total global area ofa habitat type. The current rate of loss of tropical evergreen forest—Earth’s most species-rich biome—is about 2 percent of theremaining forest each year, due to the increasing demand forforest resources by a rapidly expanding human population(Figure 59.3). If this rate of loss continues, at least 1 millionspecies that live in tropical evergreen forests could become extinctthis century.To estimate the risk that a particular population will becomeextinct, conservation biologists develop statistical models thatincorporate information about a population’s size, its geneticvariation, and the morphology, physiology, and behavior ofits members. Species in imminent danger of extinction in allor most of their range are labeled endangered. Threatened speciesare those that are likely to become endangered in the nearfuture.Species with small populations face particular risks. Rarityitself is not always a cause for concern, because some speciesthat live in unusual habitats have probably always been rareand are well adapted to being rare. However, species whosepopulations suddenly shrink rapidly—the “newly rare”—are usually at high risk, as such reductions in population sizecan lead to genetic drift and loss of genetic variation. Specieswith specialized habitat or dietary requirements are morelikely to become extinct than species with more generalizedrequirements.In addition, populations reduced to a small size or confinedto a small range can easily be eliminated by local disturbances.For example, numbers of the Cozumel thrasher (Toxostoma guttatum),a member of the mockingbird family known only on theisland of Cozumel off the coast of Mexico, had been decliningfor years due to a combination of factors (including the introductionof bird-eating boa constrictors to the island in 1971). Aseries of hurricanes, beginning with Hurricane Gilbert in 1988,had a catastrophic effect on the remaining populations. Surveysin 2006 failed to document any surviving individuals, and thespecies may now be extinct.59.2 RECAPPredicting changes in biodiversity is difficult becauseour knowledge of biodiversity is incomplete.The species–area relationship can be used to predictrates of extinction in areas that are subject tohabitat loss.• What are some of the gaps in our current knowledgeof biodiversity? See p. 1245• Why are species with rapidly shrinking populationsespecially vulnerable to extinction? See p. 1246Now that we’ve examined some of the factors that place speciesat risk of extinction, let’s see how human activities contributeto those risks. We begin with habitat loss, the primary threat tospecies persistence today.1246 CHAPTER 59 | CONSERVATION BIOLOGYGreen areas indicatedense forest cover.1950Guatemala19701985El SalvadorBelizeHondurasNicaraguaCosta Rica Panama59.3 Deforestation Rates in Tropical Forests Less than half the tropicalforest that existed in Central America in 1950 remained as of 1985,most of it in small patches. Although the rate of deforestation slowedsomewhat after 1985, by 2005 an additional 19 percent had disappeared.What Factors Threaten 59.3 Species Persistence?Human activities that threaten the persistence of species includehabitat alteration, introduction of exotic species, overexploitation,and climate alteration. Conservation biologists determinehow these activities affect species and use thatinformation to devise strategies to protect species that are endangeredor threatened.Species are endangered by the degradation,destruction, and fragmentation of their habitatsLoss of suitable habitat by degradation, fragmentation, or destructionis the most important cause of species endangermentin the United States (Figure 59.4) and around the world. Manyhabitats—particularly freshwater habitats—are degraded bypollution. Toxic substances released by human activities havenegative effects on the behavior, reproduction, and developmentof species, reducing both survivorship and competitiveability. Habitat loss can also occur through outright removal.Physical destruction of particular habitat types (such as tropicalrainforest) eliminates species that cannot survive anywhereelse. Habitat loss also affects nearby habitats that are not destroyed.As portions of a habitat are progressively lost to humanactivities, the remaining habitat becomes increasingly fragmented:habitat patches become smaller and more isolated.Small habitat patches are qualitatively different from largerpatches of the same habitat in ways that affect species persistence.Small patches cannot maintain populations of species thatrequire large areas, and they support only small populations ofthose species that can survive in small patches. In addition, thefraction of a patch influenced by external factors increases rapidlyas patch size decreases (Figure 59.5). Close to the edges of aforest patch, for example, winds are stronger, temperatures arehigher, humidity is lower, and light levels are higher than theyare farther inside the forest. Species from surrounding habitatsoften colonize edges to compete with or prey upon the speciesliving there. The effects of such factors are known as edge effects.One effect of forest fragmentation in midwestern NorthAmerica has been an increase in the abundance of the brownheadedcowbird (Molothrus ater). This bird is a brood parasite—that is, it lays its eggs in the nests of other bird species. When acowbird egg hatches, the hatchling is raised by the host parents,often to the detriment of their own young. Historically, cowbirdsfollowed bison and other grazing mammals, feedingon insects kicked up by the herds; thus their eggs were laidprimarily in nests of grassland host species. Forest fragmentation,however, opened up new opportunities for the cowbirds,which can now lay their eggs in the nests of forestbirds in forest edges. Fragmented forests, with relativelymore edge than intact forests, thus favor the proliferation ofcowbirds at the expense of forest species.59.3 | WHAT FACTORS THREATEN SPECIES PERSISTENCE? 1247Habitat destructionis the primarycause of extinctionand endangermentfor freshwateraquatic organisms.Small animals are vulnerable tohabitat destruction because theyoften have small ranges and highlyspecialized requirements.BirdsMammalsButterflies,skippersReptilesDragonflies,damselfliesTiger beetlesFernsConifersFloweringplantsFreshwaterfishesAmphibiansCrayfishesFreshwatermussels0VulnerableImperiledCritically imperiledPresumed extinct10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100Percent of species59.4 Proportions of U.S. Species Extinct or Threatened Thespecies most threatened with extinction all live in freshwater and wetlandshabitats, which are highly vulnerable and have been extensively degraded,polluted, and even destroyed for human development.This area is influencedby edge effects.This area is not influencedby edge effects.Because the width of the edgeis relatively constant, as the totalarea becomes smaller, the edgebecomes proportionately larger.30.55%Low High43.75% 64% 88.8%Percentage of patch influenced by edge effectsHabitat patch59.5 Edge Effects The smaller a patch of habitat, the greater the proportionof that patch that is influenced by conditions in the surroundingenvironment.GO TO Animated Tutorial 59.1 • Edge EffectsyourBioPortal.comBecause so many habitats have already undergone fragmentationby the time they are first investigated by ecologists, determiningthe effects of fragmentation on the original communitiescan be difficult. Timely surveys can provide some of thisinformation. For example, a major research project waslaunched in 1979 in tropical evergreen forest near Manaus,Brazil, that was slated for conversion to pasture. The landownersagreed to preserve forest patches of certain sizes and configurationslaid out by biologists (Figure 59.6). The biologistscounted the species in the future “patches” while they were stillpart of the continuous forest, then monitored the patches afterthe surrounding forest was cut. Species soon began to disappearfrom isolated patches. The first species to be eliminatedwere monkeys that travel over large areas. Army ants and thebirds that follow army ant swarms also disappeared quickly.Species that are lost from small habitat fragments are unlikelyto become reestablished there because dispersing individualsare unlikely to find the isolated fragments. As Section 55.4 pointsout, however, a species may persist in a small patch if it is connectedto other patches by habitat corridors through which individualscan disperse. Among the experimental forest fragmentsin Brazil, those that were completely isolated lost speciesmore rapidly than did those that were connected to unfragmentedforest by corridors. Since the experiment began, someof the pastures that surrounded the experimental fragments havebeen abandoned, and young forests now grow in them. Within7–9 years of abandonment, army ants and some of the birds thatfollow them recolonized forest fragments connected to largerforest patches by young forests. Other birds that forage in theforest canopy also reestablished themselves. Young forest isnot a suitable permanent habitat for most of these species, butthey can disperse through it to find more suitable habitat.Insight into the importance of corridors has led to new conservationinitiatives, among the most notable of which is theYellowstone to Yukon initiative. A joint Canada–United Statesnot-for-profit organization has as its goal sustainable managementof the mountain ecosystem extending from YellowstoneNational Park to the Yukon Territory. This stretch of land, thelargest intact ecosystem of its kind on the planet, contains highqualityhabitat for many of North America’s most imperiled animals,including grizzly bears, gray wolves, lynx, and nativefish. Managing the entire region not only provides corridors toconnect habitats, it also provides room for populations to shiftin response to global climate change.Overexploitation has driven many species to extinctionAlthough habitat loss presents a greater threat to more speciestoday than does overexploitation, many species are still threatenedby overexploitation today. Elephants and rhinoceroses areat risk in much of Africa and Asia because poachers kill themfor their tusks and horns, which are used for ornaments andknife handles; in addition, some men believe that powdered rhinoceroshorn boosts their sexual potency.The principal threat to the continued survival of tigers,whose numbers have declined by over 90 percent over the past1248 CHAPTER 59 | CONSERVATION BIOLOGYIsolated patches lost speciesmuch more quickly……than patches connectedto unfragmented forest.Even large patches lostsome species of animals.59.6 Species Losses in Brazilian Forest Fragments Biologistsstudied patches of tropical evergreen forest near Manaus, Brazil, beforeand after they were isolated by forest clearing. The results of the studydemonstrated that small, isolated habitat fragments support fewerspecies than larger patches of the same habitat.(A)(B)59.7 Endangered by Exploitation (A) The principal threat to the continuedsurvival of tigers is the use of their body parts in Asian traditionalmedicine. (B) The endangered Banggai cardinalfish of Indonesia’s coralreefs has been overexploited because of its value to the private aquariumtrade.century, is the use of their body parts in traditional medicine—bones to treat rheumatism, eyes to cure epilepsy, and penises toenhance virility (Figure 59.7A). In 2009, a bowl of tiger penissoup could be obtained for $300 in Taiwan. There is some hopethat the development of drugs for treating erectile dysfunctionwill reduce the incidence of poaching of these endangeredspecies, but as yet the drugs are not widely available in Asia,where demand for animal aphrodisiacs is greatest.Massive international trade in exotic pets and aquariumfishes, ornamental plants, and tropical forest hardwoods has alsodecimated many species. The Banggai cardinalfish Pterapogonkauderni (Figure 59.7B) is on the brink of extinction entirelydue to the pet trade; almost a million of these critically endangeredfish are hauled out of the waters near Sulawesi, Indonesia,to satisfy the demand of saltwater aquarium enthusiasts.Invasive predators, competitors, and pathogensthreaten many speciesAs people travel, they deliberately or inadvertently move speciesto regions outside their original range. Some of these exotic (nonnative)species become invasive—that is, they reproduce rapidly,spread widely, and have negative effects on the native species ofthe region. As we saw in Section 55.3, species that are introducedinto a region where their natural enemies are absent may reachvery high population densities. Moreover, the native species inan invader’s new range may not have evolved specific defensesagainst these new antagonists and competitors.Invasive species are spread in a number of ways. Marine organismshave been spread throughout the oceans by ballast waterfrom ships, taken on at the port of departure and dischargedat the destination port along with its content of surviving animalsand plants. The notorious zebra mussel (Dreissena polymorpha) isthought to have arrived in North America in this way (see Figure55.9). The brown tree snake (Boiga irregularis; Figure 59.8) arrivedon Guam in air cargo shortly after World War II. Until then,the only snake on Guam was a tiny, insect-eating species. Althoughbrown tree snakes remained rare for 20 years, in the 1960sthey began to multiply and today can be found at densities as highas 5,000 individuals per km2. The snake has exterminated 15species of land birds, including 3 found only on Guam.Over the past 400 years, Europeans colonizing new continentsdeliberately introduced plants and animals to their newhomes in an effort to reconstruct their familiar surroundings.Many of these introductions have had disastrous effects on nativeflora and fauna. In Australia, the introduction of Europeanrabbits and foxes for sport hunting and of dogs and cats as petsled to the extermination of nearly half the small to mediumsizednative marsupials over the last 100 years, by a combinationof competition with rabbits and predation by foxes, dogs,and cats. Some species deliberately introduced to control otherinvasive species have themselves become invasive and causedfurther problems. One example was the case of Manduca sextaand its wasp parasite in Hawaii, mentioned at the opening ofthis chapter; another such case is that of the cane toad (Bufo marinus),introduced in Australia to control sugarcane pests (seeFigure 55.14).Invasive plants may also have negative effects on ecosystems.While native plants must devote considerable energy and resourcesto defending themselves against native herbivores, invasiveplants are less prone to attack, in part because their naturalenemies have been left behind in their home range. Therefore, invasiveplants can devote their resources to growth and reproductionrather than to producing defensive secondary compounds.Introduced pathogens have also wreaked havoc among nativespecies, as exemplified by the effects of avian malaria in theHawaiian Islands. Before the arrival of Europeans, no mosquitoesexisted anywhere in the islands. The first mosquito specieswas found there in 1827, and over the next century several othersfollowed. At the start of the twentieth century, the microbialpathogen that causes avian malaria arrived, most likely carriedby imported caged birds. Having had no exposure to malariaover the course of their evolutionary history, Hawaii’s many endemicbird species were exceptionally vulnerable to infection.Today, nearly all species living below 1,500 m elevation—thecurrent upper limit of the range of the mosquito vectors—havebeen eliminated by avian malaria. Species living at higher elevationshave fared better, but the range of the mosquitoes appearsto be expanding upward as the climate warms, placingthe surviving endemic species at risk.Rapid climate change can cause species extinctionsHuman emissions of greenhouse gases are causing global climatewarming, as we saw in Section 58.3. Average temperaturesin North America, for example, are expected to increase 2°C–5°Cby the end of the twenty-first century. If the climate warms tothat extent, then the average temperature found at any givenlocation in North America today will be found 500–800 km tothe north, and species adapted to particular temperatures willhave to shift their ranges by that distance, or evolve new temperatureadaptations within a single century. Some habitats,such as alpine tundra, could disappear entirely as temperateforests expand up mountain slopes.59.3 | WHAT FACTORS THREATEN SPECIES PERSISTENCE? 124959.8 An Agent of Extinction Since it was accidentally introducedonto the tiny Pacific island of Guam, the brown tree snake (Boiga irregularis)has eaten15 species of land birds to extinction.Conservation biologists cannot alter rates of global warming,but they can predict how the resulting climate changes mayaffect organisms and look for ways to mitigate those effects.Their research activities include analyses of past climate changesand studies of sites currently undergoing rapid climate change.It would be helpful to know, for example, how rapidly species’ranges shifted after the end of the most recent ice age, about10,000 years ago. Which species did and did not keep pace withclimate change? How much, and in what ways, did past ecologicalcommunities differ from those of today as a result of differencesin the rates at which species ranges shifted?Species that can disperse easily, such as most birds, may beable to shift their ranges as rapidly as the climate changes, providedthat appropriate habitats can be found. However, theranges of other species are likely to shift more slowly. After theglaciers retreated in North America about 8,000 years ago, forexample, the ranges of some coniferous trees such as pine trees,with lightweight seeds that can be carried great distances bywind, expanded northward, so that today they grow as far northas the current climate permits (Figure 59.9). Earthworms, on theother hand, fared less well: the glaciers eliminated all earthwormspecies in Canada and the northern United States, and they havenot been replaced by other North American species, which havemoved their ranges northward only very slowly. (The earthwormsfound in many parts of North America today are actuallyexotic species accidentally introduced from Europe.)If Earth’s surface warms as predicted, entirely new climateswill develop, especially at low elevations in the tropics, wherea warming of even 2°C would result in conditions warmer thanthose found anywhere in the humid tropics today. Adaptationto those climates may prove difficult even for many tropical organisms.Since the mid-1980s, the average minimum nightlytemperature at the La Selva Biological Station, in the Caribbeanlowlands of Costa Rica, has increased from about 20°C to 22°C.On warmer nights, trees use more of their energy reserves justto maintain themselves. As a result, even this small rise in temperaturehas reduced the average growth rates of six differenttree species by about 20 percent.59.3 RECAPA number of human activities threaten the persistenceof species, including habitat degradation,fragmentation, and destruction; overexploitation;introductions of invasive species; and activities thatcause rapid climate change.• Describe three ways in which habitat loss is occurringtoday. See pp. 1247–1248• Why are extinction rates high in small habitat patches?See pp. 1247–1248 and Figures 59.5 and 59.6• How can dispersal ability and climate change interactto affect the probability of extinction? See pp.1249–1250Demonstrating that species are endangered is an empty exerciseif we cannot implement a plan of action to save them. In thenext section we consider some of the positive steps that can betaken to protect biodiversity.1250 CHAPTER 59 | CONSERVATION BIOLOGYThe numbers indicate the time(thousands of years ago) whenlodgepole pine entered the area.0.41.12.55.65.08.08.010.711.212.2 CanadaU.S.A.Maximum extent of glacierCurrent range of inland lodgepole pineFossil sample collection siteNeverglaciatedNeverglaciated59.9 Some Species Have Expanded Their Range Stands of lodgepole pines expanded theirrange northward as the continental glaciers that covered North America during the Pleistoceneretreated.What Strategies Do Biologists Use 59.4 to Protect Biodiversity?Conservation biologists use scientific theory, empirical data, andtools from a variety of disciplines to help protect endangered andthreatened species and ecosystems. They identify the factors thatpresent risks to species and use that information to devise actionplans. Implementing those plans, however, often requires the cooperationof many different groups of people, so conservation biologistsalso work with landowners, politicians, lawyers, environmentalactivists, and the general public. Let’s look at some of theactions that conservation biologists take to protect biodiversity.Protected areas preserve habitat and preventoverexploitationThe establishment of protected areas in which habitat alterationand exploitation are restricted or prohibited is an importantcomponent of efforts to conserve biological diversity. Protectedareas preserve habitat and may serve as nurseries from whichindividuals can disperse into exploited areas, replenishing populationsthat might otherwise become extinct.Deciding which areas to protect is a challenging enterprise.Two robust criteria are the total number of species living in anarea (its species richness; see Chapter 57) and the number of endemicspecies in an area (a measure of its uniqueness). Usingthese criteria, biologists have identified a number of biodiversity“hotspots” of unusual richness and endemism (Figure59.10). Hotspots occupy only 15.7 percent of Earth’s land surfacebut are home to 77 percent of its terrestrial vertebratespecies. Most hotspots are also areas of high human populationdensity, so habitat loss is ongoing. Developing a conservationstrategy for any of these regions requires not only a detailedanalysis of the distributions of species and the locations of specialresources (such as caves, freshwater springs, or migratory59.4 | WHAT STRATEGIES DO BIOLOGISTS USE TO PROTECT BIODIVERSITY? 1251EastMelanesiaSundalandMadagascar and theIndian Ocean islandsTropical AndesWestern Colombiaand EcuadorPolynesiaandMicronesiaMesoamerica(A) Tropical rainforest hotspotsWestern Ghatsand Sri LankaS C NCaribbeanWallaceaAtlantic forestsof BrazilPhilippinesEast Africancoastal forestsIndo-BurmaGuineanforests(B) Hotspots in other biomesCaucasusSouthAfricanKarooJapanMexicanwoodlandsEasternSouth AfricaIran-AnatoliaHimalayaMountains ofsouthwest ChinaMountains ofcentral AsiaBrazilianCerradoChileantemperateforestCaliforniaregionAfromontaneHorn ofAfricaCape Floral regionMediterraneanBasinSouthwestAustraliaNew ZealandNew Caledonia59.10 Hotspots of Biodiversity(A) Almost half of the world’s highestpriority “hotspots” for biodiversityprotection are regions of tropicalrainforest habitat. Areas circled inred encompass island groups. Thecircled letters represent the onlythree remaining areas of extensiveunbroken rainforest: S, SouthAmerican Amazonia; C, the CongoBasin of Africa; and N, the island ofNew Guinea. (B) Eighteen hotspotsrepresenting other (non-rainforest)ecosystems.stopover areas for birds), but also an analysis of factors thatthreaten and factors that support biodiversity in the region.In an effort to further pinpoint sites with threatened speciesthat are found nowhere else, in 2005 conservation biologistsidentified 595 “centers of imminent extinction.” These sites areconcentrated in tropical forests, on islands, and in mountainousregions (Figure 59.11). Only one-third of the sites are legallyprotected, and most of them are surrounded by land that is undergoingrapid development. Unless protectiveactions are taken soon, species extinctions are inevitable.Degraded ecosystems can be restoredWhen a species is endangered as a consequenceof ecosystem degradation rather than outrighthabitat loss, protecting the species may requirerestoring the habitat to a more natural state.Practitioners of restoration ecology are developingmethods aimed at just such reconstitution,because many degraded ecosystems recoveronly slowly, if at all, without human assistance.Because the soil that supports them is so rich,grasslands all over the world have been convertedto agriculture. By the middle of the twentiethcentury, for example, most North Americanprairies had been converted to cropland orwere heavily grazed by domestic livestock. Theherds of large mammals that roamed the prairieswhen European settlers arrived have been reducedto tiny remnants confined to small areas.Most of these remaining populations are toosmall to maintain their genetic diversity or playtheir original ecological roles. The species havesurvived, however, so opportunities exist to reintroducethem if their habitat can be restored.Amajor prairie restoration project is under way in northeasternMontana. When Lewis and Clark mapped this region 200years ago, they saw large herds of bison, elk, deer, and pronghorn,as well as abundant populations of their predators. Thegoal of the restoration project, run by the World Wildlife Fundand the American Prairie Foundation in cooperation with publicland managers, is to restore the native prairie and its faunain a 15,000-km2 area near the Missouri River (Figure 59.12).This ambitious project is feasible for three reasons. First, theprivate land in the area is owned by a small number of ranchers,each of whom owns extensive grazing leases on publiclands administered by either U.S. federal agencies or the Stateof Montana. Second, most of the land has never been plowed,so native vegetation can recover rapidly when grazing pressuresare reduced. Third, the area’s human population is decreasing.The ranchers are aging, and their children are abandoningthe hard work and uncertain profits of ranching for careers inurban settings. Once a free-ranging herd of several thousand bisonand large numbers of elk—along with their predators(wolves)—has been established, nature-minded tourists are expectedto flock to the area to view the wildlife spectacle. Overthe long term, the restored ecosystem should deliver major economicbenefits to the region.1252 CHAPTER 59 | CONSERVATION BIOLOGY“Centers of imminent extinction” are concentratedin tropical forests, islands, and mountainous regions.59.11 Centers of Imminent Extinction The areas shown in yellowinclude 595 “centers of imminent extinction.” These regions are home to794 species that are at serious risk of extinction.Butte BillingsBozemanMaltaGlasgowIdahoWyomingCanadaMissoula Great FallsHelenaLewistownMontanaMissouri RiverMissouri River(A)(B) Cynomys ludovicianus (C) Bison bisonFort PeckLake59.12 Restoring a North American Prairie (A) A major prairierestoration project is underway north of the Missouri River in the state ofMontana (yellow area). (B) Native prairie dogs maintain the vegetation bydigging extensive burrows and clipping plants. (C) The first bison werereintroduced to the area in 2005.In the United States, the notion that humans are capable ofcreating functioning replacement ecosystems underlies policiesthat allow developers to destroy habitats. Destruction of wetlandsin particular is often permitted because of developers’ assertionsthat they can be replaced. However, creating new wetlandsrequires detailed ecological knowledge that almost invariablyfar surpasses that which is currently available.In southern California, where 90 percent of the coastal wetlandshave been destroyed, wetland restoration is a high priority.Species have been lost from degraded coastal wetlands,so restoration requires species introductions. Early attempts, inwhich one or two common wetland species were introduced,did not succeed—other wetland-associated species failed to recolonizethe “rehabilitated” wetlands. To understand why, conservationbiologists established a large field experiment at theTijuana Estuary (Figure 59.13). Here they found that experimentalplots planted with species-rich mixtures developed a morecomplex vegetation structure (which is important to insects andbirds) and also accumulated nitrogen (required for plantgrowth) faster than did species-poor plots (Figure 59.14).Disturbance patterns sometimes need to be restoredMany species depend on particular patterns of disturbance—such as fires, windstorms, or grazing—to maintain their populations(see Section 57.4). Recognition of the need for periodicdisturbance to maintain healthy ecosystems is a rather new dimensionof conservation biology. For example, although many59.4 | WHAT STRATEGIES DO BIOLOGISTS USE TO PROTECT BIODIVERSITY? 125359.13 A Wetlands Laboratory Tijuana Estuary, near San Diego, is ashallow-water wetlands habitat. Experiments at this natural researchreserve shed light on ways to restore this valuable ecosystem.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.HYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODINVESTIGATING LIFEPlanting a rich mixture of species should enhance wetland restoration attempts.59.14 Species Richness Enhances Wetland RestorationWhen biologists attempted to restore degraded areas of the Tijuana Estuary, they found that several measures of wetland ecosystemhealth improved more rapidly in species-rich than in species-poor plantings.When attempting to restore degraded wetlands, planting a mixture of species will approach the ecosystem’soriginal condition more rapidly than planting a single species.RESULTSPercent ground cover6 12 18Months200406080100Number of canopy layers6 12 18Months Plots0.51.01.52.02.53.00Nitrogen stored (g/m2)24681012013 61. Delimit experimental plots of degraded wetland habitat, leaving control plots unplanted (i.e., no human intervention).2. Plant some experimental plots with a single plant species typical of wetlands in the region. Plant other plots withrandomly chosen assemblages of 3 and of 6 typical species. Plant the same density of seedlings in all plots.3. Over the subsequent 18 months, replant and weed the experimental tracts as necessary to compensate forearly mortality of seedlings.UnplantedcontrolPlot with 1 speciesPlot with 3 speciesPlot with 6 speciesIn the plots with higher species richness, more of the ground was covered by plants,the vegetation structure was more complex, and more nitrogen accumulated in the soil.plant species require periodic fires for successful establishmentand survival, for many years the official policy of the U.S. ForestService, symbolized by the iconic mascot Smokey Bear, wasto suppress all forest fires. Today, however, controlled burningis common, particularly in western North America. In order touse fire as an ecosystem management tool, it is important toknow the historical pattern of fires in an area, which can bedetermined in part by studies of annual growth rings of trees(Figure 59.15). A schedule of controlled burning that recreatesthe historical pattern can reduce forest floor litter, avoiding abuildup of fuel that can lead to intense, tree-killing canopy fires.Ending trade is crucial to saving some speciesMost endangered species cannot survive any further reductionsin their breeding populations, so it is important to prevent theirexploitation. The legal mechanism for prohibiting trade in thesespecies or their products is an international agreement calledthe Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species(CITES). Most nations of the world are members of CITES. Nationalrepresentatives meet every two years to review the statusof species on the CITES protected species lists, to determinewhich species may no longer need protection, and to add newspecies. CITES rules currently prohibit international trade initems such as whale meat, rhinoceros horn, and many speciesof parrots and orchids.CITES instituted a ban on international trade in elephantivory in 1989, but demand for ivory remains strong, especiallyin Japan and China. As a result, poaching of elephants continuesin the forests of central Africa and in East Africa, wherethe animals are threatened. Southern African countries(Botswana, Namibia, South Africa, Zambia, and Zimbabwe),however, have so many elephants that government officialsmust kill many of them to control populations in the limited areaswhere they are allowed to roam to prevent them from dispersingto populated areas and damaging crops. These countrieswould like to sell the ivory from the culled elephants tofund their conservation efforts. Other countries are worried thatif trade restrictions on ivory are relaxed, poaching will escalateover the entire continent.Control and regulation of ivory trade might be possible if scientistscould determine where the ivory comes from. SamuelWasser and his colleagues at the University of Washington haveidentified 16 DNA markers that can be extracted from elephantfeces. Park rangers in Malawi and Zambia were able to samplethe elephant populations in their countries by collectingfresh scat while they were on routine patrols. The source of anelephant tusk can then be determined by matching DNA extractedfrom the ivory with the geographically based frequenciesof the 16 DNA markers found in the dung samples. In June2002, 6.5 tons of illegal ivory were seized in Singapore. DNAanalyses showed that the elephants were killed in Zambia.Such safeguards were partially responsible for the controversialdecision to sanction legal sales of ivory from Namibia,Botswana, Zimbabwe, and South Africa beginning in 2008, thefirst such sale in close to a decade. Over 100 tons of elephanttusks, the equivalent of over 20,000 dead elephants, were auctionedoff over a 2-week period to authorized buyers fromChina and Japan, for use primarily in folk medicine. The sale ofthis ivory, all of which was obtained legally from animals thathad died of natural causes, generated over $15 million for elephantconservation efforts. Although the sales were monitoredby CITES, and although the last sanctioned sale, in 1999, did notappear to increase poaching activities, other African nations andmany wildlife conservation groups are concerned that in the absenceof oversight and enforcement, the flood of legal ivory willbe intermingled with poached ivory in international marketsand encourage more illegal elephant slaughter.One promising development in curbing illegal sales was thedecision by eBay, the international online marketplace, to bansales of ivory on its platform effective January 2009. An investigationby the International Fund for Animal Welfare revealedthat two-thirds of online sales of protected wildlife productstake place on eBay, so conservationists are optimistic that eBay’sactions will be effective in drying up markets and protectingelephants from poaching.Invasions of exotic species must be controlledor preventedControlling invasions of exotic species is an important componentof conservation biology. The best way to reduce the damagecaused by invasive species, of course, is to prevent theirintroduction in the first place. Given the tremendous volume ofglobal trade, it might seem impossible to curtail their spread.Some promising strategies, however, do exist. For example,transoceanic transport of invasive species in ballast water couldbe largely eliminated by the simple procedure of deoxygenat-1254 CHAPTER 59 | CONSERVATION BIOLOGY59.15 MimickingNatural DisturbancePatterns As revealed byscars (arrows) in thegrowth rings of thisPonderosa pine, low-intensitynon-lethal ground fireswere frequent in the pineforests of the southwesternUnited States prior tofire suppression.ing ballast water before it is pumped out. This practice not onlykills most organisms in the water, but also extends the life ofballast tanks, providing an economic benefit to shippers. Althoughthe U.S. House of Representatives passed (by a vote of395 to 7) a Coast Guard funding bill with language stipulatingthat freighters operating in the Great Lakes must disinfect theirballast water, the Senate vote has been impeded by legal wrangling.In the absence of federal regulation, some states have alreadyimplemented their own ballast water treatment regulations.Regulating the importation and sale of exotic species can reducedeliberate introductions. In 2002, some members of theAmerican horticulture industry crafted a voluntary code of conductfor their profession, stating that the invasive potential of aplant should be assessed prior to its introduction and marketing.Horticulturists will work with conservation biologists to determinewhich species are currently invasive, or likely to becomeso, and to identify suitable alternative species. Stocks of invasivespecies will be phased out, and gardeners will be encouraged touse noninvasive plants.Conservation biologists have developed a decision tree,based on the traits that characterize plant species that have becomeinvasive, to help horticulturists and regulators determinewhether an exotic plant species should be allowed into NorthAmerica (Figure 59.16). Although the protocols stipulated bythis decision tree cannot eliminate all introductions of invasivespecies, if they are followed conscientiously, they cangreatly reduce the risk of such introductions.Biodiversity can have market valueMuch of the value of ecosystems to humansociety depends on their biodiversity,but it has been difficult to assess thevalue of biodiversity in monetary terms.When biodiversity is perceived to haveeconomic value, industries and governmentagencies have a greater incentive toprotect it. The interdisciplinary field ofecological economics has provided tools forassessing the economic value of biodiversity.Many studies have demonstrated the market valueof protecting biodiversity. Such cases show that the argumentfor biodiversity conservation is compelling notonly from an ecological or ethical perspective, but alsofrom an economic perspective. Let’s take a closer lookat two of them.WILD DOGS AND ECOTOURISM Ecotourism—environmentallyresponsible travel to natural areas that contributesto conserving their biodiversity and to the economicwell-being of the local communities—is a major sourceof income for many developing nations. For example, touristsvisiting Africa often express interest in seeing wild dogs (Lycaonpictus; Figure 59.17). However, diseases such as rabies and caninedistemper, along with habitat loss, road traffic, deliberateextermination due to a perceived threat to livestock, and manyother factors, have decimated wild dog populations throughoutthe continent, making them the second most endangeredcarnivore in Africa. Once found in 39 countries, they are todayfound in only 14 countries. Their endangered status has piquedinterest among tourists in catching glimpses of these charismaticanimals. South Africa is home to about 400 of Africa’s remaining5,000 dogs, most of which live in Kruger National Park. Asurvey of visitors to South Africa revealed that nearly threefourthsof them would be willing to pay an extra U.S. $12 forthe opportunity to see wild dogs. Conservation biologists are59.4 | WHAT STRATEGIES DO BIOLOGISTS USE TO PROTECT BIODIVERSITY? 1255Yes NoNo Yes No YesNo Yes No YesYes NoYes NoYes NoNo YesNoIs the species invasiveelsewhere, outside ofNorth America?Is it an interspecifichybrid with knownseed sterility?Does it spread quicklyby vegetative means?Further analysisand monitoringneededFurther analysisand monitoringneededFurther analysisand monitoringneededDoes it spread quicklyby vegetative means?Is it native to parts ofNorth America otherthan the region of theproposed introduction?Is it native to parts ofNorth America otherthan the region of theproposed introduction?Does it spread quicklyby vegetative means?Is the juvenile periodusually less than 5 years?Does it reproducevegetatively?Does it reproducevegetatively?No YesYesDeny admissionDeny admissionDeny admissionDeny admissionAdmitDo the seeds requirepretreatment forgermination?CheckfurthertraitsCheckfurthertraitsCheckfurthertraitsPlants that reachthis point in theprocess are putthrough a second“decision tree.”59.16 A “Decision Tree” This diagram sets criteria for evaluating proposed introductionsof exotic plant species and helps regulators identify those species with the potential tobecome invasive.working with lodge owners and ranchers elsewhere in SouthAfrica and in Kenya to encourage them to reestablish wild dogsin areas from which they have disappeared.THE FYNBOS Studies by a group of economists, ecologists, andland managers have attempted to calculate the value of the economicbenefits provided by the spectacularly species-rich shrublandcommunity called fynbos in the Western Cape Province ofSouth Africa (Figure 59.18A). Of the 8,500 plant species in thisregion, over two-thirds are endemics. Fynbos plants thrive despitethe summer droughts, nutrient-poor soils, and periodicfires of the region.The highlands where fynbos vegetation thrives provide abouttwo-thirds of the Western Cape’s water supply. In addition, someof the endemic plants, including proteas, are harvested for cutand dried flowers. An international market has developed forrooibos, a fynbos shrub used for herbal tea. Income also comesfrom hundreds of thousands of ecotourists who visit the regionevery year to see the fynbos. The fynbos also provides recreationalopportunities for local residents in urban areas nearby.Recently, several trees and shrubs from other continents haveinvaded the fynbos. Taller and faster-growing than the endemics,they displace the native vegetation, in the process increasingthe intensity and severity of fires. Moreover, becausethe invaders transpire more water than the endemics, they decreasestream flows to less than half those from areas coveredwith native plants, reducing the water supply for people inthe region (Figure 59.18B).We can get an idea of the market value of fynbos biodiversityby estimating the cost of maintaining or replacing the services itprovides. Removing the exotic plants by felling and digging outinvasive trees and shrubs and by managing fire costs between$140 and $830 per hectare, depending on the densities of the invaders.Alternatively, the services provided by fynbos vegetationcould be replaced, but only at a much higher cost. Asewagepurification plant that would deliver the same amount of waterto the Western Cape as a well-managed watershed of 10,000hectares would cost $135 million to build and $2.6 million per yearto operate. Desalination of seawater would cost four times asmuch. Thus the available alternatives would deliver water at acost between 1.8 and 6.7 times higher than the cost of maintainingnatural vegetation in the watershed. Maintaining the fynbosvegetation would be less expensive and more labor-intensive (generatingmore employment) than the technologically sophisticatedmethods that could substitute for the services it provides.Simple changes can help protect biodiversityEstablishing protected areas is an essential component of effortsto maintain biodiversity, but this action alone is insufficient tostem global biodiversity loss. The extensive landscapes in whichpeople live and extract resources must also play important rolesin biodiversity conservation. The good news is that, carefullyused, these lands can contribute much more to conservationthan they currently do. The practice of using ecosystems for residences,resources, or recreation in ways that sustain their biodiversityis known as reconciliation ecology.1256 CHAPTER 59 | CONSERVATION BIOLOGYLycaon pictus59.17 A Sight for Travelers’ Eyes Tourists visiting Africa to experienceits wildlife often express a desire to see the rare African wild dogs.Protecting such species can be in the economic interest of the region.(B)014018022026030034038020 40 60 80 100YearsRunoff (mm/year)(A)Predicted runoff fromnative vegetationPredicted runoff fromvegetation dominated byinvasive exotic species59.18 Biodiversity Maintains Ecosystem Functioning (A) Theunique fynbos ecosystem of the Western Cape Province of South Africaprovides much of the area’s water. (B) A computer simulation of streamflows from fynbos watersheds that have and have not been invaded byexotic trees and shrubs.Reconciliation ecology is based on the principle that mostecosystem services are provided locally, and that people aremore motivated to work to protect their local interests than theyare to work on national or global issues. The National WildlifeFederation has established a very successful program in whichpeople petition to have their backyards certified as wildlifefriendly.Criteria for certification include planting shrubs thatprovide food for birds and refraining from applying pesticideson lawns. The city of Tucson, Arizona, has launched a majorproject to make the city a suitable habitat for many species ofbirds, not just the typical urban birds that live in most cities inNorth America.Even some industrial sites can support biodiversity. TheTurkey Point power plant in southern Florida uses largeamounts of water to cool its generating units. To cool the heatedwater before discharging it, the Florida Power & Light Companydug a system of 38 canals that covers 6,000 acres. Thesecooling canals are separated by low-lying berms that support avariety of native and exotic plants. Red mangroves grow alongthe edges of the canals. Today, they support a thriving populationof American crocodiles, a highly endangered species. Crocodilesliving in the canals yield about 10 percent of all youngcrocodiles in the United States. Having discovered the biodiversityvalue of its cooling system, the company employs biologiststo monitor the crocodiles and works actively to ensuretheir continued reproductive success.Captive breeding programs can maintain a few speciesA few of the world’s many endangered species can be maintainedin captivity while the external threats to their existenceare reduced or removed. However, captive propagation is onlya temporary measure that buys time to deal with those threats.Zoos, aquariums, and botanical gardens do not have enoughspace to maintain adequate populations of more than a smallfraction of Earth’s rare and endangered species. Nonetheless,captive propagation can play an important role by maintainingspecies during critical periods, providing a source of individualsfor reintroduction into the wild, and raising public awarenessof threatened and endangered species.The California condor, North America’s largest bird, survivestoday only because of captive propagation (Figure 59.19). Twocenturies ago, condors ranged from British Columbia to northernMexico, but by 1978, the wild population was plunging towardextinction. Many of the birds, which are scavengers, diedfrom ingesting animal carcasses containing lead shot. To savethe condor from certain extinction, biologists captured allknown remaining condors, which numbered only 22 individuals,and initiated a captive breeding program in 1983.The first captive-bred birds were released in the mountainsnorth of Los Angeles in 1992. Since that time, captive-bred birdshave also been released in northern Arizona and Baja California.These birds are provided with lead-free food in remote areas,and they are trained to avoid power lines prior to release,thereby reducing a major source of mortality. Today, the captive-bred birds use the same roosting sites, bathing pools, andmountain ridges that their wild-born predecessors did. In December2008, there were 327 known condors in the world, halfof which were living in the wild. In 2003, a wild-born chickfledged in the wild for the first time in over two decades.Most of the major threats to condor survival, includingpower lines, pesticides, and museum collectors, have been mitigated.Lead poisoning is still a problem, but as of July 1, 2008,under the Ridley–Tree Condor Preservation Act, Californiahunters are required to use non-lead bullets when huntingwithin the condor’s range. Passage of this legislation marks achange in public attitudes from the days when cattle ranchers,in the mistaken belief that the birds killed livestock, vociferouslyopposed their reintroduction into the wild.The legacy of Samuel PlimsollDuring the nineteenth century, many British merchant shipssailed the world’s oceans. Once these ships left harbor, they59.4 | WHAT STRATEGIES DO BIOLOGISTS USE TO PROTECT BIODIVERSITY? 1257(A) (B) Gymnogyps californianus59.19 A California CondorSoars (A) California condorsraised in captivity are fed byhumans wearing hand puppetsso they will not imprinton their captors and will beable to survive in the wild.(B) Numbered wing tags allowconservation biologists toidentify and track releasedadult condors. The survival ofNorth America’s largest birdspecies depends on this captivepropagation project.were out of contact with the rest of the world; in the case of ashipwreck, signaling for rescue was impossible. But ship ownerscould maximize their profits by overloading their ships, eventhough this practice caused some of them to become unseaworthyand sink.Samuel Plimsoll, a member of Parliament, became concernedabout the rate of loss of British vessels and sailors. He convincedParliament to pass legislation requiring that a “load line” bepainted on the hull of every large oceangoing vessel. The positionof the line was calculated using factors such as the structuralstrength of the vessel and the shape of its hull. If the loadline was under water, the ship was not permitted to leave theharbor. The “Plimsoll line,” as it came to be known, dramaticallyreduced the rate of loss of British ships and sailors. In 1930,the international community agreed on universal adoption ofload line regulations.The increasing loss of Earth’s species suggests that the loadof human activities has pushed the planet below its Plimsollline. But where and how should society draw that line? Our decisionshould be based on scientific information, but, just as inSamuel Plimsoll’s time, science cannot determine an “acceptablerate of loss.” Ethical considerations will figure prominentlyin the decisions we make about changing the way we useecosystems so that other species can survive on Earth with us.59.4 RECAPTo conserve biodiversity, it is necessary to set asideprotected areas, restore ecosystems and naturaldisturbance patterns, restrict trade in endangeredspecies and transport of invasive species, increasepopulations of endangered species, and otherwiserecognize the benefits of maintaining functioningecosystems.• What are some of the priorities conservation biologistsconsider when establishing protected areas? See pp.1251–1252 and Figures 59.11–59.13• Explain the difference between restoration ecologyand reconciliation ecology. See pp. 1252 and 1257• Do you think the analogy of the Plimsoll line is a goodone to apply to protecting the world’s biodiversity?Why or why not?1258 CHAPTER 59 | CONSERVATION BIOLOGY59.1 What Is Conservation Biology?• Conservation biology is an applied scientific discipline devotedto protecting and managing biodiversity.• Conservation biologists recognize that an understanding of theevolutionary processes that generate biodiversity is essential toprotecting it. They also understand that ecosystems are dynamic,and that humans are part of those ecosystems.• Species extinctions have always occurred, but today they areoccurring at an alarming rate.• There are many compelling reasons for protecting biodiversity,including the maintenance of the ecosystems whose manyfunctions provide humans with goods and services, includingair and water purification.59.2 How Do Biologists Predict Changes in Biodiversity?• Our understanding of biodiversity is incomplete. We do notknow how many species there are, where they live, or which ofthe species known to science have gone extinct.• Biologists can use the species–area relationship and the theoryof island biogeography to estimate rates of extinction likely tobe caused by habitat loss.• To estimate a species’ risk of extinction, statistical models takeinto account data on population sizes, genetic variation, physiology,morphology, and behavior.• Rarity is not always a cause for concern, but species whose populationsare shrinking rapidly are usually at risk of extinction.59.3 What Factors Threaten Species Persistence?• Habitat loss is the most important cause of species endangermentworldwide. As habitats become increasingly fragmented,more species are lost from those habitats. Small habitat patchescan support only small populations and are adversely influencedby edge effects. Review Figures 59.5 and 59.6,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 59.1• Overexploitation has historically been the most importantcause of species extinctions, and it is still a major threat tobiodiversity today.• Some species introduced to regions outside their original rangebecome invasive, causing extinctions of native species by competingwith them, eating them, or transmitting diseases tothem.• Climate is likely to become an increasingly important cause ofextinctions for those species that cannot shift their ranges asrapidly as the climate warms. Review Figure 59.959.4 What Strategies Do Biologists Use to ProtectBiodiversity?• Establishing protected areas is crucial to conserving biodiversity.Protected areas are selected by taking into account speciesrichness, endemism, imminence of threats, and the need to protectrepresentative ecosystems.• Restoration ecology is an important conservation strategy becausemany degraded ecosystems will not recover, or will do soonly very slowly, without human assistance. Review Figure 59.15• International trade in endangered species is controlled by regulationsthat most countries endorse.• Conservation biologists work to determine which species are likelyto become invasive and prevent their introduction to new areas.• Even within landscapes where people live and extractresources, steps may be taken to protect biodiversity. Thisapproach is known as reconciliation ecology.• Captive breeding programs can maintain some endangeredspecies for the short term while threats to their persistence arereduced or removed.SEE WEB ACTIVITY 59.1 for a concept review of this chapter.CHAPTER SUMMARY
59.1 What Is Conservation Biology?• Conservation biology is an applied scientific discipline devotedto protecting and managing biodiversity.• Conservation biologists recognize that an understanding of theevolutionary processes that generate biodiversity is essential toprotecting it. They also understand that ecosystems are dynamic,and that humans are part of those ecosystems.• Species extinctions have always occurred, but today they areoccurring at an alarming rate.• There are many compelling reasons for protecting biodiversity,including the maintenance of the ecosystems whose manyfunctions provide humans with goods and services, includingair and water purification.59.2 How Do Biologists Predict Changes in Biodiversity?• Our understanding of biodiversity is incomplete. We do notknow how many species there are, where they live, or which ofthe species known to science have gone extinct.• Biologists can use the species–area relationship and the theoryof island biogeography to estimate rates of extinction likely tobe caused by habitat loss.• To estimate a species’ risk of extinction, statistical models takeinto account data on population sizes, genetic variation, physiology,morphology, and behavior.• Rarity is not always a cause for concern, but species whose populationsare shrinking rapidly are usually at risk of extinction.59.3 What Factors Threaten Species Persistence?• Habitat loss is the most important cause of species endangermentworldwide. As habitats become increasingly fragmented,more species are lost from those habitats. Small habitat patchescan support only small populations and are adversely influencedby edge effects. Review Figures 59.5 and 59.6,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 59.1• Overexploitation has historically been the most importantcause of species extinctions, and it is still a major threat tobiodiversity today.• Some species introduced to regions outside their original rangebecome invasive, causing extinctions of native species by competingwith them, eating them, or transmitting diseases tothem.• Climate is likely to become an increasingly important cause ofextinctions for those species that cannot shift their ranges asrapidly as the climate warms. Review Figure 59.959.4 What Strategies Do Biologists Use to ProtectBiodiversity?• Establishing protected areas is crucial to conserving biodiversity.Protected areas are selected by taking into account speciesrichness, endemism, imminence of threats, and the need to protectrepresentative ecosystems.• Restoration ecology is an important conservation strategy becausemany degraded ecosystems will not recover, or will do soonly very slowly, without human assistance. Review Figure 59.15• International trade in endangered species is controlled by regulationsthat most countries endorse.• Conservation biologists work to determine which species are likelyto become invasive and prevent their introduction to new areas.• Even within landscapes where people live and extractresources, steps may be taken to protect biodiversity. Thisapproach is known as reconciliation ecology.• Captive breeding programs can maintain some endangeredspecies for the short term while threats to their persistence arereduced or removed.SEE WEB ACTIVITY 59.1 for a concept review of this chapter.