In 1944, in the midst of World War II, the U.S. CoastGuard established a LORAN (Long-Range Aids to Navigation)tracking station on the tiny island of St. Matthewin Alaska, an isolated and otherwise unoccupied patch oftundra more than 300 km from the nearest village. As anemergency food supply for the 19 men assigned to theisland, the Coast Guard brought in 29 reindeer (Rangifertarandus) by barge and released them.The reindeer thrived on the thick, lush mat of lichensthat covered the 128-square-mile island. Other than themen, the island had no reindeer predators; its only otheranimal occupants were Arctic foxes, one species of vole,and a few ground-nesting birds. As the war wound downand the men left the island, the reindeer were left behind inan environment of plentiful food and no natural predators.In 1957, David Klein, at the time a U.S. Fish and Wildlifebiologist, visited St. Matthew with a field assistant;together they counted more than 1,350 reindeer, most ofwhich appeared fat and healthy. However, they also noticedareas of seriously overgrazed lichen mats. Klein didnot return to the island until 1963, when he and three colleagueshitched a ride with a Coast Guard cutter. By thattime, there were more than 6,000 reindeer packed in at adensity of 47 per square mile. The island was covered withreindeer tracks and droppings, and the animals were distinctlysmaller than the ones sighted 6 years earlier.The winter of 1963–1964 brought punishing storms,record low temperatures, and tremendous snowfalls to St.Matthew Island. In August 1965, Coast Guard personnel reportedmassive reindeer deaths. Klein and two colleaguesarranged a return visit in the summer of 1966, at whichtime they found the island littered with reindeer skeletons.The scientists could locate only 42 living reindeer, 41 ofwhich were adult females; the lone male appeared to havedeformed antlers. In a remarkably shortperiod, the reindeer population had declinedby over 99 percent. Lichens hadessentially disappeared from the island,replaced almost entirely by sedges andgrasses, on which reindeer cannot subsist.By 1980, the reindeer had entirelydisappeared from the island.Introducing large hoofed mammalsto small islands is an inherently riskyenterprise, as the experience on St.Matthew graphically illustrates. ButReindeer games55Reindeer Pause Part of the St. Matthewreindeer herd is seen In this photographtaken in 1963, shortly before a particularlysevere winter destroyed most of this isolatedpopulation. The herd had grown exponentiallyfor almost 40 years since beingintroduced to the island as a food sourcefor soldiers during World War II.55.1 How Do Ecologists Study Populations?Well before ecology became a distinct biological discipline, peopleengaged in population management. Whenever we growcrops or raise livestock, we are explicitly increasing populationsof domesticated plants and animals. Pest control strategies aim toreduce populations of organisms whose presence we consider undesirable.Game wardens, park managers, and conservation biologistsaim to maintain stable populations of fish, wildlife, andthreatened or endangered species. All of these activities requirean understanding of population dynamics: the patterns andprocesses of change in populations. The study of population dynamicsalso allows us to understand the changes in populationswe make inadvertently in the course of other human activities—as when the Coast Guard introduced reindeer to St. Matthew.A population consists of the individuals of a species that interactwith one another within a given area at a particular time.Populations are important units for study because groups of individualsthat interact in time and space have ecological characteristicsthat individuals do not. At any given moment, an individualorganism occupies only one point in space and is aparticular age and size. The members of a population, however,are distributed over space and vary in age and size.Population density is the number of individuals per unit ofarea or volume. Density is a property of all populations and isa function of the processes that add individuals to the population(births and immigration, or movement of individuals intothe population) and the processes that reduce the number of individualsin the population (deaths and emigration, or movementof individuals out of the population).Populations also have a characteristic age structure, or distributionof individuals across age categories, and a characteristicdispersion pattern, or spatial distribution of individuals inthe environment. These characteristics, which are constantlychanging due to births, deaths, and movement, influence thestability of populations and affect the ways in which populationsof one species interact with populations of other species.Thus, to study populations, ecologists need to count the individualsin a given area, determine their ages, and calculate therates at which individuals enter and leave the population. Thestudy of these processes is known as demography.Ecologists use a variety of approaches to count andtrack individualsHow individuals are counted depends on the nature of the organismunder study. Populations of animals, for example, canIN THIS CHAPTER we will examine how ecologistsstudy populations and investigate how reproductive capacityand environmental resources affect the dynamics of populationgrowth. We will identify factors that limit populationdensities and determine the effects of environmental variationon population dynamics. Finally, we will show how anunderstanding of population dynamics is applied to managingpopulations of importance to humans.such introductions do not always end in disaster. Reindeerpopulations introduced to the sub-Antarctic islandof South Georgia almost a century ago have persistedand appear to be stable.Why would populations of a particular species in oneplace explode and crash, but in another seemingly similarplace remain stable over time? Understanding howand why populations change in size is more than an academicpursuit. Ecologists study how populations changeover time because that knowledge is critical for understandingwhy some species become pests in someplaces and not in others, for managing sustainable harvestsof economically important species, and for designingplans for conserving endangered species.CHAPTER OUTLINE55.1 How Do Ecologists Study Populations?55.2 How Do Environmental Conditions Affect LifeHistories?55.3 What Factors Limit Population Densities?55.4 How Does Habitat Variation Affect PopulationDynamics?55.5 How Can Populations Be Managed Scientifically?Predators and Population Cycles Wolves are the principalnon-human predators of reindeer, moose, and other largegrazing mammals in northern forests and tundra. There wereno wolves on St. Matthew Island, a fact largely responsible forthe reindeer population’s ability to grow exponentially.be more challenging to count than populations of trees. Most animalscan move, so, to avoid double counting, individuals mustbe identified. Nevertheless, counting every tree in a forest canbe logistically difficult, even though the trees are standing still.In some species, individuals are large and distinct enough,and populations small enough, that investigators can identifyall the individuals and count them. Biologists performed thistype of count, called a full census, on the elephant population ofSamburu and Buffalo Springs national reserves in Kenya. Bymonitoring the population for 21 months, they learned to recognizeeach of the 760 individual elephants, primarily by theirunique and distinctive ear markings (Figure 55.1A). Individualrecognition is impossible or impractical for most species, however,and to identify such individual organisms they must bemarked in some artificial way (Figure 55.1B).In most species, populations are too large and their individualmembers too small, too similar in appearance, and/or toomobile for a full census to be conducted. Thus population sizesare often estimated from representative samples using statisticalmethods.Population densities can be estimated from samplesEcologists usually measure the densities of terrestrial organismsas the number of individuals per unit of area; for organisms livingin soil, air, or water, the number or mass per unit of volumemay be used. Ecologists obtain these measurements from sampleunits, then extrapolate from these samples to estimate thetotal population density.Estimating population densities is easiest for sedentary organisms.Investigators need only count the individuals in a sampleof representative locations and extrapolate the counts to theentire geographic range of the population. Individuals may becounted within marked and measured areas called quadrats.Plants are often counted along a linear transect: a line drawnacross the population’s range (often designated by a stringmarked at regular intervals). Any individual that touches theline is counted. By making repeated counts with either of thesemethods, investigators can make reasonably good estimates ofthe size of a population.Counting mobile organisms is more difficult because individualsmove into and out of sampling areas. In such cases, investigatorsmay use the mark–recapture method. They begin bycapturing, marking, and then releasing a number of individuals.Later, after the marked individuals have had time to mixwith unmarked individuals in the population, another sampleof individuals is captured. The proportion of individuals inthe new sample that are marked can be used to estimate thetotal size of the population in the defined area, as follows:Estimated population sizewheren1 = the total number of individuals in the first sample(captured, marked, and released)n2 = the total number of individuals in the second samplen1∩2 = the number of marked individuals recaptured in secondsample (the “intersection set” of samples 1 and 2)In other words, we assume that the proportion of individualsin the second sample that were captured and marked in the firstsample is about the same as the proportion of individuals in thesampling area that were captured in the first sample.Quantifying the size and determining the density of populationsare important, but these number are only a starting pointfor understanding population dynamics, because not all individualscontribute equally to population growth.Populations have age structures and dispersion patternsThe age structure of a population—the distribution of individualsacross all age groups—has a profound effect on populationgrowth because reproductive capacity varies with age. Populationswith a large proportion of young individuals have aN = 11n nn×∩2255.1 | HOW DO ECOLOGISTS STUDY POPULATIONS? 1169The pattern of folds andnotches on each elephant’sears is as unique as a fingerprint.A computer chip on a bee’sback logs her movementsbetween the hive and flowers.(A)(B)55.1 Identifying Individuals (A) The pattern of folds and notches onthe ears of an elephant is as unique and distinctive as a fingerprint andcan be used to recognize individuals in a population. (B) Worker bees ina hive are individually indistinguishable to ecologists, who have come upwith ingenious methods of marking. This female honey bee sports a computerchip on her back, which not only identifies her but also logs hermovements between the hive and flowers.greater potential to grow than populations dominated by individualsthat are beyond their peak reproductive years.For some species, reproduction may be the province of onlya tiny fraction of the entire population for only a short intervalduring the life cycle. Adults of the tiny insect Clunio maritimus(the “one-hour midge”) mate, lay eggs, and die within about anhour after completing their larval development. In contrast,some vertebrates are capable of reproducing for years. Figure55.2 shows the results of a long-term study of the age structureof the elephant population in Kidepo Valley National Park,Uganda. Relative to 1970, the 2000 population skewed significantlytoward females, particularly those over 25 years of age.These two disparate age structures were the result of years ofdifferential mortality among young elephants due to drought,and of increased male death rates due to ivory poachers. Theage structure as of 2000 portends an increase in the population’sgrowth rate, given that female African elephants become fertilearound age 10–15 and can continue producing offspringthrough their fifties.Dispersion refers to the distribution of individuals in spacewithin a population. Dispersion determines patterns of interactionamong individuals and can thus have important effects onpopulation growth. In addition, ecologists must understand thedispersion patterns of a species to choose appropriate samplingareas and methods for estimating population sizes.Ecologists recognize three basic dispersion patterns (Figure55.3):• Aclumped dispersion pattern occurs when the presence ofone individual at any point in space increases the probabilityof others being near that point.• Aregular dispersion pattern occurs when the presence ofone individual at any point in space reduces the probabilityof others being near that point.• Arandom dispersion pattern occurs when there is an equalprobability of an individual occupying any point in space.1170 CHAPTER 55 | POPULATION ECOLOGYPrimereproductiveyearsAge group40 30 20 10 0 10 20 30Elephant population (%)0–4.95–9.910–14.915–19.920–24.925–29.930+1970 2000 55.2 Changes in Age StructureInfluence Population Growth Theelephant population in Kidepo ValleyNational Park, Uganda, was monitoredbetween 1970 and 2000. During thistime, the proportion of the populationachieving prime reproductive age range(15–30 years) grew considerably. Suchan age structure in a population is likelyto result in an increased rate of growth.(A) Clumped dispersion(B) Regular dispersion(C) Random dispersion55.3 Dispersion Patterns (A) Orcas hunting in pods display a clumped dispersionpattern. (B) Nesting seabirds often stake out territories with a radius defined by theirwingspans—an amount of space they can defend without leaving the nest. Thisresults in even dispersion. (C) Dandelion seeds are dispersed by the wind in randomfashion.Spatial variation in environmental conditions strongly influencesdispersion patterns. Small-scale differences in temperature,humidity, or wind speed can make particular places moreor less suitable for certain organisms. Aphids, for example, clusteralong the protruding veins of leaves, where they are shelteredfrom wind. Interactions among individuals may also bringabout characteristic dispersion patterns. Social life, with the cooperationit involves, tends to promote clumped dispersion patterns,as seen in Figure 55.3A. Intraspecific competition for food,space, or mates, on the other hand, tends to space individualsapart in regular dispersion patterns (Figure 55.3B).Changes in population size can be estimated fromrepeated density measurementsEcologists can use multiple estimates of population densitiesmade over time to estimate the rate at which a population isgrowing or decreasing. Over any given interval of time, thenumber of individuals in a population increases by the numberof individuals added to the population by birth and immigrationand decreases by the number of individuals lost from thepopulation by death and emigration. This relationship is expressedmathematically in the equationN1 = N0 + (B – D) + (I – E)whereN1 = the number of individuals at time 1N0 = the number of individuals at time 0B = the number of individuals born between time 0 and time 1D = the number that died between time 0 and time 1I = the number that immigrated between time 0 and time 1E = the number that emigrated between time 0 and time 1Using this equation to estimate N1 over multiple time intervalshelps researchers estimate changes in population density.Life tables track demographic eventsThe study of population dynamics requires keeping track of demographicevents (births, deaths, immigration, and emigration)in populations and determining the rate (number per unit oftime) at which they occur. Alife table is a tool that ecologists usefor these purposes. Life insurance companies use similar tables(called “actuarial tables”) to determine how much to chargepeople of different ages for insurance policies. Data from life tablescan be used to identify the principal mortality factors, orcauses of death, at particular life stages, to predict future populationtrends, and to develop strategies for managing populationsof species of commercial or ecological value.COHORT LIFE TABLES Life tables can be constructed by a numberof methods. To construct a cohort life table, investigators startwith a cohort—a group of individuals born within the sametime frame, or age class—and record their deaths until no individualsfrom the cohort remain alive. This type of life table issometimes called a horizontal life table because it is based on datacollected across the life span.The age categories used in a cohort life table depend on thelife cycle of the organism of interest. Age-dependent life tablestrack demographic events as a function of calendar age. Stagedependentlife tables track demographic events at various stagesof the life cycle (e.g., eggs, larvae, pupae, and adults in insects).They are commonly used when survival and reproduction dependmore on developmental stage than on calendar age, as isthe case, for example, with insects and other animals that undergometamorphosis.Using the data in a cohort life table, investigators can calculatemortality: the proportion of individuals of each age classthat die before reaching the next age class. They can also calculatesurvivorship (represented by the term lx), which is the likelihoodof an individual member of the cohort surviving to reachage x (Table 55.1).ESTIMATING REPRODUCTIVE CAPACITY Acohort life table can alsobe used to track the degree to which individuals in different agecategories contribute to reproduction (and hence populationgrowth). Because only females produce offspring, life tablesgenerally track the number of offspring produced by each femaleduring each time period—a factor called fecundity (indicatedin a life table by the term mx). The portion of the life tablethat tracks fecundity is called a fecundity schedule (Table 55.2).Such data allows conservation biologists and other scientists toestimate a population’s potential for growth (see Chapter 59).The data shown in Tables 55.1 and 55.2 track the survivorship(lx) and fecundity (mx), respectively, of a cohort of cactusground finches (Geospiza scandens) on Isla Daphne in the Galá-55.1 | HOW DO ECOLOGISTS STUDY POPULATIONS? 1171TABLE 55.1Life Table for the 1978 Cohort of CactusGround Finch (G. scandens) on Isla DaphneAGE CLASS NUMBER(YEARS) ALIVE SURVIVORSHIPa ( lx) MORTALITYb0–1 210 — 0.571–2 91 0.43 0.142–3 78 0.37 0.103–4 70 0.33 0.074–5 65 0.31 0.055–6 62 0.30 0.326–7 42 0.20 0.457–8 23 0.11 0.358–9 15 0.07 0.079–10 14 0.07 0.2110–11 11 0.05 0.0911–12 10 0.05 0.6012–13 4 0.02 0.2513 3 0.01 —a Survivorship = the proportion of the original cohort (here, of 210individuals) who survive to age x.b Mortality (“death rate”) = the proportion of individuals of age xwho die before reaching age x + 1.pagos archipelago. Peter and Rosemary Grant followed a cohortof 210 birds from 1978, when they hatched, until 1991,when only 3 individuals—all males—remained alive. All of thecactus ground finches on the island were banded so that theGrants could recognize them as individuals.The G. scandens life tables show that mortality was high duringthe first year of life, then dropped dramatically for severalyears before increasing in later years. The fecundity data indicatethat females of all ages breed, and breeding success doesnot correlate exclusively with age. Other observations of conditionson Isla Daphne revealed a correlation with rainfall,which in the Galápagos varies dramatically from year to year(see Table 55.2). These life tables and other ecological data, takentogether, suggest that the survival of adult birds and the numberof offspring they are able to fledge depend on food availability—that is, on cactus flower and fruit production, whichare strongly correlated with rainfall. In short, life table data canbe useful in separating out the many ecological factors that affectpopulation dynamics.Fecundity schedules vary greatly among species not only becauseorganisms differ in the number of offspring they can produce,but also because they vary in the timing of reproduction.Female cactus ground finches begin breeding at the age of1 or 2 years and, in favorable conditions, can fledge multipleoffspring each breeding season. In contrast, female Africanelephants do not produce offspring until they are at least 15years old and usually produce only one calf about every 5 years.VERTICAL LIFE TABLES Because not all species can be easily followedthrough time, some life tables are constructed by samplinga population at a single time. These life tables cut acrossall age categories and thus are known as vertical life tables. Oneway to construct a vertical life table is to record informationfrom a death assemblage, a collection of bodies or fossils of individualsthat lived together in a particular place at a given time.The birth and death dates on tombstones in a cemetery, for example,can be used to construct a vertical life table for a humanpopulation and to estimate its probability of reaching differentages. A 1944 study of Dall mountain sheep (Ovis dalli dalli) inMt. McKinley (now Denali) National Park, Alaska, was basedon 608 sheep skulls collected throughout the park. Age at deathwas estimated by counting growth rings on the horns.SURVIVORSHIP CURVES The construction of life tables has allowedecologists to observe common patterns, reflecting commonsolutions to ecological challenges, across a tremendous diversityof organisms. For example, mortality data from a lifetable can be used to plot a survivorship curve. Survivorshipcurves are correlated with general patterns of life history traits,which in turn suggest the mortality factors the population facesin its environment. Ecologists classify survivorship curves intothree types (Figure 55.4A):• Type I, or physiological, survivorship curves are typical oforganisms that experience high overall survivorshipthrough adulthood (such as humans and many other largemammals). Parental care and low fecundity are typical ofspecies with this type of survivorship curve.• Type II, or ecological, survivorship curves are typical of organismsfaced with a constant risk of mortality at all ages(such as most birds).• Type III, or maturational, survivorship curves are typical oforganisms that experience low juvenile survivorship (suchas most insects and annual plants). Species with this type ofsurvivorship curve tend to produce many offspring, butprovide little or no parental care.Note that survivorship curves can differ even among close relativeswithin a taxonomic group (Figure 55.4B).55.1 RECAPTo understand the dynamics of populations, ecologistsmeasure population density, age structure, anddispersion patterns. Life tables can be constructed eitherby following a cohort of individuals through timeor by recording age at death in a vertical life table.• What are some of the ways in which population densitycan be measured? See p. 1169• What kinds of information do life tables provide about apopulation? See pp. 1171–1172 and Tables 55.1, 55.2• Describe the three types of survivorship curves. Seep. 1171 and Figure 55.4Survivorship and fecundity are attributes of all populations, buteven within species, environmental variation across a species’1172 CHAPTER 55 | POPULATION ECOLOGYTABLE 55.2Fecundity Schedule for the 90 Females ofthe 1978 Cohort of Cactus Ground Finch(Table 55.1)AGE CLASS (YEARS) FECUNDITYa (mx)0–1 0.001–2 0.052–3 0.673–4 1.504–5 0.665–6 5.506–7 0.697–8 0.008–9 0.009–10 2.2010–11 0.0011–12 0.00a Fecundity = number of fledglings per female per breeding season.DroughtEl Niño event;increased rainfallGO TO Working With Data • Dead Sheep Tell a TaleyourBioPortal.comrange influences these measures. Comparisons across populationsand species reveal different patterns in life history traits,which allow organisms to cope with different environmentalchallenges.How Do Environmental Conditions 55.2 Affect Life Histories?The way in which an organism partitions its time and energyamong growth, maintenance, and reproduction is called its lifehistory strategy. Because resources and mortality factors varygreatly among environments, life history strategies also varydramatically. Those variations, in turn, determine how fast populationscan grow.Survivorship and fecundity determine a population’sintrinsic rate of increaseTo see how a population is likely to grow, ecologists can use lifetable data to calculate the population’s per capita growth rate,also known as the intrinsic rate of increase, symbolized as r. Apopulation’s intrinsic rate of increase is the difference betweenthe birth rate (b) and the death rate (d) per individual (per capita)(leaving aside, for the moment, immigration and emigration).It is expressed by the equationr = b – dIf the birth rate is greater than the death rate, then r > 0, and thepopulation is growing. If the death rate is greater than the birthrate, then r < 0, and the population is declining. The equilibriumstate r = 0 would indicate a stable population that is neithergrowing nor declining significantly. When applied to the humanpopulation, it is sometimes referred to as “zero populationgrowth,” with implications we will see in Section 55.5.Life history traits vary with environmental conditionsBoth survivorship (lx) and fecundity (mx) are highly habitat-dependentin practice, and the intrinsic rate of increase can thuschange as the environment changes. The life history traits mostinfluenced by environmental conditions include:• age at first reproduction (generation time)• number of broods per female (the number of times a femaleproduces offspring)• number of offspring per brood (the number of offspringproduced each time a female reproduces)These factors vary not only between species, but also betweenpopulations within species.Opportunities for reproduction for some species are limitedto certain locales or certain times of year, whereas otherspecies and populations can breed continuously over their lifespan. Many desert wildflowers grow and flower only duringthe spring rainy season, and they may not be able to reproduceat all in years when rainfall is inadequate. In contrast, sometropical vines are able to flower continuously in their warm,moist rainforest environment.Species that can reproduce multiple times over the course oftheir adult lives are iteroparous (itero, to repeat; pario, to beget).Semelparous species (semel, once), on the other hand, reproduceonly once in their lives (Figure 55.5). Generally, semelparousspecies produce many more offspring in their single brood thaniteroparous species do over their lifetime; semelparity is thussometimes called “big bang” reproduction.55.2 | HOW DO ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS AFFECT LIFE HISTORIES? 1173Type 1 curve:Most humans survive mostof their potential life span.Type 2 curve:Survivorship of many songbirds is about thesame throughout life span after fledging.Type 3 curve:In many plants, survivorship is low amongseedlings and high for the rest of the life span.Age (years)0 20 40 60 80 1005001,000100501055001,00010050105Individuals surviving (log scale)Individuals surviving (log scale)Age (years)0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9European blackbirdSong thrushAmerican robinHomo sapiens (USA) FemalesHomo sapiens (USA) MalesSpurry (weed)Type 1: Night lizard(Xanthusia virgilis)Type 2: Five-lined skink(Eumecesfasciatus)Type 3: Texas spiny lizard(Sceloporusolivaceus)(A) (B)55.4 Survivorship Curves (A) Ecologists recognize three types of survivorshipcurves. (B) Even species that are closely related may have survivorshipcurves of different types, as indicated here by the survivorshipcurves of three species of lizards.Semelparity is typical of organisms that experience no greatsurvival advantage upon reaching adulthood, including somefishes, many insects, and all annual plants (i.e., organisms witha type III survivorship curve). In contrast, iteroparity is typicalof organisms whose survival chances increase once they reachmaturity (those with a type I or II survivorship curve). For example,because environmental conditions within the nests ofsocial insects (such as honey bees and ants) are remarkably stable,iteroparity is the rule; some queens may live 10 years orlonger and reproduce over their entire adult lives.Life history traits are influenced by interspecificinteractionsPredation and other interactions among species can influencelife history strategies in many ways. Some populations of guppies(Poecilia reticulata) in Trinidad, for example, live in streamswhere they are attacked and eaten by larger fish. But somestreams have waterfalls that predatory fishes are unable to negotiate.Guppies that live in the predator-free areas upstreamfrom those waterfalls have lower death rates than guppies belowthe falls. To see whether the risk of being eaten by a predatorinfluenced the life history strategies of these guppies, DavidReznick and his colleagues collected guppies from high-predationand low-predation sites and raised them in the laboratory.Some guppies from each group were provided with plentifulfood, and others with limited food, to simulate the variation thefish would typically encounter in their home streams. In the laboratory,where no predators were present, guppies from highpredationsites matured earlier, reproduced more frequently,and produced more offspring in each brood than guppies fromlow-predation sites, no matter how much food they received.The investigators concluded that predation had selected forearly and frequent reproduction.55.2 RECAPThe difference between birth rate and death rateprovides an estimate of a population’s intrinsic rateof increase, or r. That rate is strongly influenced bythe population’s life history strategy, which in turn ishighly dependent on ecological conditions.• What life history traits vary with environmentalconditions? See p. 1173• Explain the difference between iteroparity andsemelparity. See p. 1173• How can predation affect the evolution of life historystrategies? See p. 1174A species may be rare in one location, yet elsewhere within itsrange it may be superabundant. A species that is rare in onelocality one year may be abundant the next year. For any givenspecies, environmental factors limit the growth of its populationsin different places and at different times. Population ecologistswork to identify and understand these factors.What Factors Limit Population 55.3 Densities?What would happen if all the offspring produced by a populationsurvived to reproduce themselves? The prospects arealarming. In 1911, L. O. Howard, then chief entomologist of theU.S. Department of Agriculture, estimated that a pair of flies beginningto reproduce in Washington, D.C., on April 15 couldproduce a population of 5,598,720,000,000 adults by September10. Other entomologists took issue with Howard’s calculation—they pegged the number much higher. Given such amazing reproductivecapacities, it is clear there are forces at work thatlimit the growth of fly populations (and populations of everyother organism).All populations have the potential forexponential growthAs the number of individuals in a population increases, thenumber of new individuals added per unit of time accelerates,even if the intrinsic rate of increase remains constant. If birthsand deaths occur continuously and at constant rates, a graph of1174 CHAPTER 55 | POPULATION ECOLOGYOrgyia antiqua55.5 Big Bang Reproduction Semelparous species reproduce onlyonce and invest a great deal of energy in producing the maximum numberof offspring. Female rusty tussock moths do not fly but remain withtheir empty cocoons, which are attached to the plants that are the caterpillar-stage food source. The stationary female lays a large number ofeggs and then dies. When the eggs hatch the following spring, the larvaeare surrounded by foliage they can eat.the population size over time forms a continuous upward curve(Figure 55.6A). This pattern, known as exponential growth, canbe expressed asUsing the notation of differential calculus, which is better suitedto short time intervals, this equation can be expressed asBecause the intrinsic rate of increase, r, is equivalent to b – d, theequation for exponential growth can be simplified toThe term dN/dt is the rate of change in the size of the populationover time, and the expression rN is sometimes called thebiotic potential of the population.For very short periods, some populations may grow at ratesclose to their biotic potential. During the 20 years following theirintroduction, the reindeer population on St. Matthew, describedat the opening of this chapter, grew exponentially. When thereindeer herd was introduced to the island, it had ample habitat,abundant food, and no predators, so there was nothing tolimit the population’s growth. Favorable climatic conditionsalso allowed the population to grow exponentially. A rapidchange in those conditions—deep snow during one particularlycold winter—was a major factor leading to the population’scrash (Figure 55.6B).Logistic growth occurs as a population approachesits carrying capacityNo real population can maintain exponential growth for verylong. As a population increases in density, the resources it requires—such as food, nest sites, or shelter—become depleted.In the absence of adequate resources to sustain more individuals,birth rates drop and death rates rise.Any given environment has only enough resources to supporta finite number of individuals of a species indefinitely. Thatnumber of individuals, referred to as the environment’s carryingcapacity (K), is a function of its resources. The growth of apopulation typically slows down as its density approaches theenvironmental carrying capacity. Apopulation that exhibits decreasinggrowth as resources become limiting will display a patterncalled logistic growth, in which a graph of the populationsize over time forms an S-shaped curve. Figure 55.7 shows thisgrowth pattern in a laboratory population of beetles that wasmaintained on a constant food supply.An S-shaped curve can be generated from the equation forexponential growth (left) by adding a term that slows the population’sgrowth as it approaches carrying capacity:The above term represents the reduction in population growthcaused by preemption of available resources and is referred to as environmentalresistance. As long as population size is less than carryingcapacity (i.e., N < K), only a fraction of the available resourcesare being used. As the population approaches carryingcapacity, however, the fraction of resources available for any newKNK−ddNt= rNddNt= (b − d)NΔΔ= − Ntb dchange in number of individualschange in time= b − d55.3 | WHAT FACTORS LIMIT POPULATION DENSITIES? 1175Theoretically, a populationin an environment withunlimited resources couldgrow like this indefinitely.Overpopulation and anunusually cold wintertriggered a populationcrash.Number of pups born1960 1964 1968 1972 1976 1980Year04008001,2001,600(A) Elephant seals, Año Nuevo IslandNumber of reindeer1944 1950 1955 1960 1966Year01,0002,0003,0004,0005,0006,000(B) Reindeer, St. Matthew Island55.6 Exponential Population Growth Can Lead to a PopulationCrash (A) Abundant resources allow a population to grow exponentially,as did the elephant seal population on Año Nuevo Island, California. (B)The reindeer herd introduced on St. Matthew Island grew exponentiallyfor many years despite a decreasing food supply. A single catastrophicallycold winter triggered a population crash that eventually resulted in thedeath of the entire island reindeer population.GO TO Animated Tutorial 55.1 • Exponential Population GrowthyourBioPortal.comindividual becomes smaller. The implication is that each individualadded to the population depresses population growth byan equal amount. Thus,rate of change in population = biotic potential × environmentalsize over time resistanceor, in mathematical terms,Population growth stops when N = K because at that point,K – N = 0, so (K – N)/K = 0, and thus dN/dt = 0.Population growth can be limited by density-dependentor density-independent factorsWhen resources are limited, adding more individuals to a populationruns the risk of making things worse for everyone. Factorswith an effect on population size that increases in proportionto population density are called density-dependentregulation factors. These include:• Food supply. As a population increases, it may deplete itsfood supply, reducing the amount of food available to eachindividual. Poor nutrition may then increase the death rateand/or decrease the birth rate.• Predators may be attracted to areas with high densities oftheir prey. If predators capture a larger proportion of theprey population than they did when that population wassmall, the death rate of the prey population rises.• Pathogens spread more easily in dense populations than inpopulations with fewer individuals per unit of area, resultingin a rise in the death rate.Not all population regulation factors act in a density-dependentmanner. Aperiod of extreme cold or a hurricane that blowsdown most of the trees in its path may kill a large proportion ofthe individuals in a population regardless of its density, andthus are said to be density-independent. Abiotic factors (such asextreme temperatures) tend to act on populations in a densityindependentmanner, whereas biotic factors (such as competitionfor food) tend to be density-dependent.Different population regulation factors lead to differentlife historiesSpecies vary in their capacity to reproduce, as well as in theextent to which they are vulnerable to density-dependent anddensity-independent mortality factors. Some of this variationin life history traits appears to result from adaptation to differenthabitat conditions. Generally, unpredictable habitats are associatedwith high fecundity and correspondingly high r, as organismsmake the most of rare opportunities to reproduce;conversely, predictable habitats, where organisms have a highprobability of reproductive success, are associated with lowfecundity and low r.Species whose life history strategies allow for high intrinsicrates of increase are called r-strategists, and species whose lifehistory strategies allow them to persist at or near the carryingcapacity (K) of their environment are called K-strategists (Figure55.8). Many species display elements of both strategies.For r-strategists, life is uncertain. Individuals tend to reproduceonly once and to produce large numbers of offspring. Theycan generally tolerate a wide range of resource conditions. Kstrategistsare adapted to predictable environments, are longlived,and reproduce several times; their smaller numbers of offspringhave a high probability of surviving to adulthood.K-strategists tend to be more specialized in their resource useand less tolerant of variation in resource quality. That life historystrategies can evolve is suggested by genetic correlationsamong suites of life history traits. Such genetic correlations implyeither simultaneous selection on two life history traits orlinkages among the genes that code for those traits. AcrossDrosophila melanogaster strains, for example, intrinsic rate of increaseis positively correlated with the ability to reproduce understarvation conditions and with the ability to develop on avariety of media in the laboratory—both of which are consistentwith the r strategy of tolerating a wide range of conditions.Several factors explain why some species achievehigher population densities than othersDensity-dependent and density-independent factors can explainhow populations grow or decline, but they do not explain whysome species are common whereas others are rare—that is, whythe characteristic densities of species differ. Many factors explainwhy typical population densities vary so greatly amongspecies, but four of them are especially influential:• Species that use abundant resources generally reach higher populationdensities than species that use scarce resources. Thus, onaverage, the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, which feeds ondNdtrNK NK= −1176 CHAPTER 55 | POPULATION ECOLOGYPopulation growthlevels off as itapproachescarrying capacity.Number of beetles0 5 10 15 20 25 30Time (weeks)100020030040050055.7 Logistic Population Growth Levels Off In an environment withlimited resources, a population typically stops growing exponentiallybefore it reaches the environmental carrying capacity (K). The data herewas recorded from a laboratory population of sawtoothed grain beetlesmaintained on a constant food supply; it is a typical logistic growth pattern,which forms an S-shaped curve.GO TO Web Activity 55.1 and Animated Tutorial 55.2 •Logistic Population GrowthyourBioPortal.comyeasts and other microbes found on just about any kindof rotten fruit, reaches substantially higher populationdensities than do other fruit fly species that feed on themicrobes found on specific fruits.• Species with small body sizes generally reach higher populationdensities than species with large body sizes. In general,population density decreases as body size increases because,on a per capita basis, small individuals requireless energy to survive than large individuals.• Complex social organization may facilitate high populationdensities. Highly social species, including ants, termites,and humans, can achieve remarkably high populationdensities.• Some newly introduced species reach high population densities.Species that are introduced into a new region,where their normal predators and pathogens are absent,sometimes reach population densities much higher thanthose in their native ranges. Sometimes these high populationdensities are only temporary; these densities declineif and when new mortality factors exert an influence.However, in many cases, in the absence of suchfactors, populations in the newly colonized habitat remainso dense that the introduced species becomes amajor problem for native species.The population of zebra mussels (Dreissena polymorpha) inNorth America demonstrates the speed with which newlyintroduced populations can grow. Zebra mussels first appearedin Lake St. Clair, between Lake Erie and Lake Huron,in 1988. They were probably transported there from their nativeEurope in the ballast water of transoceanic cargo ships.They spread rapidly and today occupy most of the GreatLakes and the Mississippi River drainage (Figure 55.9),reaching densities as high as 400,000 individuals per squaremeter in some places. Because they attach to any stable un-55.3 | WHAT FACTORS LIMIT POPULATION DENSITIES? 1177r-strategistsHABITATCan inhabit a broad range of habitats. High tolerancefor both environmental instability and low-qualityresources.PHYSIOLOGYRapid embryonic development, rapid maturation toreproductive age, small body size.REPRODUCTIVE STRATEGYRandom mating. Reproduce once (semelparity)resulting in a large number of offspring. Little or noparental investment in each offspring.SURVIVORSHIPShort life span, density-independent mortality, typicallya Type 3 survivorship curve (see Figure 55.4).POPULATION FLUCTUATIONShort periods of exponential population growth (r)followed by periodic or seasonal population crashes.EXAMPLESDandelions, house flies, rabbitsK-strategistsHABITATSpecific habitat requirements, including environmentalstability. Efficient users of specific and usually highqualityresources.PHYSIOLOGYExtended embryonic development, long maturation toreproductive age, large body size.REPRODUCTIVE STRATEGYMate choice, pair bonds. Reproduce many times(iteroparity), each event producing few offspring. Largeparental investment in each offspring.SURVIVORSHIPLong life span, density-dependent mortality, typicallya Type 1 or 2 survivorship curve (see Figure 55.4).POPULATION FLUCTUATIONSlowly rising population growth that stabilizes and levelsoff at carrying capacity (K).EXAMPLESOak trees, bluebirds, polar bears55.8 Two Life HistoryStrategies Species whoselife histories are geared toachieve the maximum possiblerate of population increase arereferred to as r-strategists;those whose populationdynamics are bounded by carryingcapacity are K-strategists.The life histories of mostspecies combine elements ofboth types.Zebra mussels entered North Americanwaters when ballast water from Europeanships was pumped into Lake Erie.The mussels becameestablished andrapidly spread viarivers through easternNorth America.198819891991199219962009Dreissena polymorpha55.9 Newly Introduced PopulationsCan Grow Rapidly Between 1989 and2005, the range of zebra mussels ineastern North America increased exponentially.Humans can unwittingly transportzebra mussel larvae from one bodyof water to another in their fishing boatsand other watercraft, and in recent yearsthe invasive pest has begun to appear inlakes and streams of the American West.derwater substratum, zebra mussels can cover the bottoms ofboats and docks and clog municipal water supply intakes andpower plant pipelines. They even settle on other aquatic organisms,causing problems for native mussels. Such high densitiesare never found in their native Europe, where over 100species of predators and parasites keep their population densitiesunder control.Evolutionary history may explain species abundancesThe four key factors that explain variation in population densities,as important as they are, cannot explain all differences inspecies abundances. For example, although Douglas firs and giantsequoias are both large trees that use the same sources ofenergy (sunlight) and nutrients, Douglas firs are widespreadand abundant in western North America, whereas giant sequoiasare restricted to a few groves in southern California. Similarly,each of several species of desert pupfish is restricted to asingle spring in Death Valley, California, whereas smallmouthbass live in most of the rivers and lakes in eastern North America.To explain these differences, it is important to know not justthe contemporary ecology of these organisms, but also theirlong-term evolutionary history.As Section 23.2 describes, a new species can originate in severalways. Species that arise by polyploidy or by founder eventsinevitably begin with a very small, local population. Desert pupfishspecies appear to have evolved in isolation as increasingaridity in Death Valley over the past 50,000 years cut once continuouspopulations off from one another. Conversely, when aspecies is declining toward extinction (as may be happeningto the giant sequoia), its range shrinks until it vanishes whenthe last individual dies.55.3 RECAPPopulation sizes are limited by the carrying capacityof the environment, which is determined by the availabilityof resources as well as by biotic interactions.Species associated with unpredictable habitats tendto be r-strategists, and species associated withpredictable habitats tend to be K-strategists.• Why can populations grow exponentially only forshort periods? See p. 1175 and Figures 55.6 and 55.7• What is the difference between density-dependentand density-independent factors? See p. 1176• Describe the characteristics of r-strategists andK-strategists. See p. 1176 and Figure 55.8All species, no matter how abundant, are found only in thosehabitats in which they can survive and reproduce well enoughto persist over time. Yet a species is rarely found in all of thehabitats that seem suitable for it. The evolutionary histories ofspecies supply one explanation for this observation. The nextsection explores another explanation: spatial variation in habitatsuitability.How Does Habitat Variation Affect 55.4 Population Dynamics?Most natural history field guides display maps that show thegeographic range over which a species is found. But no species,not even the most abundant, is found everywhere within itsmapped range. Every species has particular habitat requirementsthat determine where within its range it will occur.Many populations live in separated habitat patchesMost organisms live in distinct habitat patches: areas of a particularhabitat type that are surrounded by other, less suitablehabitats. Some populations living in separated habitat patchesare effectively divided into separate, discrete subpopulations,linked together by regular movement of individuals betweenpatches. The larger population to which such subpopulationsbelong is known as a metapopulation.Each subpopulation has a probability of “birth” (colonizationof its habitat patch) and “death” (extinction in that patch).Each subpopulation grows in the ways we have described, butbecause the subpopulations are much smaller than themetapopulation, local disturbances and random fluctuations innumbers of individuals are more likely to cause the extinctionof a subpopulation than of the entire metapopulation. However,if individuals move frequently between subpopulations, immigrationmay prevent declining subpopulations from becomingextinct, a process called the rescue effect.1178 CHAPTER 55 | POPULATION ECOLOGYThe population in this patch became extinctin 1976, but the site was recolonized in 1988.The Morgan Hill population patch wasprobably the source of individuals forperiodic recolonization of other patches.This patch was colonized in 1986.Colonization10 kmSerpentine outcrops (potentialbutterfly habitat)Usually lacks butterfliesCaliforniaEuphydryas editha bayensis55.10 A Checkerboard of Checkerspots The Bay checkerspotbutterfly metapopulation is divided into a number of subpopulationsconfined to patches of habitat (serpentine rock outcrops) that containits food plants.The Bay checkerspot butterfly (Euphydryas editha bayensis)provides a dramatic illustration of the dynamics of metapopulations.The caterpillars of this butterfly feed on only two speciesof annual plants, California plantain and purple owl’s clover,which are restricted to outcrops of serpentine rock on hills southof San Francisco, California. In 1960, Paul Ehrlich and his colleaguesat Stanford University began studying a population ofthis butterfly in the Jasper Ridge Biological Preserve near theStanford campus. They determined that the Jasper Ridge populationwas actually a subpopulation within a large, very fragmentedmetapopulation. They found that, over the years, threesubpopulations within this metapopulation varied enormouslyand asynchronously in size. Larval survival depends on climaticfactors, particularly temperature, the timing of rainfall, and hostplant survival. During drought years, most host plants die earlyin spring, before the caterpillars have developed enough toenter their summer resting stage.At least three butterfly subpopulations went extinct duringa severe drought in 1975–1977. One of the empty patches wasrepopulated a few years later, most likely by individuals fromthe largest single subpopulation, near Morgan Hill, which aslate as 1989 contained several hundred thousand butterflies(Figure 55.10). In 1998, however, the Morgan Hill subpopulationwent extinct. Ehrlich and colleagues examined 70 years ofclimate data for the region and concluded that increasing climaticvariation accounted for the extinction. Without a stablesource subpopulation to provide emigrants for recolonization,it is likely that none of the other subpopulations will persistwithout human intervention.Corridors allow subpopulations to persistIn any metapopulation, connections between patches, knownas corridors, play a critical role in facilitating dispersal to maintainsubpopulations. Studying corridors is experimentallydaunting because long distances may separate patches; moreover,movements of animals, particularly those that fly, can bedifficult to monitor. Therefore, to test the importance of corridors,ecologists conducted a small-scale, manipulative experimentusing mosses growing on rocks, which provide habitat fora number of small arthropod species, including springtails(minute wingless hexapods) and mites.In one experiment, the investigators created patches of habitatby clearing away the mosses surrounding the patches (Figure55.11). In small, completely isolated patches, the number ofsmall arthropod species present declined about 40 percentwithin a year. The investigators also created patches that wereconnected by narrow corridors of moss. In some cases the corridorswere left intact; in others, “pseudocorridors” were disruptedby a barrier 10 mm wide. A 10-mm barrier may seemsmall, but it presents a daunting obstacle to arthropods only 2mm wide. Six months later, patches connected by unbroken corridorscontained more small arthropod species than did patchesconnected by the disrupted pseudocorridors.55.4 | HOW DOES HABITAT VARIATION AFFECT POPULATION DYNAMICS? 1179CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE55.11 Corridors Can Affect MetapopulationsThe manipulative experiments summarized here suggest thatcorridors between patches of fragmented habitat increase thechances of recolonization and thus subpopulation persistence.HYPOTHESIS Subpopulations of a fragmented metapopulationare more likely to persist if there is nobarrier to recolonization.Even small barriers to recolonization reducethe number of subpopulations persisting in afragmented habitat.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSFURTHER INVESTIGATION: These studies involved the dispersal ofvery small organisms over very shortdistances over a very short span oftime. How might the longer term effectsof imposing barriers to dispersalbe investigated?Species persistingafter 6 months (%)Isolated60%Corridors86%Pseudocorridors59%20-cm patchesconnected bypseudocorridors(with gaps)20-cm patchesconnected bycorridorsIsolated20-cm patches60309010-mmgaps1. Determine the number of species of small organisms(mostly arthropods) living in an established habitatof mosses growing on a large rock.2. Fragment the habitat by trimming the mosses intopatches of various configurations, leaving bare rocksurrounding the patches.3. After 6 months, determine the number of speciespresent in the various patch configurations.GO TO Animated Tutorial 55.3 • Habitat FragmentationyourBioPortal.com55.4 RECAPA metapopulation consists of separate subpopulationsliving in distinct habitat patches, among whichindividuals move regularly by means of corridors.• What effects do patches of unsuitable habitat have onpopulation structure? See p. 1178 and Figure 55.10• What effects do corridors between habitat patcheshave on subpopulations? See p. 1179 and Figure55.11For many centuries, people have tried to reduce populations ofspecies they consider undesirable and maintain or increase populationsof desirable or useful species. Such efforts to managepopulations are more likely to be successful if they are based onknowledge of how those populations grow and what determinestheir densities.How Can Populations Be 55.5 Managed Scientifically?If we wish to increase or decrease populations of other species,we need to understand the life histories and the population dynamicsof the organisms we wish to manage. The principles ofpopulation dynamics can also help us understand the effectsour own population and its activities are having on otherspecies.Population management plans must take life historystrategies into accountKnowing the life history strategy of a species can be helpful inmanaging populations of commercial value. The black rockfish(Sebastes melanops), an important game fish that lives off the Pacificcoast of North America, provides one such example. Rockfishhave an indeterminate growth pattern—they continue togrow throughout their lives. As in many other animals, thenumber of eggs a female produces is proportional to her size,so larger females can produce more eggs than smaller females.In addition, older, larger females are better able to provision theeggs they produce with oil droplets, which provide energy tothe newly hatched larvae, giving them a head start in life (Figure55.12). Larvae from eggs with larger oil droplets, producedby larger females, grow faster and survive better than do larvaefrom eggs with smaller oil droplets.These life history traits have important implications for themanagement of rockfish populations. Because fishermen preferto catch big fish, intensive fishing off the Oregon coast from1996 to 1999 reduced the average age of female rockfish from9.5 to 6.5 years. Thus the females reproducing in 1999 were, onaverage, smaller than the females reproducing in 1996. Thischange decreased the average number of eggs produced by femalesand reduced the average growth rate of larvae by about50 percent. Maintaining productive populations of rockfish mayrequire setting aside no-fishing zones where some females canbe protected from fishing and allowed to grow to large sizes.Population management plans must be guidedby the principles of population dynamicsIf we look at a logistic growth curve (see Figure 55.7), we cansee that the number of births tends to be highest when a populationis well below its carrying capacity. Therefore, if we wishto maximize the number of individuals that can be harvestedfrom a population, we should manage the population so thatit is far enough below the carrying capacity to have a high birthrate. Hunting and fishing regulations are established with thisobjective in mind.Populations that have high reproductive capacities can persisteven if harvest rates are high. In such populations (whichinclude many fish species), each female may produce thousandsor millions of eggs. In many of these fast-reproducing populations,the growth rates of individuals are density-dependent.Therefore, if prereproductive individuals are harvested at a highrate, the remaining individuals may grow faster. Some fish populationscan be harvested heavily on a sustained basis becausea relatively small number of females can produce sufficientnumbers of eggs to maintain the population.1180 CHAPTER 55 | POPULATION ECOLOGY(A) Sebastes melanopsOil droplet(B)55.12 Energy Stocks Give Rockfish a Head Start (A) Among blackrockfish, older, larger females are more reproductively successful, producingboth more eggs and eggs with larger nutritive oil droplets. (B) The oildroplet attached to this rockfish larva provides it with nutrition to fuel itsgrowth until it can feed on its own.Fish can, of course, be overharvested, as illustrated by thestory of the black rockfish. Many fish populations have beengreatly reduced because so many individuals were harvestedthat the few surviving reproductive adults could not maintainthe population. Georges Bank, off the coast of New England—a source of cod, haddock, and other prime food fishes—was exploitedso heavily during the twentieth century that many fishstocks have been reduced to levels insufficient to support a commercialfishery (Figure 55.13). The haddock population hasrebounded enough to support a fishery because commercialfishing of that species ceased and was restarted only after thepopulation had recovered. In contrast, managers reduced fishingpressure on cod only slowly, and the cod population hasfailed to increase.Many rapidly reproducing species can recover if overharvestingis stopped, but recovery is more difficult for slowly reproducingspecies. Twentieth-century whalers hunted the bluewhale (Balaenoptera musculus), Earth’s largest animal, nearly toextinction. These whales reproduce very slowly: they live up to10 years before becoming reproductively mature, produce onlyone offspring at a time, and have long intervals between births.Not surprisingly, the population has failed to recover.Whether we want to manage the sizes of populations of desirablespecies for sustainable harvesting or of undesirablespecies for control purposes, the same principles apply. If thedynamics of a pest population are influenced primarily by density-dependent factors, then killing part of that population willonly reduce it to a density at which it reproduces at a higherrate. A more effective approach to reducing such a populationis to remove its resources, thereby lowering the carrying capacityof its environment. For example, we can rid our cities of ratsmore easily by making garbage unavailable (reducing the carryingcapacity of the rats’ environment) than by poisoning rats(which only increases their reproductive rate).Biological control is the use of the natural enemies (predators,parasites, or pathogens) to reduce the population densityof an economically damaging species (see the opening of Chapter30). In many cases, the target species is a pest only becauseit has been introduced to a new area. Natural enemies used forbiological control are often obtained from the native region ofthe pest species. Biological control became popular in the nineteenthcentury after an outbreak of cottony-cushion scale, anAustralian insect that attacks citrus, appeared in the citrusgroves in California. Apredaceous ladybeetle and a parasitic flywere then introduced from Australia and, within a year of theirrelease, brought the scales under control.On occasion, introduced predators and parasites not only failto have any effect on the pest they were imported to control but,freed of their own enemies, they themselves become pests. Thisfact underlies the horror story of the cane toad (Bufo marinus) inAustralia. These Central American toads (Figure 55.14) wereintroduced to control cane beetles attacking Australian sugarcanefields. But Australian cane beetles stay high on the upperstalks of the plants; the toads could not reach that high, and thushad no effect on the beetle population. Unfortunately, they hadmassive effects on other species.All stages of the B. marinus life cycle are poisonous, and Australianreptiles (including snakes and lizards) and mammalsthat eat them usually die. With no enemies to limit their populationgrowth, cane toads grow fast and outcompete native amphibianspecies for resources. The toads have spread from northernAustralia down the east coast, where they threaten nativefrog species. The Australian government is forced to spend millionsof dollars in attempting to reduce their numbers.Human population increase has been exponentialIn the nineteenth century, the historian Thomas Carlyle declaredeconomics to be “the dismal science.” He was referring in partto a famous essay written a century earlier by Thomas Malthus,in which Malthus pointed out that the human population wasgrowing exponentially but its food supply was not, and at somepoint famine and death would be the ultimate fate of the55.5 | HOW CAN POPULATIONS BE MANAGED SCIENTIFICALLY? 11810Fish harvested (kilotons)1965 1975 1985 1995Year100200300400500HaddockCod55.13 Overharvesting Can Reduce Fish Populations Populationsof cod and haddock on Georges Bank have crashed due to overfishing.Bufo marinus55.14 Biological Control Gone Awry The Central American canetoad not only failed to control destructive beetles in Australia’s sugarcanefields, but increased dramatically in abundance and now threatens manynative Australian species.human race. Neither Malthus nor Carlyle could have anticipatedthe technological innovations that greatly enhanced thecapacity of humans to produce food. Today, however, the sizeof the human population is once again a serious concern as weconfront the effects of our contributions to pollution, widespreadhabitat destruction, and the extinction of other species.For thousands of years, Earth’s carrying capacity for humanswas low due to the relative inefficiency with which humanscould obtain food and water. The development of social systemsand communication, the domestication of plants and animals,ever-increasing crop and livestock yields through ongoingtechnological advances, and increasing proficiency atmanaging diseases have all contributed to unprecedentedgrowth of the human population. It took more than 10,000 yearsfor the population to reach 1 billion, which happened at somepoint in the late nineteenth century. Today, a mere 125 yearslater, the planet is home to approximately 7 billion human beings.Population growth has slowed somewhat from its post-World War II highs—the World Resources Institute estimatesthe current worldwide rate of increase tobe about 1.1 percent per year—but with abase of 7 billion, even a minimal growthrate means millions more individuals.Human populations are not growing atthe same pace across the world, however.As we saw in Figure 55.2, in populationsof long-lived species such as elephantsand humans, the timing of births anddeaths affects the age distribution formany years. Between 1946 and 1964, theUnited States experienced a “baby boom.”During those years, almost 75 million babieswere born, and the average numberof children per family grew from 2.5 to 3.8.Birth rates declined during the 1960s, butin the 1970s and 1980s, the baby boomersbecame parents, generating another demographicbulge—a “baby boom echo”(Figure 55.15A). Today, the echo babies areentering college in record numbers (andreading about themselves in introductorybiology textbooks), and are on the thresholdof becoming the dominant age class.The age structure of the U.S. populationis typical of many industrialized nations,but a few highly developed nations(particularly in Europe) are experiencingpopulation declines. In the developingworld, however, many countries are experiencingexponential growth rates andhave populations highly skewed towardyounger age classes, portending high ratesof population growth in the future (Figure55.15B).55.5 RECAPEfforts to manage populations are more likely to besuccessful if they are based on an understanding oflife histories and population dynamics.• Describe an effective strategy for reducing a pest populationand explain why it is effective. See p. 1181• How have humans changed the carrying capacity ofEarth for our own population? See p. 1182Earth’s carrying capacity for humans is set in part by the biosphere’sability to absorb the by-products—especially carbondioxide—of our enormous consumption of fossil fuel energy; bywater availability; and by whether we are willing to tolerate theextinction of millions of other species in order to accommodateour prodigious use of Earth’s resources. We enumerate some ofthe effects of human resource use on other species in Chapters 58and 59, but first Chapters 56 and 57 discuss the nature of speciesinteractions and the formation of ecological communities.“Baby boomers”were thedominant ageclass in 1980.By 2020, thechildren of “babyboomers” will beas dominant astheir parents.Germany also experiencedthe postwar “baby boom”but birth rates have steadilydeclined since 1970.Uganda’s “truepyramid” structureis typical of manydeveloping nations.3010204050607080 Uganda20103030Population (millions)10 5 0 5 101960198020002020Male Female102030405060708010204050607080102030405060708010204050607080Age(yr)“Babyboomer”age class(A) United States (B)Childrenof “babyboomers”Male3010204050607080 Germany2010Population (millions)4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4Female55.15 Population Pyramids(A) Observed and predicted age distributionsfor the human population of the UnitedStates from 1960 to 2020 show how thebirth rate during the “baby boom” has influencedthe age structure of this country’spopulation over many decades. (B) InUganda, the largest proportion of the populationis found in the youngest age groups,which means a greatly increased birth rateas these individuals achieve reproductiveage. Conversely, a small but increasing numberof highly developed nations have thepopulation structure seen here for Germany,which presages a population decline.
55.1 How Do Ecologists Study Populations?• A population consists of the individuals of a species that interactwith one another within a particular area at a particulartime.• The density of a population is the number of individuals perunit of area or volume.• The age structure and dispersion pattern of a population influenceits dynamics. Review Figures 55.2 and 55.3• Life tables provide summaries of demographic events in a population.A cohort life table tracks a cohort of individuals born atthe same time and records the survivorship or fecundity ofthose individuals over time. Review Tables 55.1 and 55.2• Life table data can be used to construct a survivorship curve.Review Figure 55.455.2 How Do Environmental Conditions AffectLife Histories?• The life history strategy of an organism describes how it partitionsits time and energy among growth, maintenance, andreproduction.• A population’s intrinsic rate of increase (r) is the differencebetween the per capita birth rate (b) and the per capita deathrate (d).• Life history traits within a species may vary with habitat andinteractions with other species can influence the evolution oflife history traits.55.3 What Factors Limit Population Densities?• Populations can exhibit exponential growth for short periods,but eventually their resources become depleted, causing birthrates to drop and death rates to rise. Review Figure 55.6,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 55.1• Logistic growth is the pattern seen when the growth of apopulation slows as its density approaches the environmentalcarrying capacity (K). Review Figure 55.7, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 55.2 and WEB ACTIVITY 55.1• Species that are r-strategists have life histories that allow forhigh intrinsic rates of increase. K-strategists persist at or nearthe carrying capacity (K) of their environment. Many species’ lifehistory strategies fall along a continuum between these twoextremes. Review Figure 55.8• Population densities are determined by both density-dependentand density-independent factors. Several factors—includingresource abundance, body size, social organization, andthe length of time a species has occupied an area—influencepopulation densities.55.4 How Does Habitat Variation Affect PopulationDynamics?• No species is found everywhere within its mapped range.Members of most species live in distinct habitat patches.• A metapopulation consists of separate subpopulations amongwhich some individuals move on a regular basis. Review Figure55.10• Extinction of a subpopulation may be prevented by immigrationof individuals from another subpopulation, a processknown as the rescue effect. Corridors between patches mayfacilitate such movement. Review Figure 55.11, ANIMATEDTUTORIAL 55.355.5 How Can Populations Be Managed Scientifically?• To manage populations, it is important to understand their lifehistories and population dynamics. To maximize the number ofindividuals that can be harvested from a population, the populationshould be kept well below carrying capacity.• Reducing the carrying capacity of the environment for a pestspecies is a more effective way to reduce its population thankilling its members.• Earth’s carrying capacity for humans depends on our use ofresources and the effects of our activities on the environment.Human populations grow at different rates in different parts ofthe world. Review Figure 55.15