4The trip had lasted a long and anxious ten monthswhen, in the summer of 1976, the first of two visitorsfrom Earth landed on a plain on the Martian surface.A second spacecraft arrived in September. The task ofthese robotic laboratories, part of NASA’s Viking project,was to search for life.On Earth, life has existed for several billion years and hasspread over most of the planet’s surface. Determining life’sorigins is difficult, however, because (with few exceptions)simple organisms leave no fossils. On Mars, scientiststhought, things might be different. A primitive form of lifemight exist there now, or might have left chemical signaturesthat remain in place, untouched by other organisms.The two Viking spacecraft that landed on Mars in 1976analyzed soil samples for the small molecules of life, includingsimple sugars and amino acids. None were found.The robotic laboratories immersed soil samples in anaqueous solution of sugars, amino acids, and minerals.Living organisms take in and break down such substancesfrom their environment, releasing gases such as CO2. Asmall amount of CO2 was detected in one experiment,but, frustratingly, no gases were released in further experiments.The results from the Viking landers remain controversial.Why did that one experiment detect a sign of life?The 1976 robotic landers are still on Mars but have longsince stopped working. In 2008, more probes were sentfrom Earth, carrying more sophisticated instruments. Oneof them, the Phoenix lander, is in a northern region ofMars, at a latitude corresponding to that of Alaska onEarth. Phoenix has a robotic arm like thebackhoes used in a construction site. Whenthe arm dug a small trench into the Martiansoil, shiny dice-sized beads of what turnedout to be ice were exposed, although thebeads disappeared in a few days as exposureto the atmosphere caused them to vaporize.Dissolved ions such as sodium, magnesium,potassium and chloride were allpresent in the frozen water, indicating thatat least those requirements for life arepresent on Mars. Once again,the soil was analyzed fortraces of current or past organisms;once again, the resultswere negative. But even if there probably isno life on Mars today, there might havebeen in the past.Looking for lifeLab Seeking Life Landers such as the roboticspace laboratory Phoenix, shown here on Earth,have been sent to look for traces of life on Mars.What Are the Chemical Structures 4.1 and Functions of Nucleic Acids?From medicine to evolution, from agriculture to forensics, theproperties of nucleic acids impact our lives every day. It is withnucleic acids that the concept of “information” entered the biologicalvocabulary. Nucleic acids are uniquely capable of codingfor and transmitting biological information.The nucleic acids are polymers specialized for the storage,transmission between generations, and use of genetic information.There are two types of nucleic acids: DNA (deoxyribonucleicacid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid). DNA is a macromoleculethat encodes hereditary information and passes it from generationto generation. Through an RNA intermediate, the informationencoded in DNA is used to specify the amino acid sequencesof proteins. Information flows from DNA to DNAduring reproduction. In the non-reproductive activities of thecell, information flows from DNA to RNA to proteins. It is theproteins that ultimately carry out life’s functions.Nucleotides are the building blocks of nucleic acidsNucleic acids are composed of monomers called nucleotides,each of which consists of a pentose sugar, a phosphate group,and a nitrogen-containing base. (Molecules consisting of a pentosesugar and a nitrogenous base—but no phosphate group—are called nucleosides.) The bases of the nucleic acids take one oftwo chemical forms: a six-membered single-ring structure calleda pyrimidine, or a fused double-ring structure called a purine(Figure 4.1). In DNA, the pentose sugar is deoxyribose, whichdiffers from the ribose found in RNA by the absence of one oxygenatom (see Figure 3.14).In both RNA and DNA, the backbone of the macromoleculeconsists of a chain of alternating pentose sugars and phosphategroups (sugar–phosphate–sugar–phosphate). The basesare attached to the sugars and project from the polynucleotidechain (Figure 4.2). The nucleotides are joined by phosphodiesterlinkages between the sugar of one nucleotide and the phosphateof the next (diester refers to the two covalent bonds formed by—OH groups reacting with acidic phosphate groups). The phosphategroups link carbon 3 in one pentose sugar to carbon 5 inthe adjacent sugar.Most RNA molecules consist of only one polynucleotidechain. DNA, however, is usually double-stranded; its twopolynucleotide chains are held together by hydrogen bondingbetween their nitrogenous bases. The two strands of DNA runin opposite directions. You can see what this means by drawingan arrow through a phosphate group from carbon 5 toIN THIS CHAPTER we first describe the structure ofnucleic acids, the informational macromolecules needed forthe perpetuation of life. We then turn to biologists’ speculationson the origin of life and describe early experimentalevidence that life on Earth today comes from pre-existinglife. We present some ideas on the formation of the buildingblocks of life, including the monomers and polymersthat characterize biological systems. Finally, we describesome proposals for the origin of cells.As we saw in Chapter 2, water is a key requirement forlife. Remote measurements from orbiting spacecraft andchemical measurements using special telescopes haveshown that water is present on Mars and, indeed, onsome of the moons of other planets in our solar system.Scientists are using their knowledge of the small andlarge molecules that are present in living organisms tosearch for the chemical signatures of life on other planets.Chapters 2 and 3 described molecules that are importantfor biological structure and function. In Chapter4, we turn to certain molecules involved in the originand perpetuation of life itself.CHAPTER OUTLINE4.1 What Are the Chemical Structures and Functionsof Nucleic Acids?4.2 How and Where Did the Small Molecules of LifeOriginate?4.3 How Did the Large Molecules of Life Originate?4.4 How Did the First Cells Originate?Ice on Mars The Phoenixlanding site (blue dot) is nearthe Martian north pole, wherechemical traces of life might bepreserved in the hypercold environment. When the landerscooped up a patch of soil for analysis, it also took photosthat revealed ice crystals just below the surface of theRed Planet.Icecarbon 3 in the next ribose. If you do this for both strands of theDNAin Figure 4.2, the arrows will point in opposite directions.This antiparallel orientation allows the strands to fit together inthree-dimensional space.Base pairing occurs in both DNA and RNAOnly four nitrogenous bases—and thus only four nucleotides—are found in DNA. The DNA bases and their abbreviations areadenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and thymine (T). Adenineand guanine are purines; thymine and cytosine are pyrimidines.RNA is also made up of four different monomers, but its nucleotidesdiffer from those of DNA. In RNA the nucleotidesare termed ribonucleotides (the ones in DNA are deoxyribonucleotides).They contain ribose rather than deoxyribose, and in-62 CHAPTER 4 The base may be eithera pyrimidine or a purine.HCNNHNCCC CHNHCNNHCCCNHCNNH2NH2NCHCHC CNHNH2OOONHH3C CCCHCNHOONHCCCHCNHOAdenine (A)PurinesPyrimidinesGuanine (G)Cytosine (C) Thymine (T) Uracil (U)Ribose ordeoxyriboseNucleoside Phosphate NucleotideBaseBaseBasePP+ = + =The numberingof ribose carbonsis the basis foridentification of 5′and 3′ ends of DNAand RNA strands.4′2′1′O3′5′ 3′In RNA, the bases are attached to ribose. The basesin RNA are the purines adenine (A) and guanine (G)and the pyrimidines cytosine (C) and uracil (U).In DNA, the bases are attached to deoxyribose, and the basethymine (T) is found instead of uracil. Hydrogen bonds betweenpurines and pyrimidines hold the two strands of DNA together.T ACT AC GOOOOONH OOUACOOG -OOH2C-OOO-OOOOOHH2COHOOCH2CH2CH2OOPH2COOPH2COPH2COPH2CO-O PO-OO-OO-OO-OOOOPH2COOPOPH2COHO OOOPOCH2OOOOOPOOPOOPOOO OOOOOOOOOOONHNNNH NNN HNN HN5′5′5′5′3′ 5′3′3′HNNHHNHNNHNHNHNHOG NHNHODNA (double-stranded)Purine baseRNA (single-stranded)PhosphodiesterlinkageDeoxyribosePyrimidine basePhosphateRibose Phosphate3′ end5′ end3′ end5′ end3′ end5′ endHydrogenbond4.1 Nucleotides Have Three Components Nucleotide monomersare the building blocks of DNA and RNA polymers.4.2 Distinguishing Characteristics of DNA and RNA PolymersRNA is usually a single strand. DNA usually consists of two strands runningin opposite directions (antiparallel).GO TO Web Activity 4.1 • Nucleic Acid Building BlocksyourBioPortal.comstead of the base thymine, RNA uses the base uracil (U). Theother three bases are the same in RNA and DNA (Table 4.1).The key to understanding the structure and function ofnucleic acids is the principle of complementary base pairing.In double-stranded DNA, adenine and thymine always pair(A-T), and cytosine and guanine always pair (C-G).Three factors make base pairing complementary:• The sites for hydrogen bonding on each base• The geometry of the sugar–phosphate backbone, whichbrings complementary bases near each other• The molecular sizes of the paired bases; the pairing of alarger purine with a smaller pyrimidine ensures stabilityand uniformity in the double-stranded molecule of DNAAlthough RNA is generally single-stranded, complementaryhydrogen bonding between ribonucleotides plays importantroles in determining the three-dimensional shapes of some typesof RNA molecules, since portions of the single-stranded RNAcan fold back and pair with each other (Figure 4.3). Complementarybase pairing can also take place between ribonucleotidesand deoxyribonucleotides. In RNA, guanine and cytosinepair (G-C), as in DNA, but adenine pairs with uracil(A-U). Adenine in an RNA strand can pair either with uracil (inanother RNA strand) or with thymine (in a DNA strand).The three-dimensional physical appearance of DNA is strikinglyuniform. The segment shown in Figure 4.4 could be fromany DNA molecule. The variations in DNA—the different sequencesof bases—are strictly internal. Through hydrogen bonding,the two complementary polynucleotide strands pair andtwist to form a double helix. When compared with the complexand varied tertiary structures of proteins, this uniformity is surprising.But this structural contrast makes sense in terms of thefunctions of these two classes of macromolecules. As we describein Section 3.2, the different and unique shapes of proteins permitthese macromolecules to recognize specific “target” molecules.The area on the surface of a protein that interacts with thetarget molecule must match the shape of at least part of the targetmolecule. In other words, structural diversity in the targetmolecules requires corresponding diversity in the structures ofthe proteins themselves. Structural diversity is necessary in DNAas well. However, the diversity of DNA is found in its base sequencerather than in the physical shape of the molecule. DifferentDNA base sequences encode specific information.DNA carries information and is expressed through RNADNAis a purely informational molecule. The information is encodedin the sequence of bases carried in its strands—the infor-4.1 | WHAT ARE THE CHEMICAL STRUCTURES AND FUNCTIONS OF NUCLEIC ACIDS? 63Folding brings togethercomplementary butdistant base sequences.Double-strandedsegments form whensequences of RNAnucleotides pair withone another.3′5′ The yellow phosphorus atoms andtheir attached red oxygen atoms,along with deoxiribose sugars,form the two helical backbones.The paired bases are stacked inthe center of the coil (blue nitrogenatoms and gray carbon atoms).4.3 Hydrogen Bonding in RNA When a single-stranded RNA foldsin on itself, hydrogen bonds between complementary sequences canstabilize it into a three-dimensional shape with complicated surfacecharacteristics.4.4 The Double Helix of DNA The backbones of the two strands in aDNA molecule are coiled in a double helix that is held together by hydrogenbonds between the purines and pyrimidines in the interior of thestructure. In this model, the small white atoms represent hydrogen.TABLE 4.1Distinguishing RNA from DNANUCLEIC ACID SUGAR BASES STRANDSRNA Ribose Adenine SingleCytosineGuanineUracilDNA Deoxyribose Adenine DoubleCytosineGuanineThymineGO TO Web Activity 4.2 • DNA StructureyourBioPortal.commation encoded in the sequence TCAGCA is different from theinformation in the sequence CCAGCA. DNA has two functionsin terms of information. Taken together, they comprise the centraldogma of molecular biology (Figure 4.5).• DNAcan reproduce itself exactly. This is called DNA replication.It is done by polymerization on a template.• DNAcan copy its information into RNA, in a process calledtranscription. The nucleotide sequence in RNA can specify asequence of amino acids in a polypeptide. This is calledtranslation.While the details of these important processes are described inlater chapters, it is important to realize two things at this point:1. DNA replication and transcription depend on the base pairingproperties of nucleic acids. The hydrogen-bonded base pairs areA-T and G-C in DNA and A-U and G-C in RNA (see Figure 4.2).Consider this double-stranded DNA region:T CAGCAAGTCGTTranscription of the lower strand will result in a single strandof RNA with the sequence UCAGCA. Can you figure out whatthe top strand would produce?2. DNA replication usually involves the entire DNA molecule, butonly relatively small sections of the DNA are transcribed into RNA molecules.Since DNA holds essential information, it must be replicatedcompletely so that each new cell or new organism receivesa complete set of DNA from its parent. The complete set of DNAin a living organism is called its genome. However, not all ofthe information in the genome is needed at all times (Figure 4.6A).The sequences of DNA that encode specific proteins are transcribedinto RNA and are called genes (Figure 4.6B). In humans,the genes that encode the subunits of the protein hemoglobin(see Figure 3.10) are expressed only in the precursors of redblood cells. The genetic information in each globin gene is transcribedinto RNA and then translated into a globin polypeptide.In other tissues, such as the muscles, the genes that encode theglobin subunits are not transcribed, but others are—for example,the genes for the myosin proteins that are the major componentof muscle fibers (see Section 48.1).The DNA base sequence reveals evolutionaryrelationshipsBecause DNA carries hereditary information from one generationto the next, a theoretical series of DNA molecules, withchanges in base sequences, stretches back through the lineageof every organism to the beginning of biological evolution onEarth, about 4 billion years ago. Therefore, closely related livingspecies should have more similar base sequences thanspecies that are more distantly related. The details of how scientistsuse this information are covered in Chapter 24.The elucidation and examination of DNA base sequences hasconfirmed many of the evolutionary relationships that were inferredfrom more traditional comparisons of body structures,biochemistry, and physiology. Many studies of anatomy, physiology,and behavior have concluded that the closest living relativeof humans (Homo sapiens) is the chimpanzee (genus Pan).In fact, the chimpanzee genome shares more than 98 percentof its DNA base sequence with the human genome. Increasingly,scientists turn to DNA analyses to elucidate evolutionary relationshipswhen other comparisons are not possible or are notconclusive. For example, DNA studies revealed a close relationshipbetween starlings and mockingbirds that was not expectedon the basis of their anatomy or behavior.Nucleotides have other important rolesNucleotides are more than just the building blocks of nucleicacids. As we will describe in later chapters, there are several nucleotideswith other functions:• ATP (adenosine triphosphate) acts as an energy transducerin many biochemical reactions (see Section 8.2).64 CHAPTER 4 | NUCLEIC ACIDS AND THE ORIGIN OF LIFEInformation coded in thesequence of nucleotide basesin DNA is passed to a sequenceof nucleotide bases in RNA.Information in RNA is passedto polypeptides, but neverthe reverse (polypeptides tonucleic acids).DNA can replicate.Transcription TranslationDNA RNA PolypeptideDuring replication, two completecopies of the DNA molecule are made.Only the DNA sequences that encodespecific proteins are transcribed into RNA.DNADNADNADNARNA forprotein 2RNA forprotein 1+(A)(B)4.5 DNA Stores Information The DNA macromolecule stores informationthat can either be copied (replicated) or transcribed into RNA.RNA can then be translated into protein.4.6 DNA Replication and Transcription DNA is usually completelyreplicated (A) but only partially transcribed (B). RNA transcripts encodethe genes for specific proteins. Transcription of the many different proteinsis activated at different times and, in multicellular organisms, in differentcells of the body.• GTP (guanosine triphosphate) serves as an energy source,especially in protein synthesis. It also plays a role in thetransfer of information from the environment to cells (seeSection 7.2).• cAMP (cyclic adenosine monophosphate) is a special nucleotidein which an additional bond forms between thesugar and phosphate group. It is essential in manyprocesses, including the actions of hormones and thetransmission of information by the nervous system (seeSection 7.3).4.1 RECAPThe nucleic acids DNA and RNA are polymers madeup of nucleotide monomers. The sequence of nucleotidesin DNA carries the information that is usedby RNA to specify primary protein structure. The geneticinformation in DNA is passed from generationto generation and can be used to understand evolutionaryrelationships.• List the key differences between DNA and RNA. Betweenpurines and pyrimidines. See p. 61, Table 4.1,and Figure 4.1• How do purines and pyrimidines pair up in complementarybase pairing? See pp. 62–63 and Figure 4.2• What are the differences between DNA replication andtranscription? See pp. 63–64 and Figures 4.5 and 4.6• How can DNA molecules be very diverse, even thoughthey appear to be structurally similar? See p. 64We have seen that the nucleic acids RNA and DNA carry theblueprint of life, and that the inheritance of these macromoleculesreaches back to the beginning of evolutionary time. Butwhen, where, and how did nucleic acids arise on Earth? Howdid the building blocks of life such as amino acids and sugarsoriginally arise?How and Where Did the Small 4.2 Molecules of Life Originate?Chapter 2 points out that living things are composed of thesame atomic elements as the inanimate universe—the 92 naturallyoccurring elements of the periodic table (see Figure 2.2).But the arrangements of these atoms into molecules areunique in biological systems. You will not find biologicalmolecules in inanimate matter unless they came from a oncelivingorganism.It is impossible to know for certain how life on Earth began.But one thing is sure: life (or at least life as we know it) is notconstantly being re-started. That is, spontaneous generation of lifefrom inanimate nature is not happening before our eyes. Nowand for many millenia past, all life has come from life that existedbefore. But people, including scientists, did not always believethis.Experiments disproved spontaneous generation of lifeThe idea that life could have originated from nonliving matteris common in many cultures and religions. During the EuropeanRenaissance (from about 1450 to 1700, a period that witnessedthe birth of modern science), most people thought thatat least some forms of life arose repeatedly and directly frominanimate or decaying matter by spontaneous generation. Manythought that mice arose from sweaty clothes placed in dim light;that frogs sprang directly from moist soil; and that rotting meatproduced flies. Scientists such as the Italian physician and poetFrancesco Redi, however, doubted these assumptions. Redi proposedthat flies arose not by some mysterious transformationof decaying meat, but from other flies that laid their eggs on themeat. In 1668, Redi performed a scientific experiment—a relativelynew concept at the time—to test his hypothesis. He setout several jars containing chunks of meat.• One jar contained meat exposed to both air and flies.• Asecond jar was covered with a fine cloth so that the meatwas exposed to air, but not to flies.• The third jar was sealed so the meat was exposed to neitherair nor flies.As he had hypothesized, Redi found maggots, which thenhatched into flies, only in the first jar. This finding demonstratedthat maggots could occur only where flies were present. Theidea that a complex organism like a fly could appear de novofrom a nonliving substance in the meat, or from “something inthe air,” was laid to rest. Well, perhaps not quite to rest.In the 1660s, newly developed microscopes revealed a vastnew biological world. Under microscopic observation, virtuallyevery environment on Earth was found to be teeming with tinyorganisms. Some scientists believed these organisms arose spontaneouslyfrom their rich chemical environment, by the actionof a “life force.” But experiments by the great French scientistLouis Pasteur showed that microorganisms can arise only fromother microorganisms, and that an environment without life remainslifeless (Figure 4.7).Pasteur’s and Redi’s experiments showed that living organismscannot arise from nonliving materials under the conditionsthat existed on Earth during their lifetimes. But their experiments didnot prove that spontaneous generation never occured. Eons ago,conditions on Earth and in the atmosphere above it were vastlydifferent. Indeed, conditions similar to those found on primitiveEarth may have existed, or may exist now, on other bodies in oursolar system and elsewhere. This has led scientists to ask whetherlife has originated on other bodies in space, as it did on Earth.Life began in waterAs we emphasize in Chapter 2 and in the opening story of thischapter, the presence of water on a planet or moon is a necessaryprerequisite for life as we know it. Astronomers believe oursolar system began forming about 4.6 billion years ago, when a4.2 | HOW AND WHERE DID THE SMALL MOLECULES OF LIFE ORIGINATE? 65GO TO Animated Tutorial 4.1 • Pasteur's ExperimentyourBioPortal.comstar exploded and collapsed to form the sunand 500 or so bodies, called planetesimals.These planetesimals collided with one anotherto form the inner planets, including Earth andMars. The first chemical signatures indicatingthe presence of life on Earth appear to beabout 4 billion years old. So it took 600 millionyears, during a geological time frame calledthe Hadean, for the chemical conditions onEarth to become just right for life. Key amongthose conditions was the presence of water.Ancient Earth probably had a lot of waterhigh in its atmosphere. But the new planetwas hot, and the water remained in vaporform and dissipated into space. As Earthcooled, it became possible for water to condenseon the planet’s surface—but where didthat water come from? One current view isthat comets (loose agglomerations of dustand ice that have orbited the sun since theplanets formed) struck Earth and Mars repeatedly,bringing to those planets not onlywater but other chemical components of life,such as nitrogen.As the planets cooled and chemicals fromtheir crusts dissolved in the water, simplechemical reactions would have taken place.Some of these reactions might have led to life,but impacts by large comets and rocky meteoritesreleased enough energy to heat thedeveloping oceans almost to boiling, thus destroyingany early life. On Earth, these largeimpacts eventually subsided, and some timearound 3.8 to 4 billion years ago life gained afoothold. There has been life on Earth eversince. Because Mars and some other celestialbodies have a similar geological history, thepossibility exists that life exists or has existedon them. This possibility was an impetus forsending the Viking and Phoenix landers toMars.Several models have been proposed to explainthe origin of life on Earth. The next sectionsdiscuss two alternative theories: that lifecame from outside of Earth, or that life aroseon Earth through chemical evolution.Life may have come from outside EarthIn 1969, a remarkable event led to the discoverythat a meteorite from space carried moleculesthat were characteristic of life on Earth.On September 28 of that year, fragments of ameteorite fell around the town of Murchison,Australia. Using gloves to avoid Earth-derivedcontamination, scientists immediatelyshaved off tiny pieces of the rock, put them in66 CHAPTER 4 | NUCLEIC ACIDS AND THE ORIGIN OF LIFECONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE4.7 Disproving the Spontaneous Generation of LifePrevious experiments disproving spontaneous generation were called into question inregard to microorganisms, whose abundance and diversity were appreciated but whoseliving processes were not understood. Louis Pasteur’s classic experiments disprovedthe spontaneous generation of microorganisms.HYPOTHESISAll life comes from pre-existing life. An environment withoutlife remains lifeless.METHODRESULTSMicroorganisms come only from other microorganisms and cannotarise by spontaneous generation.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions, and relevantlinks for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.1 Create flasks of nutrientmedium with “swan” necksthat are open to air butexclude microorganismbearingdust particles.2 Boil to kill all microorganismsin the nutrient medium.3 Break the swan neck off oneflask, exposing the contentsto microorganisms in dust.MicrobialgrowthNo microbialgrowthDustDustDustMicrobial life grows only in the flasks exposed to microorganisms.There is no “spontaneous generation” of life in the sterile flask.test tubes and extracted them in water (Figure 4.8). They founda number of the molecules that are unique to life, includingpurines, pyrimidines, sugars, and ten amino acids.Were these molecules truly brought from space as part of themeteorite, or did they get there after the rock landed on Earth?There were a number of reasons to believe the molecules werenot Earthly contaminants:• The scientists took great care to avoid contamination. Theyused gloves and sterile instruments, took pieces from belowthe rock’s surface, and did their work very soon after itlanded (hopefully before Earth organisms could contaminatethe samples).• Amino acids found in living organisms on Earth are lefthanded(see Figure 3.2). The amino acids in the meteoritewere a mixture of right- and left-handed forms, with aslight preponderance of the left-handed. Thus the aminoacids in the meteorite were not likely to have come from aliving organism on Earth.• In the story that opens Chapter 2, we describe how the ratioof isotopes in a living organism reflects that isotope ratio inthe environment where the organism lives. The isotope ratiosfor carbon and hydrogen in the sugars from the meteoritewere different from the ratios of those elements foundon Earth.In 1984, another informative meteorite, this one the size ofa softball, was found in Antarctica. We know that the meteorite,ALH 84001, came from Mars because the composition of thegases trapped within the rock was identical to the compositionfound in the Martian atmosphere, which is quite differentfrom Earth’s atmosphere. Radioactive dating and mineral analysesdetermined that ALH 84001 was 4.5 billion years old andwas blasted off the Martian surface 16 million years ago. Itlanded on Earth fairly recently, about 13,000 years ago.Scientists found water trapped below the Martian meteorite’ssurface. This discovery was not surprising, given that surfaceobservations had already shown that water was once abundanton Mars (see the chapter-opening story). Because water is essentialfor life, scientists wondered whether the meteorite mightcontain other signs of life as well. Their analysis revealed twosubstances related to living systems. First, simple carbon-containingmolecules called polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons werepresent in small but unmistakable amounts; these substancescan be formed by living organisms. Second, crystals of magnetite,an iron oxide mineral made by many living organismson Earth, were found in the interior of the rock.ALH 84001 and the Murchison meteorite are not the only visitorsfrom outer space that have been shown to contain chemicalsignatures of life. While the presence of such molecules inrocks may suggest that those rocks once harbored life, it doesnot prove that there were living organisms in the rocks whenthey landed on Earth. Most scientists find it hard to believe thatan organism could survive thousands of years of travelingthrough space in a meteorite, followed by intense heat as themeteorite passed through Earth’s atmosphere. But there is someevidence that the heat inside some meteorites may not havebeen severe. When weakly magnetized rock is heated, it reorientsits magnetic field to align with the magnetic field aroundit. In the case of ALH 84001, this would have been Earth’s powerfulmagnetic field, which would have affected the meteoriteas it approached our planet.Careful measurements indicate that, while reorientation didoccur at the surface of the rock, it did not occur on the inside.The scientists who took these measurements, Benjamin Weissand Joseph Kirschvink at the California Institute of Technology,concluded that the inside of ALH 84001 was never heated over40°C as it entered Earth’s atmosphere. This suggests that a longinterplanetary trip by living organisms could be possible.Prebiotic synthesis experiments model the early EarthIt is clear that other bodies in the solar system have, or once had,water and other simple molecules. Possibly, a meteorite was thesource of the simple molecules that were the original buildingblocks for life on Earth. But a second theory for the origin of lifeon Earth, chemical evolution, holds that conditions on primitiveEarth led to the formation of these simple molecules (prebioticsynthesis), and these molecules led to the formation of lifeforms. Scientists have sought to reconstruct those primitive conditions,both physically (hot or cold) and chemically (by re-creatingthe combinations and proportions of elements that mayhave been present).HOT CHEMISTRY The amounts of trace metals such as molybdenumand rhenium in sediments under oceans and lakes is directlyproportional to the amount of oxygen gas (O2) present inand above the water. Measurements of dated sedimentary coresindicate that none of these rare metals was present prior to 2.5billion years ago. This and other lines of evidence suggest thatthere was little oxygen gas in Earth’s early atmosphere. Oxygengas is thought to have accumulated about 2.5 billion years ago4.2 | HOW AND WHERE DID THE SMALL MOLECULES OF LIFE ORIGINATE? 674.8 The Murchison Meteorite Pieces from a fragment of the meteoritethat landed in Australia in 1969 were put into test tubes with water.Soluble molecules present in the rock, including amino acids, nucleotidebases, and sugars, dissolved in the water. Plastic gloves and sterileinstruments were used to reduce the possibility of contamination withsubstances from Earth.as the by-product of photosynthesis by single-celled life forms;today 21 percent of our atmosphere is O2.In the 1950s, Stanley Miller and Harold Urey at the Universityof Chicago set up an experimental “atmosphere” containing thegases thought to have been present in Earth’s early atmosphere:hydrogen gas, ammonia, methane gas, andwater vapor. They passed an electric sparkthrough these gases, to simulate lightning asa source of energy to drive chemical reactions.Then, they cooled the system so the gaseswould condense and collect in a watery solution,or “ocean” (Figure 4.9). After a few daysof continuous operation, the system containednumerous complex molecules, includingamino acids, purines, and pyrimidines—someof the building blocks of life.The results of this experiment were profoundlyimportant in giving weight to speculationsabout the chemical origin of life onEarth and elsewhere in the universe. Decadesof experimental work and critical evaluationfollowed. The experiments showed that, underthe conditions used by Miller and Urey,many small molecular building blocks of lifecould be formed:• All five bases that are present in DNAand RNA (i.e., A, T, C, G and U)• 17 of the 20 amino acids used in proteinsynthesis• 3- to 6-carbon sugarsHowever, the 5-carbon sugar ribose was notproduced in these experiments.In science, an experiment and its resultsmust be repeated, reinterpreted, and refinedas more knowledge accumulates. The resultsof the Miller–Urey experiments have undergoneseveral such refinements.The amino acids in living things are alwaysL-isomers (see Figure 3.2 and p. 43). Buta mixture of D- and L-isomers appeared in theamino acids formed in the Miller–Urey experiments.Recent experiments show thatnatural processes could have selected the Laminoacids from the mixture. Some minerals,especially calcite-based rocks, haveunique crystal structures that selectively bindto D- or L-amino acids, separating the two.Such rocks were abundant on early Earth.This suggests that while both kinds of aminoacid structures were made, binding to certainrocks may have eliminated the D- aminoacids. (Interestingly, some meteorites, such as the Murchisonmeteorite, also have this selectivity.)Ideas about Earth’s original atmosphere have changed sinceMiller and Urey did their experiments. There is abundant evidenceindicating that major volcanic eruptions occurred 4 bil-68 CHAPTER 4 | NUCLEIC ACIDS AND THE ORIGIN OF LIFEHYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODThe chemical building blocks of life could have been generatedin the probable atmosphere of early Earth.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: What result would you predict if O2 were present in the“atmosphere” in this experiment?4.9 Miller and Urey Synthesized Prebiotic Molecules in anExperimental AtmosphereWith an increased understanding of the atmospheric conditions that existed onprimitive Earth, the researchers devised an experiment to see if these conditionscould lead to the formation of organic molecules.RESULTSGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.INVESTIGATING LIFEOrganic chemical compounds can be generated under conditionssimilar to those that existed in the atmosphere of primitive Earth.A condenser coolsthe “atmospheric”gases in a “rain”containing newcompounds. Thecompounds collectin an “ocean.”Electrical sparkssimulating lightningprovide energy forsynthesis of newcompounds.3Collect and analyzecondensed liquid.42Heat a solution ofsimple chemicals toproduce an “atmosphere”of methane,ammonia, hydrogen,and water vapor.1Reactions in the condensed liquideventually formed organic chemicalcompounds, including purines,pyrimidines, and amino acids.“Atmospheric”compartmentColdwaterCondensationN2H2CO2CH4NH3H2O“Oceanic”compartmentHeatGO TO Animated Tutorial 4.2 • Synthesis ofPrebiotic MoleculesyourBioPortal.comlion years ago, which would have released carbon dioxide (CO2),nitrogen (N2), hydrogen sulfide (H2S), and sulfur dioxide (SO2)into the atmosphere. Experiments using these gases in additionto the ones in the original experiment have produced more diversemolecules, including:• Vitamin B6, pantothenic acid (a component of coenzyme A),and nicotinamide (part of NAD, which is involved in energymetabolism).• Carboxylic acids such as succinic and lactic acids (also involvedin energy metabolism) and fatty acids.• Ribose, a key component of RNA, which can be formedfrom formaldehyde gas (HCHO), evidence of which hasbeen found in space.COLD CHEMISTRY Stanley Miller also performed a long-termexperiment in which the electric spark was not used. In 1972,he filled test tubes with ammonia gas, water vapor and cyanide(HCN), another molecule that is thought to have formed onprimitive Earth. After checking that there were no contaminatingsubstances or organisms that might confound the results,he sealed the tubes and cooled them to –100oC, the temperatureof the ice that covers Europa, one of Jupiter’s moons. Openingthe tubes 25 years later, he found amino acids and nucleotidebases. Apparently, pockets of liquid water within the ice had allowedhigh concentrations of the starting materials to accumulate,thereby speeding up chemical reactions. The importantconclusion is that the cold water within ice on ancient Earth,and other celestial bodies such as Mars, Europa, and Enceladus(one of Saturn’s moons; satellite photos have revealed geysersof liquid water coming from its interior) may have provided environmentsfor the prebiotic synthesis of molecules required forthe subsequent formation of simple living systems.4.2 RECAPLife does not arise repeatedly through spontaneousgeneration, but comes from pre-existing life. Wateris an essential ingredient for the emergence of life.Meteorites that have landed on Earth provide someevidence for an extraterrestrial origin of life. Prebioticchemical synthesis experiments provide supportfor the idea that life’s simple molecules formed in theprimitive Earth environment.• Explain how Redi’s and Pasteur’s experiments disprovedspontaneous generation. See p. 65 and Figure 4.7• What is the evidence that life on Earth came fromother bodies in the solar system? See pp. 66–67• What is the significance of the Miller–Urey experiment,what did it find, and what were its limitations? Seep. 68 and Figure 4.9Chemistry experiments using conditions modeling the ancientEarth’s environment suggest an origin for the monomers (suchas amino acids) that make up the polymers (such as proteins)that characterize life. How did these polymers develop on theancient Earth?How Did the Large Molecules 4.3 of Life Originate?The Miller–Urey experiment and other experiments that followedit provide a plausible scenario for the formation of thebuilding blocks of life under conditions that prevailed on primitiveEarth. The next step in forming and supporting a generaltheory on the origin of life on Earth would be an explanation ofthe formation of polymers from these monomers.Chemical evolution may have led to polymerizationScientists have used a number of model systems to try to simulateconditions under which polymers might have been made.Each of these systems is based on several observations andspeculations:• Solid mineral surfaces, such as powder-like clays, have largesurface areas. Scientists speculate that the silicates withinclay may have been catalytic (speeded up the reactions) inthe formation of early carbon-based molecules.• Hydrothermal vents deep in the ocean, where hot wateremerges from beneath Earth’s crust, lack oxygen gas andcontain metals such as iron and nickel. In laboratory experiments,these metals have been shown to catalyze the polymerizationof amino acids to polypeptides in the absence ofoxygen.• Hot pools at the edges of oceans may, through evaporation,have concentrated monomers to the point where polymerizationwas favored (the “primordial soup” hypothesis).In whatever ways the earliest stages of chemical evolution occurred,they resulted in the emergence of monomers and polymersthat have probably remained unchanged in their generalstructure and function for several billion years.There are two theories for the emergence of nucleicacids, proteins, and complex chemistryEarlier in this chapter, we described the key roles of nucleic acidsas informational molecules that are passed on from one generationto the next. We also described how DNA is transcribedto RNA, which can then be translated into protein (see Figure4.5). Chapter 3 describes the roles of proteins as catalysts, speedingup biochemical transformations (see Section 3.2). In existinglife forms, nucleic acids and proteins require one another inorder to perpetuate life. For the origin of life, this results in achicken-or-egg problem. Which came first, the genetic material(nucleic acids) or proteins? Two ideas have emerged. One suggeststhat sequential catalytic changes (primitive metabolism)came first. The other suggests that replication by nucleic acidspreceded metabolism (Figure 4.10).CHEMICAL CHANGES (METABOLISM) FIRST In this model, life beganin tiny droplets, or compartments, that concentrated and sepa-4.3 | HOW DID THE LARGE MOLECULES OF LIFE ORIGINATE? 69rated their contents from the external environment. Within sucha chemically rich environment, some substances could occasionallyand randomly undergo chemical changes. Proponents of thismodel speculate that those compartments where the changeswere effective for survival in the environment might even havebeen selected for growth and some primitive form of reproduction.Could catalysis, the speeding up of reactions essential forlife, occur in such an environment? The German scientist GünterWächtershäuser proposed that catalysis and reproduction couldhave occurred without proteins on a mineral called pyrite (irondisulfide), which has been found at hydrothermal vents andwhich could serve as a source of energy for polymerization reactions.Over time, nucleic acids and eventually proteins mighthave formed in the concentrated droplets. Then, in some of theseproteins, the ability to catalyze biochemical reactions—includingthe replication of nucleic acids—could have evolved.REPLICATOR FIRST In this model, the genetic material—nucleicacids—came first. The nucleotide building blocks made by prebioticchemistry came together to form polymers. Some of thesepolymers might have had the right shape to be catalytic so thatthey could reproduce themselves and catalyze other chemicaltransformations. Such transformations might have included thesynthesis of proteins, just as RNA is translated into proteins inliving organisms today (see Figure 4.5). Along the way, thosemolecules that were best adapted to the environment wouldsurvive and reproduce. Eventually they would have become incorporatedinto living cells.AAABBBCCCDDDEEEFFA B C D E FA B C D E FA B C D E FA B C D E FA B G D E FA BGQE DFRFGGHHIIJJKSelection(monomersremoved)Further changes ChangeSelf-ReplicationPolymerizationof replicatorPolymerizationPrebiotic synthesisof monomers(A) Chemical changes(metabolism) firstAD GHJLMA P Q R SAD GHJ LReplicatorReplicatorReplicatorCatalyst formetabolismMetabolismMetabolism(B) Replicator firstMetabolism4.10 Two Pathways to Life Biologists have proposed two ways inwhich simple monomers could have become self-replicating systemscapable of biological functions. (A) The chemical changes (metabolism)first pathway. (B) The replicator first pathway.Ribose, bases, andphosphate cometogether to form RNA.Some RNA moleculesgain the ability to replicate.RNA molecules beginto make catalytic proteins.Catalytic proteins increasethe efficiency of RNAreplication and proteinsynthesis. They also aidthe formation of doublestrandedRNA, whichthen evolves intodouble-stranded DNA.DNA becomes theprimary molecule forinformation storage. DNAuses RNA to makeproteins, which in turnhelp with DNA replicationand transcription.21345RNAProteinDNA RNA RNA ProteinDNA RNA Protein4.11 The “RNA World” Hypothesis In a world before DNA, this viewpostulates that RNA alone was both the blueprint for protein synthesisand a catalyst for its own replication. Eventually, the more compact informationstorage molecules of DNA could have evolved from RNA.There are two major problems with the replicator first model:• Nucleic acid polymers have not been observed in prebioticchemistry simulations.• DNA, the genetic material in almost all current organisms,is not self-catalytic.The first problem remains, but the second has a plausible solution:RNA can be a catalyst and can catalyze its own synthesis.RNA may have been the first biological catalystThe three-dimensional structure of a folded RNA moleculepresents a unique surface to the external environment (see Figure4.3). The surfaces of RNA molecules can be every bit asspecific as those of proteins. Just as the shapes of proteins allowthem to function as catalysts, speeding up reactions thatwould ordinarily take place too slowly to be biologically useful,the three-dimensional shapes and other chemical propertiesof certain RNA molecules allow them to function as catalysts.Catalytic RNAs, called ribozymes, can catalyze reactionson their own nucleotides as well as in other cellular substances.Although in retrospect it is not too surprising, the discoveryof catalytic RNAs was a major shock to a communityof biologists who were convinced that all biological catalystswere proteins (enzymes). It took almost a decade for the workof the scientists involved, Thomas Cech and Sidney Altman,to be fully accepted by other scientists. Later, they wereawarded the Nobel Prize.Given that RNA can be both informational (in its nucleotidesequence) and catalytic (due to its ability to form unique threedimensionalshapes), it has been hypothesized that early lifeconsisted of an “RNA world”—a world before DNA. It isthought that when RNA was first made, it could have acted asa catalyst for its own replication as well as for the synthesis ofproteins. DNA could eventually have evolved from RNA (Figure4.11). Some laboratory evidence supports this scenario:• When certain short RNA sequences are added to a mixtureof nucleotides, RNA polymers can be formed at a rate 7million times greater than the formation of polymers withoutthe added RNA. This added RNA is not a template, buta catalyst.• In the test tube, a ribozyme can catalyze the assembly ofshort RNAs into a longer molecule (Figure 4.12). This maybe how nucleic acid replication evolved.• In living organisms today, the formation of peptide linkages(see Figure 3.6) is catalyzed by ribozymes.• In certain viruses called retroviruses, there is an enzymecalled reverse transcriptase that catalyzes the synthesis ofDNAfrom RNA.4.3 RECAPThe emergence of the chemical reactions characteristicof life (metabolism), and the polymerization ofmonomers to polymers, may have occurred on thesurfaces of hydrothermal vents. One theory proposesthat metabolism came before polymerization; anothersuggests that the reverse occurred. RNA mayhave been the first genetic material and catalyst.• What are the two theories for the emergenceof metabolism and polymers? See pp. 69–71 andFigure 4.10• How does RNA self-replicate? See p. 71 andFigure 4.12The discovery of mechanisms for the formation of small andlarge molecules is essential to answering questions about theorigin of life on Earth. But we also need to understand howorganized systems formed that include these molecules and displaythe characteristic properties of life, such as reproduction,energy processing, and responsiveness to the environment.These properties are present in cells, and we now turn to ideason their origin.4.3 | HOW DID THE LARGE MOLECULES OF LIFE ORIGINATE? 711The short sequencesbase-pair with theribozyme.2The ribozyme catalyzesthe polymerization ofthe short sequences.3The short sequences arenow one longer sequenceof RNA.4These shortsequences of RNAare complementaryto parts of theribozyme.This folded RNA is aribozyme and canspeed up a reaction.5′ 3′5′5′ 5′ 3′3′3′5′5′3′ 3′5′5′3′3′4.12 An Early Catalyst for Life? In the laboratory, a ribozyme (a foldedRNA molecule) can catalyze the polymerization of several short RNAstrands into a longer molecule. Such a process could be a precursor forthe copying of nucleic acids, which is essential for their replication and forgene expression.4.4 How Did the First Cells Originate?As you have seen from many of the theories for the origin oflife, the evolution of biochemistry occurred under localized conditions.That is, the chemical reactions of metabolism, polymerization,and replication could not occur in a dilute aqueous environment.There had to be a compartment of some sort thatbrought together and concentrated the compounds involved inthese events. Biologists have proposed that initially this compartmentmay have simply been a tiny droplet of water on thesurface of a rock. But another major event in the origin of lifewas necessary.Life as we know it is separated from the environment withinstructurally defined units called cells. The internal contents ofa cell are separated from the nonbiological environment by aspecial barrier—a membrane. The membrane is not just a barrier;it regulates what goes into and out of the cell, as we describein Chapter 6. This role of the surface membrane is veryimportant because it permits the interior of the cell to maintaina chemical composition that is different from its externalenvironment. How did the first cells with membranes come intoexistence?Experiments describe the origin of cellsJack Szostak and his colleagues at Harvard University built alaboratory model that gives insights into the origin of cells. Todo this, they first put fatty acids (which can be made in prebioticexperiments) into water. Recall from Chapter 3 that fattyacids are amphipathic: they have a hydrophilic polar end and along, nonpolar tail that is hydrophobic (see Figure 3.20). Whenplaced in water, fatty acids will arrange themselves in a round“huddle” much like a football team: the hydrophilic ends pointoutward to interact with the aqueous environment and the fattyacid tails point inward, away from the water molecules.What if some water becomes trapped in the interior of this“huddle”? Now the layer of hydrophobic fatty acid tails is inwater, which is an unstable situation. To stabilize this, a secondlayer of fatty acids forms. This lipid bilayer has the polar ends ofthe fatty acids facing both outward and inward, because theyare attracted to the polar water molecules present on each sideof the double layer. The nonpolar tails form the interior of thebilayer (Figure 4.13). These prebiotic, water-filled structures,defined by a lipid bilayer membrane, very much resemble livingcells. Scientists refer to these compartments as protocells.Examining their properties revealed that• Large molecules such as DNA or RNA could not passthrough the bilayer to enter the protocells, but small moleculessuch as sugars and individual nucleotides could.• Nucleic acids inside the protocells could replicate using thenucleotides from outside. When the investigators placed ashort nucleic acid strand capable of self-replication insideprotocells and added nucleotides to the watery environmentoutside, the nucleotides crossed the barrier, entered the protocells,and became incorporated into new polynucleotidechains. This may have been the first step toward cell reproduction,and it took place without protein catalysis.Were these protocells truly cells, and was the lipid bilayer producedin these experiments a true cell membrane? Certainly not.The protocells could not fully reproduce, nor could they carryout all the metabolic reactions that take place in modern cells.The simple lipid bilayer had few of the sophisticated functions72 CHAPTER 4 | NUCLEIC ACIDS AND THE ORIGIN OF LIFEFatty acids andmonoglycerideshave polar endsand nonpolar tails.In water, the molecules form abilayer so that the polar endsare near water and the nonpolartails are in the interior of the bilayer.Polar endNonpolar tail(A)(B)DNABilayer4.13 Protocells (A) In a series of experiments in the Szostak lab,researchers mixed fatty acid molecules in water. The molecules formedbilayers that have some of the properties of a cell membrane. The bilayersand the water “trapped” inside them are essential to form a protocell.(B) A model of the protocell. Nutrients and nucleotides (blue andwhite particles) pass through the “membrane” and enter the protocell,where they copy an already present DNA template. The new copies ofDNA remain in the protocell.of modern cell membranes. Nevertheless, the protocell may bea reasonable facsimile of a cell as it evolved billions of years ago:• It can act as a system of interacting parts• It is capable of organization and self-catalysis• It includes an interior that is distinct from the exteriorenvironment.These are all fundamental characteristics of living cells.Some ancient cells left a fossil imprintIn the 1990s, scientists made an extremely rare find: a formationof ancient rocks in Australia that had remained relatively unchangedsince they first formed 3.5 billion years ago. In one ofthese rock samples, geologist J. William Schopf of the Universityof California, Los Angeles, saw chains and clumps of whatlooked tantalizingly like contemporary cyanobacteria, or “bluegreen”bacteria (Figure 4.14). Cyanobacteria are believed tohave been among the first organisms, because they can performphotosynthesis, converting CO2 from the atmosphere and waterinto carbohydrates. Schopf needed to prove that the chainswere once alive, not just the results of simple chemical reactions.He and his colleagues looked for chemical evidence of photosynthesisin the rock samples.The use of carbon dioxide in photosynthesis is a hallmark oflife and leaves a unique chemical signature—a specific ratio ofisotopes of carbon (13C:12C) in the resulting carbohydrates.Schopf showed that the Australian material had this isotope signature.Furthermore, microscopic examination of the chains revealedinternal substructures that are characteristic of living systemsand were not likely to be the result of simple chemicalreactions. Schopf’s evidence suggests that the Australian sampleis indeed the remains of a truly ancient living organism.Taking geological, chemical, and biological evidence into account,it is plausible that it took about 500 million to a billionyears from the formation of the Earth until the appearance of thefirst cells (Figure 4.15). Life has been cellular ever since. In thenext chapter, we begin our study of cell structure and function.4.4 RECAPThe chemical reactions that preceded living organismsprobably occurred in specialized compartments,such as water droplets on the surfaces ofminerals. Life as we know it did not begin until theemergence of cells. Protocells made in the laboratoryhave some of the properties of modern cells.Cell-like structures fossilized in ancient rocks datethe first cells to about 3.5 billion years ago.• Explain the importance of the cell membrane to theevolution of living organisms. See p. 72• What is the evidence that ancient rocks contain thefossils of cells? See p. 734.4 | HOW DID THE FIRST CELLS ORIGINATE? 734.14 The Earliest Cells? This fossil from Western Australia is 3.5 billionyears old. Its form is similar to that of modern filamentous cyanobacteria(inset).P r e c a m b r i a nFormationof the EarthStablehydrospherePrebioticchemistryPre-RNAworldRNAworldFirstcells4.5 4.2 4.2–4.0 4 3.8 3.5Billions of years ago4.15 The Origin of Life This highly simplified timeline gives a senseof the major events that culminated in the origin of life more than 3.5billion years ago.
4.1 What Are the Chemical Structures and Functions ofNucleic Acids?• The unique function of the nucleic acids—DNA and RNA—isinformation storage. They form the hereditary material thatpasses genetic information from one generation to the next.• Nucleic acids are polymers of nucleotides. A nucleotide consistsof a phosphate group, a pentose sugar (ribose in RNA anddeoxyribose in DNA), and a nitrogen-containing base. ReviewFigure 4.1• In DNA, the nucleotide bases are adenine, guanine, cytosine,and thymine. Uracil replaces thymine in RNA. The nucleotidesare joined by phosphodiester linkages between the sugar ofone and the phosphate of the next, forming a nucleic acid polymer.WEB ACTIVITY 4.1• DNA is a double helix with two separate strands in which thereis complementary base pairing based on hydrogen bondsbetween adenine and thymine (A-T) and between guanine andcytosine (G-C). The two strands of the DNA double helix run inopposite directions. RNA consists of one chain of nucleotides.Hydrogen bonding can occur within the single strand of RNA,forming double-stranded regions and giving the molecule athree-dimensional surface shape. Review Figures 4.2 and 4.3;WEB ACTIVITY 4.2• The information content of DNA and RNA resides in their basesequences.• DNA is expressed as RNA in transcription. RNA can then specifythe amino acid sequence of a protein in translation. ReviewFigures 4.5 and 4.64.2 How and Where did the Small Molecules of LifeOriginate?• Historically, many cultures believed that life originates repeatedlyby spontaneous generation. This was disproven experimentally.Review Figure 4.7; ANIMATED TUTORIAL 4.1• Life probably originated from chemical reactions. A prerequisitefor life is the presence of water.• The presence of chemical traces of life on meteorites that havelanded on Earth suggests that life might have originatedextraterrestrially.• Chemical experiments modeling the prebiotic conditions onEarth have shown that the small molecules that characterize lifecould have been formed from atmospheric chemicals. ReviewFigure 4.9; ANIMATED TUTORIAL 4.24.3 How Did the Large Molecules of Life Originate?• Polymerization of small molecules to polymers could occur insmall compartments such as droplets or on surfaces. Both ofthese conditions concentrate molecules such that reactions arefavored.• The “metabolism first” theory of poylmerization proposes thatchemical reactions involving small molecules evolved first, andsome of them formed polymers that acted as genetic informationand catalysts.• The “replicator first” theory proposes that RNA formed early,and acted as both genetic material and catalyst. Then reactionsinvolving small molecules could occur. Review Figure 4.10• In contemporary organisms, RNA can act as both an informationmolecule and as a catalyst. This favors the replicator first model.The RNA world may have been an important step on the way tolife. Review Figure 4.114.4 How Did Cells Originate?• A key to the emergence of living cells was the prebiotic chemicalgeneration of compartments enclosed by membranes. Suchenclosed compartments permitted the generation and maintenanceof internal chemical conditions that were different fromthose in the exterior environment.• In the laboratory, fatty acids and related lipids assemble intoprotocells that have some of the characteristics of cells. ReviewFigure 4.13• Ancient rocks (3.5 billion years old) have been found withimprints that are probably fossils of early cells.