Charles Darwin suffered throughout his adult lifefrom a debilitating illness that was never conclusivelydiagnosed. Whatever the cause of this illness,it seems to have contributed to the determinationwith which Darwin pursued his studies. In his autobiography,Darwin wrote that his “chief enjoyment and sole employmentthroughout life has been scientific work; andthe excitement from such work makes me for the timeforget, or drives quite away, my daily discomfort.” To Darwin,science was a pleasure that provided a distractionfrom his pain.One hypothesis is that Darwin suffered from Chagas’disease. Caused by the trypanosome Trypanosoma cruzi,one of many microbial eukaryotes, this disease currentlyaffects 16 to 18 million people, primarily in Central andSouth America. The trypanosome is transmitted to peopleby trypanosome-infected assassin bugs, which bite tosuck blood from their victims and then often defecatenear the wound. When people crush the insect or scratchits bite, they can become infected with the trypanosome,which is present in the assassin bug’s feces. That Darwinmay have been infected in this way is suggested by a journalentry he made during his voyage around the worldon the HMS Beagle. On March 25, 1835, while visitingArgentina, Darwin wrote:At night I experienced an attack (for it deserves no less aname) of the Benchuca … the great black bug of thePampas. It is most disgusting to feel soft wingless insects,about an inch long, crawling over one’s body. Beforesucking they are quite thin but afterwards they becomeround and bloated with blood, and in this state they areeasily crushed.Darwin’s entry describes the experienceof being bitten by one of theassassin bugs that carry Trypanosomacruzi, so clearly Darwin had the opportunityto become infected. In fact,he even experimented with the insectsto learn more about theirhabits. “[I]f a finger was presented,the bold insect would immediatelyprotrude its sucker, make a charge,and if allowed, draw blood,” he wrotein his journal.There is neither a vaccine nor anyeffective drug treatment for Chagas’How a microbial eukaryote may have changed the course of science27An Assassin with a Deadly CargoThis member of the insect genusRhodnius is an “assassin bug,” one ofseveral species that transmitsTrypanosoma cruzi, the causative agentof Chagas’ disease in humans.IN THIS CHAPTER we describe the origin and earlydiversification of the eukaryotes and the complexityachieved by some single cells. We then explore some of thediversity of microbial eukaryote body forms and adaptationsand present the developing current view of the evolutionaryrelationships among the major eukaryote groups.disease, which kills more than 40,000 people a year.Other trypanosome species cause other debilitatingdiseases, including leishmaniasis (60,000 deaths/year)and African sleeping sickness (50,000 deaths/year). Sincethe infective organism in each of these diseases is aeukaryote like us, most of the drugs that are toxic tothe trypanosomes are often toxic to humans as well.Although the treatment of bacterial diseases often capitalizeson the many differences between prokaryotesand eukaryotes in order to target only the bacteria, thediseases caused by microbial eukaryotes usually are, likeChagas’ disease, much more difficult to treat.Thugs in a Huddle Sometimes trypanosomes, like theseLeishmania major, form clusters held together by a tangle ofmucilage secreted around their flagella; nobody is sure yetwhy they behave this way.27.1 How Did the Eukaryotic Cell Arise?Many members of the domain Eukarya are familiar to us. Wehave no problem recognizing trees, mushrooms, and insectsas plants, fungi, and animals, respectively. However, a dazzlingassortment of other eukaryotes—mostly microscopic organisms—do not fit into any of these three groups. Eukaryotes thatare not plants, animals, or fungi have traditionally been“dropped” into the category protists. Phylogenetic analyses,however, are clear and consistent in showing that many of thegroups that fall under the rubric of “protists” in fact are notclosely related to one another, but are paraphyletic (see Figure22.14). Thus the word “protist” does not describe a formal taxonomicgroup, but is a convenience term—a shorthand way ofsaying “all the eukaryotes that are not plants, animals, or fungi.”The diversity of protists is reflected in bothmorphology and phylogenyIn terms of their evolutionary relationships, as well as in manyaspects of their biology, protists are more diverse than any ofthe three better known eukaryote groups. Some protists aremotile, while others do not move; some are photosynthetic, othersheterotrophic; most are unicellular, but some are multicellular(Table 27.1). Most are microscopic, but a few are huge:giant kelps, for example, can grow to be longer than a footballfield. We refer to the unicellular species of protists as microbialeukaryotes, but you should keep in mind that there are large,multicellular protists as well.The phylogeny of the major eukaryote lineages remains asubject of research and debate. Some groups of protists areclosely related to animals and fungi, whereas others are closelyrelated to the land plants, and still others are only distantly relatedto any of these familiar eukaryotes (Figure 27.1).Cellular features support the monophyly of eukaryotesEukaryotic cells differ in many ways from prokaryotic cells, andthese unique characters of eukaryotes lead us to conclude thateukaryotes are monophyletic. In other words, there was a singleeukaryotic ancestor which diversified into the many differentlineages of protists, as well as plants, animals, and fungi.Given the nature of evolutionary processes, the many synapomorphiesof eukaryotes undoubtedly did not arise simultaneously.We can make some reasonable inferences about the mostimportant events that led to the evolution of a new cell type,bearing in mind that the global environment underwent anCHAPTER OUTLINE27.1 How Did the Eukaryotic Cell Arise?27.2 What Features Account for Protist Diversity?27.3 How Do Protists Affect the World Around Them?27.4 How Do Protists Reproduce?27.5 What Are the Evolutionary Relationships amongEukaryotes?562 CHAPTER 27 | THE ORIGIN AND DIVERSIFICATION OF EUKARYOTESCommonancestor ofall eukaryotesApicomplexansDinoflagellatesCiliatesBrown algaeDiatomsOomycetesHaptophytesGlaucophytesRed algaeChlorophytesLand plantsCharophytesDiplomonadsParabasalidsHeteroloboseansEuglenidsKinetoplastidsCercozoansForaminiferansRadiolariansFungiChoanoflagellatesAnimalsLoboseansPlasmodial slime moldsCellular slime moldsAlveolatesChromalveolatesStramenopiles Opisthokonts AmoebozoansRhizariaPlantaeExcavatesUnikonts27.1 Major EukaryoteGroups in an EvolutionaryContext This tree shows acurrent hypothesis for theevolutionary relationshipsamong major groups ofeukaryotes. The dashed linesindicate clades for which theevidence is weak or disputed.The root of the tree isuncertain.enormous change—from low to high availability of free oxygen—during the course of these events (see Section 25.3). Keepin mind, however, that these inferences, although reasonableand grounded, are still conjectural; the hypothesis we pursuehere is one of a few that biologists are currently considering. Wedescribe here a prominent theory on the origin of the eukaryoticcell as a framework for thinking about the challenging questionof eukaryotic origins.27.1 | HOW DID THE EUKARYOTIC CELL ARISE? 563TABLE 27.1Major Eukaryote CladesCLADE ATTRIBUTES EXAMPLE (GENUS)ChromalveolatesHaptophytes Unicellular, often with calcium carbonate scales EmilianiaAlveolates Sac-like structures beneath plasma membraneApicomplexans Apical complex for penetration of host PlasmodiumDinoflagellates Pigments give golden-brown color GonyaulaxCiliates Cilia; two types of nuclei ParameciumStramenopiles Hairy and smooth flagellaBrown algae Multicellular; marine; photosynthetic MacrocystisDiatoms Unicellular; photosynthetic; two-part cell walls ThalassiosiraOomycetes Mostly coenocytic; heterotrophic SaprolegniaPlantaeGlaucophytes Peptidoglycan in chloroplasts CyanophoraRed algae No flagella; chlorophyll a and c; phycoerythrin ChondrusChlorophytes Chlorophyll a and b Ulva*Land plants (Chs. 28–29) Chlorophyll a and b; protected embryo GinkgoCharophytes Chlorophyll a and b; mitotic spindle oriented as in land plants CharaExcavatesDiplomonads No mitochondria; two nuclei; flagella GiardiaParabasalids No mitochondria; flagella and undulating membrane TrichomonasHeteroloboseans Can transform between amoeboid and flagellate stages NaegleriaEuglenids Flagella; spiral strips of protein support cell surface EuglenaKinetoplastids Kinetoplast within mitochondrion TrypanosomaRhizariaCercozoans Threadlike pseudopods CercomonasForaminiferans Long, branched pseudopods; calcium carbonate shells GlobigerinaRadiolarians Glassy endoskeleton; thin, stiff pseudopods AstrolithiumUnikontsOpisthokonts Single, posterior flagellum*Fungi (Ch. 30) Heterotrophs that feed by absorption PenicilliumChoanoflagellates Resemble sponge cells; heterotrophic; with flagella Choanoeca*Animals (Chs. 31–33) Heterotrophs that feed by ingestion DrosophilaAmoebozoans Amoebas with lobe-shaped pseudopodsLoboseans Feed individually AmoebaPlasmodial slime molds Form coenocytic feeding bodies PhysarumCellular slime molds Cells retain their identity in pseudoplasmodium Dictyostelium*Clades marked with an asterisk are made up of multicellular organisms and are discussed in the chapters indicated. All other groups listed are treated hereas protists.The modern eukaryotic cell arosein several stepsSeveral events preceded the origin of themodern eukaryotic cell:• The origin of a flexible cell surface• The origin of a cytoskeleton• The origin of a nuclear envelope, whichenclosed a genome organized intochromosomes• The appearance of digestive vacuoles• The acquisition of certain organelles viaendosymbiosisRAMIFICATIONS OF A FLEXIBLE CELL SURFACEMany fossil prokaryotes look like rods, and wepresume that these ancient organisms, likemost present-day prokaryotic cells, had firmcell walls. The first step toward the eukaryoticcondition was the loss of the cell wall by an ancestralprokaryotic cell. This wall-less conditionis present in some present-day bacteria,although many others have developed newtypes of cell walls. Let’s consider the possibilitiesopen to a flexible cell without a wall.First, think of cell size. As a cell grows larger,its surface area-to-volume ratio decreases (seeFigure 5.2). Unless the surface area can be increased,the cell volume will reach an upperlimit. If the cell’s surface is flexible, it can fold inwardand elaborate itself, creating more surfacearea for gas and nutrient exchange (Figure 27.2).With a surface flexible enough to allow infolding,the cell can exchange materials with itsenvironment rapidly enough to sustain a largervolume and more rapid metabolism (Figure27.2, steps 1–2). Furthermore, a flexible surfacecan pinch off bits of the environment, bringingthem into the cell by endocytosis.CHANGES IN CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONOther early steps in the evolution of the eukaryoticcell are likely to have included threeadvances: the formation of ribosome-studdedinternal membranes, some of which surroundedthe DNA; the appearance of a cytoskeleton;and the evolution of digestive vacuoles(Figure 27.2, steps 3–7).564 CHAPTER 27 | THE ORIGIN AND DIVERSIFICATION OF EUKARYOTES1 The protectivecell wall was lost.3 Cytoskeleton (microfilamentand microtubules) formed.8 Mitochondria formedthrough endosymbiosiswith a proteobacterium.6 Microtubules from thecytoskeleton formedeukaryotic flagellum,enabling propulsion.9 Endosymbiosis withcyanobacteria led to thedevelopment ofchloroplasts, whichsupplied the cell with themeans to manufacturematerials using solarenergy (see Figure 27.4).4 Internal membranes studdedwith ribosomes formed.2 Infolding of theplasma membraneadded surface areawithout increasingthe cell’s volume.5 As DNA attached tothe membrane of aninfolded vesicle, aprecursor of anucleus formed.7 Early digestive vacuolesevolved into lysosomesusing enzymes from theearly endoplasmic reticulum.ChloroplastProkaryotic cellCell wallDNAMitochondrionNucleusFlagellumEukaryotic cell27.2 From Prokaryotic Cell to Eukaryotic Cell The loss of therigid prokaryotic cell wall allowed the plasma membrane to foldinward and create more surface area. One possible evolutionarysequence, which includes the formation of a cytoskeleton and theenclosure of genetic material into the nucleus, is shown here.27.1 | HOW DID THE EUKARYOTIC CELL ARISE? 565A cytoskeleton composed of microfilaments and microtubuleswould support the cell and allow it to manage changesin shape, to distribute daughter chromosomes, and to move materialsfrom one part of the now much larger cell to other parts.The presence of microtubules in the cytoskeleton could haveevolved in some cells to give rise to the characteristic eukaryoticflagellum. The origin of the cytoskeleton is becomingclearer, as homologs of the genes that encode many cytoskeletalproteins have been found in modern prokaryotes.The DNA of a prokaryotic cell is attached to a site on itsplasma membrane. If that region of the plasma membrane wereto fold into the cell, the first step would be taken toward theevolution of a nucleus, a primary feature of the eukaryotic cell.From an intermediate kind of cell, the next step was probablyphagocytosis—the ability to engulf and digest other cells.The cytoskeleton and nuclear envelope appeared early in theeukaryote lineage. Early eukaryotes may also have had an associatedendoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus, and perhapsone or more flagella of the eukaryotic type.ENDOSYMBIOSIS AND ORGANELLES At the same time the processesoutlined above were taking place, cyanobacteria were generatingoxygen gas as a product of photosynthesis. The increasingO2 levels in the atmosphere had disastrous consequencesbecause most organisms of the time (archaea and bacteria) wereunable to tolerate the newly oxidizing environment. But someprokaryotes managed to cope with these changes, and—fortunatelyfor us—so did some of the new phagocytic eukaryotes.At about this time, endosymbiosis might have come into play(Figure 27.2, steps 8–9). Recall that the theory of endosymbiosisproposes that certain organelles are the descendants ofprokaryotes engulfed, but not digested, by ancient eukaryoticcells (see Section 5.5). One crucial endosymbiotic event in thehistory of the Eukarya was the incorporation of a proteobacteriumthat evolved into the mitochondrion. Initially, the neworganelle’s primary function was probably to detoxify O2 by reducingit to water. Later, this reduction became coupled withthe formation of ATP in cellular respiration (see Chapter 9).Upon completion of this step, the essential modern eukaryoticcell was complete.Some important eukaryotes are the result of yet another endosymbioticstep, the incorporation of a prokaryote related totoday’s cyanobacteria, which became the chloroplast.Chloroplasts are a study in endosymbiosisEukaryotes in several different groups possess chloroplasts,and groups with chloroplasts appear in several distantly relatedclades. Some of these groups differ in the photosyntheticpigments their chloroplasts contain. And we’ll see that not allchloroplasts have a pair of surrounding membranes—in somemicrobial eukaryotes, they are surrounded by three or moremembranes. We now view these observations in terms of a remarkableseries of endosymbioses, supported by extensive evidencefrom electron microscopy and nucleic acid sequencecomparisons.All chloroplasts trace their ancestry back to the engulfmentof one cyanobacterium by a larger eukaryotic cell (Figure 27.3A).Peptidoglycanhas been lostexcept inglaucophytes.A trace of the engulfedcell’s nucleus is retainedin some groups.Host membrane (fromendocytosis) enclosesthe engulfed cell.The engulfed cell’splasma membrane(white) has beenlost in euglenidsand dinoflagellates.EukaryoteHost cellnucleus(A) Primary endosymbiosis(B) Secondary endosymbiosisCyanobacteriumCyanobacteriumouter membranePeptidoglycanCyanobacteriuminner membraneHost eukaryotic cellChloroplastChloroplast-containingeukaryotic cell27.3 Endosymbiotic Events in the “Family Tree” of Chloroplasts(A) A single instance of primary endosymbiosis ultimately gave rise to allof today’s chloroplasts. A eukaryotic cell engulfed a cyanobacterium butdid not digest it. (B) Secondary endosymbiosis—the uptake and retentionof a chloroplast-containing cell by another eukaryotic cell—tookplace several times, independent of each other.This event, the step that gave rise to the photosynthetic eukaryotes,is known as primary endosymbiosis. The cyanobacterium,a Gram-negative bacterium, had both an inner and outer membrane.Thus the original chloroplasts had two surroundingmembranes—the inner and outer membranes of the cyanobacterium.Remnants of the peptidoglycan-containing wall of thebacterium are present in the form of a bit of peptidoglycan betweenthe chloroplast membranes of glaucophytes, the first microbialeukaryote group to branch off following primary endosymbiosisof the cyanobacterium.Primary endosymbiosis gave rise to the chloroplasts of the“green algae” (including chlorophytes and charophytes) and thered algae. Studies of phylogeny indicate that each of these distinctlineages trace back to a single primary endosymbiosis. Thephotosynthetic land plants arose later from a green algal ancestor.The red algal chloroplast retains certain pigments of theoriginal cyanobacterial endosymbiont that are absent in greenalgal chloroplasts.Almost all remaining photosynthetic eukaryotes are the resultof additional rounds of endosymbiosis. For example, thephotosynthetic euglenids derived their chloroplasts from secondaryendosymbiosis (Figure 27.3B). Their ancestor took up a unicellularchlorophyte, retaining the endosymbiont’s chloroplastand eventually losing the rest of the constituents of the chlorophyte.This history explains why the photosynthetic euglenidshave the same photosynthetic pigments as the chlorophytes andland plants. It also accounts for the third membrane of the euglenoidchloroplast, which is derived from the euglenid’s plasmamembrane (as a result of endocytosis). An additional round ofendosymbiosis (tertiary endosymbiosis) occurred when a dinoflagellateapparently lost its chloroplast and took up a haptophyte(itself the result of secondary endosymbiosis).Lateral gene transfer accounts for the presence ofsome prokaryotic genes in eukaryotesSeveral uncertainties remain about the origins of eukaryoticcells. Lateral gene transfer (see Section 26.4 and Figure 26.10)complicates the study of eukaryote origins, just as it complicatesthe study of relationships among prokaryotes. Lateral genetransfer accounts for the increasing numbers of genes of bacterialorigin that are being found in eukaryotes by ongoing geneticanalyses.An endosymbiotic origin of mitochondria and chloroplastsaccounts for the presence of bacterial genes encoding enzymesfor energy metabolism (respiration and photosynthesis) in eukaryotes,but it does not explain the presence of some other bacterialgenes. The eukaryotic genome clearly is a mixture of geneswith different origins. Arecent suggestion is that Eukarya mighthave arisen from the mutualistic fusion of a Gram-negative bacteriumand an archaean.Many interesting ideas about eukaryotic origins await additionaldata and analysis. We can expect that these questions andothers will eventually yield to additional research.27.1 RECAPThe modern eukaryotic cell likely arose from an ancestralprokaryote in several steps, including endosymbiosis.Primary endosymbiosis involves theengulfment of a bacterium by another free-living organism;the endosymbiosis of a bacterium probablygave rise to mitochondria, whereas the chloroplastsof photosynthesizing eukaryotes are thought tohave originated in the endosymbiosis of acyanobacterium.• Explain why protists are described as paraphyleticrather than monophyletic. See p. 561, Table 27.1,and Figure 27.1• Why was the development of a flexible cell surface akey event in eukaryotic cell history? See p. 564• Identify some of the probable events involved in theevolution of the eukaryotic cell from a prokaryotic cell.See pp. 564–565 and Figure 27.2• What is the difference between primary and secondaryendosymbiosis? See p. 566 and Figure 27.3Having considered some of the known and suspected steps thatled from the prokaryotic to the eukaryotic condition, let’s nowsee what use the early eukaryotes made of their new features.What Features Account 27.2 for Protist Diversity?The eukaryotic cell possesses some very useful features (detailedin Chapter 5). The cytoskeleton allows for various meansof locomotion and also manages the controlled movement ofcellular constituents (notably the mitotic and meiotic chromosomes).The specialized organelles of eukaryotes support a varietyof activities. Given these tools, eukaryotes have been ableto explore many environments and have exploited a variety ofnutrient sources.Protists occupy many different nichesMost protists are aquatic. Some live in marine environments,others in fresh water, and still others in the body fluids of hostorganisms. Many aquatic protists are plankton: free-floatingaquatic organisms. The slime molds inhabit damp soil, animal feces,and the moist, decaying bark of rotting trees. Other microbialprotists also live in soil water, and some of them contributeto the global nitrogen cycle by preying on soil bacteria and recyclingtheir nitrogen compounds into nitrates.Many metabolic lifestyles are found among the protists.Some protists are photosynthetic autotrophs, some are heterotrophs,and some switch with ease between the autotrophicand heterotrophic modes of nutrition. Some of the heterotrophsingest their food; others, including many parasites, absorb nutrientsfrom their environment.566 CHAPTER 27 | THE ORIGIN AND DIVERSIFICATION OF EUKARYOTESGO TO Animated Tutorial 27.1 • Family Tree of ChloroplastsyourBioPortal.comTwo general terms are sometimes used to designatetwo broad categories of protists: the protozoansand algae. These are convenience termsused to describe categories of distantly relatedspecies that have some similar attributes. Theterm protozoans refers to various groups of protists,formerly classified as animals, that often surviveby ingesting other species. Likewise, theterm algae (singular alga) refers to several groupsof photosynthetic protists. Neither of these termsdesignate formal taxonomic groups, however.Protists have diverse means of locomotionAlthough a few protist groups consist entirely ofnonmotile organisms, most groups include organismsthat move by amoeboid motion, by ciliary action,or by means of flagella. Each of these typesof motion is based on activities of the cytoskeleton.In amoeboid motion, the cell forms pseudopods(“false feet”) which are extensions of its constantlychanging cell shape. Cells such as the one shownin Figure 27.4 simply extend a pseudopod andthen flow into it. Regions of the cytoplasm alternatebetween a more liquid state and a stiffer state,and a network of cytoskeletal microfilaments squeezes the moreliquid cytoplasm forward.The proteins of the eukaryotic cytoskeleton form microtubuleswhich allowed the evolution of different means of locomotion.Cilia are tiny, hairlike organelles that beat in a coordinatedfashion to move the cell forward or backward. Someciliated organisms can change direction rapidly in response totheir environment. A eukaryotic flagellum moves like a whip;some flagella push the cell forward, others pull the cell forward.Cilia and eukaryotic flagella are identical in cross section, witha “9 + 2” arrangement of microtubules (see Figure 5.20); theydiffer only in length.Protists employ vacuoles in several waysMost unicellular organisms are microscopic. As noted above,an important reason that cells are small is that they need enoughmembrane surface area in relation to their volume to supportthe exchange of materials required for their existence. Some relativelylarge unicellular eukaryotes minimize this problem byhaving membrane-enclosed vacuoles of various types that increasetheir effective surface area.Organisms living in fresh water are hypertonic to their environment(see Section 6.3). Many freshwater protists such as Parameciumaddress this problem by means of specialized vacuolesthat excrete the excess water they constantly take in by osmosis.Members of several groups have such contractile vacuoles.The excess water collects in the contractile vacuoles, which thenexpel the water from the cell (Figure 27.5).A digestive vacuole is a second important type of vacuolefound in Paramecium and many other protists. These organismsengulf solid food by endocytosis, forming a vacuole withinwhich the food is digested. Smaller vesicles containing digestedfood pinch away from the digestive vacuole and enter the cy-27.2 | WHAT FEATURES ACCOUNT FOR PROTIST DIVERSITY? 567Pseudopods120 μmPeloxima carolinensis3 …expels itscontents……and detachesfrom the membrane.…which expands and 4fuses with the plasmamembrane…Water passes from the 2cytoplasm to radiatingcanals and to thecentral vacuole…1Inside of cell Plasma membraneOutsideof cellContractile vacuoleCiliaParamecium27.4 An Amoeba in Motion Its flowing pseudopods are constantlychanging shape as this “chaos amoeba” moves and feeds.27.5 Contractile Vacuoles Bail Out Excess Water Contractile vacuoles remove thewater that constantly enters freshwater protists by osmosis.toplasm. These tiny vesicles provide a large surface area acrosswhich the products of digestion may be absorbed by the restof the cell (Figure 27.6).The cell surfaces of protists are diverseA few protists, such as the amoeba in Figure 27.4, are surroundedby only a plasma membrane, but most have stiffer surfacesthat maintain the structural integrity of the cell. Many havecell walls, which are often complex in structure, outside theplasma membrane. Other protists that lack cell walls have a varietyof ways of strengthening their surfaces.Paramecium has proteins in its cell surface—known as a pelliclein this genus (see Figure 27.18)—that make it flexible butresilient. Other groups have external “shells,” which the organismeither produces itself or makes from bits of sand and thickeningsimmediately beneath the plasma membrane, as someamoebas do (Figure 27.7A). The complex cell walls of diatomsare glassy, based on silica (silicon dioxide; Figure 27.7B). Biologistsrecently measured, at a microscopic scale, the forces568 CHAPTER 27 | THE ORIGIN AND DIVERSIFICATION OF EUKARYOTESCONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE27.6 The Role of Vacuoles in Ciliate DigestionAn experiment with the ciliate protist Parameciumdemonstrates the function of food vacuoles. Given thatan acidic environment is known to aid digestion in manyorganisms, does this microbial eukaryote use acid toobtain nutrients?HYPOTHESIS The food vacuoles of Paramecium produce anacidic environment that allows the organism todigest food particles.Acidification of food vacuoles assistsdigestion in this ciliate protist.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSFURTHER INVESTIGATION: How might you determine whether theacid level changes in Paramecium’sfood vacuoles are the result ofenzymes?A food vacuole formsaround yeast cells.1The change in colorshows that the interiorvacuole has becomeacidic, which helpsdigest the yeast cells.2As products of digestionmove into the cytosol, thepH increases in the vacuole(the dye becomes red again).3Red-stained(basic) wastematerial isexpelled.4Stainedyeast cellsOralgroove1. Feed Paramecium yeast cells stained withCongo red, a dye that is red at neutral or basicpH but turns green at acidic pH.2. Under a light microscope, observe the formationand degradation of food vacuoles within theParamecium. Note time and sequence of color(i.e., acid level) changes.GO TO Animated Tutorial 27.2 • Food Vacuoles HandleDigestion and ExcretionyourBioPortal.com(A) Nebela collarisShell (test)made ofsand grainsPlasmamembraneof amoebaPseudopodsof amoeba10 μm18 μm(B) Endictya oceanica27.7 Cell Surfaces among Microbial Eukaryotes (A) This testateamoeba has built a lightbulb-shaped shell, or test, by gluing sand grainstogether. Its pseudopods extend through the single aperture in the test(compare with Figure 27.4). (B) Scanning electron micrography reveals theintricate patterning of the silica-dense cell walls of this diatom. Thesespectacular unicellular, photosynthetic eukaryotes dominate the aquaticphytoplankton community (see also Figure 27.19).needed to break single, living diatoms, and discovered thatthe glassy cell walls are exceptionally strong. Evolution of thesewalls by natural selection may have given diatoms an enhanceddefense against predators, and thus an edge over competitors.27.2 RECAPProtists are diverse in their habitat, nutrition, locomotion,and body form. Some protists move by useof pseudopods, cilia, or flagella. Protists may havecell walls or external coverings that provide structuralsupport and protection.• Can you explain the roles of the cytoskeleton in the locomotionof protists? See p. 567• Do you understand the operation of contractile andfood vacuoles in Paramecium? See p. 567 and Figures27.5 and 27.6The diversity of body form, habitat, nutrition, and locomotionfound among the protists reflects the diversity of avenues pursuedduring the early evolution of eukaryotes. Protists have anenormous effect on biotic and physical environments.How Do Protists Affect 27.3 the World Around Them?Protists are extremely diverse, and their effects on other organismsand on the physical environment are almost as diverse.Some protists are food for marine animals, while others poisonthe sea; some are packaged as nutritional supplements, andsome are pathogens; the remains of some form the sands ofmany modern beaches, and others are a major source of today’sever more expensive crude oil. Many protists are constituentsof the plankton. Photosynthetic members of the plankton arecalled phytoplankton.Asingle eukaryote clade, the diatoms, is responsible for abouta fifth of all photosynthetic carbon fixation on Earth—about thesame amount of photosynthesis performed by all of Earth’s rainforests.These spectacular unicellular organisms (see Figures27.7B and Figure 27.19) are the predominant members of thephytoplankton, but other protist clades also include importantphytoplanktonic species that contribute heavily to global photosynthesis.Like green plants on land, the phytoplankton serveas a gateway for energy from the sun into the living world; inother words, they are primary producers. In turn, they are eatenby heterotrophs, including animals and many other protists.Those consumers are, in turn, eaten by other consumers. Mostaquatic heterotrophs (with the exception of some species existingin the deep ocean) depend on the photosynthesis performedby phytoplankton.Some protists are endosymbiontsAs we have described, endosymbiosis is the condition in whichtwo organisms live together, one inside the other. Endosymbiosisis common among the microbial protists, many of which livewithin the cells of animals. Members of the dinoflagellates arecommon symbionts in both animals and in other protists; mostbut not all dinoflagellate endosymbiont species are photosynthetic.Some dinoflagellates live endosymbiotically in the cellsof corals, contributing products of their photosynthesis to thepartnership. The importance to the coral is demonstrated whenthe dinoflagellates die as a result of changing environmentalconditions, a phenomenon known as coral bleaching (Figure27.8A); the coral is ultimately damaged or destroyed when itsnutrient supply is reduced.Many radiolarians also harbor photosynthetic endosymbionts(Figure 27.8B). As a result, the radiolarians, which are not photosyntheticthemselves, appear greenish or golden, depending onthe type of endosymbiont they contain. This arrangement is oftenmutually beneficial: the radiolarian can make use of the organic(A) (B)Astrolithium sp. 250 μmBleaching occurs when the photosyntheticdinoflagellates living endosymbioticallywithin this coral die.Goniopora sp.27.8 Dinoflagellate Endosymbiontsare Photosynthesizers(A) Some corals lose their chiefnutritional source when their photosyntheticendosymbionts die,often as a result of changing environmentalconditions such aswarming water. (B) Dinoflagellateslive endosymbiotically inside aradiolarian (another protist), providingorganic nutrients for theradiolarian and imparting the goldenbrown pigmentation seen atthe center of its glassy skeleton.27.3 | HOW DO PROTISTS AFFECT THE WORLD AROUND THEM? 569nutrients produced by its photosynthetic guest, and the guest mayin turn make use of metabolites made by the host or receive physicalprotection. In some cases, the guest is exploited for its photosyntheticproducts while receiving little or no benefit itself.Some microbial protists are deadlyThe best-known pathogenic microbial protists are members ofthe genus Plasmodium, a highly specialized group of apicomplexansthat spend part of their life cycle as parasites in human redblood cells, where they are the cause of malaria (Figure 27.9).In terms of the number of people affected, malaria is one ofthe world’s three most serious infectious diseases; it kills about880,000 people each year, out of 250 million infected individuals.On average, someone dies from malaria every 36 seconds—usually in sub-Saharan Africa, although malaria occurs in morethan 100 countries.Female mosquitoes of the genus Anopheles transmit Plasmodiumto humans. The parasite enters the human circulatory systemwhen an infected Anopheles mosquito penetrates the humanskin in search of blood. The parasites find their way to cells in2 After a mosquitoingests blood,male and femalegametocytesdevelop intogametes whichfuse.3 The resulting zygoteenters the mosquito’sgut wall and forms a cyst.4 The zygote gives riseto sporozoites thatinvade the salivary gland.5 The mosquito injectssporozoites into a human’sblood when it feeds.6 Sporozoites penetrateliver cells and developinto merozoites.7 Merozoites canreinfect the liver,producing newgenerations.8 They also invadered blood cells,grow and divide,and lyse the cells.9 Eventually, somemerozoites developinto male andfemale gametocytes.1 A feeding mosquitoingests the Plasmodiumgametocytes and thecycle begins again.(B)(A)170 μmEvents in human Events in mosquitoHumanliver cellRed blood cell FemalegameteMalegameteMosquito'sgut wallMosquito'sgut wallCystsMosquito'ssalivary glandSTART27.9 Life Cycle of the Malarial Parasite (A) Like many parasiticspecies, the apicomplexan Plasmodium falciparum has a complex lifecycle, part of which is spent in mosquitoes of the genus Anopheles andpart in humans. The sexual phase (gamete fusion) of this life cycle takesplace in the insect, and the zygote is the only diploid stage. (B) EncystedPlasmodium zygotes (artificially colored blue) cover the stomach wall of amosquito. Invasive sporozoites will hatch from the cysts and be transmittedto a human, in whom the parasite causes malaria.the liver and the lymphatic system, change their form, multiply,and reenter the bloodstream, attacking red blood cells.The parasites multiply inside the red blood cells, which thenburst, releasing new swarms of parasites. If another Anophelesbites the victim, the mosquito takes in Plasmodium cells alongwith blood. Some of the ingested cells are gametes that formedin human cells. The gametes unite in the mosquito, forming zygotesthat lodge in the mosquito’s gut, divide several times, andmove into its salivary glands, from which they can be passedon to another human host. Thus Plasmodium is an extracellularparasite in the mosquito vector and an intracellular parasite inthe human host.Plasmodium has proved to be a singularly difficult pathogento attack. The complex Plasmodium life cycle is best broken bythe removal of stagnant water, in which mosquitoes breed. Usinginsecticides to reduce the Anopheles population can be effective,but the benefits must be weighed against the ecological,economic, and health risks posed by the insecticides themselves.The genomes of one malarial parasite, Plasmodium falciparum,and one of the mosquitoes that transmits malaria, Anophelesgambiae, have been sequenced. These advances should lead toa better understanding of the biology of malaria and to the developmentof drugs, vaccines, or other means of dealing withthis pathogen or its insect vectors. The opening story of Chapter30 describes a novel weapon against malaria: mosquito nettingcontaining fungi that attack mosquitoes.Some kinetoplastids are human pathogens, such as the trypanosomesdiscussed at the opening of this chapter. Recall thattrypanosomes cause sleeping sickness, leishmaniasis, and Chagas’disease. The genomes of all three of the trypanosomes responsiblefor these diseases have now been sequenced.Some chromalveolates, including diatoms, dinoflagellates, andhaptophytes, reproduce in enormous numbers in warm andsomewhat stagnant waters. The result can be a “red tide,” socalled because of the reddish color of the sea that results fromthe dinoflagellates’ pigments (Figure 27.10A). During a dinoflagellatered tide, the concentration of cells may reach 60 millionper liter of ocean water. Some red tide species produce a potentnerve toxin that can kill tons of fish. The genus Gonyaulax producesa toxin that can accumulate in shellfish in amounts that,although not fatal to the shellfish, may kill a person who eatsthe shellfish.The haptophyte Emiliania huxleyi is one of the smallest unicellularprotists, but it can form tremendous blooms in oceanwaters. This coccolithophore (“sphere of stone”) has an armoredcoating that makes the surface water more reflective (Figure27.10B). This reflectivity cools the deeper layers of water belowthe bloom by reducing the amount of sunlight that penetrates.At the same time, it is possible that E. huxleyi contributes toglobal warming, because its metabolism increases the amountof dissolved CO2 in ocean waters.We continue to rely on the products ofancient marine protistsDiatoms are often lovely to look at, but their importance to usgoes far beyond aesthetics. They store oil as an energy reserveand to help them float at the correct depth in the ocean. Overmillions of years, diatoms have died and sunk to the ocean floor,ultimately undergoing chemical changes and becoming a majorsource of petroleum and natural gas, two of our most importantenergy supplies and political concerns.Other marine protists have also contributed to today’s world.Some foraminiferans, for example, secrete shells of calcium carbonate.After they reproduce (by mitosis and cytokinesis), thedaughter cells abandon the parent shell and make new shells oftheir own. The discarded shells of ancient foraminiferans makeup extensive limestone deposits in various parts of the world,forming a layer hundreds to thousands of meters deep over mil-27.3 | HOW DO PROTISTS AFFECT THE WORLD AROUND THEM? 571Emiliania huxleyi(A)(B)A coccolithophore’s scalesreflect sunlight.0.9 μm27.10 Chromalveolates Can Bloomin the Oceans (A) By reproducing inastronomical numbers, the dinoflagellateGonyaulax tamarensis can causetoxic red tides, such as this one alongthe coast of Baja California. (B) Massiveblooms of this coccolithophore, a tinyhaptophyte, can reduce the amount ofsunlight able to penetrate to the watersbelow.lions of square kilometers of ocean bottom. Foraminiferan shellsalso make up much of the sand of some beaches. Asingle gramof such sand may contain as many as 50,000 foraminiferan shellsand shell fragments.The shells of individual foraminiferans are easily preservedas fossils in marine sediments. The shells of foraminiferanspecies have distinctive shapes (Figure 27.11), and each geologicalperiod has a distinctive assemblage of foraminiferan species.For this reason, and because they are so abundant, the remainsof foraminiferans are especially valuable in classifying and datingsedimentary rocks, as well as in oil prospecting. Analysesof foraminiferan shells are also used in determining the globaltemperatures prevalent at the time of their existence.27.3 RECAPProtists have many effects, both positive and negative,on other organisms and on global ecosystems.Some species are primary producers, many are endosymbionts,and some are pathogens. They areamong the most important producers of petroleumproducts, and they are important for producing anddating sedimentary rock formations.• Can you describe the role of female mosquitoes of thegenus Anopheles in the transmission of malaria? Seepp. 570–571 and Figure 27.9• Do you understand the role of dinoflagellates in thevery different phenomena of coral bleaching and redtides? See pp. 569 and 571This section has presented a brief overview of the many waysprotists interact with one another and with other species. Nextwe examine their diverse forms of reproduction.27.4 How Do Protists Reproduce?Although most protists engage in both asexual and sexual reproduction,sexual reproduction has yet to be observed in somegroups. As we will see, some protists separate the acts of sexand reproduction, so that the two are not directly linked.Asexual reproductive processes found among the protistsinclude:• Binary fission: Equal splitting of one cell into two, with mitosisfollowed by cytokinesis• Multiple fission: Splitting of one cell into multiple (i.e., morethan two) cells• Budding: The outgrowth of a new cell from the surface of anold one• Spores: The formation of specialized cells that are capable ofdeveloping into new organismsSexual reproduction also occurs among the protists, and ittakes various forms. In some protists, as in animals, the gametesare the only haploid cells. In others, the zygote is the onlydiploid cell. In still others, both diploid and haploid cells undergomitosis, giving rise to alternation of generations (the alternationof multicellular diploid and haploid life stages).Some protists have reproduction without sex,and sex without reproductionMembers of the genus Paramecium are ciliates, a protist groupcharacterized by the possession of two types of nuclei in a singlecell—commonly one macronucleus and from one to severalmicronuclei. The micronuclei, which are typical eukaryotic nuclei,are essential for genetic recombination. The macronucleusis derived from micronuclei. Each macronucleus contains manycopies of the genetic information, packaged in units containingvery few genes each. The macronuclear DNA is transcribed andtranslated to regulate the life of the cell. In asexual reproduction,all of the nuclei are copied before the cell divides.Paramecia also have an elaborate sexual behavior called conjugation,in which two paramecia line up tightly against eachother and fuse in the oral groove region of the body. Nuclearmaterial is extensively reorganized and exchanged over the nextseveral hours (Figure 27.12). Each cell ends up with two haploidmicronuclei, one of its own and one from the other cell,which fuse to form a new diploid micronucleus. A newmacronucleus develops from the micronucleus through a seriesof dramatic chromosomal rearrangements. The exchange of nucleiis fully reciprocal—each of the two paramecia gives and receivesan equal amount of DNA. The two organisms then separateand go their own ways, each equipped with newcombinations of alleles.572 CHAPTER 27 | THE ORIGIN AND DIVERSIFICATION OF EUKARYOTES250 μm27.11 Foraminiferan Shells Are Building Blocks Some foraminiferanshells are made of calcium carbonate that has been mineralized on anorganic matrix external to the cell. Over millions of years, the remains offoraminiferans have formed limestone deposits and sandy beaches.Several species are shown in this micrograph.Conjugation in Paramecium is a sexual process of genetic recombination,but it is not a reproductive process. Two cells beginthe process and two cells are there at the end, so no new cellsare created. As a rule, each asexual clone of paramecia must periodicallyconjugate. Experiments have shown that if somespecies are not permitted to conjugate, the clones can livethrough no more than approximately 350 cell divisions beforethey die out.Some protist life cycles feature alternationof generationsAlternation of generations is a type of life cycle found in manymulticellular protists, land plants, and some fungi. The term describesa life cycle in which a multicellular, diploid, spore-producingorganism gives rise to a multicellular, haploid, gameteproducingorganism. When two haploid gametes fuse(fertilization, or syngamy), a diploid organism is formed (Figure27.13). The haploid organism, the diploid organism, or bothmay also reproduce asexually.The two alternating generations (spore-producing and gamete-producing) differ genetically (one has diploid cells, theother haploid cells), but they may or may not differ morphologically.In heteromorphic alternation of generations, the two generationsdiffer morphologically; in isomorphic alternation ofgenerations, they do not, despite their genetic difference.Examples of both heteromorphic and isomorphic alternationof generations are found in both brown algae and green algae.As we discuss the life cycles of land plants and multicellularphotosynthetic protists, we will use the terms sporophyte(“spore plant”) and gametophyte (“gamete plant”) to refer tothe multicellular diploid and haploid generations, respectively.Gametes are not produced by meiosis because the gametophytegeneration is already haploid. Instead, specialized cells ofthe diploid sporophyte, called sporocytes, divide meiotically toproduce four haploid spores. The spores may eventually germinateand divide mitotically to produce multicellular haploid gametophytes,which produce gametes by mitosis and cytokinesis.Gametes, unlike spores, can produce new organisms only byfusing with other gametes. The fusion of two gametes producesa diploid zygote, which then undergoes mitotic divisions to producea diploid organism: the sporophyte generation. The sporocytesof the sporophyte generation then undergo meiosis andproduce haploid spores, starting the cycle anew.27.4 | HOW DO PROTISTS REPRODUCE? 5733 The paramecia donatemicronuclei to eachother. The macronucleidisintegrate.The micronuclei ineach cell—eachgeneticallydifferent—fuse.Three of the four haploid 4micronuclei disintegrate;the remaining micronucleusundergoes mitosis.Two paramecia conjugate; 2all but one micronucleus ineach cell disintegrate. Theremaining micronucleusundergoes meiosis.1 The new diploid micronucleidivide mitotically, eventuallygiving rise to a macronucleusand the appropriate numberof micronuclei.5MacronucleusMicronucleus27.12 Paramecia Achieve Genetic Recombination by ConjugatingThe exchange of micronuclei by two conjugating Paramecium individualsresults in genetic recombination. After conjugation, the cells separate andcontinue their lives as two individuals.Gametes fuse toform a zygote.Haploid gametesare produced bymitosis.21The zygote developsinto a diploidsporophyte.53The sporophyteproduces haploidspores by meiosis.4Spores germinateand divide to formthe haploidgametophyte.STARTDIPLOID (2n)HAPLOID (n)Meiosis FertilizationMulticellularhaploidorganism (n)(gametophyte)Multicellulardiploidorganism (2n)(sporophyte)Mitosis MitosisMitosis27.13 Alternation of Generations In many multicellular protists, landplants, and some fungi, a multicellular diploid generation that producesspores alternates with a multicellular haploid generation that producesgametes.Two gametes lookthe same–Ulvais isogamous.The diploid sporophytes andhaploid gametophytes lookalike—the life cycle is isomorphic.DIPLOID (2n)HAPLOID (n)Haploid (n)gametesFusinggametesHaploidsporesDiploid (2n)zygoteDiploidsporophyteHaploidgametophytesMeiosisMitosisMitosisMitosisFertilizationThe zygote is theonly diploid cellin the haplonticlife cycle.Some gametophytecells can dividemitotically to formzoospores.FertilizationMeiosisZoospores (n)New gametophyte (n)Newgametophyte (n)AsexualreproductionZoospores (n)DIPLOID (2n)HAPLOID (n)Haploid (n)gametesZygote (2n)Chlorophytes provide examplesof several life cyclesThe major features of protist life cycles canall be seen in the chlorophytes. Let’s beginwith the common sea lettuce, Ulva lactuca.Like many chlorophytes, sea lettuce exhibitsalternation of generations. The diploid sporophyteof this common multicellular seashoreorganism is a broad sheet only two cells thick.Some of its cells (sporocytes) differentiate and undergomeiosis and cytokinesis, producing motilehaploid spores. These zoospores swim away, and somefind a suitable place to settle. The zoospores begin to dividemitotically, producing a thin filament that developsinto a broad sheet only two cells thick. The gametophyte thusproduced looks just like the sporophyte—in other words, Ulvalactuca has an isomorphic life cycle (Figure 27.14).In most species of Ulva, the gametes are structurally of justa single type, making those species isogamous—having gametesof identical appearance. Other chlorophytes, includingsome other species of Ulva, are anisogamous—they have femalegametes that are distinctly larger than the male gametes.The life cycles of many other chlorophytes do not feature alternationof generations. Some chlorophytes have a haplonticlife cycle, in which a multicellular haploid individual producesgametes that fuse to form a zygote. The zygote functions directlyas a sporocyte, undergoing meiosis to produce spores,which in turn produce a new haploid individual. In the entirehaplontic life cycle, only one cell—the zygote—is diploid. Thefilamentous organisms of the genus Ulothrix are examples ofhaplontic chlorophytes (Figure 27.15).Some chlorophytes have a diplontic life cycle like that of manyanimals. In a diplontic life cycle, meiosis of diploid sporocytesproduces haploid gametes directly; the gametes fuse, and the resultingdiploid zygote divides mitotically toform a new multicellular diploid sporophyte. Insuch organisms, all cells except the gametes arediploid. Between these two extremes are chlorophytesin which the gametophyte and sporo-57427.14 An Isomorphic Life Cycle The sexual lifecycle of sea lettuce (Ulva lactuca) is an example of isomorphicalternation of generations.27.15 A Haplontic Life Cycle In the life cycle of Ulothrix, a filamentous,multicellular haploid gametophyte generation alternates with adiploid sporophyte generation consisting of a single cell (the zygote).Ulothrix gametophytes can also reproduce asexually.GO TO Web Activity 27.2 • A Haplontic Life CycleyourBioPortal.comGO TO Web Activity 27.1 • An IsomorphicLife CycleyourBioPortal.comphyte generations are both multicellular, but one generation(usually the sporophyte) is much larger and more prominentthan the other.The life cycles of some protists require morethan one host speciesThe trypanosome diseases discussed at the opening of this chaptershare a striking feature with malaria: in each case, the eukaryotepathogen completes part of its life cycle in the humanhost and part in an insect (see Figure 27.9). Many other protistlife cycles require the participation of two different host species.What might be the advantage of a life cycle with two hosts?This remains an intriguing question. It may be relevant that inthe human pathogens described above, the sexual phase of theorganism’s life cycle—the fusion of gametes into a zygote—takes place in the insect host. Could this imply that the humanhost is nothing but a copying machine for the products of sexualreproduction in the insect host?27.4 RECAPProtists reproduce both asexually and sexually, althoughsex may occur independently of reproductionin some species. Some multicellular protists exhibitalternation of generations, alternating betweenmulticellular haploid and diploid life stages. Parasiticprotists may have complex life cycles in which theyinfect more than one host species.• Why is conjugation between paramecia considered asexual process but not a reproductive process? Seep. 573 and Figure 27.12• Can you explain the difference between the diplontichuman life cycle and a life cycle with alternation ofgenerations? See pp. 573–574The success of protists’ diverse adaptations for nutrition, locomotion,and reproduction is evident from the abundance anddiversity of eukaryotes living today. In the next section we surveythat diversity.What Are the Evolutionary 27.5 Relationships among Eukaryotes?Biologists used to classify the various groups of protists largelyon the basis of life history and reproductive features. However,scientists using electron microscopy and gene sequencing haverevealed many new patterns of evolutionary relatedness. Analysesof slowly evolving gene sequences are making it possible toexplore evolutionary relationships among eukaryotes in evergreater detail and with greater confidence. Today we recognizegreat diversity among the many distantly related protist clades,whose members have explored a great variety of lifestyles.Most eukaryotes can be classified in one of five major hypothesizedclades: chromalveolates, Plantae, excavates, rhizaria,or unikonts (see Figure 27.1 and Table 27.1). As we will see,some of these groups consist of organisms with enormously diversebody forms and nutritional lifestyles. The phylogeneticrelationships among the major groups of eukaryotes comprisean active area of study, and new data from genomes are rapidlychanging our understanding of the evolution of these species.These relationships also help us understand how the major multicellulareukaryotic groups (brown algae, plants, fungi, and animals)originated from the microbial eukaryotes.CHROMALVEOLATESWe begin our tour of protist groups withthe chromalveolates, a group of photosyntheticorganisms, usuallywith cellulose in their cell walls,that includes the haptophytes,alveolates and stramenopiles. Themonophyly of the chromalveolatesis not yet well established.The haptophytes are unicellularorganisms with flagella; many are“armored” with elaborate scales (see Figure 27.10B). The alveolatesand stramenopiles are large and diverse clades that weexplore here in greater detail.Alveolates have sacs under their plasma membraneThe synapomorphy that characterizes the alveolate clade isthe possession of sacs called alveoli just below their plasmamembranes. The alveoli may play a role in supporting the cellsurface. These organisms are all unicellular, but they are diversein body form. The alveolate groups we consider in detail hereare the dinoflagellates, apicomplexans, and ciliates.DINOFLAGELLATES The dinoflagellates are of great ecological,evolutionary, and morphological interest. Most dinoflagellatesare marine, and they are important primary photosyntheticproducers of organic matter in the oceans. A distinctive mixtureof photosynthetic and accessory pigments gives dinoflagellatechloroplasts a golden brown color. (Section 27.1describes the endosymbiotic events that gave rise to dinoflagellateswith different numbers of membranes surroundingtheir chloroplasts.) Some are photosynthetic endosymbiontsliving in the cells of other organisms, including invertebrateanimals (such as corals) and other marine protists (see Figure27.8). Some are nonphotosynthetic and live as parasites withinother marine organisms.Dinoflagellates have a distinctive appearance. They are unicellularand generally have two flagella, one in an equatorialgroove around the cell, the other starting near the same pointas the first and passing down a longitudinal groove before extendinginto the surrounding medium (Figure 27.16). Some dinoflagellatescan take on different forms, including amoeboidones, depending on environmental conditions. It has beenclaimed that the dinoflagellate Pfiesteria piscicida can occur in atleast two dozen distinct forms, although this claim is highly con-27.5 | WHAT ARE THE EVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIPS AMONG EUKARYOTES? 575DinoflagellatesApicomplexansCiliatesBrown algaeDiatomsOomycetesHaptophytesAlveolates Stramenopilestroversial. In any case, this remarkable dinoflagellate is harmfulto fish and can, when present in great numbers, both stunand feed on them.APICOMPLEXANS The exclusively parasitic apicomplexans derivetheir name from the apical complex, a mass of organelles containedin the apical end (the tip) of a cell. These organelles helpthe apicomplexan invade its host’s tissues. For example, the apicalcomplex enables the merozoites and sporozoites of Plasmodium,the causative agent of malaria, to enter their target cells inthe human body.Like many obligate parasites, apicomplexans have elaboratelife cycles featuring asexual and sexual reproduction by a seriesof very dissimilar life stages. Often these stages are associatedwith two different types of host organisms, as is the case withPlasmodium. The apicomplexan Toxoplasma alternates betweencats and rats to complete its life cycle. Arat infected with Toxoplasmaloses its fear of cats, making it more likely to be eaten by,and thus transfer the parasite to, a cat.Apicomplexans lack contractile vacuoles. They contain amuch-reduced chloroplast that no longer has a photosyntheticfunction (derived, like all chromalveolate chloroplasts, from secondaryendosymbiosis of a red alga). This chloroplast might bea target for a future antimalarial drug.CILIATES The ciliates are so named because they characteristicallyhave numerous hairlike cilia shorter than, but otherwiseidentical to, eukaryotic flagella. Thisgroup is noteworthy for its diversityand ecological importance (Figure27.17). Almost all ciliates are heterotrophic(although a few containphotosynthetic endosymbionts), andthey are much more complex in bodyform than are most other unicellulareukaryotes. The definitive characteristicof ciliates is the possession of twotypes of nuclei (as seen in the parameciain Figure 27.12).Paramecium, a frequently studiedciliate genus, exemplifies the complexstructure and behavior of ciliates (Figure27.18). The slipper-shaped cell iscovered by an elaborate pellicle, astructure composed principally of anouter membrane and an inner layer ofclosely packed, membrane-enclosedsacs (the alveoli) that surround thebases of the cilia. Defensive organelles576 CHAPTER 27 | THE ORIGIN AND DIVERSIFICATION OF EUKARYOTESPeridinium sp.15 μmLongitudinalgrooveEquatorial groove27.16 A Dinoflagellate The dinoflagellates are an important group ofalveolates. Most of them are photosynthetic and are a crucial component ofthe world’s phytoplankton. They are often endosymbiotic (see Figure 27.8)and can be the agents of deadly ocean “blooms” (see Figure 27.10A).(C) Paracineta sp. Tentacles20 μm(A) Paramecium sp.(B) Vorticella sp.(D) Euplotes sp.Cilia 10 μm10 μm 25 μmCiliaOral groove Rows offused cilia27.17 Diversity among the Ciliates (A) A free-swimmingorganism, this paramecium belongs to a ciliate group whosemembers have many cilia of uniform length. (B) Members of thisgroup have cilia on their mouthparts. (C) In this group, cilia arereplaced by tentacles as development proceeds. (D) Some of thecilia in Euplotes are grouped into flat sheets that sweep foodparticles into the oral groove.Micronuclei function ingenetic recombination.The macronucleus controlsthe cell’s activities.ContractilevacuoleCiliaOral grooveFibrilsAlveolusCiliumAnal poreFoodvacuoleAlveoliTrichocystPelliclecalled trichocysts are also present in the pellicle. In response toa threat, a microscopic explosion expels the trichocysts in a fewmilliseconds, and they emerge as sharp darts, driven forwardat the tip of a long, expanding filament.The cilia provide a form of locomotion that is generally moreprecise than locomotion by flagella or pseudopods. Aparameciumcan coordinate the beating of its cilia to propel itself eitherforward or backward in a spiraling manner. It can also backoff swiftly when it encounters a barrier or a negative stimulus.The coordination of ciliary beating is probably the result of adifferential distribution of ion channels in the plasma membranenear the two ends of the cell.Stramenopiles have two unequal flagella, one with hairsAmorphological synapomorphy shared by most stramenopilesis the possession of rows of tubular hairs on the longer of theirtwo flagella. Some stramenopiles lack flagella, but they are descendedfrom ancestors that possessed flagella. The stramenopilesinclude the diatoms and the brown algae, whichare photosynthetic, and the oomycetes and slime nets, whichare not. Most golden algae are photosynthetic, but nearly all ofthem become heterotrophic when light intensity is limited orwhen there is a plentiful food supply; some even feed on diatomsor bacteria. The slime nets (not to be confused with slimemolds) are unicellular organisms that produce networks of filamentsalong which the cells move.DIATOMS All of the diatoms are unicellular, althoughsome species associate in filaments. Many have sufficientcarotenoids in their chloroplasts to give them ayellow or brownish color. All make carbohydrates andoils as photosynthetic storage products. Diatoms lackflagella except in male gametes.Architectural magnificence on a microscopic scale isthe hallmark of the diatoms. As mentioned earlier, almostall diatoms deposit silica (hydrated silicon dioxide)in their cell walls. The cell wall is constructed in twopieces, with the top overlapping the bottom like thetop and bottom of a petri plate. The silica-impregnatedwalls have intricate patterns unique to each species(Figure 27.19). Despite their remarkable morphologicaldiversity, all diatoms are symmetrical—either bilaterally (with “right” and “left” halves) or radially(with the type of symmetry possessed by a circle).Diatoms reproduce both sexually and asexually. Asexual reproductionis by binary fission and is somewhat constrainedby the stiff, silica-containing cell wall. Both the top and the bottomof the “petri plate” become tops of new “plates” withoutchanging appreciably in size; as a result, the new cell madefrom the former bottom is smaller than the parent cell. If thisprocess continued indefinitely, one cell line would simply vanish,but sexual reproduction largely solves this potential problem.Gametes are formed, shed their cell walls, and fuse. Theresulting zygote then increases substantially in size before anew cell wall is laid down.27.5 | WHAT ARE THE EVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIPS AMONG EUKARYOTES? 57727.19 Diatom Diversity This brightfield micrograph of diatoms showsa variety of species-specific forms. Diatoms are photosynthesizers anddominant components of the world’s phytoplankton.Diatoms displayeither radial (circular)symmetry......or bilateral(left-right)symmetry.25 μmGO TO Web Activity 27.3 • Anatomy of ParameciumyourBioPortal.com27.18 Anatomy of Paramecium This diagram shows the complexstructure of a typical paramecium, detailing the pellicle (outer covering)with its trichocysts and alveoli.Diatoms are found in all the oceans and are frequently presentin great numbers, making them major photosynthetic producersin coastal waters. Diatoms are also common in fresh waterand even occur on the wet surfaces of terrestrial mosses.They are also the dominant organisms in the dense “blooms”of plankton that occasionally appear in the open ocean.Because the silica-containing walls of dead diatom cells resistdecomposition, certain sedimentary rocks are composed almostentirely of diatom skeletons that sank to the seafloor overtime. Diatomaceous earth, which is obtained from such rocks,has many industrial uses, such as insulation, filtration, andmetal polishing. It has also been used as an “Earth-friendly” insecticidethat clogs the tracheae (breathing structures) of insects.BROWN ALGAE The brown algae obtain their namesake colorfrom the carotenoid fucoxanthin, which is abundant in theirchloroplasts. The combination of this yellow-orange pigmentwith the green of chlorophylls a and c yields a brownish tinge.All brown algae are multicellular, and some are extremely large.Giant kelps, such as those of the genus Macrocystis, may be upto 60 meters long.The brown algae are almost exclusively marine.They are composed either of branched filaments(Figure 27.20A,B) or of leaflike growths(Figure 27.20D). Some float in the open ocean;the most famous example is the genus Sargassum,which forms dense mats in the Sargasso Seain the mid-Atlantic. Most brown algae, however,are attached to rocks near the shore. Afew thriveonly where they are regularly exposed to heavysurf; a notable example is the sea palm Postelsiapalmaeformis of the Pacific coast. All of the attachedforms develop a specialized structure,called a holdfast, that literally glues them to therocks (Figure 27.20C). The “glue” of the holdfastis alginic acid, a gummy polymer of sugar acidsfound in the walls of many brown algal cells. Inaddition to its function in holdfasts, alginic acidcements algal cells and filaments together, andis harvested and used by humans as an emulsifierin ice cream, cosmetics, and other products.Some brown algae differentiate extensivelyinto specialized organs. Some, like the sea palm,have stemlike stalks and leaflike blades. Somedevelop gas-filled cavities or bladders that serveas floats. In addition to organ differentiation, thelarger brown algae also exhibit considerable tissuedifferentiation. Most of the giant kelps have photosyntheticfilaments only in the outermost regions of their stalks andblades. Within the stalks and blades lie filaments of tubular cellsthat closely resemble the nutrient-conducting tissue of landplants. Called trumpet cells because they have flared ends, thesetubes rapidly conduct the products of photosynthesis throughthe body of the organism.OOMYCETES A nonphotosynthetic stramenopile group calledthe oomycetes consists in large part of the water molds andtheir terrestrial relatives, such as the downy mildews. Watermolds are filamentous and stationary, and they are absorptiveheterotrophs—that is, they secrete enzymes that digest large foodmolecules into smaller molecules that the water mold can absorb.If you have seen a whitish, cottony mold growing on deadfish or dead insects in water, it was probably a water mold ofthe common genus Saprolegnia (Figure 27.21).Don’t be misled by the “mycete” in the name of this group.That term means “fungus,” and it is there because these organismswere once classified as fungi. However, we now knowthat the oomycetes are more distantly related to the fungi than578 CHAPTER 27 | THE ORIGIN AND DIVERSIFICATION OF EUKARYOTES(A) Cystoseira usneoides (B) Ectocarpus sp.(C) Postelsia palmaeformis60 μm(D) Postelsia palmaeformis27.20 Brown Algae (A) This seaweed illustrates thefilamentous growth form of the brown algae. (B)Filaments of the microscopic brown alga Ectocarpusseen through a light microscope. (C) Sea palms andmany other brown algal species are “glued” to the substratumby tough, branched structures called holdfasts.(D) Sea palms exemplify the leaflike form of brownalgae. Holdfasts allow them to withstand the poundingof the surf.are many other eukaryote groups, including ourselves (see Figure27.1), and the similarity of oomycetes to fungi is only superficial.For example, the cell walls of oomycetes are typicallymade of cellulose, whereas those of fungi are made of chitin.Some oomycetes are coenocytes, which means they havemany nuclei enclosed in a single plasma membrane. Their filamentshave no cross-walls to separate the many nuclei into discretecells. Their cytoplasm is continuous throughout the bodyof the organism, and there is no single structural unit with a singlenucleus, except in certain reproductive stages. Adistinguishingfeature of the oomycetes is their flagellated reproductivecells. Oomycetes are diploid throughoutmost of their life cycle.The water molds, such as Saprolegnia, areall aquatic and saprobic—meaning theyfeed on dead organic matter. Some otheroomycetes are terrestrial. Although most ofthe terrestrial oomycetes are harmless or helpful decomposersof dead matter, a few are serious plant parasites that attack cropssuch as avocados, grapes, and potatoes.Although their presumed chromalveolate ancestors had chloroplastsand were photosynthetic, the oomycetes lack chloroplasts.PLANTAEPlantae contains mostly photosyntheticspecies and consists of severalmajor clades, including glaucophytes,red algae, chlorophytes,charophytes, and the land plants, all ofwhich probably trace their chloroplastsback to a single incidence of endosymbiosis(see Section 27.1). It is for this reason that the smallclade known as the glaucophytes, unicellular organisms thatlive in fresh water, is of particular interest.The glaucophytes were likely the first group to diverge afterthe primary endosymbiosis event. Their chloroplast is uniquein containing a small amount of peptidoglycan between its innerand outer membranes—the same arrangement as that foundin cyanobacteria (see Figure 27.3A). The presence of peptidoglycan,the characteristic cell wall component of bacteria, suggeststhat this feature has been retained in glaucophytes but lostin the other Plantae groups.Red algae have a distinctive accessoryphotosynthetic pigmentAlmost all red algae are multicellular (Figure 27.22). Their characteristiccolor is a result of the accessory photosynthetic pigmentphycoerythrin, which is foundin relatively large amounts in thechloroplasts of many species. In additionto phycoerythrin, red algaecontain phycocyanin, carotenoids,and chlorophyll a.The red algae include species thatgrow in the shallowest tide pools aswell as the photosynthesizers founddeepest in the ocean (as deep as 260meters if nutrient conditions are rightand the water is clear enough to permitlight to penetrate). Very few red algaeinhabit fresh water. Most grow attachedto a substratum by a holdfast.In a sense, the red algae are misnamed.They have the capacity tochange the relative amounts of their27.5 | WHAT ARE THE EVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIPS AMONG EUKARYOTES? 579Saprolegnia sp.27.21 An Oomycete The filaments of a water mold radiate from thecarcass of an insect.GlaucophytesRed algaeChlorophytesLand plantsCharophytes(A) Ceramium sp.1.5 mm(B) Calliarthron tuberculatum7.5 mm27.22 Red Algae (A) Differential contrastlight microscopy reveals the rich redcolor of the pigment phycoerythrin.(B) Coralline red alga, named for its corallikeappearance.580 CHAPTER 27 | THE ORIGIN AND DIVERSIFICATION OF EUKARYOTESvarious photosynthetic pigments depending on the light conditionswhere they are growing. Thus the leaflike Chondrus crispus,a common North Atlantic red alga, may appear bright greenwhen it is growing at or near the surface of the water and deepred when growing at greater depths. The ratio of pigments presentdepends to a remarkable degree on the intensity of the lightthat reaches the alga. In deep water, where the light is dimmest,the alga accumulates large amounts of phycoerythrin. The algaein deep water have as much chlorophyll as the green onesnear the surface, but the accumulated phycoerythrin makesthem look red.In addition to being the only photosynthetic eukaryotes withphycoerythrin among their pigments, the red algae have twoother distinctive characteristics:• They store the products of photosynthesis in the form offloridean starch, which is composed of very small, branchedchains of approximately 15 glucose monomers.• They produce no motile, flagellated cells at any stage of theirlife cycle. The male gametes lack cell walls and are slightlyamoeboid; the female gametes are completely immobile.Some red algal species enhance the formation of coral reefs(see Figure 27.22B). Like coral animals, they possess the biochemicalmachinery for secreting calcium carbonate, which theydeposit both in and around their cell walls. After the deaths ofcorals and algae, the calcium carbonate persists, sometimesforming substantial rocky masses.Some red algae produce large amounts of mucilaginous polysaccharidesubstances, which contain the sugar galactose witha sulfate group attached. This material readily forms solid gelsand is the source of agar, a substance widely used in the laboratoryfor making a solid aqueous medium on which tissue culturesand many microorganisms can be grown.The distinctive chloroplasts of the photosynthetic chromalveolatesare derived by secondary endosymbiosis of a red alga,as discussed in Section 27.1.Chlorophytes, charophytes, and land plantscontain chlorophylls a and bOne major clade of “green algae” is the chlorophytes. A sistergroup to the chlorophytes contains another green algal clade—the charophytes, or Charales—along with the land plants (seeSection 28.1). The green algae share several characters that distinguishthem from other protists: like the land plants, they containchlorophylls a and b, and their reserve of photosyntheticproducts is stored as starch in chloroplasts. Through secondaryendosymbiosis, a chlorophyte became the chloroplast of theeuglenids.There are more than 17,000 species of chlorophytes. Most areaquatic—some are marine, though more are freshwater forms—but others are terrestrial, living in moist environments. Thechlorophytes range in size from microscopic unicellular formsto multicellular forms many centimeters long.The chlorophytes display an incredible variety of shapes andbody forms. Chlamydomonas is an example of the simplest type:unicellular and flagellated. Surprisingly large and well-formedcolonies of cells are found in such freshwater groups as the genusVolvox (Figure 27.23A). The cells in these colonies are not differentiatedinto specialized tissues and organs, as in land plantsand animals, but the colonies show vividly how the preliminarystep of this great evolutionary innovation might have been taken.In Volvox, the origins of cell specialization can be seen in certaincells in the colony that are specialized for reproduction.While Volvox is colonial and spherical, Oedogonium is multicellularand filamentous, and each of its cells has only onenucleus. Cladophora is multicellular, but each cell is multinucleate.Bryopsis is tubular and coenocytic, forming cross-wallsonly when reproductive structures form. Acetabularia is a singlegiant, uninucleate cell a few centimeters in length that becomesmultinucleate only at the end of its reproductive stage. Ulva lactucais a thin, membranous sheet a few centimeters across; itsdistinctive appearance justifies its common name of sea lettuce(Figure 27.23B).As mentioned above, the chlorophytes are the largest cladeof green algae, but there are other green algal clades as well.Those clades are branches of a clade that also includes the landplants, which are described in the next chapter.(A) Volvox sp.Parent colony Somatic cells(B) Ulva lactucaReproductive cells120 μm3 cm27.23 Chlorophytes (A) Volvox colonies are precisely spaced arrangementsof cells. Specialized reproductive cells produce daughter colonies,which will eventually release new individuals. (B) Sea lettuce grows inocean tidewaters.EXCAVATESExcavates include a number of diverseclades, several of which lack mitochondria.This absence of mitochondriaonce led to the view that these groupsmight represent early diverging groupsof eukaryotes that diversified before theevolution of mitochondria. However, the absenceof mitochondria seems to be a derived condition,judging in part from the presence of nuclear genes normallyassociated with mitochondria. Ancestors of theseorganisms probably possessed mitochondria that were lost orreduced in the course of evolution. The existence of such organismstoday shows that eukaryotic life is feasible without mitochondria,and for that reason, these groups are the focus ofmuch attention.Diplomonads and parabasalids are excavatesthat lack mitochondriaThe diplomonads and parabasalids, all of which are unicellular,are distinctive in their lack of mitochondria. Giardia lamblia, adiplomonad, is a familiar parasite that contaminates water suppliesand causes the intestinal disease giardiasis (Figure 27.24A).This tiny organism contains two nuclei bounded by nuclear envelopes,and it has a cytoskeleton and multiple flagella.Trichomonas vaginalis is a parabasalid responsible for a sexuallytransmitted disease in humans (Figure 27.24B). Infectionof the male urethra, where it may occur without symptoms, isless common than infection of the vagina. In addition to flagellaand a cytoskeleton, the parabasalids have undulating membranesthat also contribute to the cell’s locomotion.Heteroloboseans alternate between amoeboidforms and forms with flagellaThe amoeboid body form appears in several protist groups—including the loboseans and heteroloboseans—that are onlydistantly related to one another. These groups belong, respectively,to the unikonts and excavates. Amoebas of the free-livingheterolobosean genus Naegleria, some of which can enterhumans and cause a fatal disease of the nervous system, usuallyhave a two-stage life cycle, in which one stage has amoeboidcells and the other flagellated cells.Euglenids and kinetoplastids have distinctivemitochondria and flagellaThe euglenids and kinetoplastids, both of which are excavates,together constitute a clade of unicellular organisms with flagella.Their mitochondria contain distinctive, disc-shaped cristae, andtheir flagella contain a crystalline rod not found in other organisms.They reproduce primarily asexually by binary fission.EUGLENIDS The euglenids possess flagella arising from a pocketat the anterior end of the cell. Spiraling strips of proteins undertheir plasma membranes control the cell’s shape. Some membersof the group are photosynthetic. Euglenids used to be claimedby the zoologists as animals and by the botanists as plants.Figure 27.25 depicts a cell of the genus Euglena. Like mostother euglenids, this common freshwater organism has a complexcell structure. It propels itself through the water with27.5 | WHAT ARE THE EVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIPS AMONG EUKARYOTES? 581DiplomonadsParabasalidsHeteroloboseansEuglenidsKinetoplastids(A) Giardia sp.(B) Trichomonas vaginalis2.5 μm2.5 μm27.24 Some Excavate Groups Lack Mitochondria (A) Giardia, adiplomonad, has flagella and two nuclei. (B) Trichomonas, a parabasalid,has flagella and undulating membranes. Neither of these organisms possessesmitochondria.Photosynthetic chloroplasts are prominentfeatures in a typical Euglena cell.Flagella NucleusPigmentshieldPhotoreceptorContractilevacuoleStored polysaccharidesfrom photosynthesis27.25 A Photosynthetic Euglenid Several Euglena species possessflagella. In this species, the second flagellum is rudimentary.the longer of its two flagella, which may also serve as an anchorto hold the organism in place. The second flagellum is oftenrudimentary.Euglenids have diverse nutritional requirements. Manyspecies are always heterotrophic. Other species are fully autotrophicin sunlight, using chloroplasts to synthesize organiccompounds through photosynthesis. The chloroplasts of euglenidsare surrounded by three membranes as a result of secondaryendosymbiosis (see Figure 27.3B). When kept in the dark,these euglenids lose their photosynthetic pigment and begin tofeed exclusively on dissolved organic material in the wateraround them. Such a “bleached” Euglena resynthesizes its photosyntheticpigment when it is returned to the light and becomesautotrophic again. But Euglena cells treated with certain antibioticsor mutagens lose their photosynthetic pigment completely;neither they nor their descendants are ever autotrophs again.However, those descendants function well as heterotrophs.KINETOPLASTIDS The kinetoplastids are unicellular parasiteswith two flagella and a single, large mitochondrion. That mitochondrioncontains a kinetoplast—a unique structure housingmultiple circular DNA molecules and associated proteins. Someof these DNA molecules encode “guides” that edit messengerRNA in the mitochondrion.The trypanosomes described at the opening of this chapterare kinetoplastids. They are able to change their cell surfacerecognition molecules frequently, which allows them to evadeour best attempts to kill them and eradicate the diseases theycause (Table 27.2).RHIZARIAThe primary groups of Rhizaria are unicellularaquatic eukaryotes. Foraminiferans, radiolarians,and cercozoans typically havelong, thin pseudopodia that contrast withthe broader, lobelike pseudopodia of the familiaramoebas. These groups have contributed to ocean sediments,some of which have become terrestrial features in the courseof geological history.The cercozoans are a diverse group, with many forms andhabitats. Some are amoeboid, while others have flagella. Someare aquatic; others live in soil. One group of cercozoans possesseschloroplasts derived from a green alga by secondaryendosymbiosis—and that chloroplast contains a trace of thegreen alga’s nucleus.Foraminiferans have created vast limestone depositsSome foraminiferans secrete external shells of calcium carbonate(see Figure 27.11), which over time have accumulated toproduce much of the world’s limestone. Some foraminiferanslive as plankton; others live on the seafloor. Living foraminiferanshave been found at the deepest point in the world’soceans—10,896 meters down in the Challenger Deep, in thewestern Pacific. At that depth, however, they cannot secrete anormal shell because the surrounding water is too poor in calciumcarbonate.Long, threadlike, branched pseudopods reach out throughnumerous microscopic apertures in the shell and interconnectto create a sticky, reticulated net, which planktonic foraminiferause to catch smaller plankton. The pseudopods provide locomotionin some species.Radiolarians have thin, stiff pseudopodsThe radiolarians are recognizable by their thin, stiff pseudopods,which are reinforced by microtubules. These pseudopods:• greatly increase the surface area of the cell for exchange ofmaterials with the environment• help the cell float in its marine environmentFound exclusively in marine environments, radiolarians are immediatelyrecognizable by their distinctive radial symmetry (seeFigure 27.8B). Almost all radiolarian species secrete glassy endoskeletons(internal skeletons). Acentral capsule lies within thecytoplasm. The skeletons of the different species are as variedas snowflakes, and many have elaborate geometric designs (Figure27.26). Afew radiolarians are among the largest of the unicellulareukaryotes, measuring several millimeters across.582 CHAPTER 27 | THE ORIGIN AND DIVERSIFICATION OF EUKARYOTESTABLE 27.2A Comparison of Three Kinetoplastid TrypanosomesTrypanosoma brucei Trypanosoma cruzi Leishmania majorHuman disease Sleeping sickness Chagas’ disease LeishmaniasisInsect vector Tsetse fly Assassin bug Sand flyVaccine or effective cure None None NoneStrategy for survival Changes surface recognition Causes changes in surface Reduces effectiveness ofmolecules frequently recognition molecules on host cell macrophage hostsSite in human body Bloodstream; attacks nerve tissue Enters cells, especially muscle cells Enters cells, primarily macrophagesin final stagesApproximate number 50,000 43,000 60,000of deaths per yearCercozoansForaminiferansRadiolariansUNIKONTSWe now consider the unikonts, alarge clade that may be closeto the root of the eukaryotetree. The name unikont derivesfrom the Greek for“single cone,” and in these eukaryotes,the flagella, if present,are single. Unikonts consist of twomajor groups, the opisthokonts (which includeanimals and fungi) and the amoebozoans (see Figure 27.1).Amorphological synapomorphy of the opisthokonts is thattheir flagellum, if present, is posterior, as in animal sperm. Theflagella of all other eukaryotes are anterior. In addition to theanimals and fungi, opisthokonts also include the choanoflagellates.Fungi and animals are discussed in Chapters 30–33. Thechoanoflagellates, or collar flagellates, are sister to the animals,and the animal–choanoflagellate clade is sister to the fungi.Some choanoflagellates are colonial (Figure 27.27A). Theybear a striking resemblance to the most characteristic type of cellfound in the sponges (compare Figure 27.27B with Figure 31.7).Amoebozoans use lobe-shaped pseudopodsfor locomotionThe lobe-shaped pseudopods used by amoebozoans are a hallmarkof the amoeboid body plan. The amoebozoan pseudopoddiffers in form and function from the slender pseudopods ofrhizaria. We consider three amoebozoan groups here: the loboseansand two clades of slime molds.LOBOSEANS Alobosean, such as the Peloxima carolinensis shownin Figure 27.4, consists of a single cell. Unlike the cells of theslime molds, loboseans live independently of one another anddo not aggregate. Alobosean feeds on small organisms and particlesof organic matter by phagocytosis, engulfing them withits pseudopods. Many loboseans are adapted for life on the bottomsof lakes, ponds, and other bodies of water. Their creepinglocomotion and their manner of engulfing food particlesfit them for life close to a relatively rich supply of sedentary organismsor organic particles. Most loboseans exist as predators,parasites, or scavengers.Some loboseans are shelled, living in casings of sand grainsglued together (see Figure 27.7A). Others have shells secretedby the organism itself.SLIME MOLDS The two major groups of slime molds share onlygeneral characteristics. All are motile, all ingest particulate foodby endocytosis, and all form spores on erect structures calledfruiting bodies. They undergo striking changes in organizationduring their life cycles, and one stage consists of isolated cellsthat take up food particles by endocytosis. Some slime moldsmay cover areas of 1 meter or more in diameter while in theirless aggregated stage. Such a large slime mold may weigh morethan 50 grams. Slime molds of both types favor cool, moist habitats,primarily in forests. They range from colorless to brilliantyellow and orange.PLASMODIAL SLIME MOLDS If the nucleus of an amoeba beganrapid mitotic division, accompanied by a tremendous increasein cytoplasm and organelles but no cytokinesis, the resultingorganism might resemble the multinucleate mass of a plasmodialslime mold. During its vegetative (feeding) phase, aplasmodial slime mold is a wall-less mass of cytoplasm withnumerous diploid nuclei. This mass streams very slowly overits substratum in a remarkable network of strands called a plas-Podocyrtis cothurnata25 μm27.26 A Radiolarian’s Glass House Radiolarians secrete intricateglassy skeletons such as the one shown here. A living radiolarian with itsendosymbionts is shown in Figure 27.8B.Opisthokonts AmoebozoansFungiChoanoflagellatesAnimalsLoboseansPlasmodial slime moldsCellular slime moldsStalk Individual cell(A) Codosiga botrytis5 μm(B) Choanoeca sp.10 μm27.27 A Link to the Animals Choanoflagellates are the sister groupto the animals. (A) The formation of colonies by unicellular organisms, asin this choanoflagellate species, is one route to the evolution of multicellularity.(B) A solitary choanoflagellate illustrates the similarity of this microbialprotist group to a cell type present in the multicellular sponges (seeFigure 31.7).27.5 | WHAT ARE THE EVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIPS AMONG EUKARYOTES? 583modium. The plasmodium of such a slime mold is another exampleof a coenocyte, with many nuclei enclosed in a singleplasma membrane. The outer cytoplasm of the plasmodium(closest to the environment) is normally less fluid than the interiorcytoplasm and thus provides some structural rigidity(Figure 27.28A).Plasmodial slime molds provide a dramatic example ofmovement by cytoplasmic streaming. The outer cytoplasmic regionof the plasmodium becomes more fluid in places, and cytoplasmrushes into those areas, stretching the plasmodium.This streaming somehow reverses its direction every few minutesas cytoplasm rushes into a new area and drains away froman older one, moving the plasmodium over its substratum.Sometimes an entire wave of plasmodium moves across thesubstratum, leaving strands behind. Microfilaments and a contractileprotein called myxomyosin interact to produce thestreaming movement. As it moves, the plasmodium engulfsfood particles by endocytosis—predominantly bacteria, yeasts,spores of fungi, and other small organisms, as well as decayinganimal and plant remains.A plasmodial slime mold can grow almost indefinitely inits plasmodial stage, as long as the food supply is adequate andother conditions, such as moisture and pH, are favorable. However,one of two things can happen if conditions become unfavorable.First, the plasmodium can form an irregular mass ofhardened cell-like components called a sclerotium. This restingstructure rapidly becomes a plasmodium again when favorableconditions are restored.Alternatively, the plasmodium can transform itself intospore-bearing fruiting structures (Figure 27.28B). These stalkedor branched structures rise from heaped masses of plasmodium.They derive their rigidity from walls that form and thickenbetween their nuclei. The diploid nuclei of the plasmodiumdivide by meiosis as the fruiting structure develops. One ormore knobs, called sporangia, develop on the end of the stalk.Within a sporangium, haploid nuclei become surrounded bywalls and form spores. Eventually, as the fruiting body dries,it sheds its spores.The spores germinate into wall-less, haploid cells calledswarm cells, which can either divide mitotically to produce morehaploid swarm cells or function as gametes. Swarm cells canlive as separate individual cells that move by means of flagellaor pseudopods, or they can become walled and resistant restingcysts when conditions are unfavorable; when conditions improveagain, the cysts release swarm cells. Two swarm cells canalso fuse to form a diploid zygote, which divides by mitosis (butwithout a wall forming between the nuclei) and thus forms anew, coenocytic plasmodium.CELLULAR SLIME MOLDS Whereas the plasmodium is the basicvegetative (feeding, nonreproductive) unit of the plasmodialslime molds, an amoeboid cell is the vegetative unit of the cellularslime molds. Large numbers of cells called myxamoebas,which have single haploid nuclei, engulf bacteria and other foodparticles by endocytosis and reproduce by mitosis and fission.This simple life cycle stage, consisting of swarms of independent,isolated cells, can persist indefinitely as long as food andmoisture are available.When conditions become unfavorable, the cellular slimemolds aggregate and form fruiting structures, as do their plasmodialcounterparts. The individual myxamoebas aggregateinto a mass called a slug or pseudoplasmodium (Figure 27.29). Unlikethe true plasmodium of the plasmodial slime molds, thisstructure is not simply a giant sheet of cytoplasm with manynuclei; the individual myxamoebas retain their plasma membranesand, therefore, their identity.Aslug may migrate over its substratum for several hours beforebecoming motionless and reorganizing to construct a delicate,stalked fruiting structure. Cells at the top of the fruitingstructure develop into thick-walled spores, which are eventuallyreleased. Later, under favorable conditions, the spores germinate,releasing myxamoebas.The cycle from myxamoebas through slug and spores to newmyxamoebas is asexual. Cellular slime molds also have a sex-584 CHAPTER 27 | THE ORIGIN AND DIVERSIFICATION OF EUKARYOTES(A) Physarum polycephalum 0.1 mm 0.25 mm(B) Physarum polycephalum27.28 Plasmodial Slime Molds (A) The slime mold Physarum is mostoften seen in its plasmodial form, covering rocks, decaying logs, andother objects as it engulfs bacteria and other food items from the surface.(B) Fruiting structures of Physarum.ual cycle, in which two myxamoebas fuse. The product of thisfusion develops into a spherical structure that ultimately germinates,releasing new haploid myxamoebas.In subsequent chapters we explore the three major groups ofmulticellular eukaryotes. Chapters 28 and 29 describe the originand diversification of the plants, Chapter 30 presents thefungi, and Chapters 31–33 describe the animals. All three ofthese groups arose from protist ancestors.27.5 | WHAT ARE THE EVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIPS AMONG EUKARYOTES? 585The sporangium of themature fruiting structurewill release spores.0.25 mmDictyostelium discoideumSlugFruiting structure(various stages)27.29 A Cellular Slime Mold The life cycle of the slime moldDictyostelium is shown here in a composite micrograph.27.1 How Did the Eukaryotic Cell Arise?• The modern eukaryotic cell evolved from an ancestral prokaryote.Probable early events in this evolution include the loss ofthe cell wall and infolding of the plasma membrane. Suchinfolding probably led to the segregation of the genetic materialin a membrane-enclosed nucleus. The development of acytoskeleton gave the evolving cell increasing control over itsshape and distribution of daughter chromosomes. ReviewFigure 27.2• Some organelles were acquired by endosymbiosis.Mitochondria evolved from a proteobacterium.• Primary endosymbiosis of a eukaryote and a cyanobacteriumgave rise to the chloroplasts, beginning with those of glaucophytes,red algae, green algae, and land plants. Secondary andtertiary endosymbiosis of these chloroplast-containing eukaryoteswithin other eukaryotes gave rise to the chloroplasts ofeuglenids, dinoflagellates, and other groups. Review Figure27.3, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 27.127.2 What Features Account for Protist Diversity?• Protists are a diverse, paraphyletic assemblage of mostly unicellulareukaryotes. Review Figure 27.1• Some protists are photosynthetic autotrophs, some are heterotrophs,and some are both.• The cytoskeleton allows for various means of locomotion. Mostprotists are motile, moving by amoeboid motion withpseudopods or by means of cilia or flagella.• Some protist cells contain contractile vacuoles that pump outexcess water, or digestive vacuoles where food is digested.Review Figures 27.5 and 27.6, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 27.2• Many protists have protective cell surfaces such as cell walls,external “shells,” or shells constructed from sand.27.3 How Do Protists Affect the World Around Them?• The diatoms, part of the plankton, are responsible for about afifth of all the photosynthetic carbon fixation on Earth.CHAPTER SUMMARY
27.1 How Did the Eukaryotic Cell Arise?• The modern eukaryotic cell evolved from an ancestral prokaryote.Probable early events in this evolution include the loss ofthe cell wall and infolding of the plasma membrane. Suchinfolding probably led to the segregation of the genetic materialin a membrane-enclosed nucleus. The development of acytoskeleton gave the evolving cell increasing control over itsshape and distribution of daughter chromosomes. ReviewFigure 27.2• Some organelles were acquired by endosymbiosis.Mitochondria evolved from a proteobacterium.• Primary endosymbiosis of a eukaryote and a cyanobacteriumgave rise to the chloroplasts, beginning with those of glaucophytes,red algae, green algae, and land plants. Secondary andtertiary endosymbiosis of these chloroplast-containing eukaryoteswithin other eukaryotes gave rise to the chloroplasts ofeuglenids, dinoflagellates, and other groups. Review Figure27.3, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 27.127.2 What Features Account for Protist Diversity?• Protists are a diverse, paraphyletic assemblage of mostly unicellulareukaryotes. Review Figure 27.1• Some protists are photosynthetic autotrophs, some are heterotrophs,and some are both.• The cytoskeleton allows for various means of locomotion. Mostprotists are motile, moving by amoeboid motion withpseudopods or by means of cilia or flagella.• Some protist cells contain contractile vacuoles that pump outexcess water, or digestive vacuoles where food is digested.Review Figures 27.5 and 27.6, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 27.2• Many protists have protective cell surfaces such as cell walls,external “shells,” or shells constructed from sand.27.3 How Do Protists Affect the World Around Them?• The diatoms, part of the plankton, are responsible for about afifth of all the photosynthetic carbon fixation on Earth.
• Phytoplankton are the primary producers in the marineenvironment.• Endosymbiosis is common among protists and often helpful toboth partners. Review Figure 27.8• Pathogenic protists include species of Plasmodium and trypanosomes.Review Figure 27.927.4 How Do Protists Reproduce?• Most protists reproduce both asexually and sexually.• Conjugation in paramecia is a sexual process but not a reproductiveone. Review Figure 27.12• Alternation of generations, which includes a multicellulardiploid phase and a multicellular haploid phase, is a feature ofmany protist life cycles. Review Figure 27.13• Alternation of generations may be heteromorphic or isomorphic.The alternating generations are the (diploid) sporophyteand (haploid) gametophyte. Specialized cells of the sporophyte,called sporocytes, divide meiotically to produce haploidspores.• Depending on whether their gametes look identical or dissimilar,species are termed isogamous or anisogamous.• In a diplontic life cycle, the gametes are the only haploid cells.In a haplontic life cycle, the zygote is the only diploid cell.Review Figures 27.14 and 27.15, WEB ACTIVITIES 27.1 AND27.2• Some protist life cycles involve more than one host species.27.5 What Are the Evolutionary Relationships AmongEukaryotes?• Most eukaryotes can be classified in one of five major clades:chromalveolates, Plantae, excavates, rhizaria, or unikonts.Review Table 27.1 and Figure 27.1• The chromalveolates include the haptophytes, alveolates, andstramenopiles.• Alveolates are unicellular organisms with sacs (alveoli) beneaththeir plasma membranes. Alveolate clades include the marinedinoflagellates, the parasitic apicomplexans, and the diverse,highly motile ciliates. REVIEW WEB ACTIVITY 27.3• Stramenopiles typically have two flagella of unequal length,the longer one bearing rows of tubular hairs. Included amongthe stramenopiles are the unicellular diatoms, the multicellularbrown algae, and the nonphotosynthetic oomycetes, includingthe water molds and downy mildews.• Clades in the Plantae include the glaucophytes, red algae,chlorophytes, charophytes, and the land plants. All are photosyntheticand contain chloroplasts. Glaucophyte chloroplastscontain peptidoglycan between their inner and outer membranes.• The excavates include the diplomonads, parabasalids, heteroloboseans,euglenids, and kinetoplastids. The diplomonads andparabasalids lack mitochondria, having apparently lost themduring their evolution. Heteroloboseans are amoebas with atwo-stage life cycle. Euglenids are often photosynthetic andhave anterior flagella and strips of protein that support their cellsurface. Kinetoplastids have a single, large mitochondrion inwhich mitochondrial mRNA is edited.• Rhizaria are unicellular and aquatic; most are amoeboid. Thisgroup includes the foraminiferans, whose shells have contributedto great limestone deposits; the radiolarians with thin,stiff pseudopods and glassy endoskeletons; and thecercozoans, which take many forms and live in diverse habitats.• The unikonts encompass organisms with single flagella on theirflagellated cells (if any). They can be divided into two subgroups,the opisthokonts and the amoebozoans.• In the opisthokonts, the flagellum (when present) is posterior.The opisthokont subgroups are the fungi, choanoflagellates,and animals. Choanoflagellates resemble the cells of spongesand are sister to the animal clade.• The amoebozoans move by means of lobe-shaped pseudopodia.They comprise the loboseans, plasmodial slime molds, andcellular slime molds. A lobosean consists of a single cell; thesecells do not aggregate. Plasmodial slime molds are amoebozoanswhose feeding phase is coenocytic. In the feeding phase,movement is by cytoplasmic streaming. In cellular slime molds,the individual cells maintain their identity at all times but aggregateto form fruiting bodies.