The fruit of the Judean date palm was once muchprized. The prophet Muhammad admired its nutritionaland medicinal properties; in the Koran, it is associatedwith heaven and described as a symbol of goodness.The Judean date was the source of the “honey” inthe biblical “land of milk and honey.” Today that ancientstrain of date is extinct. Or is it?Around two thousand years ago, at the beginning of theCommon Era, a seed developed in a fruit on a Judean datepalm. The fruit that contained that seed found its way to astoreroom in the fortress Masada in Judea. In 73 C.E. almosta thousand Jewish Zealots involved in a religious revoltagainst Rome fled to this refuge with their families. Romanlegions followed, and the ensuing siege lasted more thantwo years. In the end, rather than be killed or enslaved bythe Roman soldiers, the Zealots are said to have killedthemselves and their families in a dramatic mass suicide.Twenty centuries later, archeologists working in Masadadiscovered the date seed that was long ago stored in theMasada fortress and confirmed its age. The previousrecord for seed survival and germination was 1,300 years,held by lotus seeds that recently germinated under thecare of scientists in China. But botanist Elaine Solowey succeededin making the 2,000-year-old date seed germinate!The resulting seedling (nicknamed Methuselah) has continuedto thrive and grow. Perhaps the ancient Egyptiansknew what they were doing when they placed date seedsin the tombs of the Pharaohs as symbols of immortality.Seeds are important structures for the survival ofplants. They protect the plant embryo within from environmentalextremes through what may be a long andstressful resting period—in the case of the Judean date,many centuries in a harsh desert. Seeds of the coconutpalm remain dormant for years as they float across vastexpanses of ocean, finally washing up on a distant shore,where they germinate and grow. Such hardiness is one ofthe properties that have contributed to making seedplants the predominant plants on Earth. All of today’sforests are dominated by seed plants.So will the seedling growing under Dr. Solowey’s careserve as the parent of a new population of Judean dates,thus resurrecting that genotype from extinction? Unfortunately,it cannot do so alone, because date trees are of twodifferent sexes. However, it may be possible to germinateA seed from biblical times germinates after 2,000 years29A Refuge King Herod of Judea fortified Masada and stockedit with water and food—including Judean dates.How Did Seed Plants Become Today’s 29.1 Dominant Vegetation?By the late Devonian period, more than 360 million years ago,Earth was home to a great variety of land plants, many of whichare discussed in Chapter 28. The land plants shared the hot,humid terrestrial environment with insects, spiders, centipedes,and fishlike amphibians (early tetrapods). The plants and animalsaffected one another, acting as agents of natural selection.In the Devonian an innovation had appeared: some plantsdeveloped extensively thickened woody stems, which resultedfrom the proliferation of xylem. This type of growth in the diameterof stems and roots is called secondary growth. Amongthe first plants with this adaptation were seedless vascular plantscalled progymnosperms, all species of which are now extinct.The earliest fossil evidence of seed plants is found in lateDevonian rocks. Like the progymnosperms, these seed ferns werewoody. They possessed fernlike foliage but had seeds attachedto their leaves. By the end of the Permian, other groups of seedplants became dominant (Figure 29.1).The living seed plants fall into two major groups, the gymnosperms(such as pines and cycads) and the angiosperms(flowering plants). There are several competing phylogenetichypotheses regarding the major groups of gymnosperms relativeto the angiosperms, but Figure 29.2 shows the most widelysupported relationships. All living gymnosperms and many angiospermsshow secondary growth. The life cycles of all seedplants also share distinctive features, as we are about to see.Features of the seed plant life cycle protectgametes and embryosSection 28.2 describes a trend in plant evolution: the sporophytebecame less dependent on the gametophyte, which becamesmaller in relation to the sporophyte. This trend continued withthe appearance of the seed plants, whose gametophyte generationis reduced even further than it is in the ferns (Figure 29.3).The haploid gametophyte develops partly or entirely while attachedto and nutritionally dependent on the diploid sporophyte.Among the seed plants, only the earliest groups of gymnosperms(such as cycads and ginkgos) had swimming sperm.Later groups of gymnosperms and the angiosperms evolvedother means of bringing eggs and sperm together. The culminationof this striking evolutionary trend in seed plants was independencefrom the liquid water that earlier plants neededto assist sperm in reaching the egg. The advent of the seed gaveseed plants the opportunity to colonize drier areas and spreadover the terrestrial environment.IN THIS CHAPTER we will describe the defining characteristicsof the seed plants as a group. Living seed plantsinclude the gymnosperms, which produce seeds not protectedby ovary or fruit tissue, and the angiosperms, whichare characterized by flowers and fruits. We will cover someof the unsolved problems in seed plant evolution, concludingwith a survey of the diversity of living seed plants.other Judean dates, and/or to cross the tree with Moroccan,Egyptian, or Iraqi varieties of date palms. Althoughthese latter varieties differ from Judean dates at almosthalf of the gene loci that have been examined, crossingthese varieties may introduce many beneficial alleles fromJudean dates back into modern date plantations.Today, humans are collecting and storing seeds frommany species in seed banks (see Chapter 34). Many plantspecies or cultivars that would otherwise be lost to extinctionare thus being preserved for restoration projectsor other uses by future generations.CHAPTER OUTLINE29.1 How Did Seed Plants Become Today’s DominantVegetation?29.2 What Are the Major Groups of Gymnosperms?29.3 What Features Contributed to the Success of theAngiosperms?29.4 How Do Plants Support Our World?The Hardy Seed This coconut seed arrived on a beach,where it germinated successfully. The evolution of seeds was amajor factor in the eventual dominance of the seed plants.Seed plants are heterosporous (see Figure 28.9B); that is, theyproduce two types of spores, one that becomes the male gametophyteand one that becomes the female gametophyte. Theyform separate microsporangia and megasporangia on structuresthat are grouped on short axes, such as the stamens and pistilsof an angioperm flower.Within the microsporangium, the meiotic products are microspores,which divide mitotically within the spore wall oneor a few times to form a multicellular male gametophyte calleda pollen grain. Pollen grains are released from the microsporangiumto be distributed by wind or by ananimal pollinator (Figure 29.4). The wallof the pollen grain contains sporopollenin, themost chemically resistant biological compoundknown, which protects the pollengrain against dehydration and chemical damage—another advantagein terms of survival in the terrestrial environment. Recallthat sporopollenin in spore walls contributed to the successfulcolonization of the terrestrial environment by the earliestland plants.In contrast to the pollen grains produced by the microporangia,the megaspores of seed plants are not shed. Instead, theydevelop into female gametophytes within the megasporangia.These megagametophytes are dependent on the sporophyte forfood and water.29.1 | HOW DID SEED PLANTS BECOME TODAY’S DOMINANT VEGETATION? 609Millions of years ago (mya)Quaternary500 400 300 200 100 PresentCarboniferousRhyniophytes (seedless vascular plants without roots or leaves)Progymnosperms (seedless vascular trees with roots and leaves)Seed fernsGinkgosConifersRise of seed plants Gymnosperms dominantAngiospermsdominantFlowering plantsOrdovician Silurian Devonian Permian Triassic Jurassic Cretaceous TertiaryP a l e o z o i c M e s o z o i c CenozoicCycads29.1 The Fossil Record of Seed Plants and Some of Their ExtinctSeedless Relatives Woody growth evolved in the seedless progymnosperms.The now-extinct seed ferns had woody growth, fernlikefoliage, and seeds attached to their leaves. New lineages of seed plantsarose during the Carboniferous, but the earliest known fossils of floweringplants are from the late Jurassic.GymnospermsCycadsGinkgosConifersGnetophytesFlowering plantsAngiospermsCommonancestorof seedplantsHeterosporySeedsFlowers29.2 The Major Groups of Living Seed Plants There are fourgroups of gymnosperms and one of angiosperms. Their exact evolutionaryrelationship is still uncertain, but this cladogram representsone current interpretation.In most seed plant species, only one of the meiotic productsin a megasporangium survives. The surviving haploid nucleusdivides mitotically, and the resulting cells divide again to producea multicellular female gametophyte. The megasporangiumis surrounded by sterile sporophytic structures, which forman integument that protects the megasporangium and its contents.Together, the megasporangium and integument constitutethe ovule, which will develop into a seed after fertilization(Figure 29.5).The arrival of a pollen grain at an appropriate landing point,close to a female gametophyte on a sporophyte of the samespecies, is called pollination. A pollen grain that reaches thispoint develops further. It produces a slender pollen tube thatelongates and digests its way toward the megagametophyte (seeFigure 29.5). When the tip of the pollen tube reaches themegagametophyte, sperm are released from the tube and fertilizationoccurs.The resulting diploid zygote divides repeatedly, forming anembryonic sporophyte. After a period of embryonic development,growth is temporarily suspended (the embryo enters a dormantstage). The end product at this stage is a multicellular seed.The seed is a complex, well-protected packageAseed contains tissues from three generations. Aseed coat developsfrom the integument—tissues of the diploid sporophyte parentthat surround the megasporangium. Within the megasporangiumis the haploid female gametophytic tissue from the nextgeneration, which contains a supply of nutrients for the developingembryo. (This tissue is fairly extensive in most gymnospermseeds. In angiosperm seeds it is greatly reduced, andnutrition for the embryo is supplied by a tissue called endosperm,which is described below.) In the center of the seed is the thirdgeneration, the embryo of the new diploid sporophyte.The seed of a gymnosperm or an angiosperm is a well-protectedresting stage. The seeds of some species may remain dormantbut stay viable (capable of growth and development) forThe moss gametophytenourishes the sporophyte.The large sporophytes and the smallgametophytes of ferns are nutritionallyindependent of one another.The seed plant sporophytenourishes the developinggametophytes.Sporophyte (2n)Sporophyte (2n)Gametophyte (n)Sporophyte (2n)Gametophyte (n)Femalegametophyte (n)OvaryAntherMalegametophytes (n)Flowers29.3 The Relationship between Sporophyte and Gametophyte Inthe course of plant evolution, the gametophyte has been reduced and thesporophyte has become more prominent.Betula pendula29.4 Pollen Grains Pollen grains are the male gametophytes of seedplants. The pollen of this silver birch is dispersed by the wind, and grainsmay land near the female gametophytes of the same or other silverbirch trees.610 CHAPTER 29 | THE EVOLUTION OF SEED PLANTSThe pollen tubeelongates on itsway to the megagametophyte.When the tip of thepollen tube reachesthe megagametophyte,sperm are releasedfrom the tube andfertilization ensues(see Figure 29.15).The pistil,composedof one ormore carpels,receivespollen.The anthers ofthe stamen bearpollen-producingmicrosporangia.(B)ReceptaclePollen tubePollen grainsPetal(A)StigmaStyleOvaryOvuleSepalPollen grainsIntegumentMegagametophyteAntherFilamentmany years, germinating only when conditions are favorablefor the growth of the sporophyte, as happened with the 2,000-year-old Judean date seed mentioned at the beginning of thischapter. In contrast, the embryos of seedless plants developdirectly into sporophytes, which either survive or die, dependingon environmental conditions. Spores of some seedless plantsmay remain dormant and viable for long periods of time, butseeds provide a more secure and lasting dormant stage.During the dormant stage, the seed coat protects the embryofrom excessive drying and may also protect it against potentialpredators that would otherwise eat the embryo and its nutrientreserves. Many seeds have structural adaptations that promotetheir dispersal by wind or, more often, by animals. Whenthe young sporophyte resumes growth, it draws on the food reservesin the seed. The possession of seeds is a major reason forthe enormous evolutionary success of the seed plants, whichare the dominant life forms of most modern terrestrial floras.A change in anatomy enabled seed plantsto grow to great heightsThe most ancient seed plants produced wood—extensively proliferatedxylem—which gave them the support to grow tallerthan other plants around them, thus capturing more light forphotosynthesis. The younger portion of wood is well adaptedfor water transport, whereas older wood becomes clogged withresins or other materials. Although no longer functional in transport,the older wood continues to provide support for the plant.Not all seed plants are woody. In the course of seed plantevolution, many seed plants lost the woody growth habit; however,other advantageous attributes helped them become establishedin an astonishing variety of places.29.1 RECAPPollen, seeds, and wood are major evolutionaryinnovations of the seed plants. Protection of thegametes and embryos is a hallmark of seed plants.• Distinguish between the roles of the megagametophyteand the pollen grain. See p. 609• Explain the importance of pollen in freeing seed plantsfrom dependence on liquid water. See pp. 609–610and Figure 29.5• What are some of the advantages afforded by seeds?By wood? See pp. 610–61129.1 | HOW DID SEED PLANTS BECOME TODAY’S DOMINANT VEGETATION? 61129.5 Pollination in an Angiosperm In all seed plants, a pollen tubegrows from the pollen to the megagametophyte, where sperm arereleased. (A) Scanning electron micrograph of a pollen tube growing in aprairie gentian flower. (B) The process of pollination is diagrammed for ageneralized angiosperm flower.GO TO Web Activity 29.1 • Flower MorphologyyourBioPortal.comThe seed ferns have long been extinct, but the surviving seedplants have been remarkable successes. Next we examine thegymnosperms, the next group of plants to dominate terrestrialenvironments.What Are the Major Groups of 29.2 Gymnosperms?The gymnosperms are seed plants that donot form flowers. Gymnosperms (whichmeans “naked-seeded”) are so namedbecause their ovules and seeds arenot protected by ovary or fruit tissue.Although there are probablyfewer than 1,200 species of living gymnosperms,these plants are second only to the angiosperms intheir dominance of the terrestrial environment.Although the modern gymnosperms are probably a clade,their monophyly has not been established beyond a doubt. Thefour major groups of living gymnosperms bear little superficialresemblance to one another.• The cycads (Cycadophyta) are palmlike plants of the tropicsand subtropics, growing as tall as 20 meters (Figure 29.6A).Of the present-day gymnosperms, the cycads are probablythe earliest-diverging clade. There are about 300 species.Their tissues are often highly toxic to humans if ingested.• Ginkgos (Ginkgophyta), which were common during theMesozoic era, are represented today by a single genus andspecies: Ginkgo biloba, the maidenhair tree (Figure 29.6B).There are both male (microsporangiate) and female (megasporangiate)maidenhair trees. The difference is determinedby X and Y sex chromosomes, as in humans; few otherplants have distinct sex chromosomes.• Gnetophytes (Gnetophyta) number about 90 species in threevery different genera, which share certain characteristicsanalogous to ones found in the angiosperms, as we will see.One of the gnetophytes is Welwitschia (Figure 29.6C), along-lived desert plant with just two straplike leaves thatsprawl on the sand and can grow as long as 3 meters.612 CHAPTER 29 | THE EVOLUTION OF SEED PLANTS(C) Welwitschia mirabilis (D) Sequoiadendron giganteum(A) Encephalartos villosus (B) Ginkgo biloba29.6 Diversity among the Gymnosperms (A) Many cycads havegrowth forms that resemble both ferns and palms, but cycads are notclosely related to either. (B) The characteristic fleshy seed coat andbroad leaves of the maidenhair tree. (C) A gnetophyte growing in theNamib Desert of Africa. Straplike leaves grow throughout the life of theplant, breaking and splitting as they grow. (D) Conifers, like this giantsequoia growing in Sequoia National Park, California, dominate manymodern forests.GinkgosConifersGnetophytesAngiospermsCycads• Conifers (Coniferophyta) are by far the most abundant ofthe gymnosperms. There are about 700 species of thesecone-bearing plants, including the pines and redwoods(Figure 29.6D).With the exception of the gnetophytes, the living gymnospermgroups have only tracheids as water-conducting and supportcells within the xylem. In most angiosperms, cells called vesselelements and fibers (specialized for water conduction andsupport, respectively) are found alongside tracheids. While thegymnosperm water-transport and support system may thusseem somewhat less efficient than that of the angiosperms, itserves some of the largest trees known. The coastal redwoodsof California are the tallest gymnosperms; the largest are wellover 100 meters tall.During the Permian, as environments became warmer anddryer, the conifers and cycads flourished. Gymnosperm forestschanged over time as the gymnosperm groups evolved. Gymnospermsdominated the Mesozoic era, during which the continentsdrifted apart and large dinosaurs walked the Earth. Gymnospermswere the principal trees in all forests until about 65million years ago, and even down to the present day, conifers arethe dominant trees in many forests, especially of higher latitudesand altitudes. The oldest livingsingle organism on Earth todayis a gymnosperm in California—a bristlecone pine that germinatedabout 4,800 years ago, atabout the time the ancient Egyptianswere just starting to developwriting.Conifers have conesbut no motile gametesThe great Douglas fir and cedarforests found in the northwesternUnited States and the massive borealforests of pine, fir, and spruceof the northern regions of Eurasiaand North America, as well as onthe upper slopes of mountainranges everywhere, rank amongthe great vegetation formations ofthe world. All these trees belongto one group of gymnosperms,Coniferophyta—the conifers, orcone-bearers.Male and female cones containthe reproductive structuresof conifers. The female (seed-bearing) cone is known as a megastrobilus(plural: megastrobili); this is the familiar woody cone ofpine trees. The seeds in a megastrobilus are protected by a tightcluster of woody scales, which are modifications of branchesextending from a central axis (Figure 29.7A). The typically muchsmaller male (pollen-bearing) cone is known as a microstrobilus.The microstrobilus is typically herbaceous rather thanwoody, as its scales are composed of modified leaves, beneathwhich are the pollen-bearing microsporangia (Figure 29.7B).We will use the life cycle of a pine to illustrate reproductionin gymnosperms (Figure 29.8). The production of male gametophytesin the form of pollen grains frees the plant completelyfrom its dependence on liquid water for fertilization. Wind,rather than water, assists conifer pollen grains in their first stageof travel from the strobilus to the female gametophyte inside acone (see Figure 29.4). The pollen tube provides the sperm withthe means for the last stage of travel by elongating through maternalsporophytic tissue, as diagrammed for an angiosperm inFigure 29.5. When it reaches the female gametophyte, it releasestwo sperm, one of which degenerates after the other unites withan egg. Union of sperm and egg results in a zygote; mitotic di-29.2 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR GROUPS OF GYMNOSPERMS? 613(A) Pinus resinosa(B) Pinus resinosaMale (pollen bearing)cones, or microstrobiliFemale (seed bearing)cones, or megastrobiliWoody scales aremodifications ofbranchesHerbaceous scalesare modifications ofleavesMicrosporangiabearing pollenSeedCentral axisCross section of a megastrobilusCross section of a microstrobilusCentral axis29.7 Female and Male Cones(A) The scales of female cones (megastrobili)are modified branches. (B) Thespore-bearing structures in male cones(microstrobili) are modified leaves.visions and further development of the zygote result in an embryo.The megasporangium, in which the female gametophyte willform, is enclosed in a layer of sporophytic tissue—the integument—that will eventually develop into the seed coat that protectsthe embryo. The integument, the megasporangium insideit, and the tissue attaching it to the maternal sporophyte constitutethe ovule. The pollen grain enters through a small openingin the integument at the tip of the ovule, the micropyle.Most conifer ovules (which will develop into seeds after fertilization)are borne exposed on the upper surfaces of the mod-614 CHAPTER 29 | THE EVOLUTION OF SEED PLANTSThe sporophyteis an enormoustree.The gametophytesare tiny comparedto the sporophyte.The same plant has bothpollen-producing microstrobiliand egg-producing megastrobili.MeiosisDIPLOID (2n)SporophytegenerationHAPLOID (n)GametophytegenerationImmature megastrobilusScale of megastrobiliusSectionthrough scaleOvuleMicrostrobili MegasporangiumSporophyte(about 10–100 m)Section throughscaleFunctionalmegasporePollenchamberMicrosporesPollengrainPollengrainMale gametophyte(germinating pollengrain)ArchegoniumFemalegametophyteEggZygoteWingMature megastrobilusScale of megastrobilusScale ofmicrostrobilusWinged seedEmbryoSeed coatFemale gametophyte (providesnutrition for developing embryo)MeiosisFertilizationMegasporocyteMicropyleSpermSeedIntegument29.8 The Life Cycle of a Pine Tree In conifersand other gymnosperms, the gametophytes aresmall and nutritionally dependent on the sporophytegeneration.GO TO Web Activity 29.2 and Animated Tutorial 29.1 •Life Cycle of a ConiferyourBioPortal.comified branches that form the scales of the cone (megastrobilus).The only protection of the ovules comes from the scales, whichare tightly pressed against one another within the cone. Somepines, such as the lodgepole pine, have such tightly closed conesthat only fire suffices to split them open and release the seeds.Afire devastated lodgepole pine forests in Yellowstone NationalPark in 1988 but also released large numbers of seeds from thecones. As a result, large numbers of lodgepole pine seedlingsare now emerging in the burn area (Figure 29.9).About half of all conifer species have soft, fleshy modificationsof cones that envelop their seeds; examples are the fruitlikecones or “berries” of juniper and yew. Animals may eatthese tissues and then disperse the seeds in their feces, often carryingthem considerable distances from the parent plant.29.2 RECAPLiving gymnosperms include cycads, ginkgos,gnetophytes, and conifers, all of which are woodyand have seeds that are not protected by ovaries.• Explain the different functions of a megastrobilus anda microstrobilus. See p. 613 and Figure 29.8• What is the role of the integument in a gymnospermseed? See p. 614 and Figure 29.8• Do you understand how fire can be necessary for thesurvival of some species? See p. 615The “berries” on some gymnosperms (such as juniper and yew)are not true fruits but rather are fleshy cones. As we will see,true fruits are the ripened ovaries of plants. Ovaries are absentin gymnosperms but are a characteristic of the plant group thatis dominant today: the angiosperms. Let’s look at other ways inwhich angiosperms differ from gymnosperms.What Features Contributed to the 29.3 Success of the Angiosperms?The oldest fossil evidence of angiospermsdates back to the late Jurassic period,about 150 million years ago (see Figure29.1). The angiosperms radiatedexplosively in the Tertiary (beginning65 million years ago) and becamethe dominant plant life on Earth. Todaythere are more than a quarter million species of angiosperms.The female gametophyte of the angiosperms is even more reducedthan that of the gymnosperms, usually consisting of justseven cells. Thus the angiosperms represent the current extremeof the trend we have traced throughout the evolution of the vascularplants: the sporophyte generation becomes larger and moreindependent of the gametophyte, while the gametophyte generationbecomes smaller and more dependent on the sporophyte.What else sets the angiosperms apart from other plants?The major synapomorphies (shared derived traits) that characterizethe angiosperms include:• Double fertilization• Production of a nutritive tissue called the endosperm• Ovules and seeds enclosed in a carpel• Flowers• Fruits• Phloem with companion cells• Reduced gametophytesIn the angiosperms, pollination consists of the arrival of amicrogametophyte—a pollen grain—on a receptive surface ina flower (the stigma). As in the gymnosperms, pollination is thefirst in a series of events that result in the formation of a seed.The next is the growth of a pollen tube extending to the megagametophyte(see Figure 29.5). The third event is a fertilizationprocess that, in detail, is unique to the angiosperms.Double fertilization is often considered the single most reliabledistinguishing characteristic of the angiosperms. Two malegametes, contained in a single microgametophyte, participatein fertilization events in the megagametophyte of an angiosperm.The nucleus of one sperm combines with that of theegg to produce a diploid zygote, the first cell of the sporophytegeneration. In most angiosperms, the other sperm nucleus combineswith two other haploid nuclei of the female gametophyteto form a triploid (3n) nucleus (further discussed below; see Figure29.15). That nucleus, in turn, divides to form a triploid tissue,the endosperm, that nourishes the embryonic sporophyteduring its early development. This process, in which two fertilizationevents take place, is known as double fertilization.29.3 | WHAT FEATURES CONTRIBUTED TO THE SUCCESS OF THE ANGIOSPERMS? 61529.9 From Devastation, New Life Emerges A stand of lodgepolepines in Yellowstone National Park. The mature trees were destroyed by aforest fire in 1988. The fire released large numbers of lodgepole pineseeds from the cones, and now many young lodgepole pine trees areemerging in the burn area.GinkgosConifersGnetophytesAngiospermsCycadsDouble fertilization occurs in nearly all present-day angiosperms.We are not sure when and how it evolved becausethere is no known fossil evidence on this point. It may have firstresulted in two diploid embryos, as it does in the three existinggenera of the gnetophytes.The name angiosperm (“enclosed seed”) is drawn from anotherdistinctive characteristic of these plants: the ovules andseeds are enclosed in a modified leaf called a carpel. Besidesprotecting the ovules and seeds, the carpel often interacts withincoming pollen to prevent self-pollination, thus favoring crosspollinationand increasing genetic diversity. Of course, the mostobvious diagnostic feature of angiosperms is that they haveflowers. Production of fruits is another of their unique characteristics.As we will see, both flowers and fruits afford major advantagesto angiosperms.Most angiosperms are distinguished by the possession ofspecialized water-transporting cells called vessel elements intheir xylem (see Chapter 34). These cells are broad in diameterand connect without obstruction, allowing easy water movement.Asecond distinctive cell type in angiosperm xylem is thefiber, which plays an important role in supporting the plantbody. Angiosperm phloem possesses another unique cell type,called a companion cell. Like the gymnosperms, woody angiospermsshow secondary growth, producing secondary xylemand secondary phloem and growing in diameter.In the remainder of this section we examine the structure andfunction of flowers, evolutionary trends in flower structure, thefunctions of pollen and fruits, and the angiosperm life cycle.The sexual structures of angiosperms are flowersIf you examine any familiar flower, you will notice that the outerparts look somewhat like leaves. In fact, all the parts of a flowerare modified leaves.We showed a generalized flower (for which there is no exactcounterpart in nature) in Figure 29.5. The structures bearing microsporangiaare called stamens. Each stamen is composed ofa filament bearing an anther that contains pollen-producing microsporangia.The structures bearing megasporangia are thecarpels. A structure composed of one carpel or two or morefused carpels is called a pistil. The swollen base of the pistil, containingone or more ovules (each containing a megasporangiumsurrounded by its protective integument), is called the ovary.The apical stalk of the pistil is the style, and the terminal surfacethat receives pollen grains is the stigma.In addition, a flower often has several specialized sterile (nonspore-bearing) leaves. The inner ones are called petals (collectively,the corolla) and the outer ones sepals (collectively, thecalyx). The corolla and calyx (collectively, the perianth) can bequite showy and often play roles in attracting animal pollinatorsto the flower. The calyx more commonly protects the immatureflower in bud. From base to apex, the sepals, petals, stamens,and carpels (which are referred to as the floral organs; see Figure19.14) are usually positioned in circular arrangements or whorlsand attached to a central stalk called the receptacle.The generalized flower in Figure 29.5 has functional megasporangiaand microsporangia; such flowers are referred to asperfect (or hermaphroditic). Many angiosperms produce twotypes of flowers, one with only megasporangia and the otherwith only microsporangia. Consequently, either the stamens orthe carpels are nonfunctional or absent in a given flower, andthe flower is referred to as imperfect.Species such as corn or birch, in which both megasporangiate(female) and microsporangiate (male) flowers occur onthe same plant, are said to be monoecious (meaning “onehoused”—but, it must be added, one house with separaterooms). Complete separation is the rule in some other angiospermspecies, such as willows and date palms; in thesespecies, a given plant produces either flowers with stamensor flowers with carpels, but never both. Such species are saidto be dioecious (“two-housed”).Flowers come in an astonishing variety of forms—just thinkof some of the flowers you recognize. The generalized flowerin Figure 29.5 has distinct petals and sepals arranged in distinctwhorls. In nature, however, petals and sepals sometimes are indistinguishable.Such appendages are called tepals. In otherflowers, petals, sepals, or tepals are completely absent.Flowers may be single, or they may be grouped together toform an inflorescence. Different families of flowering plantshave characteristic types of inflorescences, such as the compoundumbels of the carrot family (Figure 29.10A), the headsof the aster family (Figure 29.10B), and the spikes of manygrasses (Figure 29.10C).Flower structure has evolved over timeThe flowers of the most basal clades of angiosperms have a largeand variable number of tepals (or sepals and petals), carpels,and stamens (Figure 29.11A). Evolutionary change within theangiosperms has included some striking modifications of thisearly condition: reductions in the number of each type of floralorgan to a fixed number, differentiation of petals from sepals,and changes in symmetry from radial (as in a lily or magnolia)to bilateral (as in a sweet pea or orchid), often accompanied byan extensive fusion of parts (Figure 29.11B).According to one theory, the first carpels to evolve wereleaves with marginal sporangia, folded but incompletely closed.Early in angiosperm evolution, the carpels fused and becameprogressively more buried in receptacle tissue, forming theovary (Figure 29.12A). In some flowers, the other floral organsare attached at the top of the ovary, rather than at the bottom asin Figure 29.5. The stamens of the most ancient flowers mayhave appeared leaflike (Figure 29.12B), little resembling thoseof the generalized flower in Figure 29.5.Why do so many flowers have pistils with long styles andanthers with long filaments? Natural selection has favoredlength in both of these structures, probably because length increasesthe likelihood of successful pollination. Long filamentsmay bring the anthers into contact with insect bodies, or theymay place the anthers in a better position to catch the wind. Similararguments apply to long styles.A perfect flower represents a compromise of sorts. On theone hand, in attracting a pollinating bird or insect, the plant isattending to both its female and male functions with a single616 CHAPTER 29 | THE EVOLUTION OF SEED PLANTS(A) Aegopodium podagrariaRay flowers Disc flowers (many)Spikes(C) Pennisetum alopecuroidesUmbelsCompound umbel(B) Helianthus annuus29.10 Inflorescences (A) The inflorescence of bishop’s goutweed (a member ofthe carrot family) is a compound umbel. Each umbel bears flowers on stalks thatarise from a common center. (B) Sunflowers are members of the aster family; theirinflorescence is a head. In a head, each of the long, petal-like structures is a rayflower; the central portion of the head consists of dozens to hundreds of disc flowers.(C) Grasses such as this fountain grass have inflorescences called spikes.(A) Magnolia watsonii(B) Paphiopedilum maudiaeAccording to onetheory, the carpelbegan as a modifiedleaf with sporangia.In the course ofevolution, leaf edgescurled inward andfinally fused.3 At the end of thesequence, three carpelshave fused to form athree-chambered ovary.1 2The leaflike portionof the structure wasprogressively reduced……until only themicrosporangiaremained.1 2Austrobaileya sp. Magnolia LilySporangiaFusedcarpel(A) Carpel evolution(B) Stamen evolutionModifiedleafCrosssectionModifiedleaflikestructureCrosssectionSporangiaAntherFilament29.11 Flower Form and Evolution (A) A magnolia flowershows the major features of early flowers: it is radially symmetrical,and the individual tepals, carpels, and stamensare separate, numerous, and attached at their bases. (B)Orchids, such as this ladyslipper, have a bilaterally symmetricalstructure that evolved much later.29.12 Carpels and Stamens Evolved from Leaflike Structures(A) Possible stages in the evolution of a carpel from a more leaflike structure.(B) The stamens of three modern plants show the various stages in the evolutionof that organ. It is not implied that these species evolved from each other;their structures simply illustrate the possible stages.flower type, whereas plants with imperfect flowers must createthat attraction twice—once for each type of flower. On the otherhand, the perfect flower can favor self-pollination, which is usuallydisadvantageous. Another potential problem is that thefemale and male functions might interfere with each other—forexample, the stigma might be so placed as to make it difficultfor pollinators to reach the anthers, thus reducing the exportof pollen to other flowers.Might there be a way around these problems? One solutionis seen in the bush monkeyflower (Mimulus aurantiacus),which is pollinated by hummingbirds and has a stigma thatinitially serves as a screen, hiding the anthers (Figure 29.13).Once a hummingbird touches the stigma, one of the stigma’stwo lobes folds, so that subsequent hummingbirds pick uppollen from the previously screened anthers. The first birdtransfers pollen from another plant to the stigma, eventuallyleading to fertilization. Later visitors pick up pollen from thenow-accessible anthers, fulfilling the flower’s male function.Figure 29.14 describes the experiment that revealed the functionof this mechanism.Angiosperms have coevolved with animalsWhereas many gymnosperms are wind-pollinated, most angiospermsare animal-pollinated. The many different pollinationsymbioses between plants and animals are vital to both parties.This fascinating coevolutionary field is covered in more detailin Chapter 56, but we mention some aspects here.Many flowers entice animals to visit them by providing foodrewards. Some flowers produce a sugary fluid called nectar, andthe pollen grains themselves sometimes serve as food for animals.In the process of visiting flowers to obtain nectar or pollen,animals often carry pollen from one flower to another or fromone plant to another. Thus, in their quest for food, the animalscontribute to the genetic diversity of the plant population. In-618 CHAPTER 29 | THE EVOLUTION OF SEED PLANTSAnthers accessible(stigma closed)Anthers StigmaAccess routeAccess blocked(stigma open)Filaments Style29.13 An Unusual Solution to Selfing Both long stamens and longstyles facilitate cross pollination, but if these male and female structuresare too close to each other, the likelihood of (disadvantageous) self-pollinationincreases. In Mimulus aurantiacus, initially the stigma is open,blocking access to the anthers. A hummingbird’s touch as it depositspollen on the stigma causes one lobe of the stigma to retract, creating apath to the anthers and allowing pollen dispersal.CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE29.14 Stigma Behavior in Mimulus FlowersElizabeth Fetscher’s experiments showed that the unusualstigma retraction mechanism in monkeyflowers (see Figure29.13) enhances the dispersal of pollen from the anthers.HYPOTHESIS Stigma responses in M. aurantiacus increasethe likelihood that an individual’s pollen will beexported once pollen from another individualhas been deposited on the stigma.Stigma responses enhance the male functionof the flower (dispersal of pollen) once thefemale function (receipt of pollen) has beenperformed.METHODRESULTS1. Set up experimental arrays such that only oneflower in each array can donate pollen. In controlarrays, the pollen donor styles function normally.In another set of arrays, donor stigmas areartificially sealed closed; in a third set, the pollendonor stigmas are permanently propped open.2. Allow hummingbirds to visit the arrays, thencount the pollen grains from each donor on thenext flower visited.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: How might you test how thismechanism affects self-pollinationof the flower?Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.Almost twice as muchpollen was exportedfrom control flowersas from flowers withstigmas propped open.Experimentally sealingstigmas in the closedposition resulted in evengreater pollen dispersal.Number of pollen grainsdeposited on recipientsStigmasclosedControls Stigmaspropped open500100150200250300350Double fertilizationresults in a 2n zygoteand 3n endosperm.Microspores (4)DIPLOID (2n)HAPLOID (n)MicrosporocyteAntherOvaryOvulePolar nuclei (2)Megagametophyte(n)EggPollen grains(microgametophyte, n)PollengrainTube cell nucleusPollen tubeSperm (2)Megasporocyte (2n)MegasporangiumOvaryOvuleSurvivingmegaspore (n)Endospermnucleus (3n)Zygote (2n)Double Fertilization MeiosisFlower of mature sporophyteSeedEndospermEmbryoSeedlingsects, especially bees, are among the most important pollinators;birds and some species of bats are also major pollinators.For more than 150 million years, angiosperms and their animalpollinators have coevolved in the terrestrial environment.The animals have affected the evolution of the plants, and theplants have affected the evolution of the animals. Flower structurehas become incredibly diverse under these selection pressures.Some of the products of coevolution are highly specific;for example, some yucca species are pollinated by only onespecies of moth. Pollination by just one or a few animal speciesprovides a plant species with a reliable mechanism for transferringpollen from one of its members to another.Most plant–pollinator interactions are much less specific; thatis, many different animal species pollinate the same plantspecies, and the same animal species pollinate many differentplant species. However, even these less specific interactionshave developed some specialization. Bird-pollinated flowersare often red and odorless. Many insect-pollinated flowers havecharacteristic odors, and bee-pollinated flowers may have conspicuousmarkings, or nectar guides, that may be visible only inthe ultraviolet region of the spectrum, where bees have bettervision than in the red region (see Table 56.1 and Figure 56.10).The angiosperm life cycle features double fertilizationThe angiosperm life cycle is considered in detail in Chapter38, but let’s look at it briefly here, comparing Figure 29.15 withthe conifer life cycle shown in Figure 29.8.61929.15 The Life Cycle of an Angiosperm Theformation of a triploid endosperm is one of the featuresthat distinguishes the angiosperms from thegymnosperms. One sperm nucleus fertilizes theegg to form the zygote, while the other combineswith the two polar nuclei to form the endosperm.GO TO Animated Tutorial 29.2 •Life Cycle of an AngiospermyourBioPortal.comLike all seed plants, angiosperms are heterosporous. As wehave seen, their ovules are contained within carpels rather thanbeing exposed on the surfaces of scales, as in most gymnosperms.The male gametophytes, as in the gymnosperms, arepollen grains.The ovule develops into a seed containing the products ofthe double fertilization that characterizes angiosperms: a diploidzygote and a triploid endosperm. The endosperm serves as storagetissue for starch or lipids, proteins, and other substancesthat will be needed by the developing embryo.The zygote develops into an embryo, which consists of anembryonic axis (the “backbone” that will become a stem and aroot) and one or two cotyledons, or seed leaves. The cotyledonshave three different possible fates in different plants. In many,they serve as absorptive organs that take up and digest the endosperm.In others, they enlarge and become photosyntheticwhen the seed germinates. Often they play both roles.Angiosperms produce fruitsThe ovary of a flower (together with the seeds it contains) developsinto a fruit after fertilization. The fruit protects the seedsand can also promote seed dispersal by becoming attached toor being eaten by an animal. Other fruits are adapted for dispersalby wind or water. A fruit may consist only of the matureovary and its seeds, or it may include other parts of theflower or structures associated with it (Figure 29.16). A simplefruit, such as a plum, is one that develops from a single carpelor several united carpels. A raspberry is an example of an aggregatefruit—one that develops from several separate carpelsof a single flower. Pineapples and figs are examples of multiplefruits, formed from a cluster of flowers (an inflorescence). Fruitsderived from parts in addition to the carpel and seeds are calledaccessory fruits; examples are apples, pears, and strawberries.Fruits are not necessarily fleshy; they can be hard and woodyor small and have modified structures that allow the seeds tobe dispersed by wind. The development, ripening, and dispersalof fruits are considered in Chapters 37 and 38.Recent analyses have revealed the oldest splitamong the angiospermsFigure 29.17 shows the relationships among the major angiospermclades. The two largest clades— the monocots andthe eudicots—include the great majority of angiosperm species.The monocots are so called because they have a single embryoniccotyledon; the eudicots have two. (Chapter 34 describesother differences between these two groups.)Some familiar angiosperms belong to other clades, includingthe water lilies, star anise and its relatives, and the magnoliidcomplex (Figure 29.18). The magnoliids are less numerousthan the monocots and eudicots, but they include many familiarand useful plants such as magnolias, avocados, cinnamon,and black pepper.The root of the evolutionary tree of flowering plants wasonce a matter of great controversy. A fundamental issue wasidentifying the group that is sister to the remaining angiosperms,and the magnoliid clade was a leading candidatefor the postion. At the close of the twentieth century, however,an impressive convergence of molecular and morpholog-(A) (B) (C)(D) (E) (F)29.16 Fruits Come in Many Forms (A–C) Simple fruits. (A) The single-seeded drupe of the fleshyfruitedplum is dispersed by animals. (B) Each macadamia seed is covered by a hard, woody fruit thatallows it to survive drought and other hardships. (C) The highly reduced fruits of dandelions are dispersed bywind. (D) A multiple fruit (pineapple). (E) An aggregate fruit (raspberry). (F) An accessory fruit (strawberry).29.3 | WHAT FEATURES CONTRIBUTED TO THE SUCCESS OF THE ANGIOSPERMS? 621AmborellaWater liliesStar aniseMagnoliidsEudicotsMonocotsVesselelementsPerianth oftwo whorlsSinglecotyledonPollen withthree groovesCarpels fused bytissue connectionCommon ancestorof angiospermsCarpels; endosperm;seeds in fruit; reducedgametophytes; doublefertilization; flowers;phloem with companioncellsTransitionaltracheidvesselelements29.17 Evolutionary Relationships among theAngiosperms Recent analyses of manyangiosperm genes have clarified the relationshipsamong the major groups.(A) Amborella trichopoda (B) Nymphaea sp. (C) Illicium anisatum(E) Aristolochia macrophylla (F) Persea americana(D) Piper nigrum29.18 Monocots and Eudicots Are Not the Only Surviving Angiosperms(A) Amborella, a shrub, is the sister to the remaining extantangiosperms. Of interest in this photo of a female flower is the pair offalse anthers (male flower parts), possibly serving to lure insects that aresearching for pollen. (B) The water lily clade is the next clade to divergeafter Amborella. (C) Star anise and its relatives belong to another basalclade. (D–F) The largest clade other than the monocots and eudicots isthe magnoliid complex, represented here by (D) black pepper, (E) Dutchman’spipe, and (F) avocado. The magnolia in Figure 29.11A is anothermagnoliid.ical evidence led to the conclusion that the sister group to theremaining flowering plants is a clade that today consists of asingle species of the genus Amborella (see Figure 29.18A). Thiswoody shrub, with cream-colored flowers, lives only on NewCaledonia, an island in the South Pacific. Its 5 to 8 carpels arein a spiral arrangement, and it has 30 to 100 stamens. The xylemof Amborella lacks vessel elements, which evolved after thisdeepest split in the angiosperm evolutionary tree.29.3 RECAPThe synapomorphies of angiosperms include doublefertilization, endosperm (triploid in most species),flowers, fruit, and distinctive cells in their xylem andphloem. The largest angiosperm clades are themonocots and the eudicots.• Explain the difference between pollination andfertilization. See pp. 615–616• Give some examples of how animals have affected theevolution of the angiosperms. See pp. 618–619• What are the respective roles of the two sperm indouble fertilization? See pp. 619–620 and Figure 29.15• What are the different functions of flowers, fruits,and seeds?The remarkable diversity of the seed plants has been shapedin part by the different environments in which these and otherplants have evolved. In turn, land plants—and seed plants inparticular—affect their environments.29.4 How Do Plants Support Our World?Once life moved onto land, it was plants that shaped the environment,and today’s environment is dominated by angiosperms.Representatives of the two largest angiospermclades are everywhere. The monocots (Figure 29.19) includegrasses, cattails, lilies, orchids, and palms. The eudicots (Figure29.20) include the vast majority of familiar seed plants, includingmost herbs (i.e., nonwoody plants), vines, trees, and shrubs.Among the eudicots are such diverse plants as oaks, willows,beans, snapdragons, and sunflowers.Plants make profound contributions to ecosystem services—processes by which the environment maintains resources thatbenefit humans. These benefits include the effects of plants onsoil, water, the atmosphere, and the climate. Plants produce oxygenand remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, as wellas play important roles in forming and renewing the fertility ofsoils. Plant roots help hold soil in place, providing a defenseagainst erosion by wind and water. They also moderate localclimate in various ways, such as by increasing humidity, providingshade, and blocking wind.Seed plants are our primary food sourcePlants are primary producers; that is, their photosynthesis trapsenergy and carbon, making those resources available not onlyfor their own needs but also for the herbivores and omnivoresthat consume them, for the carnivores and omnivores that eatthe herbivores, and for the prokaryotes and fungi that completethe food chain. The earliest steps in human civilization involvedcultivating angiosperms to provide a reliable food supply.Today, twelve species of seed plants stand between the humanrace and starvation: rice, coconut, wheat, corn (also calledmaize), potato, sweet potato, cassava (also called tapioca or man-622 CHAPTER 29 | THE EVOLUTION OF SEED PLANTS(A) Phoenix dactylifera(C) Lilium sp.(B) Triticum aestivum29.19 Monocots (A) Palms are among the fewmonocot trees. Date palms are a major foodsource in some areas of the world. (B) Grassessuch as this cultivated wheat and the fountaingrass in Figure 29.10C are monocots. (C)Monocots include popular garden flowers suchas these lilies. Orchids (Figure 29.11B) are alsohighly sought-after monocot flowers.ioc), sugarcane, sugar beet, soybean, common bean (Phaseolusvulgaris), and banana. Hundreds of other seed plants are cultivatedfor food, but none rank with these twelve in importance.Indeed, more than half of the world’s human population derivesthe bulk of its food energy from the seeds of a single plant:rice, Oryza sativa. Rice is particularly important in the Far East,where it has been cultivated for more than 8,000 years. Peoplealso use rice straw in many ways, such as thatching for roofs, foodand bedding for livestock, and clothing. Rice hulls, too, havemany uses, ranging from fertilizer to fuel.Another vitally important angiosperm is the coconut (Cocosnucifera), whose seed is illustrated at the opening of this chapter.In some cultures of the coastal tropics, this monocot tree isknown as the “tree of life.” Every aboveground part of theplant—its seeds, fruit, stem (trunk), leaves, buds,and even its sap—is of use and value to humans.Millions of people get most of their protein from the“meat” of coconut seeds, and the seed’s “milk” isvital in areas where water is scarce or unfit to drink.Seed plants have been sources of medicinesince ancient timesOne of the oldest human professions is that of medicineman or shaman—a person who cures otherswith medicines derived from seed plants. It isclaimed that a legendary Chinese emperor around2700 B.C.E. knew some 365 medicinal plants. Althoughwe also use medicines derived from fungi,lichens, and actinobacteria, seed plants are thesource of many of our medications, just a few ofwhich are shown in Table 29.1. Even in syntheticpharmaceuticals, the chemical structures of activeingredients are often based on the biochemistry ofsubstances isolated from plants.How are plant-based medicines discovered? These daysmany are found by systematic testing of tremendous numbersof plants from all over the world, a process that began in the1960s. One example is taxol, an important anticancer drug.Among the myriad plant samples that had been tested by 1962,extracts of the bark of Pacific yew (Taxus brevifolia) showed antitumoractivity in tests against rodent tumors. The active ingredient,taxol, was isolated in 1971 and tested against human cancersin 1977. After another 16 years, the U.S. Food and DrugAdministration approved it for human use, and taxol is nowwidely used in treating breast and ovarian cancers as well asseveral other types of cancers.(A) Echinocereus reichenbachii 29.4 | HOW DO PLANTS SUPPORT OUR WORLD? 623(C) Crataegus viridis(B) Mimosa nuttallii29.20 Eudicots (A) The cactus family is a large group ofeudicots, with about 1,500 species in the Americas. Thisblack lace cactus bears large pink flowers for a brief period ofthe year. (B) This sensitive briar is a legume (“bean and peafamily”), an economically important plant group with a largenumber of species. (C) The green hawthorn is a small eudicottree and a member of the family that includes roses.TABLE 29.1Some Medicinal Plants and Their ProductsPRODUCT PLANT SOURCE MEDICAL APPLICATIONAtropine Belladonna Dilating pupils for eye examinationBromelain Pineapple stem Controlling tissue inflammationDigitalin Foxglove Strengthening heart muscle contractionEphedrine Ephedra Easing nasal congestionMenthol Japanese mint Relief of coughingMorphine Opium poppy Relief of painQuinine Cinchona bark Treatment of malariaTaxol Pacific yew Treatment of ovarian and breast cancersTubocurarine Curare plant Muscle relaxant in surgeryVincristine Periwinkle Treatment of leukemia and lymphomaWidespread screening of plant samples eventually wasdeemphasized in favor of a purely chemical approach. Usingautomation and miniaturization, pharmaceutical laboratoriesgenerate vast numbers of compounds that are screened justas plant materials were screened in the search for taxol andother plant-based medicines. Now, however, the plant screeningis getting renewed interest. Both approaches are based ontrial and error.The other leading source of medicinal plants is work by ethnobotanists,who study how people use and view plants in theirlocal environments. This work proceeds all over the globe today.An older example is the discovery of quinine as a treatmentfor malaria. In the sixteenth century, Spanish priests in Peru becameaware that the native population used the bark of localCinchona trees to treat fevers. The priests successfully used thebark to treat malaria. Word of the medicine spread to Europe,where it is said to have been in use in Rome by 1631. The activeingredient of Cinchona bark—quinine—was identified in 1820,and quinine remained the standard malarial remedy well intothe twentieth century.624 CHAPTER 29 | THE EVOLUTION OF SEED PLANTS29.1 How Did Seed Plants Become Today’s DominantVegetation?• Fossils of woody seed ferns are the earliest evidence of vascularseed plants. The surviving groups of seed plants are the gymnospermsand angiosperms.• All seed plants are heterosporous, and their gametophytes aremuch smaller than (and dependent on) their sporophytes.Review Figure 29.3• An ovule consists of the seed plant megagametophyte and theintegument that protects it. The ovule develops into a seed.• Pollen grains, the microgametophytes, do not require liquidwater to perform their functions. Following pollination, apollen tube emerges from the pollen grain and elongates todeliver gametes to the megagametophyte. Review Figure 29.5,WEB ACTIVITY 29.1• Seeds are well protected, and they are often capable of long periodsof dormancy, germinating when conditions are favorable.29.2 What Are the Major Groups of Gymnosperms?• The gymnosperms produce seeds that are not protected byovaries.• The major gymnosperm groups are the cycads, ginkgos,gnetophytes, and conifers. Review Figure 29.2.• The megaspores of conifers are produced in woody conescalled megastrobili, and microspores are produced in herbaceouscones called microstrobili. Pollen reaches the megagametophyteby way of the micropyle, an opening in theintegument of the ovule. Review Figure 29.8, WEB ACTIVITY29.2, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 29.129.3 What Features Contributed to the Success of theAngiosperms?• Only angiosperms have flowers and fruits.• The ovules and seeds of angiosperms are enclosed in and protectedby carpels. Review Figure 29.12• Angiosperms have double fertilization, resulting in the productionof a zygote and endosperm (which is triploid in mostspecies). Review Figure 29.15, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 29.2• The xylem and phloem of angiosperms are more complex andefficient than those of the gymnosperms. Vessel elements inthe xylem of angiosperms function in water transport. Fibers inangiosperm xylem play an important role in structural support.• The floral organs, from the apex to the base of the flower, arethe pistil, stamens, petals, and sepals. Stamens bear microsporangiain anthers. The pistil (consisting of one or more carpels)includes an ovary containing ovules. The stigma is the receptivesurface of the pistil. The floral organs are borne on thereceptacle. Review Figure 29.5• A flower with both megasporangia and microsporangia is perfect;all other flowers are imperfect. Flowers may be grouped toform an inflorescence. Flowers may be pollinated by wind oranimals.• A monoecious species has megasporangiate and microsporangiateflowers on the same plant. A dioecious species is one inwhich megasporangiate and microsporangiate flowers occur ondifferent plants.• The most species-rich angiosperm clades are the monocots andthe eudicots. The magnoliids form the sister group to themonocots and eudicots. Review Figure 29.17• The oldest evolutionary split among the angiosperms isbetween the single species in the genus Amborella and all theremaining flowering plants.29.4 How Do Plants Support Our World?• Plants provide ecosystem services that affect soil, water, airquality, and climate.• Plants are primary producers and as such are the foundation ofthe entire terrestrial food web.• Plants provide many important medicinal products. ReviewTable 29.1CHAPTER SUMMARY
29.1 How Did Seed Plants Become Today’s DominantVegetation?• Fossils of woody seed ferns are the earliest evidence of vascularseed plants. The surviving groups of seed plants are the gymnospermsand angiosperms.• All seed plants are heterosporous, and their gametophytes aremuch smaller than (and dependent on) their sporophytes.Review Figure 29.3• An ovule consists of the seed plant megagametophyte and theintegument that protects it. The ovule develops into a seed.• Pollen grains, the microgametophytes, do not require liquidwater to perform their functions. Following pollination, apollen tube emerges from the pollen grain and elongates todeliver gametes to the megagametophyte. Review Figure 29.5,WEB ACTIVITY 29.1• Seeds are well protected, and they are often capable of long periodsof dormancy, germinating when conditions are favorable.29.2 What Are the Major Groups of Gymnosperms?• The gymnosperms produce seeds that are not protected byovaries.• The major gymnosperm groups are the cycads, ginkgos,gnetophytes, and conifers. Review Figure 29.2.• The megaspores of conifers are produced in woody conescalled megastrobili, and microspores are produced in herbaceouscones called microstrobili. Pollen reaches the megagametophyteby way of the micropyle, an opening in theintegument of the ovule. Review Figure 29.8, WEB ACTIVITY29.2, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 29.129.3 What Features Contributed to the Success of theAngiosperms?• Only angiosperms have flowers and fruits.• The ovules and seeds of angiosperms are enclosed in and protectedby carpels. Review Figure 29.12• Angiosperms have double fertilization, resulting in the productionof a zygote and endosperm (which is triploid in mostspecies). Review Figure 29.15, ANIMATED TUTORIAL 29.2• The xylem and phloem of angiosperms are more complex andefficient than those of the gymnosperms. Vessel elements inthe xylem of angiosperms function in water transport. Fibers inangiosperm xylem play an important role in structural support.• The floral organs, from the apex to the base of the flower, arethe pistil, stamens, petals, and sepals. Stamens bear microsporangiain anthers. The pistil (consisting of one or more carpels)includes an ovary containing ovules. The stigma is the receptivesurface of the pistil. The floral organs are borne on thereceptacle. Review Figure 29.5• A flower with both megasporangia and microsporangia is perfect;all other flowers are imperfect. Flowers may be grouped toform an inflorescence. Flowers may be pollinated by wind oranimals.• A monoecious species has megasporangiate and microsporangiateflowers on the same plant. A dioecious species is one inwhich megasporangiate and microsporangiate flowers occur ondifferent plants.• The most species-rich angiosperm clades are the monocots andthe eudicots. The magnoliids form the sister group to themonocots and eudicots. Review Figure 29.17• The oldest evolutionary split among the angiosperms isbetween the single species in the genus Amborella and all theremaining flowering plants.29.4 How Do Plants Support Our World?• Plants provide ecosystem services that affect soil, water, airquality, and climate.• Plants are primary producers and as such are the foundation ofthe entire terrestrial food web.• Plants provide many important medicinal products. ReviewTable 29.1