It must have been quite a shock when Thomas “Grif”Taylor’s Antarctic exploration team first spotted BloodFalls in 1911. The blood-red falls were certainly a surprisein the snowy, icy terrain. What could possibly cause ared waterfall in Antarctica?A few million years ago, the Taylor Glacier (which nowbears the explorer’s name) moved above a pool of saltywater, trapping the pool under 400 meters of ice. Theharsh environment in the resulting enclosed subglacialsea could hardly seem more hostile to life. It is extremelycold; there is no light and virtually no oxygen; and saltconcentrations are several times higher than seawater. Inshort, it is not a place one might expect to find a diverseliving ecosystem.Some water is able to seep out of this subglacial sea.This water is stained a dark, rusty red, and it spills from thehead of Taylor Glacier to form Blood Falls. Taylor speculatedthat red algae might account for the red coloration,but in the 1960s geologist Robert Black discovered thatthe water’s color arises from iron oxides that come fromthe underlying bedrock. With the methods then available,biologists could not detect any living organisms in thecold, saline, iron-rich water.A half-century later, biologists were better equipped tostudy microscopic life in strange places. By then it wasalso possible to amplify and sequence genes from singlemicrobes, and to place these gene sequences into theframework of the tree of life to identify and classify themicrobes. Microbiologist Jill Mikucki and her colleaguesused these techniques on water samples from Blood Falls,and reported in 2009 that the falls contain an unusualecosystem of at least 17 different species of bacteria. Thebacteria survive by metabolizing minute amounts of organicmatter trapped in the subglacial sea, using sulfateand iron ions as catalysts andelectron acceptors.The presence of living organismsin Blood Falls confirms that itis hard to find a place on or evennear the surface of the Earth thatdoes not contain populations ofprokaryotes. There are prokaryotesin volcanic vents, in the clouds, inenvironments as acidic as batteryacid or as alkaline as householdammonia. There are species thatcan survive below the freezingpoint and above the boiling pointLife on a strange planet26A Splash of Color in a Frozen Worldof White Antarctica’s Blood Falls isthe outflow of a subglacial sea thatcontains an unusual ecosystem ofbacteria that rely on sulfate and ironions for metabolism.PART SEVEN THE EVOLUTION OF DIVERSITYHow Did the Living World 26.1 Begin to Diversify?You may think that you have little in common with unicellularprokaryotes. But multicellular eukaryotes like yourself actuallyshare many attributes with Bacteria and Archaea. For example,all three of you:• conduct glycolysis• use DNA as the genetic material that encodes proteins• produce those proteins by transcription and translationusing a similar genetic code• replicate DNA semiconservatively• have plasma membranes and ribosomes in abundanceThese features support the conclusion that all living organismsare related to one another. If life had multiple origins, therewould be little reason to expect all organisms to use overwhelminglysimilar genetic codes or to share structures as unique asribosomes. Furthermore, similarities in DNA sequences of universalgenes (such as those that encode the structural componentsof ribosomes) confirm the monophyly of life.Despite the commonalities found across all three domains,major differences have evolved as well. Let’s first distinguishbetween Eukarya and the two prokaryotic domains. Note that“domain” is a subjective term used for the largest groups of life.There is no objective definition of a domain, any more than thereis of a kingdom or a family.The three domains differ in significant waysProkaryotic cells differ from eukaryotic cells in three importantways:• Prokaryotic cells lack a cytoskeleton and a nucleus, so they do notdivide by mitosis. Instead, after replicating their DNA (seeFigure 11.2), prokaryotic cells divide by their own method,binary fission.• The organization of the genetic material differs. The DNA of theprokaryotic cell is not organized within a membraneenclosednucleus. DNA molecules in prokaryotes (bothbacteria and archaea) are often circular. Many (but not all)prokaryotes have only one main chromosome and are effectivelyhaploid, although many have additional smallerDNAmolecules, called plasmids, as well (see Section 12.6).IN THIS CHAPTER we will discuss the distribution ofprokaryotes and examine their remarkable metabolic diversity.We will describe the difficulties involved in determiningevolutionary relationships among the prokaryotesand will survey the surprising diversity of organisms ineach domain. We will discuss how prokaryotes can haveenormous influence on their environments. Finally, we willdiscuss the evolutionary origin and diversity of viruses andtheir relationship to the rest of life.of water. There are more prokaryotes living on and insideour bodies than we have human cells. The prokaryotesare masters of metabolic ingenuity, having developedmore ways to obtain energy from the environmentthan the eukaryotes have. They have been around muchlonger than other organisms, too.Prokaryotes are by far the most numerous organismson Earth. Late in the twentieth century, it became apparentto microbiologists that all prokaryotes are not mostclosely related to one another. Two prokaryotic lineagesdiverged early in life’s evolution: Bacteria and Archaea.An early merging between members of these twogroups is thought to have given rise to the eukaryoticlineage, which includes humans.CHAPTER OUTLINE26.1 How Did the Living World Begin to Diversify?26.2 What Are Some Keys to the Success ofProkaryotes?26.3 How Can We Resolve Prokaryote Phylogeny?26.4 What Are the Major Known Groups ofProkaryotes?26.5 How Do Prokaryotes Affect Their Environments?26.6 Where Do Viruses Fit into the Tree of Life?Prokaryotes Can Take the Heat Entire ecosystems ofprokaryotes create the beauty of Morning Glory Pool, a hotspring in Yellowstone National Park. Cyanobacteria impart the“morning glory blue” color. Archaea live in the intensely hotregions of the pool’s interior.• Prokaryotes have none of the membrane-enclosed cytoplasmic organelles—mitochondria, Golgi apparatus, and others—that arefound in most eukaryotes. However, the cytoplasm of aprokaryotic cell may contain a variety of infoldings of theplasma membrane and photosynthetic membrane systemsnot found in eukaryotes.A glance at Table 26.1 will show you that there are also majordifferences (most of which cannot be seen even under an electronmicroscope) between the two prokaryotic domains. Insome ways archaea are more like eukaryotes; in other ways theyare more like bacteria. (Note that we use lowercase when referringto the members of these domains and uppercase when referringto the domains themselves.) The structures of prokaryoticand eukaryotic cells are compared in Chapter 5. The basicunit of an archaeon (the term for a single archaeal organism) orbacterium (a single bacterial organism) is the prokaryotic cell.Each single-celled organism contains a full complement of geneticand protein-synthesizing systems, including DNA, RNA,and all the enzymes needed to transcribe and translate the geneticinformation into proteins. The prokaryotic cell also containsat least one system for generating the ATP it needs.Genetic studies clearly indicate that all three domains had asingle common ancestor. For a major portion of their genome,eukaryotes share a more recent common ancestor with Archaeathan they do with Bacteria (Figure 26.1). However, the mitochondriaof eukaryotes (as well as the chloroplasts of photosyntheticeukaryotes, such as plants) originated through the endosymbiosisof a bacterium, as described in Section 5.5. Some biologistsprefer to view the origin of eukaryotes as a fusion of two equalpartners (one ancestor that was related to modern archaea, andanother that was more closely related to modern bacteria). Othersview the divergence of the early eukaryotes from the archaeaas a separate and earlier event than the later endosymbiosis ofthe bacterium (the origin of mitochondria). In either case, somegenes of eukaryotes are more closely related to those of archaea,while others are more closely related to those of bacteria. Thetree of life therefore contains some merging of lineages, as wellas the predominant diverging of lineages.The common ancestor of all three domains had DNA as itsgenetic material, and its machinery for transcription and translationproduced RNAs and proteins, respectively. This ancestorprobably had a circular chromosome.Three shapes are particularly common among the bacteria:spheres, rods, and curved or helical forms (Figure 26.2). Aspherical bacterium is called a coccus (plural cocci). Cocci maylive singly or may associate in two- or three-dimensional arrays538 CHAPTER 26 | BACTERIA AND ARCHAEA: THE PROKARYOTIC DOMAINSTABLE 26.1The Three Domains of Life on EarthDOMAINCHARACTERISTIC BACTERIA ARCHAEA EUKARYAMembrane-enclosed nucleus Absent Absent PresentMembrane-enclosed organelles Absent Absent PresentPeptidoglycan in cell wall Present Absent AbsentMembrane lipids Ester-linked Ester-linked Ester-linkedUnbranched Branched UnbranchedRibosomesa 70S 70S 80SInitiator tRNA Formylmethionine Methionine MethionineOperons Yes Yes NoPlasmids Yes Yes RareRNA polymerases One Oneb ThreeRibosomes sensitive to chloramphenicol and streptomycin Yes No NoRibosomes sensitive to diphtheria toxin No Yes Yesa70S ribosomes are smaller than 80S ribosomes.bArchaeal RNA polymerase is similar to eukaryotic polymerases.Last common ancestorof today’s speciesTimeBACTERIAARCHAEAEUKARYAAncient PresentOriginof lifeVery ancientprokaryotesEndosymbiotic originof mitochondriaEndosymbiotic originof chloroplasts26.1 The Three Domains of the Living World All three domainsshare a common prokaryotic ancestor.GO TO Animated Tutorial 26.1 • The Evolution ofthe Three DomainsyourBioPortal.comas chains, plates, blocks, or clusters of cells. A rod-shaped bacteriumis called a bacillus (plural bacilli). The spiral form (like acorkscrew), or helix (plural helices), is the third main bacterialshape. Bacilli and helices may be single, form chains, or gatherin regular clusters. Among the other bacterial shapes are longfilaments and branched filaments.Less is known about the shapes of archaea because many ofthese organisms have never been seen. Many archaea are knownonly from samples of DNA from the environment, as we describein Section 26.4. However, the morphology of some speciesis known, including cocci, bacilli, and even triangular andsquare-shaped species; the latter grow on surfaces, arrangedlike sheets of postage stamps.Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya are all products of billions ofyears of mutation, natural selection, and genetic drift, and theyare all well adapted to present-day environments. None is“primitive.” Their last common ancestor probably lived 2 to 3billion years ago. The earliest prokaryotic fossils date back atleast 3.5 billion years, and they indicate that there was considerablediversity among the prokaryotes even during the earliestdays of life.26.1 RECAPBacteria and archaea are highly divergent from eachother and are only distantly related on the tree of life.Eukaryotes received ancient evolutionary contributionsfrom both of these prokaryotic lineages.• What are the principal differences between theprokaryotes and the eukaryotes? See pp. 537–538and Table 26.1• Why don’t we group Bacteria and Archaea together ina single domain? See p. 538 and Table 26.1The prokaryotes were alone on Earth for a very long time,adapting to new environments and to changes in existing environments.They have survived to this day, in massive numbersand incredible diversity, and they are found everywhere.What Are Some Keys to the 26.2 Success of Prokaryotes?If success is measured by numbers of individuals, the prokaryotesare the most successful organisms on Earth. Individual bacteriaand archaea in the oceans number more than 3 × 1028. Thisstunning number is perhaps 100 million times as great as thenumber of stars in the visible universe. In fact, the bacteria livingin your intestinal tract outnumber all the humans who haveever lived.Prokaryotes are unicellular organisms, although many formmulticellular colonies that contain many individual cells. Thesemulticellular associations are not cases of true multicellularorganisms, however, because each individual cell is fully viableand independent. These associations arise as cells adhere to oneanother after reproducing by binary fission. Associations in theform of chains are called filaments. Some filaments becomeenclosed in delicate tubular sheaths.Prokaryotes generally form complex communitiesProkaryotic cells and their associations do not usually live in isolation.Rather, they live in communities of many different speciesof organisms, often including microscopic eukaryotes. (Microscopicorganisms are often collectively referred to as microbes.)Some microbial communities form layers in sediments, and othersform clumps a meter or more in diameter. While some microbialcommunities are harmful to humans, others provide importantservices. They help us digest our food, break downmunicipal waste, and recycle organic matter in the environment.Many microbial communities tend to form dense biofilms.Upon contacting a solid surface, the cells secrete a gel-like stickypolysaccharide matrix that then traps other cells (Figure 26.3).Once this biofilm forms, it is difficult to kill the cells. Pathogenic(disease-causing) bacteria are difficult for the immune system—and modern medicine—to combat once they form a biofilm. Forexample, the film may be impermeable to antibiotics. Worse,some drugs stimulate the bacteria in a biofilm to lay down morematrix, making the film even more impermeable.Biofilms form on contact lenses, on artificial joint replacements,and on just about any available surface. They foul metal pipesand cause corrosion, a major problem in steam-driven electricitygeneration plants. The stain on our teeth that we call dentalplaque is also a biofilm. Fossil stromatolites—large, rocky structuresmade up of alternating layers of fossilized microbial biofilmand calcium carbonate—are the oldest remnants of early life on26.2 | WHAT ARE SOME KEYS TO THE SUCCESS OF PROKARYOTES? 539HelicalbacteriaCocciBacilli0.50 μm26.2 Bacterial Cell Shapes This composite, colorized micrographshows the three common types of bacterial morphology. Spherical cellsare called cocci; the acid-producing cocci shown here in green are aspecies of Enterococcus from the mammalian gut. The rod-shaped bacilli(orange) are represented by Escherichia coli, also a resident of the gut.Leptospira interrogans is a helical (spiral) bacterium and a humanpathogen.Earth (see Figure 25.4). Stromatolitesstill form today insome parts of the world.Biofilms are the subject ofmuch current research. For example,some biologists arestudying the chemical signalsthat bacteria in biofilms use tocommunicate with one another.By blocking the signalsthat lead to the production ofthe matrix polysaccharides, researchersmay be able to preventbiofilms from forming.Ateam of bioengineers andchemical engineers recentlydevised a sophisticated techniquethat enables them tomonitor biofilm developmentin extremely small populationsof bacteria, cell by cell.They developed a tiny chiphousing six separate growthchambers, or “microchemostats”(Figure 26.4). The techniquesof microfluidics usemicroscopic tubes and computer-controlled valves to directfluid flow through complex“plumbing circuits” inthe growth chambers.540 CHAPTER 26 | BACTERIA AND ARCHAEA: THE PROKARYOTIC DOMAINSOther organismsare attracted to thesignal molecules.Helical and sphericalorganisms aretrapped in the matrix.Binding to surfaceIrreversible attachmentGrowth and division,formation of matrixMatrixFree-swimming prokaryotesSingle-species biofilmSignalmoleculesSignalmoleculesMature biofilm(A) (B)100 μm26.3 Forming a Biofilm (A) Free-swimmingbacteria and archaea readily attachthemselves to surfaces and form films stabilizedand protected by a surrounding matrix.Once the population size is large enough, thedeveloping biofilm can send chemical signalsthat attract other microorganisms. (B) Scanningelectron micrography reveals a biofilm ofplaque on a used toothbrush bristle. Thematrix of dental plaque consists of proteinsfrom both bacterial secretions and saliva.TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE26.4 The MicrochemostatUsing techniques from microfluidic engineering, biologists can monitor the dynamics of extremelysmall bacterial populations. The photograph shows six microchemostats on a chip. Each of the six isequipped with input ports for growth and flushing media, and a number of output ports (diagram).Tiny valves, controlled by a computer, direct flow. Samples are removed through the output ports andare analyzed to record changes in the bacterial population.Valves can be adjusted to admitfresh growth medium and collectcells at an output port.In continuous circulation mode, medium containingcells is pumped around the growth chamber loop(green) as the cells multiply.Growthmedium(input) ValvesSupplychannelsFlushingmedium(input)PumpOutput portsProkaryotes have distinctive cell wallsMany prokaryotes have a thick and relatively stiff cell wall. Itis quite different from the cell walls of land plants and algae,which contain cellulose and other polysaccharides, and fromthose of fungi, which contain chitin. The cell walls of almostall bacteria contain peptidoglycan (a cross-linked polymer ofamino sugars), which produces a meshlike structure around thecell. Archaeal cell walls are of differing types, but most containsignificant amounts of protein. One group of archaea haspseudopeptidoglycan in its cell wall; as you can probably guessfrom the prefix pseudo, pseudopeptidoglycan is similar to, butdistinctly different from, the peptidoglycan of bacteria. Themonomers making up pseudopeptidoglycan differ from andare differently linked than those of peptidoglycan. Peptidoglycanis a substance unique to bacteria; its absence from thewalls of archaea is a key difference between the two prokaryoticdomains.To appreciate the complexity of some bacterial cell walls, considerthe reactions of bacteria to a simple staining process. Atestcalled the Gram stain separates most types of bacteria into twodistinct groups, Gram-positive and Gram-negative. A smearof cells on a microscope slide is soaked in a violet dye andtreated with iodine; it is then washed with alcohol and counterstainedwith a red dye (safranine). Gram-positive bacteria retainthe violet dye and appear blue to purple (Figure 26.5A). The alcoholwashes the violet stain out of Gram-negative cells; thesecells then pick up the safranine counterstain, so Gram-negativebacteria appear pink to red (Figure 26.5B).For most bacteria, the Gram-staining results are determinedby the chemical structure of the cell wall. AGram-negative cellwall usually has a thin peptidoglycan layer, and outside thepeptidoglycan layer the cell is surrounded by a second, outermembrane quite distinct in chemical makeup from the plasmamembrane (see Figure 26.5B). Between the inner (plasma) andouter membranes of Gram-negative bacteria is a periplasmicspace. This space contains proteins that are important indigesting some materials, transporting others, and detectingchemical gradients in the environment.AGram-positive cell wall usually has about five timesas much peptidoglycan as a Gram-negative wall. Thisthick peptidoglycan layer is a meshwork that may servesome of the same purposes as the periplasmic space of theGram-negative cell wall.The consequences of the different features of prokaryoticcell walls are numerous and relate to the disease-causingcharacteristics of some bacteria. Indeed, the cell wallis a favorite target in medical combat against pathogenicbacteria because it has no counterpart in eukaryotic cells.Antibiotics such as penicillin and ampicillin, as well asother agents that specifically interfere with the synthesisof peptidoglycan-containing cell walls, tend to have little,if any, effect on the cells of humans and other eukaryotes.Prokaryotes have distinctive modes of locomotionAlthough many prokaryotes cannot move, others aremotile. These organisms move by one of several means.Some helical bacteria, called spirochetes, use a corkscrewlikemotion made possible by modified flagella, called axialfilaments, running along the axis of the cell beneath theouter membrane (Figure 26.6A). Many cyanobacteria anda few other groups of bacteria use various poorly understoodgliding mechanisms, including rolling. Variousaquatic prokaryotes, including some cyanobacteria, canmove slowly up and down in the water by adjusting theamount of gas in gas vesicles (Figure 26.6B). By far themost common type of locomotion in prokaryotes, however,is that driven by flagella.Prokaryotic flagella are slender filaments that extendsingly or in tufts from one or both ends of the cell or aredistributed all around it (Figure 26.7). A prokaryotic flagellumconsists of a single fibril made of the protein fla-26.2 | WHAT ARE SOME KEYS TO THE SUCCESS OF PROKARYOTES? 541Gram-positive bacteria have a uniformly densecell wall consisting primarily of peptidoglycan.Gram-negative bacteria have a very thinpeptidoglycan layer and an outer membrane.5 μmCell wall(peptidoglycan)Plasmamembrane(A)(B)PeptidoglycanlayerOutermembraneof cell wallPlasmamembrane10 μmInside of cellOutside of cellInside of cellOutside of cellPeriplasmic spacePeriplasmic space26.5 The Gram Stain and the Bacterial Cell Wall When treated with Gramstain, the cell walls of different bacteria react in one of two ways. (A) Gram-positivebacteria have a thick peptidoglycan cell wall that retains the violet dye andappears deep blue or purple. (B) Gram-negative bacteria have a thin peptidoglycanlayer that does not retain the violet dye but picks up the counterstain andappears pink to red.GO TO Web Activity 26.1 • Gram Stain and BacteriayourBioPortal.comgellin, projecting from the cell surface, plus a hook and basalbody responsible for motion (see Figure 5.5). In contrast, the flagellumof eukaryotes is enclosed by the plasma membrane andusually contains a circle of nine pairs of microtubules surroundingtwo central microtubules, all containing the protein tubulin,along with many other associated proteins. The prokaryotic flagellumrotates about its base, much like a propeller, rather thanbeating in a whiplike manner, as a eukaryotic flagellum or ciliumdoes.Prokaryotes reproduce asexually, but geneticrecombination can occurProkaryotes reproduce by binary fission, an asexual process(see Figure 11.2). Recall, however, that there are also processes—transformation, conjugation, and transduction—that allow theexchange of genetic information between some prokaryoteswithout reproduction occurring. So prokaryotes can exchangeand recombine their DNA with other individuals (this is sex inthe genetic sense of the word), but this genetic exchange isnot directly linked to reproduction as it is in most eukaryotes.If conditions are favorable, some prokaryotes can multiplyvery rapidly. The shortest known prokaryote generation timesare about 10 minutes, although these rapid rates of replicationusually are not maintained for long. Under less optimal conditions,generation times often extend to many hours or even severaldays. Bacteria living deep in Earth’s crust may suspendtheir growth for more than a century without dividing, thenmultiply for a few days before once again suspending growth.Prokaryotes can communicateProkaryotes can send and receive signals from one another andfrom other organisms. One communication channel they employis chemical. Another is physical, with light as the medium.Bacteria release chemical substances that are sensed by otherbacteria of the same species. They can announce their availabilityfor conjugation, for example, by means of such signals. Theycan also monitor the density of their population. As the densityof bacteria in a particular region increases, the concentrationof a chemical signal builds up. When the bacteria sense that theirpopulation has become sufficiently dense, they can commenceactivities that smaller densities could not manage, such as forminga biofilm (see Figure 26.3). This density-sensing techniqueis called quorum sensing.Like fireflies and many other organisms, some bacteria canemit light by a process called bioluminescence. A complex, enzyme-catalyzed reaction requiring ATP causes the emission oflight but not heat. Often such bacteria luminesce only when aquorum has been sensed. The bioluminescent spots present insome deep-sea fishes are produced by colonies of biolumines-542 CHAPTER 26 | BACTERIA AND ARCHAEA: THE PROKARYOTIC DOMAINSAxial filaments(A)(B)Cell wallOutermembraneGasvesicles50 nm0.4 μm26.6 Structures Associated with Prokaryote Motility (A) A spirochetefrom the gut of a termite, seen in cross section, shows the axialfilaments used to produce a corkscrew-like motion. (B) Gas vesicles ina cyanobacterium, visualized by the freeze-fracture technique.Flagella 0.75 μm26.7 Some Prokaryotes Use Flagella for Locomotion Multipleflagella propel this Salmonella bacillus.cent bacteria. On land, some soil-dwelling bioluminescent bacteriaproduce eerily glowing patches of ground at night.How is bioluminescence useful to a prokaryote? One fairlywell understood case is that of some bacteria of the genus Vibrio.These bacteria can live freely, but they truly thrive inside theguts of fish. Inside the fish, they may attach to food particlesand then can be expelled as waste along with particulate matter.Reproducing on the particles, a bacteria population increasesuntil a glowing particle attracts another fish, which ingests thebacteria along with the particle—giving the bacteria a newhome and food source for a while. In this case, Vibrio are bothcommunicating with another species and enhancing their ownnutritional status. In the Indian Ocean off the eastern coast ofAfrica, Vibrio sometimes concentrate over such a large area (severalthousand square kilometers) that their bioluminescence isvisible from space (Figure 26.8).Prokaryotes have amazingly diversemetabolic pathwaysBacteria and archaea outdo the eukaryotes in terms of metabolicdiversity. Although much more diverse in size and shape,eukaryotes draw on fewer metabolic mechanisms for theirenergy needs. In fact, much of the eukaryotes’ energy metabolismis carried out in organelles—mitochondria and chloroplasts—that are endosymbiotic descendants of bacteria, asdescribed in Section 5.5.The long evolutionary history of bacteria and archaea, duringwhich they have had time to explore a wide variety of habitats,has led to the extraordinary diversity of their metabolic“lifestyles”—their use or nonuse of oxygen, their energysources, their sources of carbon atoms, and the materials theyrelease as waste products.ANAEROBIC VERSUS AEROBIC METABOLISM Some prokaryotescan live only by anaerobic metabolism because molecular oxygenis poisonous to them. These oxygen-sensitive organismsare called obligate anaerobes. Other prokaryotes can shift theirmetabolism between anaerobic and aerobic modes (see Chapter9) and thus are called facultative anaerobes. Many facultativeanaerobes alternate between anaerobic metabolism (suchas fermentation) and cellular respiration as conditions dictate.Aerotolerant anaerobes cannot conduct cellular respirationbut are not damaged by oxygen when it is present. By definition,an anaerobe does not use oxygen as an electron acceptorfor its respiration.At the other extreme from the obligate anaerobes, someprokaryotes are obligate aerobes, unable to survive for extendedperiods in the absence of oxygen. They require oxygen for cellularrespiration.NUTRITIONAL CATEGORIES All living organisms face the samenutritional challenges: they must synthesize energy-rich compoundssuch as ATP to power their life-sustaining metabolic reactions,and they must obtain carbon atoms to build their ownorganic molecules. Biologists recognize four broad nutritionalcategories of organisms: photoautotrophs, photoheterotrophs,chemolithotrophs, and chemoheterotrophs. Prokaryotes are representedin all four groups (Table 26.2).Photoautotrophs perform photosynthesis. They use light astheir energy source and carbon dioxide (CO2) as their carbonsource. Like green plants and other photosynthetic eukaryotes,the cyanobacteria, a group of photoautotrophic bacteria, usechlorophyll a as their key photosynthetic pigment and produce26.2 | WHAT ARE SOME KEYS TO THE SUCCESS OF PROKARYOTES? 543Indian OceanArabian PeninsulaHornof Africa BioluminescentVibrio26.8 Bioluminescent Bacteria Seen from Space In this satellitephoto, legions of bioluminescent Vibrio harveyi form a glowing patchthousands of square kilometers in area in the Indian Ocean, off the Hornof Africa. Compare their blue glow with the white light of cities in easternAfrica and the Middle East.TABLE 26.2How Organisms Obtain Their Energy and CarbonNUTRITIONAL CATEGORY ENERGY SOURCE CARBON SOURCEPhotoautotrophs Light Carbon dioxide(found in all threedomains)Photoheterotrophs Light Organic(some bacteria) compoundsChemolithotrophs Inorganic Carbon dioxide(some bacteria, substancesmany archaea)Chemoheterotrophs Organic Organic(found in all three compounds compoundsdomains)oxygen gas (O2) as a by-product of noncyclic electron transport(see Section 10.1).There are other photosynthetic groups among the bacteria,but these use bacteriochlorophyll as their key photosynthetic pigment,and they do not release O2. Indeed, some of these photosynthesizersproduce particles of pure sulfur, because hydrogensulfide (H2S) rather than H2O is their electron donor forphotophosphorylation (see Section 10.2). Bacteriochlorophyllmolecules absorb light of longer wavelengths than the chlorophyllmolecules used by all other photosynthesizing organisms.As a result, bacteria using this pigment can grow in water underfairly dense layers of algae, using light of wavelengths thatare not absorbed by the algae (Figure 26.9).Photoheterotrophs use light as their energy source but mustobtain their carbon atoms from organic compounds made byother organisms. Their “food” consists of organic compoundssuch as carbohydrates, fatty acids, and alcohols. For example,compounds released from plant roots (as in rice paddies) orfrom decomposing photosynthetic bacteria in hot springs aretaken up by photoheterotrophs and metabolized to form buildingblocks for other compounds; sunlight provides the necessaryATP through photophosphorylation. The purple nonsulfurbacteria, among others, are photoheterotrophs.Chemolithotrophs (also called chemoautotrophs) obtain theirenergy by oxidizing inorganic substances, and they use someof that energy to fix CO2. Some chemolithotrophs use reactionsidentical to those of the typical photosynthetic cycle, butothers use alternative pathways to fix CO2. Some bacteria oxidizeammonia or nitrite ions to form nitrate ions. Others oxidizehydrogen gas, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur, and other materials.Many archaea are chemolithotrophs.Deep-sea hydrothermal vent ecosystems are dependent onchemolithotrophic prokaryotes that are incorporated into largecommunities of crabs, mollusks, and giant worms, all living ata depth of 2,500 meters—below any hint of sunlight. These bacteriaobtain energy by oxidizing hydrogen sulfide and othersubstances released in the near-boiling water flowing from volcanicvents in the ocean floor.Finally, chemoheterotrophs obtain both energy and carbonatoms from one or more complex organic compounds that havebeen synthesized by other organisms. Most known bacteria andarchaea are chemoheterotrophs—as are all animals and fungiand many protists.NITROGEN AND SULFUR METABOLISM Key metabolic reactions inmany prokaryotes involve nitrogen or sulfur. For example, somebacteria carry out respiratory electron transport without usingoxygen as an electron acceptor. These organisms use oxidizedinorganic ions such as nitrate, nitrite, or sulfate as electron acceptors.Examples include the denitrifiers, bacteria that releasenitrogen to the atmosphere as nitrogen gas (N2). These normallyaerobic bacteria, mostly species of the genera Bacillus andPseudomonas, use nitrate (NO3–) as an electron acceptor in placeof oxygen if they are kept under anaerobic conditions:2 NO3– + 10 e– + 12 H+→N2 + 6 H2ONitrogen fixers convert atmospheric nitrogen gas into a chemicalform (ammonia) usable by the nitrogen fixers themselves aswell as by other organisms, especially land plants:N2 + 6 H →2 NH3All organisms require nitrogen in order to build proteins, nucleicacids, and other important compounds. Nitrogen fixationis thus vital to life as we know it. This all-important biochemicalprocess is carried out by a wide variety of archaea and bacteria(including cyanobacteria) but by no other organisms, sowe depend on these prokaryotes for our very existence. We describethe details of nitrogen fixation in Chapter 36.Ammonia is oxidized to nitrate in soil and in seawater bychemolithotrophic bacteria called nitrifiers. Bacteria of two genera,Nitrosomonas and Nitrosococcus, convert ammonia to nitriteions (NO2–), and Nitrobacter oxidizes nitrite to nitrate (NO3–).What do the nitrifiers get out of these reactions? Their metabolismis powered by the energy released by the oxidationof ammonia or nitrite. For example, by passing the electronsfrom nitrite through an electron transport chain (see Section 9.3),Nitrobacter can make ATP, and using some ofthis ATP, can also make NADH. With thisATP and NADH, the bacterium can convertCO2 and H2O to glucose.544 CHAPTER 26 | BACTERIA AND ARCHAEA: THE PROKARYOTIC DOMAINSThe alga absorbs strongly in theblue and red wavelengths, shadingthe bacteria living below it.Bacteria with bacteriochlorophyllcan use long-wavelength (infrared)light, which the algae do not absorb,for their photosynthesis.Ulva sp.(green alga)Purple sulfurbacteriaLowHighWavelength (nm)Relative absorption300 400 500 600 700 800 900 100026.9 Bacteriochlorophyll Absorbs Long-Wavelength Light The chlorophyll in Ulva, agreen alga, absorbs no light of wavelengths longerthan 750 nm. Purple sulfur bacteria, which containbacteriochlorophyll, can conduct photosynthesisusing longer wavelengths.26.2 RECAPProkaryotes have established themselves everywhereon Earth. They may form communities called biofilmsthat coat materials with a gel-like matrix. Prokaryoteshave distinctive cell walls and modes of locomotion,communication, reproduction, and nutrition.• How do biofilms form and why are they of special interestto researchers? See pp. 539–540 and Figure 26.3• Describe bacterial cell wall architecture. See p. 541and Figure 26.5• How are the four nutritional categories of prokaryotesdistinguished? See pp. 543–544 and Table 26.2• Explain why nitrogen metabolism in the prokaryotes isvital to other organisms. See p. 544We noted earlier that only recently have scientists appreciatedthe huge distinctions between Bacteria and Archaea. How doresearchers approach the classification of organisms they can’teven see?How Can We Resolve 26.3 Prokaryote Phylogeny?As detailed in Chapter 22, classification schemes serve three primarypurposes: to identify organisms, to reveal evolutionaryrelationships, and to provide universal names. Classifying bacteriaand archaea is of particular importance to humans becausescientists and medical technologists must be able to identify bacteriaquickly and accurately; when the bacteria are pathogenic,lives may depend on it. In addition, many emerging biotechnologies(see Chapter 18) depend on a thorough knowledge ofprokaryote biochemistry, and understanding an organism’sphylogeny allows biologists to make predictions about the distributionof biochemical processes across the wide diversity ofprokaryotes.The small size of prokaryotes has hinderedour study of their phylogenyUntil about 300 years ago, nobody had even seen an individualprokaryote; these organisms remained invisible to humans untilthe invention of the first simple microscope. Prokaryotesare so small that even the best light microscopes don’t revealmuch about them. It took the advanced microscopic equipmentand techniques of the twentieth century (see Figure 5.3) to openup the microbial world.Until recently, taxonomists based prokaryote classificationon observable phenotypic characters such as shape, color, motility,nutritional requirements, antibiotic sensitivity, and reactionto the Gram stain. When biologists learned how to grow bacteriain pure culture on nutrient media, they learned a great dealabout the genetics, nutrition, and metabolism of those speciesthat could be cultured. However, these species represent probablyless than 1 percent of living prokaryote species. Furthermore,this work provided little insight into how prokaryotic organismsevolved—a question of great interest to microbiologistsand evolutionary biologists. Only recently have systematists developedthe appropriate tools to produce classification schemesthat make sense in evolutionary terms.The nucleotide sequences of prokaryotes revealtheir evolutionary relationshipsAnalyses of nucleotide sequences of ribosomal RNA (rRNA)genes provided the first comprehensive evidence of evolutionaryrelationships among prokaryotes. For several reasons, rRNAis particularly useful for evolutionary studies of living organisms:• rRNA is evolutionarily ancient, as it was found in thecommon ancestor of life.• No free-living organism lacks rRNA, so rRNA genes canbe compared throughout the tree of life.• rRNA plays a critical role in translation in all organisms,so lateral transfer of rRNA genes among distantly relatedspecies is unlikely.• rRNA has evolved slowly enough that gene sequencescan be aligned and analyzed among even distantlyrelated species.Comparisons of rRNA genes from a great many organisms haverevealed the probable phylogenetic relationships from throughoutthe tree of life. Databases such as GenBank contain rRNAgene sequences from hundreds of thousands of species—morethan any other gene sequences.Although these data are helpful, it is clear that even distantlyrelated prokaryotes sometimes exchange genetic material. Insome groups of prokaryotes, analyses of multiple gene sequenceshave suggested several different phylogenetic patterns.How could such differences among different gene sequencesarise?Lateral gene transfer can lead to discordant gene treesAs noted earlier, prokaryotes reproduce by binary fission. If wecould follow these divisions back through evolutionary time,we would be tracing the path of the complete tree of life for bacteriaand archaea. This underlying tree of relationships, representedin highly abbreviated form in Appendix A, is called theorganismal (or species) tree. Because whole genomes are replicatedduring asexual binary fission divisions, we expect phylogenetictrees constructed from most gene sequences to reflectthese same relationships (see Chapter 22).From early in evolution to the present day, however, somegenes have been moving “sideways” from one prokaryoticspecies to another, a phenomenon known as lateral gene transfer.Mechanisms of lateral gene transfer include transfer by plasmidsand viruses and uptake of DNA from the environment bytransformation. Lateral gene transfers are well documented, especiallyamong closely related species; some have been documentedeven across the three primary domains of life.26.3 | HOW CAN WE RESOLVE PROKARYOTE PHYLOGENY? 545Consider, for example, the genome of Thermotoga maritima,a bacterium that can survive extremely high temperatures. Incomparing the 1,869 gene sequences of T. maritima against sequencesfor the same proteins in other species, investigatorsfound that some of this bacterium’s genes have their closestrelationships not with those of other bacterial species, but withthe genes of archaeal species that live in similar environments.When genes involved in lateral transfer events are sequencedand analyzed phylogenetically, the resulting individual genetrees will not match the organismal phylogeny in every respect(Figure 26.10). Individual gene trees will vary because the historyof lateral gene transfer events is different for each gene. Biologistsreconstruct the underlying organismal phylogeny bycomparing multiple genes (to produce a consensus tree), or byconcentrating on genes that are unlikely to be involved in lateralgene transfer events. For example, genes that are involvedin fundamental cell processes (such as the rRNA genes discussedabove) are unlikely to be replaced by the same genesfrom other species, since functional, locally adapted copies ofthese genes are already present.What kinds of genes are most likely to be involved in lateralgene transfer? Genes that result in a new, adaptive functionthat will convey higher fitness to a recipient species aremost likely to be transferred repeatedly among species. For example,genes that produce antibiotic resistance are often transferredon plasmids among many bacterial species, especiallyunder the strong selective conditions of antibiotic medicationby humans. This selection for antibiotic resistance is whyinformed physicians are now more careful in prescribing antibiotics.Improper or frequent use of antibiotics can lead to selectionfor resistant strains of bacteria, which are then muchharder to treat effectively.It is debatable whether lateral gene transfer has seriouslycomplicated our attempts to resolve the tree of prokaryotic life.Recent work suggests that it has not—while it complicates studiesin some individual species, it need not present problems athigher levels. It is now possible to make nucleotide sequencecomparisons involving entire genomes, and these studies arerevealing a stable core of crucial genes that are uncomplicated bylateral gene transfer. Gene trees based on this stable core moreaccurately reveal relationships of the organismal phylogeny (seeFigure 26.10). The problem remains, however, that only a verysmall proportion of the prokaryotic world has been describedand studied.The great majority of prokaryote specieshave never been studiedMost prokaryotes have defied all attempts to grow them in pureculture, causing biologists to wonder how many species, andpossibly even important clades, we might be missing. A windowonto this problem was opened with the introduction of anew way to look at nucleic acid sequences. Unable to work withthe whole genome of a single species, biologists instead examinesequences in individual genes collected from a random sampleof the environment.Norman Pace of the University of Colorado isolated individualrRNA gene sequences from extracts of environmental samplessuch as soil and seawater. Comparing such sequences withpreviously known ones revealed an extraordinary number ofnew sequences, implying that they came from previously unrecognizedspecies. Biologists have described only about 10,000species of bacteria and only a few hundred species of archaea(see Figure 1.10). The results of Pace’s and similar studies suggestthat there may be millions, perhaps hundreds of millions,of prokaryote species on Earth. Other biologists put the estimatemuch lower, and argue that the high dispersal ability of manybacterial species greatly reduces local endemism (geographicallyrestricted species). Only the magnitude of these estimatesdiffer, however; all sides agree that we have just begun to uncoverEarth’s bacterial and archaeal diversity.546 CHAPTER 26 | BACTERIA AND ARCHAEA: THE PROKARYOTIC DOMAINSGene x is transferred laterallybetween species C and D. The apparent close relationship ofC and D inferred from sequencesof gene x reflects the lateral transferof this gene rather than thephylogeny of the organisms.The consensus tree from a core of stablegenes reflects the organismal phylogeny.Species AGene xSpecies BSpecies CSpecies DABCDABCDOrganismal tree Gene x tree Three genes fromthe stable core26.10 Lateral Gene Transfer Complicates PhylogeneticRelationships (A) The phylogeny of four hypothetical species, witha lateral gene transfer of gene x. (B) A tree based only on gene xshows the phylogeny of the laterally transferred gene, rather than theorganismal phylogeny. (C) In many cases, a “stable core” of prokaryotegenes can be used to reconstruct the organismal phylogeny ofprokaryotes.26.3 RECAPThe study of prokaryote phylogeny and diversity hasbeen inhibited by the organisms’ small size, our inabilityto grow some of them in pure culture, and lateralgene transfer. However, nucleotide sequences ofessential genes are providing a much clearer pictureof bacterial and archaeal evolutionary relationships.• How did biologists classify bacteria before it becamepossible to determine nucleotide sequences? Seep. 545• Explain why nucleotide sequences of rRNA genes areuseful for evolutionary studies. See p. 545• How does lateral gene transfer complicate evolutionarystudies? See p. 545–546 and Figure 26.10With the advent of sequencing techniques, biologists have maderapid progress in understanding the phylogeny of prokaryotes.In the next section, we identify the characteristics and life historyof the major groups.What Are the Major Known 26.4 Groups of Prokaryotes?Here we use a widely accepted classification scheme that hasconsiderable support from nucleotide sequence data. More thana dozen major clades have been proposed under this scheme,just a few of which we discuss here. We pay the closest attentionto six groups that have received the most study: the spirochetes,chlamydias, high-GC Gram-positives, cyanobacteria,low-GC Gram-positives, and proteobacteria (Figure 26.11).First, however, a few words about the origins of the prokaryotesare in order.Several of the earliest branching lineages of bacteria and archaeaare thermophiles (Greek, “heat-lovers”). This observationis in line with the hypothesis that the first living organismswere thermophiles, given that most environments on early Earthwere much hotter than those of today. While additional evidencecontinues to support this hypothesis, some researchers believethat the various thermophilic groups evolved more recently thandid the lineages leading to the spirochetes and chlamydias.Spirochetes move by means of axial filamentsSpirochetes are Gram-negative, motile, chemoheterotrophicbacteria characterized by unique structures called axial filaments,which are modified flagella running through theperiplasmic space (see Figure 26.6A). The cell body is a longcylinder coiled into a helix (Figure 26.12). The axial filamentsbegin at either end of the cell and overlap in the middle. Proteinmotors connect the axial filaments to the cell wall, enablingrotation of these structures as they do in other prokaryotic flagella.Many spirochetes live in humans as parasites; a few arepathogens, including those that cause syphilis and Lyme disease.Others live free in mud or water.26.4 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR KNOWN GROUPS OF PROKARYOTES? 547Origin of Proteobacteriamitochondria Origin ofchloroplastsCyanobacteriaSpirochetesChlamydiasHigh-GCGram-positivesLow-GCGram-positivesCrenarchaeotaEuryarchaeotaEukaryotesOriginof lifeBACTERIAARCHAEAEUKARYA26.11 Two Domains: A Brief Overview This abridged summary classificationof the domains Bacteria and Archaea shows their relationshipsto each other and to Eukarya. The relationships among the many cladesof bacteria, not all of which are listed here, are incompletely resolved atthis time.Treponema pallidum 200 nm26.12 A Spirochete This corkscrew-shaped bacterium causes syphilisin humans.Chlamydias are extremely small parasitesChlamydias are among the smallest bacteria (0.2–1.5 μm in diameter).They can live only as parasites in the cells of other organisms.It was once believed that this obligate parasitism resultedfrom an inability of chlamydias to produce ATP—thatchlamydias were “energy parasites.” However, genome sequencingfrom the end of the twentieth century indicates thatchlamydias have the genetic capability to produce at least someATP. They can augment this capacity by using an enzyme calleda translocase, which allows them to take up ATP from the cytoplasmof their host in exchange for ADP from their own cells.These tiny, Gram-negative cocci are unique prokaryotes becauseof their complex life cycle, which involves two differentforms of cells, elementary bodies and reticulate bodies (Figure26.13). In humans, various strains of chlamydias cause eye infections(especially trachoma), sexually transmitted diseases,and some forms of pneumonia.Some high-GC Gram-positives are valuablesources of antibioticsHigh-GC Gram-positives, also known as actinobacteria, derivetheir name from the relatively high ratio of G-C to A-T nucleotidebase pairs in their DNA. These bacteria develop an elaboratelybranched system of filaments (Figure 26.14) and can resemblethe filamentous growth habit of fungi, albeit at a reducedscale. Some high-GC Gram-positives reproduce by formingchains of spores at the tips of the filaments. In species that donot form spores, the branched, filamentous growth ceases, andthe structure breaks up into typical cocci or bacilli, which thenreproduce by binary fission.The high-GC Gram-positives include several medically importantbacteria. Mycobacterium tuberculosis causes tuberculosis,which kills 3 million people each year. Genetic data suggest thatthis bacterium arose 3 million years ago in East Africa, makingit the oldest known human bacterial affliction. Streptomyces producestreptomycin as well as hundreds of other antibiotics.We derive most of our antibiotics from members of the high-GCGram-positives.Cyanobacteria are important photoautotrophsCyanobacteria, sometimes called blue-green bacteria because oftheir pigmentation, are photoautotrophs that require only water,nitrogen gas, oxygen, a few mineral elements, light, and carbondioxide to survive. They use chlorophyll a for photosynthesisand release oxygen gas; many species also fix nitrogen. Theirphotosynthesis was the basis of the “oxygen revolution” thattransformed Earth’s atmosphere (see Section 25.3).Cyanobacteria carry out the same type of photosynthesis thatis characteristic of eukaryotic photosynthesizers. They containelaborate and highly organized internal membrane systemscalled photosynthetic lamellae. The chloroplasts of photosyntheticeukaryotes are derived from an endosymbiotic cyanobacterium.Cyanobacteria may live free as single cells or associate incolonies. Depending on the species and on growth conditions,colonies may range from flat sheets one cell thick to filamentsto spherical balls of cells.Some filamentous colonies of cyanobacteria differentiate intothree cell types: vegetative cells, spores, and heterocysts (Figure26.15). Vegetative cells photosynthesize, spores are restingstages that can survive harsh environmental conditions andeventually develop into new filaments, and heterocysts are cellsspecialized for nitrogen fixation. All of the known cyanobacteriawith heterocysts fix nitrogen. Heterocysts also have a role inreproduction: when filaments break apart to reproduce, the heterocystmay serve as a breaking point.548 CHAPTER 26Elementary bodies aretaken into a eukaryoticcell by phagocytosis……where they develop intothin-walled reticulate bodies,which grow and divide.Reticulate bodies reorganize intoelementary bodies, which are liberatedby the rupture of the host cell.Chlamydia psittaci 0.2 μm1 23Host cell membrane26.13 Chlamydias Change Form during their Life CycleElementary bodies and reticulate bodies are the two major phases of thechlamydia life cycle.2 μmActinomyces sp.Branch point26.14 Filaments of a High-GC Gram-Positive The branching filamentsseen in this scanning electron micrograph are typical of thismedically important bacterial group.The low-GC Gram-positives include the smallestcellular organismsAs their name suggests, the low-GC Gram-positives have a lowerratio of G-C to A-T nucleotide base pairs than do the high-GCGram-positives. Some of the low-GC Gram-positives are in factGram-negative, and some have no cell wall at all. Despite thesedifferences among the various species, phylogenetic analysesof DNA sequences support the monophyly of this clade.Some low-GC Gram-positives can produce heat-resistantresting structures called endospores (Figure 26.16). When akey nutrient such as nitrogen or carbon becomes scarce, thebacterium replicates its DNA and encapsulates one copy, alongwith some of its cytoplasm, in a tough cell wall heavily thickenedwith peptidoglycan and surrounded by a spore coat. Theparent cell then breaks down, releasing the endospore. Endosporeproduction is not a reproductive process; the endosporemerely replaces the parent cell. The endospore, however,can survive harsh environmental conditions that wouldkill the parent cell, such as high or low temperatures ordrought, because it is dormant—its normal activity is suspended.Later, if it encounters favorable conditions, the endosporebecomes metabolically active and divides, formingnew cells that are like the parent cells.Some endospores can be reactivated after more than 1,000years of dormancy. There are even credible claims of reactivationof Bacillus endospores after millions of years. Members ofthis endospore-forming group of low-GC Gram-positives includethe many species of Clostridium and Bacillus.Dormant endospores of Bacillus anthracis are the source of anexotoxin (see page 555) that causes anthrax. The spores germinatewhen they sense specific molecules (macrophages; see Chapter42) in the cytoplasm of mammalian blood cells. However, endosporesof other, nonpathogenic Bacillus species do not germi-26.4 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR KNOWN GROUPS OF PROKARYOTES? 549A thick wall separates thecytoplasm of the nitrogenfixingheterocyst from thesurrounding environment.A thin neck attaches a heterocyst to eachof two vegetative cells in a filament.(B)(A) Anabaena sp. 2 μm0.6 μmHeterocyst V e g e t a t iv e c e ll s Spore(C)26.15 Cyanobacteria (A) Anabaena is a genus of cyanobacteria thatform filamentous colonies containing three cell types. (B) Heterocysts arespecialized for nitrogen fixation and serve as a breaking point when filamentsreproduce. (C) Cyanobacteria appear in enormous numbers insome environments. This California pond has experienced eutrophication:phosphorus and other nutrients generated by human activity have accumulated,feeding an immense green mat (commonly referred to as “pondscum”) that is made up of several species of free-living cyanobacteria.26.16 A Structure for Waiting Out Bad Times This low-GC Grampositivebacterium, which can cause severe colitis in humans, producesendospores as resistant resting structures.EndosporeClostridium difficile0.3 μmnate in this environment. B. anthracis has been used as a bioterrorismagent because large quantities of its endospores are relativelyeasy to transport and spread among human populations,where they may be inhaled or ingested.The genus Staphylococcus—the staphylococci—includes low-GC Gram-positives that are abundant on the human body surface;they are responsible for boils and many other skin problems(Figure 26.17). Staphylococcus aureus is the best-knownhuman pathogen in this genus; it is found in 20 to 40 percentof normal adults (and in 50 to 70 percent of hospitalized adults).In addition to skin diseases, it can cause respiratory, intestinal,and wound infections.Another interesting group of low-GC Gram-positives, themycoplasmas, lack cell walls, although some have a stiffeningmaterial outside the plasma membrane. The mycoplasmas includethe smallest cellular creatures known (Figure 26.18)—evensmaller than chlamydias. The smallest mycoplasmas capableof multiplying by fission have a diameter of about 0.2 μm. Theyare small in another crucial sense as well: they have less than halfas much DNA as most other prokaryotes. It has been speculatedthat the amount of DNA in a mycoplasma, which codes for fewerthan 500 proteins, may be the minimum amount required to encodethe essential properties of a living cell.The proteobacteria are a large and diverse groupBy far the largest group of bacteria, in terms of number of describedspecies, is the proteobacteria. The proteobacteria includemany species of Gram-negative, bacteriochlorophyll-containing,sulfur-using photoautotrophs—as well as dramaticallydiverse bacteria that bear no phenotypic resemblance to thephotoautotrophic species. Genetic and morphological evidenceindicates that the mitochondria of eukaryotes were derivedfrom a proteobacterium by endosymbiosis (see Section 27.2).No characteristic demonstrates the diversity of the proteobacteriamore clearly than their metabolic pathways (Figure26.19). There are five groups of proteobacteria: alpha, beta,gamma, delta, and epsilon. The common ancestor of all the proteobacteriawas a photoautotroph. Early in evolution, twogroups of proteobacteria lost their ability to photosynthesizeand have been chemotrophs ever since. The other three groupsstill have photoautotrophic members, but in each group someevolutionary lines have abandoned photoautotrophy and takenup other modes of nutrition. There are chemolithotrophs andchemoheterotrophs in all three groups. Why? One possibility isthat each of the trends shown in Figure 26.19 was an evolution-1 μmStaphylococcus aureus26.17 Low-GC Gram-Positives “Grape clusters” are the usualarrangement of staphylococci.0.4 μmMycoplasma gallisepticum26.18 The Tiniest Cells Containing only about one-fifth as much DNAas E. coli, mycoplasmas are the smallest known bacteria.A change of line color from green to red or blueindicates loss of the ability to photosynthesize.Photoautotrophicancestor ofproteobacteriaDeltaEpsilonAlphaChemolithotrophsChemoheterotrophsPhotoautotrophsBetaGamma26.19 Modes of Nutrition in the Proteobacteria The commonancestor of all proteobacteria was probably a photoautotroph. As theyencountered new environments, the delta and epsilon proteobacteria lostthe ability to photosynthesize. In the other three groups, some evolutionarylineages became chemolithotrophs or chemoheterotrophs.ary response to selective pressures encountered as these bacteriacolonized new habitats that presented new challenges andopportunities. Lateral gene transfer may have played a role inthese responses.Among the proteobacteria are some nitrogen-fixing genera,such as Rhizobium (see Figure 36.9), and other bacteria that contributeto the global nitrogen and sulfur cycles. Escherichia coli,one of the most studied organisms on Earth, is a proteobacterium.So, too, are many of the most famous human pathogens, suchas Yersinia pestis (which causes bubonic plague), Vibrio cholerae(cholera), and Salmonella typhimurium (gastrointestinal disease).Although fungi cause most plant diseases, and viruses causeothers, about 200 known plant diseases are of bacterial origin.Crown gall, with its characteristic tumors (Figure 26.20), is oneof the most striking. The causal agent of crown gall is Agrobacteriumtumefaciens, a proteobacterium that harbors a plasmidused in recombinant DNA studies as a vehicle for insertinggenes into new plant hosts (see Section 18.2).We have discussed six clades of bacteria in some detail.Other bacterial clades are well known, and there are probablydozens more waiting to be discovered. This estimate is conservativebecause so few bacteria have been cultured and studiedin the laboratory.Archaea differ in several important ways from bacteriaThe separation of Archaea from Bacteria and Eukarya was originallybased on phylogenetic relationships determined from sequencesof rRNA genes. This conclusion was supported whenbiologists sequenced the first archaeal genome. It consisted of1,738 genes, more than half of which were unlike any genes everfound in the other two domains. Archaea are well known forliving in extreme habitats such as those with high salinity (saltcontent), low oxygen concentrations, high temperatures, or highor low pH (Figure 26.21). However, many archaea are not extremeophilesbut live in moderate habitats; they are common in26.4 | WHAT ARE THE MAJOR KNOWN GROUPS OF PROKARYOTES? 55126.20 Crown Gall A crown gall, the type of tumor shown here growingon the stem of a bushy shrub, is caused by the proteobacteriumAgrobacterium tumefaciens.CONCLUSIONINVESTIGATING LIFE26.21 What Is the Highest Temperature Compatible with Life?Can any organism thrive at temperatures above 120°C?This is the temperature used for sterilization, known to destroyall previously described organisms. Kazem Kashefi and DerekLovley isolated an unidentified prokaryote from water samplestaken near a hydrothermal vent and found it survived andeven grew at 121°C. The organism was dubbed “Strain 121,”and its gene sequencing results indicate that it is an archaealspecies.HYPOTHESIS Some prokaryotes survive and even multiply attemperatures above the 120°C threshold ofsterilization.Some prokaryotic organisms can surviveand grow at temperatures above thepreviously defined sterilization limit.Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.METHODRESULTSFURTHER INVESTIGATION: Note that Strain 121 did not growduring a 2-hour exposure to 130°C,but it did not die, either. How wouldyou demonstrate that it was still alive?1. Seal samples of unidentified, iron-reducing,thermal vent prokaryotes in tubes with a mediumcontaining Fe3+ as an electron acceptor. Controltubes contain Fe3+ but no organisms.Cells multiplied most rapidly atabout 105°C but divided aboutonce a day even at 121°C.Generation time (hours)80 90 100 110 120 130Temperature (°C)51015202530The iron-containing solids wereattracted to a magnet only in thosetubes that contained living cells.2. Hold both tubes in a sterilizer at 121°C for 10hours. If the iron-reducing organisms aremetabolically active, they will reduce the Fe3+ toFe2+ (as magnetite, which can be detected witha magnet).3. Isolate any surviving organisms and test forgrowth at various temperatures.Strain121soil, for example. Perhaps the largest number of archaea livein the ocean depths.One current classification scheme divides Archaea into twoprincipal groups, Euryarchaeota and Crenarchaeota. Less isknown about two more recently discovered groups, Korarchaeotaand Nanoarchaeota. In fact, we know relatively littleabout the phylogeny of archaea, in part because the study of archaeais still in its early stages.Two characteristics shared by all archaea are the absence ofpeptidoglycan in their cell walls and the presence of lipids ofdistinctive composition in their cell membranes (see Table 26.1).The unusual lipids in the membranes of archaea are found inall archaea and in no bacteria or eukaryotes. Most bacterial andeukaryotic membrane lipids contain unbranched long-chainfatty acids connected to glycerol molecules by ester linkages:In contrast, some archaeal membrane lipids contain long-chainhydrocarbons connected to glycerol molecules by ether linkages:These ether linkages are a synapomorphy of archaea. In addition,the long-chain hydrocarbons of archaea are branched. Oneclass of these lipids, with hydrocarbon chains 40 carbon atomsin length, contains glycerol at both ends of the hydrocarbons (Figure26.22). This lipid monolayer structure, unique to archaea, stillfits in a biological membrane because the lipids are twice as longas the typical lipids in the bilayers of other membranes. Lipidmonolayers and bilayers are both found among the archaea. Theeffects, if any, of these structural features on membrane performanceare unknown. In spite of this striking difference in theirmembrane lipids, the membranes seen in all three domains havesimilar overall structures, dimensions, and functions.Most Crenarchaeota live in hot and/or acidic placesMost known Crenarchaeota are either thermophilic (heat loving),acidophilic (acid loving), or both. Members of the genusSulfolobus live in hot sulfur springs at temperatures of 70°C to75°C. They become metabolically inactive at 55°C (131°F). Hotsulfur springs are also extremely acidic. Sulfolobus grows bestin the range from pH 2 to pH 3, but some members of thisgenus readily tolerate pH values as low as 0.9. Most acidophilicthermophiles maintain an internal pH of 5.5 to 7 (close to neutral)in spite of their acidic environment. These and other thermophilesthrive where very few other organisms can even survive.The archaea living in the volcanic vent shown in theopening of this chapter are examples of such thermophiles.Euryarchaeota are found in surprising placesSome species of Euryarchaeota share the property of producingmethane (CH4) by reducing carbon dioxide. All of thesemethanogens are obligate anaerobes, and methane productionis the key step in their energy metabolism. Comparison of rRNAgene sequences has revealed a close evolutionary relationshipamong these methanogenic species, which were previouslyassigned to several different bacterial groups.Methanogens release approximately 2 billion tons ofmethane gas into Earth’s atmosphere each year, accountingfor 80 to 90 percent of the methane in the atmosphere, includingthe methane produced in some mammalian digestive systems.Approximately a third of this methane comes frommethanogens living in the guts of grazing herbivores such ascattle, sheep, and deer, and another large fraction comes fromthe methanogens that live in the guts of termites and cockroaches.Methane is increasing in Earth’s atmosphere by about1 percent per year and contributes to the greenhouse effect. Partof the increase is due to increases in cattle and rice farming andthe methanogens associated with both.One methanogen, Methanopyrus, lives on the ocean bottomnear hot hydrothermal vents. Methanopyrus can survive andgrow at 122°C. It grows best at 98°C and not at all at temperaturesbelow 84°C.Another group of Euryarchaeota, the extreme halophiles (saltlovers), lives exclusively in very salty environments, such as thewater of Blood Falls described in the opening of this chapter.Because they contain pink carotenoid pigments, halophiles aresometimes easy to see (Figure 26.23). Halophiles grow in theDead Sea and in brines of all types: the reddish pink spots thatcan occur on pickled fish are colonies of halophilic archaea. Fewother organisms can live in the saltiest of the homes that the extremehalophiles occupy; most would “dry” to death, losing toomuch water to the hypertonic environment. Extreme halophileshave been found in lakes with pH values as high as 11.5—themost alkaline environment inhabited by living organisms, andalmost as alkaline as household ammonia.Some of the extreme halophiles have a unique system fortrapping light energy and using it to form ATP—without usingany form of chlorophyll—when oxygen is in short supply. Theyuse the pigment retinal (also found in the vertebrate eye) com-—C—O—C—HHHH—C—O—C—O HH552 CHAPTER 26 | BACTERIA AND ARCHAEA: THE PROKARYOTIC DOMAINSSome archaea have long-chainhydrocarbons that span themembrane (a lipid monolayer).Other archaeal hydrocarbons fit thesame template as those of bacteriaand eukaryotes (a lipid bilayer).Fattyacids26.22 Membrane Architecture in Archaea The long-chain hydrocarbonsof many archaeal membranes have glycerol molecules at bothends, so that the membranes consist of a lipid monolayer. In contrast,the membranes of other archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes consist ofa lipid bilayer.bined with a protein to form a light-absorbing molecule calledbacteriorhodopsin, and they form ATP by a chemiosmotic mechanismof the kind described in Figure 9.9.Another member of the Euryarchaeota, Thermoplasma, has nocell wall. It is thermophilic and acidophilic, its metabolism isaerobic, and it lives in coal deposits. It has the smallest genomeamong the archaea, and among the smallest (along with the mycoplasmas)of any free-living organism—1,100,000 base pairs.Korarchaeota and Nanoarchaeota are less well knownThe Korarchaeota are known only by evidence derived fromDNA isolated directly from hot springs. No korarchaeote hasbeen successfully grown in pure culture.Another distinctive archaeal lineage has been discovered ata deep-sea hydrothermal vent off the coast of Iceland. It is thefirst representative of a group christened Nanoarchaeota becauseof their minute size. This organism lives attached to cellsof Ignicoccus, a crenarchaeote. Because of their association, thetwo species can be grown together in culture (Figure 26.24).26.4 RECAPBacteria and Archaea are highly diverse groups thatsurvive in almost every imaginable habitat on Earth.Many can survive and even thrive in habitats whereno eukaryotes can live, including extremely hot,acidic, or alkaline conditions.• Can you explain how metabolic diversity could havebecome so great in the proteobacteria? See pp.550–551 and Figure 26.19• What makes the membranes of archaea unique? Seep. 552 and Figure 26.22Because prokaryotes have so many different metabolic and nutritionalcapabilities, and because they can live in so many environments,it is reasonable to expect that they affect their environmentsin many ways. As we are about to see, prokaryotesdirectly affect humans—in ways both beneficial and harmful.How Do Prokaryotes Affect 26.5 Their Environments?Prokaryotes live in and exploit all kinds of environments and arepart of all ecosystems. In this section we examine the roles ofprokaryotes that live in soils, in water, and even in other organisms,where they may exist in a neutral, beneficial, or parasitic relationshipwith their host’s tissues. The roles of some prokaryotesliving in extreme environments have yet to be determined.Remember that in spite of our frequent mention of prokaryotesas human pathogens, only a small minority of the knownprokaryotic species are pathogenic. Many more prokaryotesplay positive roles in our lives and in the biosphere. We makedirect use of many bacteria and a few archaea in such diverseapplications as cheese production, sewage treatment, and theindustrial production of an amazing variety of antibiotics, vitamins,organic solvents, and other chemicals.Prokaryotes are important players in element cyclingMany prokaryotes are decomposers—organisms that metabolizeorganic compounds in dead organisms and other organicmaterial and return the products to the environment as inorganicsubstances. Prokaryotes, along with fungi, return tremen-26.5 | HOW DO PROKARYOTES AFFECT THEIR ENVIRONMENTS? 55326.23 Extreme Halophiles Commercial seawater evaporating ponds(these are in San Francisco Bay) are home to salt-loving archaea, easilyvisible here because of their carotenoid pigments.1 μm26.24 A Nanoarchaeote Growing in Mixed Culture with aCrenarchaeote Nanoarchaeum equitans (red), discovered living neardeep-ocean hydrothermal vents, is the only representative of the nanoarchaeotegroup so far discovered. This tiny organism lives attached tocells of the crenarchaeote Ignicoccus (green). For this confocal lasermicrograph, the two species were visually differentiated by fluorescentdye “tags” that are specific to their separate gene sequences.dous quantities of organic carbon to the atmosphere as carbondioxide, thus carrying out a key step in the carbon cycle.Prokaryotic decomposers also return inorganic nitrogen andsulfur to the environment.Animals depend on plants and other photosynthetic organismsfor their food, directly or indirectly. But plants depend onother organisms—prokaryotes—for their own nutrition. The extentand diversity of life on Earth would not be possible withoutnitrogen fixation by prokaryotes. Nitrifiers are crucial to thebiosphere because they convert the products of nitrogen fixationinto nitrate ions, the form of nitrogen most easily used bymany plants (see Figure 36.11). Plants, in turn, are the source ofnitrogen compounds for animals and fungi. Denitrifiers alsoplay a key role in keeping the nitrogen cycle going. Withoutdenitrifiers, which convert nitrate ions back into nitrogen gas,all forms of nitrogen would leach from the soil and end up inlakes and oceans, making life on land impossible. Otherprokaryotes—both bacteria and archaea—contribute to a similarcycle of sulfur.In the ancient past, the cyanobacteria had an equally dramaticeffect on life: their photosynthesis generated oxygen, convertingEarth’s atmosphere from an anaerobic to an aerobic environment(see Section 25.3). Amajor result was the wholesaleloss of obligate anaerobic species that could not tolerate the oxygengenerated by the cyanobacteria. Only those anaerobes thatadapted to aerobic conditions or colonized environments thatremained anaerobic survived. However, this transformationto aerobic environments made possible the evolution of cellularrespiration and the subsequent explosion of eukaryotic life.Prokaryotes live on and in other organismsProkaryotes work together with eukaryotes in many ways. As wehave seen, mitochondria and chloroplasts are descended fromwhat were once free-living bacteria. Much later in evolutionaryhistory, some plants became associated with bacteria to form cooperativenitrogen-fixing nodules on their roots (see Figure 36.9).Many animals harbor a variety of bacteria and archaea in theirdigestive tracts. Cattle depend on prokaryotes to perform importantsteps in digestion. Like most animals, cattle cannot producecellulase, the enzyme needed to start the digestion of thecellulose that makes up the bulk of their plant food. However,bacteria living in a special section of the gut, called the rumen,produce enough cellulase to process the daily diet for the cattle.Humans use some of the metabolic products—especially vitaminsB12 and K—of bacteria living in our large intestine. Theseand other bacteria and archaea line our intestines with a densebiofilm that is in intimate contact with the mucosal lining of thegut. This biofilm facilitates nutrient transfer from the intestineinto the body and induces immunity to the gut contents. Thebiofilm in the gut is a major part of an “organ” consisting ofprokaryotes that is essential to our health. Its makeup variesfrom time to time and from region to region of the intestinaltract, and it has a complex ecology that scientists have just begunto explore in detail—including the possibility that thespecies composition of an individual’s prokaryote gut faunamay contribute to obesity (or the resistance to it).We are heavily populated inside and out by bacteria. A2009study of bacteria that live on human skin identified more than1,000 species living on the outside of our bodies, and many ofthese are thought to be critical to maintaining the skin’s health.Although only a small percentage of bacterial species are agentsof disease, popular notions of bacteria as “germs” and fear of theconsequences of infection arouse our curiosity about those few.A small minority of bacteria are pathogensThe late nineteenth century was a productive era in the historyof medicine—a time when bacteriologists, chemists, andphysicians proved that many diseases are caused by microbialagents. During this time the German physician Robert Koch laiddown a set of four rules for establishing that a particular microorganismcauses a particular disease:• The microorganism is always found in individuals with thedisease.• The microorganism can be taken from the host and grownin pure culture.• Asample of the culture produces the same disease wheninjected into a new, healthy host.• The newly infected host yields a new, pure culture of microorganismsidentical to those obtained in the second step.These rules, called Koch’s postulates, were very important ina time when it was not widely understood that microorganismscause disease. Although medical science today has more powerfuldiagnostic tools, the postulates remain useful on occasion.For example, physicians were taken aback in the 1990s whenstomach ulcers—long accepted and treated as the result of excessstomach acid—were shown by Koch’s postulates to becaused by the bacterium Helicobacter pylori (see Figure 51.14).Only a tiny percentage of all prokaryotes are pathogens, andof those that are known, all are in the domain Bacteria. For anorganism to be a successful pathogen, it must:• arrive at the body surface of a potential host;• enter the host’s body;• evade the host’s defenses;• multiply inside the host; and finally• infect a new host.Failure to successfully complete any of these steps ends the reproductivecareer of a pathogenic organism. However, in spiteof the many defenses available to potential hosts (see Chapter42), some bacteria are very successful pathogens.For the host, the consequences of a bacterial infection dependon several factors. One is the invasiveness of the pathogen—its ability to multiply in the host’s body. Another is its toxigenicity—its ability to produce toxins, chemical substances that areharmful to the host’s tissues. Corynebacterium diphtheriae, theagent that causes diphtheria, has low invasiveness and multipliesonly in the throat, but its toxigenicity is so great that theentire body is affected. In contrast, Bacillus anthracis, whichcauses anthrax (a disease primarily of cattle and sheep, but554 CHAPTER 26 | BACTERIA AND ARCHAEA: THE PROKARYOTIC DOMAINSwhich is also sometimes fatal in humans), has low toxigenicitybut is so invasive that the entire bloodstream ultimately teemswith the bacteria.There are two general types of bacterial toxins: exotoxins andendotoxins. Endotoxins are released when certain Gram-negativebacteria grow or lyse (burst). Endotoxins are lipopolysaccharides(complexes consisting of a polysaccharide and a lipid component)that form part of the outer bacterial membrane. Endotoxinsare rarely fatal; they normally cause fever, vomiting, and diarrhea.Among the endotoxin producers are some strains of thegamma-proteobacteria Salmonella and Escherichia.Exotoxins are usually soluble proteins released by living,multiplying bacteria, and they may travel throughout the host’sbody. They are highly toxic—often fatal—to the host, but theydo not produce fevers. Human diseases induced by bacterialexotoxins include tetanus (Clostridium tetani), cholera (Vibriocholerae), and bubonic plague (Yersinia pestis). Anthrax resultsfrom three exotoxins produced by Bacillus anthracis. Botulism iscaused by exotoxins produced by Clostridium botulinum that areamong the most poisonous ever discovered. The lethal dose ofthe botulinum Aexotoxin for humans is about one-millionth ofa gram (1 μg). Nonetheless, much smaller doses of this exotoxin,marketed under various trade names, are used to treat musclespasms and also for cosmetic purposes (temporary wrinkle reductionin skin).Pathogenic bacteria are often surprisingly difficult to combat,even with today’s arsenal of antibiotics. One source of thisdifficulty is the ability of prokaryotes to form biofilms.26.5 RECAPProkaryotes play key roles in the cycling of Earth’selements. Many prokaryotes are beneficial andeven necessary to other forms of life; others arepathogens.• Describe the roles of bacteria in the nitrogen cycle.See p. 554• What are some of the challenges facing a pathogen?See p. 554Before moving on to discuss the diversity of eukaryotic life, itis appropriate to consider how viruses are related to the rest oflife. Although they are not cellular, viruses are numericallyamong the most abundant organisms on Earth. Their effects onother organisms are enormous. Where did viruses come from,and how do they fit into the tree of life? Biologists are still workingto answer these questions.Where Do Viruses Fit 26.6 into the Tree of Life?Some biologists do not think of viruses as living organisms, primarilybecause they are not cellular and must depend on cellularorganisms for basic life functions such as replication and metabolism.But viruses are derived from the cells of other livingorganisms. They use the same essential forms of genetic storageand transmission as do cellular organisms. Viruses infect allcellular forms of life, including bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes.They replicate, mutate, evolve, and interact with otherorganisms, often causing serious diseases when they infect theirhosts. They are also numerically among the most abundant organismson the planet. And, finally, viruses clearly evolve independentlyof other organisms, so it is almost impossible not totreat them as a part of life.Several factors make virus phylogeny difficult to resolve. Thetiny size of many viral genomes restricts the phylogenetic analysesthat can be conducted to relate viruses to cellular organisms.The rapid mutational rate, which results in rapid evolution ofviral genomes, tends to cloud evolutionary relationships acrosslong periods of time. There are no known viral fossils (virusesare too small and delicate to fossilize), so the paleontologicalrecord offers no clues as to viral origins. Finally, viruses arehighly diverse (see Figure 26.25), and several lines of evidencesupport the hypothesis that viruses have evolved repeatedlywithin each of the major groups of life.Many RNA viruses probably represent escapedgenomic componentsAlthough viruses are now obligate parasites of cellular species,they may once have been cellular components involved in basiccellular functions—that is, they may be “escaped” componentsof cellular life that now evolve independently of their hosts.NEGATIVE-SENSE SINGLE-STRANDED RNA VIRUSES Acase in pointis a class of viruses whose genome is composed of singlestrandedRNA that is the complement (negative-sense) of themRNA needed for protein translation. Many of these negative-sense single-stranded RNA viruses have only a few genes,including an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase that allowsthem to make mRNA from their negative-sense RNA genome.Modern cellular organisms cannot generate mRNA in this manner(at least in the absence of viral infections), but scientists speculatethat single-stranded RNA genomes may have been commonin the distant past, before DNA became the primarymolecule for genetic information storage.Aself-replicating RNA polymerase gene that begins to replicateindependently of a cellular genome could conceivably acquirea few additional protein-coding genes through recombinationwith its host’s DNA. If one or more of these genes wereto foster the development of a protein coat, the virus might thensurvive outside the host and infect new hosts. It is believed thatthis scenario has been repeated many times independentlyacross the tree of life, given that many of the negative-sense single-stranded RNA viruses that infect organisms from bacteriato humans are not closely related to one another. In other words,negative-sense single-stranded RNA viruses do not represent adistinct taxonomic group, but exemplify a particular process ofcellular escape that probably happened many different times.Examples of familiar negative-sense single-stranded RNAviruses include the viruses that cause measles, mumps, rabies,and influenza (Figure 26.25A).26.6 | WHERE DO VIRUSES FIT INTO THE TREE OF LIFE? 555POSITIVE-SENSE SINGLE-STRANDED RNA VIRUSES The genome ofanother type of single-stranded RNA viruses is composed ofpositive-sense RNA. Positive-sense genomes are already set fortranslation; unlike in negative-sense RNA, no replication of thegenome into the complement strand is needed before proteintranslation can take place. Positive-sense single-stranded RNAviruses are the most abundant and diverse class of viruses (Figure26.25B). Most of the viruses that cause diseases in cropplants are in this group. When they infect plants, these viruseskill patches of cells in the leaves or stems of the plants, leavinglive cells amid a patchwork of discolored dead plant tissue (givingthem the name of mosaic or mottle viruses; Figure 26.26).Other viruses in this group infect bacteria, fungi, and animals.Human diseases caused by positive-sense single-stranded RNAviruses include polio, hepatitis C, and the common cold. As istrue of the other functionally defined groups of viruses, theseviruses appear to have evolved multiple times across the treeof life from different groups of cellular ancestors.RNA RETROVIRUSES The RNAretroviruses are best known as thegroup that includes the human immunodeficiency viruses (HIV;Figure 26.25C). Like the previous two categories of viruses, RNAretroviruses have genomes composed of single-stranded RNAand likely evolved as escaped cellular components.556 CHAPTER 26 | BACTERIA AND ARCHAEA: THE PROKARYOTIC DOMAINSA double-stranded DNA virus: One of themany herpes viruses (Herpesviridae).Different herpes viruses are responsible formany human infections, including chickenpox, shingles, cold sores. and genitalherpes (HSV1/2). Surface view.A double-stranded DNA virus: BacteriophageT4. Viruses that infect bacteriaare referred to as bacteriophage (orsimply phage). T4 attaches leglike fibersto the outside of its host cell and injectsits DNA into the cytoplasm through its“tail” (pink structure in this rendition).A double-stranded DNA mimivirus: ThisAcanthamoeba polyphaga mimivirus(APMV) has the largest diameter of allknown viruses and a genome larger thansome prokaryote genomes. Cutaway view.A negative-sense single-stranded RNAvirus: Influenza virus H5N1, the “bird flu”virus. Surface view.A positive-sense single-stranded RNAvirus: Hepatitis C virus, the cause of ahuman liver disease. Surface view.An RNA retrovirus: One of the humanimmunodeficiency viruses (HIV) thatcauses AIDS. Cutaway view.(A) (B) (C)(D) (E) (F)50 nm 50 nm 20 nm20 nm 60 nm 150 nm26.25 Viruses Are Diverse Relatively small genomes and rapid evolutionaryrates make it difficult to reconstruct phylogenetic relationshipsamong some classes of viruses. Instead, viruses are classified largely bygeneral characteristics of their genomes. The images here are computerartists’ reconstructions based on cryoelectron micrographs.Yellow areas are deadleaf cells, killed bythe mosaic virus.Retroviruses are so named because they regenerate themselvesby reverse transcription. When the retroviruses enter the nucleusof their vertebrate host, viral reverse transcriptase producescDNA from the viral RNA genome and then replicates the single-stranded cDNA to produce double-stranded DNA. Anothervirally encoded enzyme called integrase catalyzes the integrationof the new piece of double-stranded viral DNA into the host’sgenome. The viral genome is then replicated along with the hostcell’s DNA; the integrated retroviral DNA is known as a provirus.Many components of cellular species (such as retrotransposons;see Section 17.3) resemble components of retroviruses.Retroviruses are only known to infect vertebrates, althoughgenomic elements that resemble portions of these viruses are acomponent of the genomes of a wide variety of organisms includingbacteria, plants, and many animals. Several retrovirusesare associated with the development of various forms of cancer,as cells infected with these viruses are likely to undergo uncontrolledreplication.DOUBLE-STRANDED RNA VIRUSES Double-stranded RNA virusesmay have evolved repeatedly from single-stranded RNA ancestors—or perhaps vice versa. These viruses, which are not closelyrelated to one another, infect organisms from throughout thetree of life. For example, many important plant diseases arecaused by double-stranded RNA viruses, whereas other virusesof this type cause many cases of infant diarrhea in humans.Some DNA viruses may have evolved fromreduced cellular organismsAnother class of viruses is composed of those that have a double-stranded DNA genome (Figure 26.25D–F). This group is alsoalmost certainly polyphyletic (with many independent origins).Many of the common phage that infect bacteria (bacteriophage)are double-stranded DNA viruses, as are the viruses that causesmallpox and herpes in humans.Some biologists think that at least some of the DNA virusesmay represent highly reduced parasitic organisms that have losttheir cellular structure as well as their ability to survive as freelivingspecies. For example, some of the largest DNA virusesare the mimiviruses (see Figure 26.25F), which have a genomein excess of a million base pairs of DNA. This is double thegenome size of some parasitic bacteria such as Mycoplasma genitalium.Phylogenetic analyses of these DNA viruses suggest thatthey have evolved repeatedly from cellular organisms. Furthermore,recombination among different viruses may have allowedthe exchange of various genetic modules, further complicatingthe history and origins of viruses.26.6 RECAPViruses are highly diverse and appear to have evolvedindependently from many different groups of cellularorganisms from throughout the tree of life. Someviruses appear to have evolved from escaped componentsof cellular organisms, whereas other virusesmay have evolved from parasitic cellular ancestors.• What are some the reasons that it is difficult to placeviruses precisely within the phylogeny of cellularorganisms? See p. 555• Explain the two main hypotheses of viral origins.See p. 555–557It appears that the enormous diversity of viruses is, at least inpart, a result of their multiple origins from many different cellularorganisms. Some may have arisen as escaped genetic components,while others may represent reduced and specializedparasites. Some appear to be derived from bacterial species, othersto be derived from eukaryotic organisms. It may be best toview viruses as spinoffs from the various branches on the treeof life—sometimes evolving independently of cellular genomes,sometimes recombining with them. One way to think of virusesis as the “bark” on the tree of life: certainly an important componentall across the tree, but not quite like the main branches.26.6 | WHERE DO VIRUSES FIT INTO THE TREE OF LIFE? 55726.26 Mosaic Viruses Are a Problem for Agriculture Mosaic or“mottle” viruses are the most abundant and diverse class of viruses. Thisleaf is from an apple tree infected with mosaic virus.
26.1 How Did the Living World Begin to Diversify?• Two of life’s three domains, Bacteria and Archaea, are prokaryotic.They are distinguished from Eukarya in several ways,including their lack of membrane-enclosed organelles. ReviewTable 26.1• Eukaryotes are related to both Archaea and Bacteria, andappear to have formed through a merging of members of thesetwo lineages. The last common ancestor of all three domainsprobably lived 2 to 3 billion years ago. Review Figure 26.1,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 26.1• Prokaryotes may be single or may form chains or clusters. Thethree most common bacterial morphologies are cocci (spheres),bacilli (rods), and helices (spirals). Review Figure 26.2• The cells of some bacteria aggregate, forming filaments andother structures.26.2 What Are Some Keys to the Success ofProkaryotes?• Prokaryotes are the most numerous organisms on Earth. Theyoccur in an enormous variety of habitats, including inside otherorganisms and deep in Earth’s crust.• Prokaryotes form complex communities, some of whichbecome dense films called biofilms. Review Figure 26.3• Most prokaryotes have cell walls containing molecules importantin transport, digestion, and sensing the environment.Almost all bacterial cell walls contain peptidoglycan. The cellwalls of archaea lack peptidoglycan and instead includepseudopeptidoglycan or proteins. Review Figure 26.5, WEBACTIVITY 26.1• Bacteria can be placed into two groups by the Gram stain.Gram-negative bacteria have a periplasmic space between theinner (plasma) and outer membranes. In Gram-positive bacteria,the cell wall usually has about five times as much peptidoglycanas a Gram-negative wall.• Prokaryotes move by a variety of means, including axial filaments,gas vesicles, and flagella. Review Figures 26.6 and 26.7• Prokaryotes reproduce asexually but may undergo geneticrecombination. Reproduction and genetic recombination arenot directly linked in prokaryotes.• Prokaryote metabolism is very diverse. Some prokaryotes areanaerobic, others are aerobic, and yet others can shift betweenthese modes. Prokaryotes are classified as photoautotrophs,photoheterotrophs, chemolithotrophs, or chemoheterotrophs.Review Table 26.2• The metabolic pathways of some prokaryotes involve sulfur ornitrogen. Nitrogen fixers convert nitrogen gas into a formorganisms can metabolize.26.3 How Can We Resolve Prokaryote Phylogeny?• Early attempts to classify prokaryotes were hampered by theorganisms’ small size and difficulties growing them in pure culture.Phylogenetic classification of prokaryotes is now based onnucleotide sequences of rRNA and other slowly evolving genes.• Although lateral gene transfer has occurred throughoutprokaryotic evolutionary history, elucidation of prokaryote phylogenyis still possible. Review Figure 26.10• Only a tiny percentage of all prokaryote species have beendescribed.26.4 What Are the Major Known Groups ofProkaryotes?• Several major taxonomic groups of prokaryotes have been recognized.The members of a prokaryote clade often differ profoundlyfrom one another. Review Figures 26.11 and 26.19• Of the major taxonomic groups of Bacteria, the proteobacteriaembrace the largest number of species. Other important groupsinclude the cyanobacteria, spirochetes, chlamydias, and low-GC Gram-positives. Some high-GC Gram positives produceimportant antibiotics.• The low-GC Gram-positives include the mycoplasmas, whichare among the smallest cellular organisms ever discovered.• Ether linkages in the branched long-chain hydrocarbons of cellmembranes are a synapomorphy of archaea.• The best-studied groups of Archaea are Euryarchaeota andCrenarchaeota. Some species of Euryarchaeota aremethanogens; extreme halophiles are also found among theEuryarchaeota. Most known Crenarchaeota are both thermophilicand acidophilic.26.5 How Do Prokaryotes Affect their Environments?• Prokaryotes play key roles in the cycling of elements such asnitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and carbon. One such role is as decomposersof dead organisms.• Nitrogen-fixing bacteria fix the nitrogen needed by all otherorganisms. Nitrifiers convert that nitrogen into forms that canbe used by plants, and denitrifiers ensure that nitrogen isreturned to the atmosphere.• Oxygen production by early photosynthetic cyanobacteriareconfigured Earth’s atmosphere, which made aerobic forms oflife possible.• Prokaryotes inhabiting the guts of many animals help themdigest their food.• Koch’s postulates establish the criteria by which an organismmay be classified as a pathogen. Relatively few bacteria—andno archaea—are known to be pathogens.26.6 Where Do Viruses Fit Into the Tree of Life?• Viruses have evolved many times from many different groups ofcellular organisms. They do not represent a single taxonomicgroup.• Some viruses are probably derived from escaped genetic elementsof cellular species; others are thought to have evolved ashighly reduced parasites.• Viruses are categorized by the nature of their genomes. ReviewFigure 26.25