50On April 29, 1993, the Boston Celtics met theCharlotte Hornets in a National Basketball Associationplayoff game at the Boston Garden. TheCeltics captain and star, 27-year-old Reggie Lewis, had justscored 10 points in 3 minutes when he suddenly slumpedforward and fell to the floor. He was examined by theteam doctor, who allowed him to return to the game. ButLewis’s legs were “wobbly,” and he played only briefly.Lewis had been experiencing dizzy spells for about amonth before the playoff incident. Afterward he underwentrigorous testing by cardiologists, who diagnosed himas having a dangerous arrhythmia (irregular heartbeat)caused by cardiomyopathy (diseased cardiac muscle). Acceptingthis diagnosis would mean the end of his professionalathletic career, and Lewis sought a second opinion.After another battery of tests, a second medical teamconcluded that Lewis had undergone a transient irregularheartbeat attributable to normal athletic stresses. The conditionwas thought to be due to Lewis’s enlarged heart—acondition common in high-performing athletes. In July1993, after an hour spent shooting baskets in a pick-upgame, Reggie Lewis collapsed and died of heart failure.Your heart is a muscular pump that, at rest, beats anaverage of 60 to 70 times per minute. With each beat, itcirculates about 70 milliliters of blood through the body.Without taking work or exercise into account, that is 300liters per hour, 7,200 liters per day, 2.6 million liters peryear—no time-outs.Heart failure is the leading cause of death in the UnitedStates, accounting for some one-fourth (about 600,000) ofthe deaths each year. Heart failure most commonly resultsfrom blockage of the vessels that supply the heart musclewith blood, and its risk increases with age. But heartfailure is also the leading cause of death among youngathletes.In athletes, heart failure is usually due not to vesselblockage but to defects of the heart or blood vessels. Themost common defect is hypertrophic cardiomyopathy(HCM), caused by a mutation that affects the contractileproteins of heart muscle. The heart is good at compensatingfor these mutant proteins. About 0.5 percent of thepopulation has HCM, and most of them are unaware of it;they can live their entire lives without symptoms. WithYou gotta have heartAn Athlete’s Heart Basketball star Reggie Lewis died ofheart failure at the age of 27. The exact medical situation underlyinghis heart problems remains clouded in controversy.Why Do Animals Need a 50.1 Circulatory System?A circulatory system consists of a muscular pump (the heart),a fluid (blood), and a series of conduits (blood vessels) throughwhich the fluid can be pumped around the body. Heart, blood,and vessels are also known collectively as a cardiovascular system(Greek kardia, “heart,” and Latin vasculum, “vessel”). Thefunction of a circulatory system is to transport things aroundthe body. Preceding chapters discuss how circulatory systemstransport heat, hormones, respiratory gases, blood cells,platelets, and cells and molecules of the immune system. Succeedingchapters add nutrients and waste products to that list.In this section we will describe the general types of circulatorysystems found in animals.Some animals do not have a circulatory systemSingle-celled organisms serve all of their needs through directexchanges with the environment. Such organisms are foundmostly in aquatic or very moist terrestrial environments. Similarly,many multicellular aquatic organisms are small or thinenough that all their cells are close to the external environment.Such species may not have a circulatory system because nutrients,respiratory gases, and wastes can diffuse directly betweenthe cells of their bodies and the environment.The cells of some larger aquatic multicellular animals withouta circulatory system are served by highly branched central cavitiescalled gastrovascular systems which essentially bring the externalenvironment into the animal. All the cells of a sponge, forexample, are in contact with, or very close to, the water that surroundsthe animal and circulates through its central cavity (seeFigure 49.1B). Very small animals without a circulatory systemcan maintain high levels of metabolism and activity, but largeranimals without a circulatory system such as sponges, jellyfishes,and flatworms tend to be inactive, slow, or even sedentary. Large,active animals need a circulatory system.Circulatory systems can be open or closedThe cells of large, mobile animals are supported by the extracellularfluid. All nutrients—oxygen, fuel, essential molecules—come from that fluid, and the waste products of cell metabolismgo into it. Circulatory systems have muscular chambers, or hearts,that move the extracellular fluid around the body. In open circulatorysystems, extracellular fluid is the same as the fluid in theIN THIS CHAPTER we will learn about the adaptationsof circulatory systems that enable them to match blood supplywith demand in a variety of species. Taking the humancirculatory system as a model, we will explore the mechanicsof the beating heart and the characteristics of the arteries,capillaries, and veins of the vascular system. We will thendescribe the features of blood before ending with a discussionof the hormonal and neural regulation of the mammaliancirculatory system.continued heavy exercise, however, the heart compensatesby getting larger. Eventually, this increase in sizecan disrupt the electrical impulses that coordinate contractionsof the heart muscle. When heavy demand isplaced on such an enlarged heart, muscle fiber contractionscan suddenly become uncoordinated and renderthe heart incapable of pumping blood. The lack of priorsymptoms is why the condition often goes undiagnosed.Diagnosis is getting better. In December 2008, 33-yearoldCuttino Mobley, who had just joined the New YorkKnicks, announced his retirement from basketball afterlearning that his career could kill him. Like Reggie Lewis,Mobley has an enlarged heart. When a physical examshowed arrhythmia, Mobley’s physician ordered an MRIthat revealed the thickening of the heart walls characteristicof HCM. “Getting the MRI saved my life,” Mobley said.CHAPTER OUTLINE50.1 Why Do Animals Need a Circulatory System?50.2 How Have Vertebrate Circulatory SystemsEvolved?50.3 How Does the Mammalian Heart Function?50.4 What Are the Properties of Blood and BloodVessels?50.5 How Is the Circulatory System Controlled andRegulated?Clear! Hospital emergency rooms deal with heart attacks ona daily basis. Advances in heart surgery and emergency resuscitationtechniques have saved many lives, but circulatory systemfailure remains the number one cause of death in Europe,Canada, and the United States.circulatory system and is called hemolymph. This fluid leaves thevessels of the circulatory system, percolates between cells andthrough tissues, and then flows back into the heart or vessels ofthe circulatory system to be pumped out again. In contrast, closedcirculatory systems completely contain the circulating fluid (blood)in a continuous system of vessels. Blood cells and large moleculesstay within the system, but water and low-molecularweightsolutes leak out of the smallest vessels, the capillaries,which are highly permeable.In animals with a closed circulatory system, extracellular fluidrefers to both the fluid in the circulatory system and the fluidoutside it. The fluid in the circulatory system is the blood plasma;the fluid around the cells is the interstitial fluid (see Figure 40.1).A 70-kilogram person has a total extracellular fluid volume ofabout 14 liters. Less than a quarter of it—about 3 liters—is theblood plasma.Circulatory systems control the distribution of blood to thebody’s tissues and organs, with two reciprocal and complementaryfunctions: to maintain the blood composition by pickingup nutrients and eliminating wastes, and to supply nutrients toand remove wastes from the body’s tissues.Open circulatory systems move extracellular fluidOpen circulatory systems are found in arthropods, mollusks, andsome other invertebrate groups. In these systems, a muscularpump, or heart, helps move the hemolymph through vessels leadingto different regions of the body. The fluid leaves the vesselsto trickle through the tissues before returning to the heart. In thegeneralized arthropod shown in Figure 50.1A, the fluid returnsdirectly to the heart through openings called ostia. Ostia havevalves that allow hemolymph to enter the relaxed heart but preventit from flowing in the reverse direction when the heart contracts.In mollusks (Figure 50.1B), open vessels collect hemolymphfrom different regions of the body and return it to the heart.Closed circulatory systems circulate bloodthrough a system of blood vesselsIn closed circulatory systems, a system of vessels keeps circulatingblood separate from the interstitial fluid. Blood is pumpedthrough this vascular system by one or more muscular hearts,and some components of the blood never leave the vessels.Closed circulatory systems characterize vertebrates and someinvertebrate groups, among them annelids.Asimple example of a closed circulatory system is that of theearthworm (Figure 50.1C). One large ventral blood vessel carriesblood from the worm’s anterior end to its posterior end.Smaller vessels branch off and transport the blood to evensmaller vessels serving the tissues in each body segment. In thesmallest vessels, respiratory gases, nutrients, and metabolicwastes diffuse between the blood and interstitial fluid. Theblood then flows from these vessels into larger vessels that leadinto one large dorsal vessel, which carries the blood from theposterior to the anterior end of the body. Five pairs of muscularvessels connect the large dorsal and ventral vessels in theanterior end, thus completing the circuit. The dorsal vessel andthe five connecting vessels serve as hearts for the earthworm;their contractions keep the blood circulating. The direction ofcirculation is determined by one-way valves in the dorsal andconnecting vessels.50.1 | WHY DO ANIMALS NEED A CIRCULATORY SYSTEM? 1047Extracellular fluid (hemolymph) of arthropodspercolates through tissues and enters theheart through openings called ostia.In annelids, muscularhearts pump blood througha system of closed vessels.Sites of exchangeof materialsbetween blood andinterstitial fluid.(C) Annelid worm(A) ArthropodTubular heartHeartFootmuscle(B) MolluskDorsal vesselVentral vesselHearts(connecting vessels)GillGutStomachIn mollusks, a system of vessels drains the intercellularspaces and returns hemolymph to the heart.50.1 Circulatory Systems Arthropods, illustrated here by an insect(A), and mollusks such as clams (B) have an open circulatory system.Hemolymph is pumped by a tubular heart and directed to differentregions of the body through vessels that open into intercellular spaces.(C) Annelids such as earthworms have a closed circulatory system, inwhich the cellular and macromolecular elements of the blood are confinedin a system of vessels and the blood is pumped through those vessels byone or more muscular hearts.Closed circulatory systems have several advantages overopen systems:• Fluid can flow more rapidly through vessels than throughintercellular spaces and can therefore transport nutrientsand wastes to and from tissues more rapidly.• By changing the diameter (hence resistance) of specific vessels,closed systems can control the flow of blood to selectivetissues and organs to match their needs.• Specialized cells and large molecules that aid in transportinghormones and nutrients can be kept in the vessels butcan drop their cargo in the tissues where it is needed.It seems logical to accept the premise that in all but very smallanimals, closed circulatory systems can support higher levelsof metabolic activity than open systems can. But we then haveto ask: How do highly active insect species achieve high levelsof metabolic output with an open circulatory system? The reasonis that insects do not depend on their circulatory systemsfor respiratory gas exchange. As noted in Chapter 49, respiratorygas exchange in insects is through a separate system of airfilledtubes (see Figure 49.4).50.1 RECAPCirculatory systems consist of a pump and an openor closed set of vessels through which a fluid transportsoxygen, nutrients, wastes, and a variety ofother substances.• Why are most animals with an open circulatory systemrather inactive, and why does that not apply toinsects? See p. 1047 and Figure 50.1• What are some advantages of a closed circulatorysystem? See p. 1048This overview of the open and closed systems of invertebratesintroduced some basic concepts about circulatory systems. Nowlet’s turn to describing the more complex circulatory systems ofvertebrates.How Have Vertebrate Circulatory 50.2 Systems Evolved?Vertebrates have a closed circulatory system and a heart withtwo or more chambers. When a heart chamber contracts, itsqueezes the blood, putting it under pressure. Blood then flowsout of the heart and into vessels, where pressure is lower. Valvesprevent the backflow of blood as the heart cycles between contractionand relaxation.As we explore the features of the circulatory systems of differentclasses of vertebrates, a general evolutionary theme willemerge: as circulatory systems become more complex, the bloodthat flows to the gas exchange organs (gills or lungs; see Chapter49) becomes more completely separated from the blood thatflows to the rest of the body.In fishes, the phylogenetically oldest vertebrates, blood ispumped from the heart to the gills and then to the tissues of thebody and back to the heart—a single circuit. In birds and mammals,blood is pumped from the heart to the lungs and back tothe heart in a pulmonary circuit, and then from the heart to therest of the body and back to the heart in a systemic circuit. In allother vertebrates we see various adaptations for separating theblood flow into pulmonary and systemic circuits.Both pulmonary and systemic circuits begin with vesselscalled arteries that carry blood away from the heart. Arteriesgive rise to smaller vessels called arterioles, which feed bloodinto capillary beds. Capillaries are the tiny, thin-walled vesselswhere materials are exchanged between the blood and the tissuefluid. Small vessels called venules drain capillary beds. Thevenules join to form larger vessels called veins, which deliverblood back to the heart.We can trace the evolutionary history of vertebrate circulatorysystems by comparing the circulatory systems of fishes, lungfishes,amphibians, ectothermic reptiles, and birds and mammals.Fishes have a two-chambered heartThe fish heart has two chambers. An atrium (plural atria) receivesblood from the body and pumps it into a more muscularchamber, the ventricle. The ventricle pumps the blood to thegills, where gases are exchanged. Blood leaving the gills collectsin a large dorsal artery, the aorta, which distributes blood tosmaller arteries and arterioles leading to all the organs and tissuesof the body. In the tissues, blood flows through beds of tinycapillaries, collects in venules and veins, and eventually returnsto the atrium of the heart.Most of the pressure imparted to the blood by the contraction ofthe ventricle is lost as a result of the blood entering the manynarrow spaces in the gill lamellae. Therefore, blood leaving thegills and entering the aorta is under low pressure, limiting themaximum capacity of the fish circulatory system to supply thetissues with oxygen and nutrients. Yet this limitation on arterialblood pressure does not seem to hamper the performance ofmany rapidly swimming species, such as tuna and marlin.The evolutionary transition from breathing water to breathingair had important consequences for the vertebrate circulatorysystem. An example of how the system changed to servea primitive lung can be seen in the African lungfish.Fishes have a heartwith two chambers:a single atrium and asingle ventricle.GillsVentricleAtriumVeinsSystemiccapillariesOxygenatedbloodDeoxygenatedbloodAortaArteries1048 CHAPTER 50 | CIRCULATORY SYSTEMSLungfish are periodically exposed to water with low oxygencontent or to situations in which their aquatic environment driesup. The adaptation that deals with these conditions is an outpocketingof the gut that serves as a lung. The lung containsmany thin-walled blood vessels, so blood flowing through thosevessels can pick up oxygen from air gulped into the lung.How does the lungfish circulatory system take advantage ofthis new organ? In fishes, the gills are arranged on supportivegill arches (see Figure 49.5). Blood flows into the gill arch in anafferent arteriole and leaves in an efferent arteriole. In lungfishes,the blood vessels in the posterior pair of gill arteries havebeen modified to be a low-resistance conduit for blood to thelung, and a new vessel carries oxygenated blood from the lungback to the heart. In addition, two anterior gill arches have losttheir gills, and their blood vessels deliver blood from the heartdirectly to the dorsal aorta. Because a few of the gill arches retaingills, the African lungfish can breathe either air or water.The lungfish heart partially separates its flow of blood intopulmonary and systemic circuits; it has a partially dividedatrium. The left side receives oxygenated blood from the lungs,and the right side receives deoxygenated blood from the othertissues. These two bloodstreams stay mostly separate as theyflow through the ventricle and the large vessel leading to thegill arches. As a result, oxygenated blood goes mostly to the anteriorgill arteries leading to the dorsal aorta, and deoxygenatedblood goes mostly to the other gill arches that have functionalgills as well as to the gill arteries that serve the lung.We can conclude that the lungfish lung evolved as a meansof supplementing oxygen uptake from the gills. When the wateris fully oxygenated, the lungfish can depend on its gills;but in oxygen-depleted water, it can augment its oxygen intakeby gulping air. Associated modifications of the lungfish vascularsystem set the stage for the evolution of separate pulmonaryand systemic circulations in higher vertebrates.Amphibians have a three-chambered heartPulmonary and systemic circulations are partially separatedin adult amphibians. A single ventricle pumps blood to thelungs and the rest of the body. Two atria receive blood returningto the heart: one receives oxygenated blood from the lungs,while the other receives deoxygenated blood from the body.Because both atria deliver blood to the same ventricle, the oxygenatedand deoxygenated blood could mix, so that blood goingto the tissues would not carry a full load of oxygen. Mixingis limited, however, because anatomical features of theventricle direct the flow of deoxygenated blood from the rightatrium to the pulmonary circuit and the flow of oxygenatedblood from the left atrium to the aorta. Partial separation of pulmonaryand systemic circulation has the advantage of allowingblood destined for the tissues to sidestep the large pressure dropthat occurs in the gas exchange organ. Blood leaving the amphibianheart for the tissues moves directly to the aorta, andhence to the body, at a higher pressure than if it had first flowedthrough the lungs.Amphibians have another adaptation for oxygenating theirblood: they can pick up a considerable amount of oxygen inblood flowing through small blood vessels in their skin.Reptiles have exquisite control of pulmonaryand systemic circulationReptiles include turtles, snakes, lizards, crocodilians, and birds(see Figure 33.18). Crocodilians and birds have cardiovascularsystems with two completely separated ventricles, creating afour-chambered heart. All other reptiles have a three-chamberedheart because their ventricles are not completely separated intoleft and right chambers.Consider the behavior, ecology, and physiology of ectothermicreptiles. Many are active, powerful, fast animals. But theiractivity comes in bursts that are interspersed with long periodsof inactivity, during which these animals’ metabolic rates aremuch lower than the resting metabolic rates of the endothermicbirds and mammals. So enormous is the range of metabolic demandin ectothermic reptiles that they do not need to breathecontinuously. Some species are accomplished divers and spendlong periods under water, where they cannot breathe air.When these animals are not breathing, it would be a wasteof energy for them to pump blood through their lungs. Thus,they have evolved the capability to send blood to the lungs andthe rest of the body when they are breathing, but when they areOxygenatedbloodDeoxygenatedbloodMixed bloodIn adult amphibians,the pulmonary andsystemic circuits arepartially separated.The heart has threechambers.LeftatriumRightatriumAortaVentriclePulmonary circuitSystemic circuitLungcapillariesSystemiccapillariesThe lungfish heart has twoatria, one receiving oxygenatedblood from the lung and onereceiving deoxygenated bloodfrom the body.GillsVentricleOxygenatedbloodLungcapillariesPulmonarycircuitSystemiccircuitDeoxygenatedbloodMixed bloodAtriaGillbypassesDorsalaortaSystemiccapillaries50.2 | HOW HAVE VERTEBRATE CIRCULATORY SYSTEMS EVOLVED? 1049not breathing, they can bypass the pulmonary circuit and pumpall the blood to the body. How do they do this?Let’s look first at the ectothermic reptiles with a three-chamberedheart—the turtles, snakes, and lizards. The ventricle inthese species is partially divided into left and right halves by aseptum. Oxygenated blood from the lungs enters the left sideof the ventricle through the left atrium. Deoxygenated bloodfrom the body enters the right side of the ventricle through theright atrium. These species have two aortas—a left and a right.The left aorta is positioned so that it receives oxygenated bloodfrom the left side of the ventricle. The right aorta, however, ispositioned so that it can receive blood from either the right orleft side of the ventricle.When the animal is breathing air, the resistance in the pulmonarycircuit is lower than the resistance in the systemic circuit,so blood from the right side of the ventricle tends to flowinto the pulmonary artery rather than the right aorta. When theanimal is not breathing, pulmonary vessels constrict, resistancein the pulmonary circuit goes up, and blood from the right sideof the ventricle tends to flow into the right aorta. As a result,blood from both sides of the ventricle flows through both aortasto the systemic circuit.Crocodilians, like birds, have two completely separated ventricles.Unlike birds, they have two aortas, one originating ineach ventricle. There is a connection between the two aortas justas they leave the heart, and this connection enables them to alterthe proportions of blood going to their pulmonary and systemiccircuits. When a crocodile or alligator is breathing and resistancein the pulmonary circuit is low, backpressure from thestronger left ventricle closes the valve between the right ventricleand the right aorta, forcing all of the blood from the rightventricle to flow into the pulmonary circuit. When the animalstops breathing, pulmonary vessels constrict, resistance in thepulmonary circuit rises, and blood from the right ventricle flowsinto the right aorta. This ability of all ectothermic reptiles todirect blood to their pulmonary or systemic circuits is highlyadaptive for their lifestyle of intermittent breathing.Birds and mammals have fully separated pulmonaryand systemic circuitsThe four-chambered hearts of birds and mammals have completelyseparate pulmonary and systemic circuits. Separatecircuits have several advantages for these active animals withcontinuously high metabolic rates:• Oxygenated and deoxygenated blood cannot mix; therefore,the systemic circuit always receives blood with thehighest oxygen content.• Respiratory gas exchange is maximized because the bloodwith the lowest oxygen content and highest CO2 content issent to the lungs.• Separate systemic and pulmonary circuits can operate atdifferent pressures.The tissues of birds and mammals have high nutrient demandsand thus a very high density of blood vessels, requiringthe heart to generate a high blood pressure to perfuse allthe vessels of the systemic circuit. The pulmonary circuit ofthese animals receives a blood flow equal to that of the systemiccircuit, but the lungs have far fewer blood vessels. Thus,the pulmonary circuit of birds and mammals can function atlower pressures, and the four-chambered heart makes thatpossible.Birds and mammalshave four-chamberedhearts. Their pulmonaryand systemic circuits aretotally separate.LungcapillariesRightventricleLeftventricleOxygenatedbloodDeoxygenatedbloodSystemiccapillariesOxygenatedbloodDeoxygenatedbloodMixed bloodRightaortaLeftaortaLeftatriumLeftventricleCrocodilians have completelydivided ventricles, but they canselectively shunt blood to thepulmonary or systemic circuitsthrough a connection betweenthe two aortas. They also havetwo separate ventricles, butcan direct blood from the rightventricle to either the lungs orthe systemic circuit.Lung capillariesSystemiccapillariesRight atriumLeft atriumLeft aortaVentricleOxygenatedbloodDeoxygenatedbloodMixed bloodRight aortaSystemiccapillariesLung capillariesIn the reptilian3-chambered heart,the ventricle is partlydivided by a septum,which directs oxygenatedblood to the bodyand deoxygenatedblood to the lungs.1050 CHAPTER 50 | CIRCULATORY SYSTEMSGO TO Web Activity 50.1 • Vertebrate Circulatory SystemsyourBioPortal.com50.2 RECAPThe closed circulatory system of vertebrates hasevolved from a two-chambered heart in fishes to afour-chambered heart in crocodilians, birds, andmammals.• Explain why fishes cannot supply blood to their tissuesat high pressure. See p. 1048• By comparing lungfish and amphibian circulatorysystems, explain how a three-chambered heart couldhave evolved. See pp. 1048–1049• What are some of advantages of a four-chamberedheart? See p. 1050How Does the Mammalian 50.3 Heart Function?Humans have a typical mammalian heart, characterized by fourchambers—a right and a left atrium and a right and a left ventricle(Figure 50.2). The right ventricle pumps blood throughthe pulmonary circuit, and the left ventricle pumps bloodthrough the systemic circuit.One-way valves between the atria and ventricles, the atrioventricular(AV) valves, prevent backflow of blood into the atria whenthe ventricles contract. The pulmonary valve and aortic valve, onewayvalves between the ventricles and the major arteries, preventbackflow of blood into the ventricles when they relax.In this section, we will describe the flow of blood throughthe heart and body and examine the unique electrical propertiesof cardiac muscle that result in the heartbeat.Blood flows from right heart to lungs to left heart to bodyThe heart’s right atrium receives deoxygenated blood from thesuperior (upper) vena cava and the inferior (lower) vena cava(see Figure 50.2), large veins that collect blood returning to the50.3 | HOW DOES THE MAMMALIAN HEART FUNCTION? 1051Tolung1 Deoxygenated blood fromthe tissues of the bodyenters the right atrium…4 From the pulmonarycircuit, the bloodreturns to theleft atrium…5 …and flows throughan atrioventricularvalve into the leftventricle.6 The left ventriclepumps blood throughthe aortic valve intothe systemic circuit.2 …and flows through anatrioventricular valve intothe right ventricle.3 The right ventriclepumps the blood throughthe pulmonary valve intothe pulmonary circuit.Vessels shown in redbring oxygenated bloodfrom the lungs to the leftheart, which pumps it tothe rest of the body.Vessels shown in blue bringdeoxygenated blood fromthe body to the right heart,which pumps it to the lungsfor oxygenation.Superiorvena cavaTolungFromlungInferiorvena cavaPulmonary veinsFromlungPulmonary arteryPulmonaryvalveAortaSuperiorvena cavaSubclavianartery and vein AortaCommon carotid arteryInferiorvena cavaHepaticveinsDescendingaortaHepaticportal vesselCommon iliacartery and veinClosed OpenAorticvalveRenal arteryand veinInternaljugular veinPulmonaryarteryPulmonaryveins50.2 The Human Heart and Circulation In the human heart,blood flows from right heart to lungs to left heart to body. Theatrioventricular valves prevent blood from flowing back into theatria when the ventricles contract. The pulmonary and aorticvalves prevent blood from flowing back into the ventricles fromthe arteries when the ventricles relax.GO TO Web Activity 50.2 • The Human HeartyourBioPortal.comheart from the upper and lower body, respectively. The veins ofthe heart itself also drain into the right atrium. From the rightatrium, the blood flows through an AV valve into the right ventricle.Most of the filling of the ventricle results from passive flowwhile the heart is relaxed between beats. Just at the end of thisperiod of passive ventricular filling, the atrium contracts andadds a little more blood to the ventricular volume. The right ventriclethen contracts, causing the AV valve to close and pumpingthe blood into the pulmonary artery leading to the lungs.After gas exchange occurs in the lungs, pulmonary veins returnoxygenated blood from the lungs to the left atrium, from whichthe blood enters the left ventricle through another AV valve. Ason the right side of the heart, most left ventricular filling is passive,but ventricular filling is completed when the atria contract.The walls of the left ventricle are powerful muscles that contractaround the blood with a wringing motion starting fromthe bottom. When pressure in the left ventricle is high enoughto push open the aortic valve, blood rushes into the aorta to beginits circulation throughout the body. In Figure 50.2, observethat the walls of the left ventricle are thicker than those of theright ventricle. The left ventricle has to propel blood throughmany more kilometers of blood vessels than does the right ventricle,and must therefore push against more resistance, eventhough both ventricles pump the same volume of blood.Both sides of the heart contract at the same time. Contractionof the two atria, followed by contraction of the two ventriclesand then relaxation, is the cardiac cycle. The cardiac cycle is dividedinto two phases: systole (pronounced sís-toll-ee), whenthe ventricles contract, and diastole (die-ás-toll-ee), when theventricles relax (Figure 50.3). Just at the end of diastole, the atriacontract and top off the volume of blood in the ventricles.The sounds of the cardiac cycle, the “lub-dup” heard througha stethoscope placed on the chest or the back, are created by theheart valves slamming shut. The closing and opening of thesevalves are simple mechanical events resulting from pressure differenceson the two sides of the valves. As the ventricles beginto contract, the pressure in them rises above the pressure inthe atria, so the AV valves close (“lub”). When the ventricles be-1052 CHAPTER 50 | CIRCULATORY SYSTEMS“Dup”: The ventricles relax; pressure in theventricles falls at the end of systole, andsince pressure is now greater in the aortaand pulmonary artery, the aortic andpulmonary valves slam shut.“Lub” The ventricles contract,the atrioventricular valves close,and pressure in the ventriclesbuilds up until the aortic andpulmonary valves open.5 The ventricles fillBlood is pumped outof the ventricles andinto the aorta and1 The atria contract. 32 4pulmonary artery. with blood.23 514RightatriumLeft atriumRight ventricleLeftventricle125100755025130 ml65 mlPressure inleft ventricle,mm Hg( )Pressure inaorta, mm Hg( )0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0Time (seconds)Volume in leftventricle, ml( )AtrioventricularvalvesPulmonaryvalveAortic valve“Lub” “Dup”Diastole Systole Diastole50.3 The Cardiac Cycle The rhythmic contraction (systole) and relaxation(diastole) of the ventricles is called the cardiac cycle. The representationbelow shows pressure and volume changes during the cardiaccycle for the left ventricle only.GO TO Animated Tutorial 50.1 • The Cardiac CycleyourBioPortal.comgin to relax, the high pressure in the aorta and pulmonary arterycloses the aortic and pulmonary valves (“dup”).Defective valves that do not close completely produce turbulentblood flow and the sounds known as heart murmurs. Forexample, if an AV valve does not close completely, blood willflow back into the atrium with a “whoosh” following the “lub.”You can feel the rhythm of the cardiac cycle in the pulsationof arteries such as the one that supplies blood to your hand.You’ve probably taken your pulse by placing two fingers fromone hand lightly over the wrist of your other hand just belowthe thumb. During systole, the pressure wave created by thecontraction of the left ventricle surges through the arteries ofyour arms; this pressure wave is what you feel as the pulsingof the artery in your wrist.Blood pressure changes associated with the cardiac cycle canbe measured in the large artery in your arm by using an inflatablepressure cuff and a pressure gauge, together called a sphygmomanometer,and a stethoscope (Figure 50.4). This methodmeasures the minimum pressure necessary to compress an arteryso blood does not flow through it at all (the systolic value)and the minimum pressure that causes intermittent flowthrough the artery (the diastolic value). A conventional bloodpressure reading is expressed as the systolic value placed overthe diastolic value. Healthy values for a young adult might be120 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) during systole and 70 mmHg during diastole, or 120/70.The heartbeat originates in the cardiac muscleCardiac muscle (see Section 48.1) has unique adaptations thatenable it to function as a pump. First, cardiac muscle cells arein electrical contact with one another through gap junctions,which enable action potentials (see Section 45.2) to spread rapidlyfrom cell to cell. Because a spreading action potential stimulatescontraction, large groups of cardiac muscle cells contractin unison. This coordinated contraction is essential for pumpingblood effectively.Second, some cardiac muscle cells are pacemaker cells thatcan initiate action potentials without stimulation from the nervoussystem. When they fire action potentials, they stimulateneighboring cells to contract. The primary pacemaker of theheart is a group of modified cardiac muscle cells, the sinoatrialnode, located at the junction of the superior vena cava and rightatrium (see Figure 50.6). The resting membrane potentials of thesecells are less negative than those of other cardiac muscle cellsand are not stable, but they gradually become even less negativeuntil they reach threshold for initiating an action potential.The action potentials of pacemaker cells are very different fromthose of neurons and other muscle cells (see Figure 45.10). Theyare slower to rise; they are broader; and they are slower to returnto resting potential. These properties of pacemaker cellsare due to the ion channels in their membranes.Pacemaker potentials involve Na+, Ca2+, and K+ channels. Aswe discuss in Section 45.2, when Na+ or Ca2+ channels open, positivecharges flow into the cell and the membrane potential becomesless negative. When K+ channels open, positive chargesflow out of the cell and the membrane potential becomes morenegative. Because the Na+ channels of pacemaker cells are moreopen than are those of other cardiac muscle cells, the pacemakerresting potential is less negative. The action potential of pacemakercells is due to voltage-gated Ca2+ channels rather than voltage-gated Na+ channels as in neurons, skeletal muscle, and othercardiac muscle cells. These Ca2+ ion channels open and close moreslowly than voltage-gated Na+ channels, explaining the shape ofpacemaker action potentials.The unstable resting potential of pacemakercells is due to the behavior of cationchannels. As in neurons and skeletal musclecells, there are voltage-gated K+ channelsthat open on the rising phase of the actionpotential. The opening of these channels allowsK+ ions to leave the cell and restores thenegative charge on the cell membrane. Thehyperpolarization (negative membrane potential)causes the opening of a unique classof voltage-gated cation channels that mostlyconduct Na+. At the same time, the voltagegatedK+ channels that opened during theaction potential are slowly closing. The resultis that there are more Na+ ions cominginto the cell than there are K+ ions leaving,and the cell membrane potential graduallybecomes less negative.50.3 | HOW DOES THE MAMMALIAN HEART FUNCTION? 105312080 24016020300200Pulsingsounds7070Pulsing soundgives way tosmooth “whoosh”of blood flow12080 240160203002001 The cuff is inflatedbeyond the pointthat shuts off allblood flow.2 Pressure in the cuff is graduallylowered until the sound of a pulsingflow of blood through the constrictionin the artery is heard. At this time,pressure in the cuff is just below thepeak systolic pressure in the artery.3 Pressure is further lowered untilthe sound becomes continuous.At this time, the cuff is just belowthe diastolic pressure in theartery. This person’s bloodpressure is 120/70.50.4 Measuring Blood Pressure Blood pressure in the majorartery of the arm can be measured with a device called a sphygmomanometer,which combines an inflatable cuff and a pressure gauge.A stethoscope is also used to detect sounds created by the bloodvessels in response to changes in pressure during the cardiac cycle.The gradual rise in membrane potential closes the channelsthat are allowing Na+ to move into the cell, but as the membranebecomes less negative, some Ca2+ channels open, causing themembrane to continue its gradual rise. Eventually this risingmembrane potential reaches threshold for the major voltagegatedCa2+ channels, and another action potential is generated.The intricate interaction of these ion channels through their effectson membrane potential causes the rhythmic generationof action potentials that characterizes the pacemakercells.The nervous system controls the heartbeat (speeds itup or slows it down) by influencing the rate at which thepacemaker cell resting potentials drift upward (Figure50.5). Norepinephrine released onto pacemaker cells bysympathetic nerves increases the permeability of the Na+channels and the Ca2+ channels. The result is that the restingpotential of the pacemaker cells drifts up more rapidly,the interval between action potentials is decreased,and the heart beats faster. Conversely, the parasympatheticneurotransmitter acetylcholine has the opposite effect.ACh increases the permeability of K+ channels so that themembrane potential becomes even more negative followingan action potential and rises more slowly. ACh alsodecreases the permeability of the Ca2+ channels so that therate of rise of the membrane potential slows, the intervalbetween pacemaker action potentials lengthens, and theheart slows down.A conduction system coordinates the contractionof heart muscleAnormal heartbeat begins with an action potential in thesinoatrial node (Figure 50.6). This action potentialspreads rapidly throughout the electrically coupled cellsof the atria, causing them to contract in unison. Becausethere are no gap junctions between the cells of the atriaand those of the ventricles, the action potential does notspread directly to the ventricles. Therefore, the ventriclesdo not contract in unison with the atria.How does the action potential move from the atria tothe ventricles? Situated at the junction of the atria and theventricles is a nodule of modified cardiac muscle cells—the atrioventricular node—which is stimulated by the depolarizationof the atria. With a slight delay, it generatesaction potentials that are conducted to the ventricles viathe bundle of His, which consists of modified cardiac musclefibers that do not contract. These fibers divide intoright and left bundle branches that run to the tips of theventricles and then spread throughout the ventricularmuscle mass as Purkinje fibers. These conducting fibersensure that the cardiac action potential spreads rapidlyand evenly throughout the ventricular muscle mass, startingat the very bottom of the ventricles. The short delayin the spread of the action potential imposed by the atrioventricularnode ensures that the atria contract before theventricles do, so that the blood passes progressively fromthe atria to the ventricles to the arteries.Electrical properties of ventricular muscles sustainheart contractionElectrical properties of ventricular muscle fibers allow them tocontract for about 300 milliseconds—much longer than thoseof skeletal muscle fibers. As in neuronal and skeletal muscle1054 CHAPTER 50 | CIRCULATORY SYSTEMSHYPOTHESISCONCLUSIONMETHODThe ANS neurotransmitters norepinephrine andACh control heart rate by altering the properties ofthe pacemaker cell membrane potentials.50.5 The Autonomic Nervous System Controls Heart RateThe membrane potentials of pacemaker cells spontaneouslydepolarize until action potential threshold is reached. Neurotransmittersignals from the two divisions of the autonomic nervous systemspeed up and slow down the rate at which the pacemaker membranepotential drifts upward, thereby controlling the rate at whichpacemaker cells fire action potentials.The autonomic nervous system neurotransmittersnorepinephrine and acetylcholine influence themembrane potentials of pacemaker cells.RESULTSGo to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.INVESTIGATING LIFE1. Culture living sinoatrial node tissue in a dish. Insert anintracellular recording electrode into pacemaker cells.2. Measure the membrane potential of pacemaker cellsduring a resting heartbeat (the control) and afterapplications of the ANS neurotransmitters norepinephrine(sympathetic) and acetylcholine (parasympathetic).+60–70Membranepotential (mV)Time (seconds)0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2Control recording showsthat the membranepotential of pacemakercells graduallydepolarizes after anaction potential is fired.When norepinephrine isapplied, the rate ofdepolarization of themembrane potentialincreases. Time betweenaction potentialsdecreases and the heartrate increases.When acetylcholine isapplied, the membranepotential is morenegative following anaction potential and therate of depolarization isslower. Time betweenaction potentialsincreases and the heartrate slows down.ThresholdNormalrestingheartbeatrateaction potentials, the rising phase of the ventricular muscle cellaction potentials is due to the opening of voltage-gated Na+channels. Unlike neurons and skeletal muscle fibers, however,ventricular muscle cells remain depolarized for a long time.This extended plateau of the action potential is due to sustainedopening of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels (Figure 50.7). Likeother muscle, cardiac muscle is stimulated to contract whenCa2+ is available to bind with troponin (see Figure 48.6). As longas Ca2+ remains in the sarcoplasm, the ventricular muscle cellscontinue to contract.The drug digitalis has been used since the late 1700s to treatweakened hearts or hearts with irregular patterns of contraction.Digitalis strengthens and slows the heartbeat by slowingthe reuptake of Ca2+ by the sarcoplasmic reticulum and therebyincreasing the concentration of Ca2+ in the sarcoplasm. Beforebeing introduced into the practice of medicine, digitalis preparedfrom the purple foxglove plant, Digitalis purpurea, was afolk remedy for heart problems.The ECG records the electrical activity of the heartElectrical events in the cardiac muscle during the cardiac cyclecan be recorded by electrodes placed on the surface of the body.Such a recording is an electrocardiogram, or ECG. EKG is alsoused because German physicians who invented the methodused the Greek word for heart and called it the electrokardiogramm.The ECG is an important tool for diagnosing heart problems(Figure 50.8A).The action potentials that sweep through the muscles of theatria and ventricles before they contract are such massive, localizedelectrical events that they cause electric currents to flowthroughout the body. Electrodes placed at different locations on50.3 | HOW DOES THE MAMMALIAN HEART FUNCTION? 1055The sinoatrial nodefires; action potentialsspread through the atria,which contract.The atrioventricular nodefires, sending impulsesalong conducting fibers;the ventricles contract.Sinoatrial node(pacemaker)AtrioventricularnodeAtriaBundleof HisBundlebranchesPurkinjefibersVentriclesHeart at rest (diastole)Atrial contractionVentricular contraction(systole)50.6 The Heartbeat Pacemaker cells in the sinoatrial node initiate theheartbeat by firing action potentials that spread through the electricallycoupled atrial muscle. The atrial action potential eventually spreads to theatrioventricular node that, with a delay, conducts it through the Bundle ofHis and Purkinje fibers to the cells of the ventricles.The rising phase of the ventricular cell actionpotential is due to opening of voltage-gated Na+channels and closure of K+ channels.The plateau phase is due tothe prolonged opening ofvoltage-gated Ca2+ channels.The falling phase is due to theclosure of Ca2+ channels andopening of K+ channels.0 0.15 0.30Time (seconds)1.00.110.0–50–1000Membrane potential (mV)of ventricular muscle cell ( )Relative membrane permeability ( )Na+ channelsCa2+channelsK+channelsActionpotential50.7 The Action Potential of Ventricular Muscle Fibers The risingphase of the action potential of ventricular muscle fibers (red) is due tothe opening of voltage-gated Na+ channels (gold). However, the membraneremains in a depolarized state for a prolonged time because of theopening of voltage-gated K+ channels (black).the skin detect those currents at different times and register avoltage difference between them. The appearance of the ECGdepends on the placement of the electrodes. Electrodes placedon the right wrist and left ankle produced the normal ECGshown in Figure 50.8B. The wave patterns of the ECG are designatedP, Q, R, S, and T, each letter representing a particularevent in the cardiac muscle, as shown in the figure.50.3 RECAPThe mammalian heart has two atria and two ventricles.Modified cardiac muscle tissue in the rightatrium functions to spontaneously generate pacemakeraction potentials. Other modified cardiacmuscle tissue between the atria and ventricles andthroughout the ventricles conducts those signalsand coordinates the heart contraction.• Trace the path of blood through both sides of theheart, naming the major blood vessels and heartvalves. See pp. 1051–1052 and Figure 50.2• Differentiate systole and diastole and describe theevents of the cardiac cycle. See p. 1052 and Figure 50.3• How do cells of the sinoatrial node generate the heartbeat?See pp. 1053–1054 and Figures 50.5 and 50.6We’ll now consider the composition of the blood and the characteristicsof the vessels through which blood circulates aroundthe body, illustrating once again how structure serves function.We will also consider the role of the lymphatic vessels that returninterstitial fluid to the blood.What Are the Properties of Blood 50.4 and Blood Vessels?Blood is a connective tissue. It consists of cells suspended inan extracellular matrix of complex, yet specific, composition.The unusual feature of blood is that the extracellular matrix isa liquid, so blood is a fluid tissue.The cells of the blood can be separated from the fluid matrix,called plasma, by centrifugation (Figure 50.9). If a sample of bloodis spun in a centrifuge, all the cells move to the bottom of the tube,leaving the clear, straw-colored plasma on top. The packed-cell volume,or hematocrit, is the percentage of the blood volume madeup by cells. Normal hematocrit is about 42 percent for womenand 46 percent for men, but these values can vary considerably.They are usually higher, for example, in people who live andwork at high altitudes, because the low oxygen concentrationsthere stimulate the production of more red blood cells.Here we will consider two elements in blood: the red blood cellsand the platelets, which are pinched-off fragments of cells. Whiteblood cells, or leukocytes, are the cells of the immune system, whichwe discussed in Chapter 42.Red blood cells transport respiratory gasesMost of the cells in the blood are erythrocytes, or red blood cells.Mature red blood cells are biconcave, flexible discs packed withhemoglobin. Their function is to transport respiratory gases.Their shape gives them a large surface area for gas exchange,1056 CHAPTER 50 | CIRCULATORY SYSTEMSP corresponds tothe depolarizationof the atrial muscle.T corresponds tothe relaxation andrepolarization ofthe ventricles.Q, R, and Stogether correspondto the depolarizationof the ventricles.The sounds heard through a stethoscopeoccur at the beginning and end of systole.ECG(mV)ArterialpressureDiastoleSystoleSystoleSystoleSystoleDiastoleDiastoleDiastolePQRSTPQRSTPQRSTPQRST“Lub” “Dup”HighLowTime (seconds)1 2 3 41.0–0.50.50(A) (B)50.8 The Electrocardiogram (A) An electrocardiogram (abbreviatedas ECG or EKG) is used to monitor heart function. Electrodes attached tothe person on the treadmill record an ECG that is amplified and displayedon a monitor. (B) Variations from the normal pattern shown here can beused to diagnose heart problems.and their flexibility enables them to squeeze through narrowcapillaries. Men have 4.5 to 6.0 million red blood cells per microliterof blood, and women have 3.5 to 5.0 million.Red blood cells, as well as all the other cellular componentsof blood, are generated by stem cells in the bone marrow, particularlyin the ribs, breastbone, pelvis, vertebrae, and the longbones of the limbs. Red blood cell production is controlled by ahormone, erythropoietin, which is released by cells in the kidneysin response to insufficient oxygen—hypoxia. Many tissuesrespond to hypoxia by expressing a transcription factorcalled hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1). When the kidneys becomehypoxic and express HIF-1, one of the actions of the transcriptionfactor is to activate the gene encoding erythropoietin.Increased circulating erythropoietin extends the lives of maturered blood cells and stimulates production of new red bloodcells in the bone marrow.Under normal conditions, your bone marrow produces about2 million red blood cells every second. Developing, immaturered blood cells divide many times while still in the bone marrow,and during this time they produce hemoglobin. Whenthe hemoglobin content of a red blood cell approaches about 30percent, the nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus,and mitochondria of the cell begin to break down. This processis almost complete when the new red blood cell squeezes betweenthe endothelial cells of blood vessels in the bone marrowand enters the circulation. Loss of nuclei from the red blood cellsoccurs in most mammalian species, but the red cells of somemammals and of all other vertebrates are nucleated.Each red blood cell circulates for about 120 days. As it getsolder, its membrane becomes less flexible and more fragile.Therefore, old red blood cells can rupture as they bend to fitthrough narrow capillaries. One place where they are reallysqueezed is in the spleen, an organ that sits near the stomach inthe upper left side of the abdominal cavity. The spleen has manyvenous cavities, or sinuses, that serve as a reservoir for red bloodcells, but to get into the sinuses, the red blood cells must squeezebetween spleen cells. When old red blood cells are rupturedby this squeezing, their remnants are taken up and degradedby macrophages (a class of white blood cells that ingest debrisand foreign materials).Platelets are essential for blood clottingBesides producing erythrocytes and leukocytes, the bone marrowstem cells described in Section 42.1 also produce cells calledmegakaryocytes. Megakaryocytes are large cells that remain inthe bone marrow and release cell fragments called platelets intothe circulation. A platelet is just a tiny fragment of a cell withoutcell organelles, but it is packed with enzymes and chemicalsnecessary for its function: sealing leaks in blood vessels andinitiating blood clotting (Figure 50.10).Damage to a blood vessel exposes collagen fibers. An encounterwith collagen fibers activates a platelet. The plateletswells, becomes irregularly shaped and sticky, and releaseschemicals that activate other platelets and initiate the clotting ofblood. The sticky platelets also form a plug at the damaged site.Blood clotting requires many steps and many clotting factors,most of which are circulating in the blood in an inactiveform. The absence of any one of these proteins can impair clottingand cause excessive bleeding. Because the liver produces50.4 | WHAT ARE THE PROPERTIES OF BLOOD AND BLOOD VESSELS? 1057Blood is withdrawn from the arm, placedin a test tube, and centrifuged.Cellular portionPlasma portionComponentsComponentsNumber perμl of bloodFunctionsFunctionsErythrocytes(red blood cells)4–6 millionWaterSolvent100%50%10%Transportoxygen andcarbon dioxideDestroy foreign cells, produce antibodies;roles in allergic responses5,000–10,000Leukocytes(white blood cells; see Chapter 42)SaltsSodium, potassium,calcium, magnesium,chloride, bicarbonateOsmotic balance,pH buffering, regulationof membrane potentialsPlasma proteinsAlbuminFibrinogenImmunoglobulinsTransported by blood:• Nutrients(e.g., glucose, vitamins)• Waste products ofmetabolism• Respiratory gases(O2 and CO2)• Hormones• HeatOsmotic balance,pH buffering, clotting,immune responsesEosinophil Neutrophil LymphocytePlatelets(cell fragments)250,000–400,000BloodclottingBasophil MonocyteHematocrit50.9 The Composition of Blood Blood consists of a complex aqueoussolution (the plasma) and numerous cell types and cell fragments.The hematocrit (arrow) is a measure of the cellular portion as a percentageof total blood volume.most of the clotting factors, liver diseases such as hepatitis andcirrhosis can result in excessive bleeding. People with hemophiliaexperience uncontrolled bleeding because of a genetic inabilityto produce one of the clotting factors.Blood clotting factors participate in a cascade of chemical activationsof other substances circulating in the blood. The cascadebegins with blood vessel and other tissue damage that exposesthe blood to proteins such as collagen that are normallyseparated from the blood by endothelial cells lining the bloodvessels. This exposure activates platelets and begins the clottingfactor cascade. The end result of this cascade is to convert an inactivecirculating enzyme, prothrombin, to its active form, thrombin.Thrombin cleaves molecules of fibrinogen, a plasma protein,forming insoluble threads of fibrin. The fibrin threads formthe meshwork that binds platelets, seals the vessel, and providesa scaffold for the formation of scar tissue (see Figure 50.10).Blood circulates throughout the body in a systemof blood vesselsAs we mentioned in Section 50.1, blood circulates through thevertebrate body in a system of closed vessels. Blood leaves theheart in arteries and is distributed throughout the body’s tissuesin arterioles, which feed capillary beds. Exchanges of nutrients,wastes, respiratory gases, and hormones occur in thecapillaries. Blood leaving capillary beds collects in venules,which empty into veins that conduct the blood back to the heart.The walls of the large arteries have many extracellular collagenand elastin fibers, which enable them to withstand the highblood pressures generated by the heart (Figure 50.11A). Theseelastic tissues have another important function: they arestretched during systole, and thereby store some of the energyimparted to the blood by the heart. Elastic recoil during diastolereturns this energy to the blood by squeezing it and pushingit forward. As a result, even though pressure in the arteriespulsates with the beating of the heart, the flow of blood issmoother than it would be through a system of rigid pipes.Smooth muscle cells in the walls of the arteries and arteriolesconstrict or dilate those vessels. When the diameter of thevessels changes, their resistance to blood flow also changes, andthe amount of blood flowing through them changes as a result.Neural and hormonal mechanisms act on smooth musclecells in the walls of the arteries and arterioles, controlling theflow of blood through these vessels. The arterioles are referredto as resistance vessels because their resistance can vary to controlthe blood flow to specific tissues.Materials are exchanged in capillary beds byfiltration, osmosis, and diffusionBeds of capillaries lie between arterioles and venules (Figure50.11B). Few cells are more than a few cell diameters awayfrom a capillary. (Notable exceptions include developingoocytes and the cells of the lens and cornea.) The cells’ needsare served by the exchange of materials between blood and interstitialfluid across the capillary walls. This exchange is facilitatedby the capillaries’ thin, permeable walls, as well as bythe slow flow of blood through the capillaries.It may seem strange that blood flows through the large arteriesrapidly at high pressures, but when it reaches the small capillaries,the pressure and rate of flow decrease (Figure 50.11C).When you restrict the diameter of a garden hose by placing yourthumb over the opening, the pressure in the hose increases,which in turn increases the velocity of the water spraying out ofthe hose. But keep in mind that the arteries branch into many arterioles,which give rise to a huge number of capillaries. Even1058 CHAPTER 50 | CIRCULATORY SYSTEMSAn injury to the lining of a bloodvessel exposes collagen fibers;platelets adhere and become sticky.Platelets release substances that cause thevessel to contract. Sticky platelets form a plugand initiate the formation of a fibrin clot.The fibrin clot sealsthe wound until thevessel wall heals.Red blood cell Platelet plugPlateletCollagen fibersClotting factors:1. Released from platelets and injured tissue2. Plasma proteins synthesized in liver andcirculated in inactive formProthrombincirculatingin plasmaThrombinFibrinogencirculatingin plasmaFibrin(A)(B)Fibrin meshwork50.10 Blood Clotting (A) Damage toa blood vessel initiates a cascade ofevents that produce a fibrin meshwork.(B) As the meshwork forms, red bloodcells are enmeshed in the fibrin threads,forming a clot, as shown in this colorenhancedelectron micrograph.though each capillary has a diameter so small that red blood cellsmust pass through in single file, there are so many capillariesthat their total cross-sectional area is much greater than that ofany other class of vessels. As a result, all the capillaries togetherhave a much greater capacity for blood than do the arterioles.Returning to our garden hose analogy, if we connected the hoseto an increasing number of lawn sprinklers, eventually the pressureand flow in each sprinkler would be low.Capillary walls consist of a single layer of thin endothelialcells (Figure 50.12). In most tissues of the body other than thebrain, capillaries have tiny holes, or fenestrations ( fenestra, “windows”).Capillaries are permeable to water, some ions, andsome small molecules but not to large molecules such as proteins.At the arterial (high pressure) end, blood pressuresqueezes water and some small solutes out of the capillaries andinto the surrounding intercellular spaces. Why don’t water andsmall-molecular-weight solutes collect in the intercellularspaces? How is the blood volume maintained if fluid is continuouslyleaking out of the capillaries?An answer to this question was put forth more than 100 yearsago by the physiologist E. H. Starling. Starling suggested thatwater movement across capillary walls is a result of two opposingforces, which are now known as Starling’s forces:• Blood pressure squeezes water and small solutes out of thecapillaries.• Osmotic pressure pulls water back into the capillaries.Blood pressure is high at the arterial end of a capillarybed and steadily drops as blood moves towards the venousend (Figure 50.13). The osmotic pressure is due tothe large protein molecules that cannot leave the capillaries,and it is relatively constant along the capillaries.As long as the blood pressure is above the osmotic pressure,fluid leaves the capillaries. At the venule end ofmost capillaries, blood pressure falls below the osmoticpressure, so fluid returns to the capillaries. The actualnumbers for a normal capillary bed in a resting personsuggest that there would be a slight net loss of fluid tothe intercellular spaces. This loss, about 4 liters per day,percolates between cells as the interstitial fluid before itreturns to the venous blood via the lymphatic system,which we will discuss later in this chapter.Several observations supported Starling’s model. Inpeople with severe liver disease or protein starvation, afall in blood protein concentration leads to an accumulationof fluid in the extracellular spaces, which resultsin tissue swelling, or edema. Edema is also characteris-50.4 | WHAT ARE THE PROPERTIES OF BLOOD AND BLOOD VESSELS? 1059Arteries have manyelastin fibers andsmooth musclefibers, allowingthem to withstandhigh pressures.Because veinsoperate under lowpressure, some veinshave valves to preventbackflow of blood(see Figure 49.14).EndotheliumValveSmoothmuscleConnectivetissueElastinlayerSmallarteryArteriolesCapillariesVenules VeinMean blood pressure(mm Hg)Velocity(cm/sec)LargearteriesLowHighSmallarteriesArterioles Capillaries Venules VeinsTotal area(cm2)Largeartery(A) Artery Vein(B)(C)Total area(cm2)Elastinlayer50.11 Anatomy of Blood Vessels (A) Thedifferent anatomical characteristics of arteriesand veins match their functions. (B) Blood fromthe arterial system feeds into capillary beds,where exchanges with the interstitial fluid occur.The venous system returns the blood to theheart. (C) The area encompassed by each vesseltype is graphed along with the pressure andvelocity of the blood within them.GO TO Web Activity 50.3 • Structure of a Blood VesselyourBioPortal.com12 μmRed blood cellsmust pass throughcapillaries in single file.Capillary wallsNucleus ofcapillary endothelium50.12 A Narrow Lane Capillaries have a very small diameter, andblood flows through them slowly.tic of the inflammation response accompanying tissue damageor allergic responses (see Figure 42.3). Histamine, a mediator ofinflammation released by certain white blood cells, increasescapillary permeability and relaxes the smooth muscles of thearterioles, raising blood pressure in the capillaries and leadingto fluid leakage into tissues.Afew situations are not explained by Starling’s hypothesis.During strenuous exercise, the blood pressure in the arteriolesserving the muscles rises substantially but does not result inedema. In birds, the blood pressure in arterioles is much higherthan in mammals, and the osmotic pressure is lower. If edemais not a chronic problem in exercising muscles and in birds, whatis missing from Starling’s model?Recent research suggests that bicarbonate ions (HCO3–) inthe blood plasma contribute significantly to the osmotic attractionthat draws water back into the capillaries. The CO2 producedby cellular metabolism diffuses into the endothelial cellslining the capillaries, where it is converted into HCO3– and releasedinto the plasma. When the subject is at rest, the increasingHCO3– concentration can cause the osmotic pressure of theblood at the venous end to be 30 mm Hg higher than at the arterialend, and during strenuous exercise this difference can bemuch higher. Thus it appears that CO2 and HCO3– are majorfactors that pull water back into the capillaries.Lipid-soluble substances and many small solute moleculescan easily pass through capillary walls from an area of higherconcentration to one of lower concentration. The capillaries indifferent tissues, however, are differentially selective as to thesizes of molecules that can pass through them. You can imaginethat this is an important issue in the design and delivery ofdrugs. All capillaries are permeable to O2, CO2, glucose, lactate,and small ions such as Na+ and Cl–. However, the capillariesof the brain do not have fenestrations, and therefore not muchelse can pass through them other than lipid-soluble substances,such as alcohol and anesthetics. This high selectivity of braincapillaries is known as the blood–brain barrier.Much less selective capillaries are found in the digestive tract,where nutrients are absorbed, and in the kidneys, where wastesare filtered. Even in the brain there are specific regions wherethe capillaries are more permeable, enabling the brain to detectnon-lipid soluble hormones.Blood flows back to the heart through veinsThe pressure of the blood flowing from capillaries to venules isextremely low and is insufficient to propel blood back to theheart. The walls of veins are more expandable than the walls ofarteries, and blood tends to accumulate in veins. As much as 60percent of your total blood volume may be in your veins whenyou are resting. Because of their high capacity to stretch andstore blood, veins are called capacitance vessels.Blood flow through veins that are above the level of the heartis assisted by gravity. Below the level of the heart, however, venousreturn is against gravity. The most important force propellingblood from these regions is the squeezing of the veinsby the contractions of surrounding skeletal muscles. As musclescontract, the vessels are compressed and blood is squeezedthrough them. Blood flow may be temporarily obstructed duringa prolonged muscle contraction, but when muscles relax,blood is free to move again. One-way valves in the veins ofthe extremities prevent backflow of blood. Thus, whenever avein is squeezed, blood is propelled forward toward the heart(Figure 50.14).In a resting person, gravity causes blood accumulation in theveins of the lower body and exerts backpressure on the capillarybeds. This backpressure shifts the balance between bloodpressure and osmotic pressure, causing increased loss of fluidto the intercellular spaces. That is why your feet swell duringa long airline flight.Because of the one-way valves in the veins of the legs, thecontractions of leg muscles act as auxiliary vascular pumpswhen an animal walks or runs and facilitate the return of bloodto the heart from the veins of the lower body. As a greater volumeof blood is returned to the heart, the heart contracts moreforcefully and its pumping action is enhanced. The heartbeatgets stronger because of a property of cardiac muscle cells describedby the Frank–Starling law: if the cardiac muscle cells arestretched, as they are when the volume of returning blood increases,they contract more forcefully.1060 CHAPTER 50 | CIRCULATORY SYSTEMSFluid is squeezed out of thecapillary by blood pressure.Fluid is pulled back into thecapillary by osmotic pressure.Net driving force forfluid to leave capillaryOsmoticpressureArteriole endBlood pressure 40Osmotic pressureNet outward force– 2515Blood pressure 16Osmotic pressureNet inward force– 25–9Venule end50250Pressure (mm Hg)mm Hg mm HgBloodpressure(40)Osmoticpressure(25)Bloodpressure(16)Osmoticpressure(25)Blood pressureNet driving force forfluid to reenter capillary(A)(B)50.13 Starling’s Forces Starling’s model explains how blood volumeis maintained in the capillary beds. (A) When blood pressure is greaterthan osmotic pressure, fluid leaves the capillaries; when blood pressurefalls below osmotic pressure, fluid returns to the capillaries. (B) The balanceof these two forces changes over the capillary bed as blood pressurefalls.The actions of breathing also help return venous blood to theheart. The muscles involved in inhalation create negative pressurethat pulls air into the lungs (see Figure 49.11), and this negativepressure also pulls blood toward the chest, increasingvenous return to the right atrium. In addition, some of thelargest veins closest to the heart contain smooth muscle thatcontracts at the onset of exercise. Contraction of veins can rapidlyincrease venous return and stimulate the heart in accordwith the Frank–Starling law, increasing cardiac output.Lymphatic vessels return interstitial fluid to the bloodThe interstitial fluid contains water and small molecules, but nored blood cells, and less protein than found in plasma. Aseparatesystem of vessels—the lymphatic system—returns interstitialfluid to the blood. Each capillary bed contains at least oneblind-ended lymph capillary.Once it enters the lymphatic vessels, the interstitial fluid iscalled lymph. Fine lymphatic capillaries merge into progressivelylarger vessels and ultimately into two lymphatic vessels—the thoracic ducts—that empty into large veins at the base ofthe neck (see Figure 42.1). The left thoracic duct carries mostof the lymph from the lower part of the body and is much largerthan the right thoracic duct. Lymph, like blood, is propelled towardthe heart by skeletal muscle contractions and breathingmovements, and lymphatic vessels, like veins, have one-wayvalves that keep the lymph flowing toward the thoracic duct.Mammals and birds have lymph nodes along the major lymphaticvessels. Lymph nodes are a major site of lymphocyte productionand of the phagocytic action that removes microorganismsand other foreign materials from the circulation (seeSection 42.1).Vascular disease is a killerAs mentioned at the start of this chapter, cardiovascular diseaseis responsible for about one-fourth of all deaths each year in theUnited States, and the same is true for Europe. The immediatecause of most of these deaths is not a defect in heart muscle, asit is in athletes. Instead, the cause is mostly heart attack orstroke, which are usually the end result of a disease called atherosclerosis(“hardening of the arteries”) that begins manyyears before symptoms are detected.Healthy arteries have a smooth internal lining of endothelialcells (Figure 50.15A) that can be damaged by chronic high bloodpressure, smoking, a high-fat diet, or microorganisms. Depositscalled plaque begin to form at sites of endothelial damage. First,the damaged endothelial cells attract certain white blood cellsto the site. These cells are then joined by smooth muscle cellsmigrating from the deeper layers of the arterial wall. Lipids, especiallycholesterol, are deposited in these cells, so that the developingplaque becomes fatty. Fibrous connective tissue madeby the invading smooth muscle cells in the plaque, along with50.4 | WHAT ARE THE PROPERTIES OF BLOOD AND BLOOD VESSELS? 1061Muscle contracts:Valve closed Valve openMuscle relaxes:Valve open Valve closedContractions of skeletalmuscles squeeze the veins.This squeezing moves the blood in the veins toward theheart because of one-way valves that prevent backflow.Blood is propelled forward bymuscle contractions and, insome body regions, by gravity.Back pressure is due to contractionsof atria, contractions of muscles,and, in some regions, gravity.50.14 One-Way Flow Veins have valves that prevent blood from flowingbackward, and contractions of skeletal muscle help move bloodtoward the heart.PlaqueSmooth muscleThrombus(B)(A)Smooth muscleEndothelium50.15 Atherosclerotic Plaque (A) A healthy, clear artery. (B) An atheroscleroticartery, clogged with plaque and a thrombus.deposits of calcium, make the artery wall less elastic—hence,“hardening of the arteries.” The growing plaque deposit narrowsthe artery and causes turbulence in the blood flow. Bloodplatelets stick to the plaque (see Figure 50.10) and initiate formationof an intravascular blood clot, a thrombus, which canblock the artery (Figure 50.15B).The blood supply to the heart muscle flows through the coronaryarteries which are highly susceptible to atherosclerosis. Asthese arteries narrow, blood flow to the heart muscle decreases,causing the symptoms of chest pain and shortness of breath duringmild exertion. A person with atherosclerosis is at high riskof forming a thrombus in a coronary artery. This condition,called coronary thrombosis, can totally block the vessel, causinga heart attack, or myocardial infarction.A piece of a thrombus that breaks loose, called an embolus,is likely to travel to and become lodged in a vessel of smallerdiameter, blocking its flow (an embolism). Arteries already narrowedby plaque formation are likely places for an embolism.An embolism in an artery in the brain causes the cells fed bythat artery to die. This event is a stroke. The specific damage resultingfrom a stroke, such as memory loss, speech impairment,or paralysis, depends on the location of the blocked artery.Probably the most important determinants of whether youwill get atherosclerosis are your genetic predisposition and yourage. Environmental risk factors play a large role, however. Ifyou do have a genetic predisposition to atherosclerosis, it is evenmore important to minimize environmental risk factors. Theseinclude high-fat and high-cholesterol diets, smoking, and asedentary lifestyle. Certain untreated medical conditions suchas hypertension (high blood pressure), obesity, and diabetes arealso risk factors for atherosclerosis. Changes in diet and behaviorand treatment of predisposing medical conditions can preventand reverse early atherosclerosis and help fend off thissilent killer.50.4 RECAPBlood is a fluid tissue with cellular components thatplay roles in transport of respiratory gases, immunesystem function, and blood clotting. Blood is distributedthroughout the body in a system of vessels. Exchangesbetween the blood and interstitial fluids occurin the smallest of those vessels, the capillaries.• How are the structural differences between the variousclasses of vessels related to their functions? Seepp. 1058–1061 and Figure 50.11• Why are arterioles called resistance vessels and veinscalled capacitance vessels? See pp. 1058 and 1060• What factors control the movement of fluids betweenthe vascular and extravascular spaces? See pp.1059–1060 and Figure 50.13• What propels blood from the lower part of the bodyback to the heart? See pp. 1060–1061 and Figure50.14Every tissue in the body requires an adequate flow of oxygensaturatedblood that carries essential nutrients and is relativelyfree of waste products. Blood flow depends on the maintenanceof an appropriate blood pressure, and the distribution of bloodflow throughout the body depends on control of the resistancein the blood vessels supplying different tissues.How Is the Circulatory System 50.5 Controlled and Regulated?When we investigate how a physiological process is regulated,we start by identifying the critical components of that process,how they can be controlled, and the information used to governthat control. Because blood flow depends on pressure, wecan identify the pressure in the aorta as a critical variable of thecirculatory system. The pressure in the aorta oscillates betweensystole and diastole, so we define our variable as the mean arterialpressure (MAP). MAP is determined by the cardiac output(CO) and the resistance to flow in the blood vessels, or total peripheralresistance (TPR):MAP = CO × TPRSince CO is a function of the heart rate (HR) and stroke volume(SV), however, the critical relationships we have to understandcan be expressed as:MAP = HR × SV × TPRHR, SV, and TPR are controlled by neural and hormonal mechanismsat both the local and systemic levels. At the local level,each tissue controls its own blood flow through autoregulatorymechanisms that cause the arterioles supplying that tissue toconstrict or dilate.The collective autoregulatory actions in the capillary beds inall tissues of the body determine TPR and therefore MAP. Ifmany arterioles suddenly dilate, TPR goes down and MAP falls.If many arterioles constrict, TPR goes up and MAP goes up.Changes in MAP provide information about changing needs ofthe body. As blood flows through capillary beds, its compositionchanges; its CO2 content goes up and its O2 content goesdown. Thus, blood composition also provides information thebody uses to regulate the circulatory system.The nervous and endocrine systems respond to changes inMAPand blood composition by changing breathing rate, heartrate, stroke volume, and peripheral resistance to match themetabolic needs of the body. We will now see how these mechanismswork.Autoregulation matches local blood flow to local needThe amount of blood that flows through a capillary bed is controlledby the smooth muscle of the arteries and arterioles feedingthat bed. Figure 50.16 illustrates the flow of blood in a typicalcapillary bed. Blood flows into the bed from an arteriole.Smooth muscle “cuffs,” or precapillary sphincters, on the arteriolecan shut off the supply of blood to the capillary bed. Whenthe precapillary sphincters are relaxed and the arteriole is open,the arterial blood pressure pushes blood into the capillaries.1062 CHAPTER 50 | CIRCULATORY SYSTEMSAutoregulation depends on the sensitivity of the smoothmuscle to its local chemical environment. Low O2 concentrationsand high CO2 concentrations cause the smooth muscle torelax, thus increasing the supply of blood, which brings in moreO2 and carries away CO2—a response known as hyperemia,which means “excess blood.” Increases in other by-productsof metabolism, such as lactic acid, hydrogen ions, potassium,and adenosine (all of which increase in exercising muscle), promotehyperemia through the same mechanism. Hence, activitiesthat increase the metabolism of a tissue also induce hyperemiain that tissue.Arterial pressure is regulated byhormonal and neural mechanismsControl and regulation of the circulatory systembegins with the local autoregulatorymechanisms that alter the resistance of arteriesand arterioles feeding capillary beds. Thedemands of the capillary beds influence MAPand blood composition. Both of these provideinformation for the control of endocrine andneural responses that act to return bloodpressure and composition to normal. Thuscirculatory functions are matched to the regionaland overall needs of the body.Arteries and arterioles are innervated bythe autonomic nervous system, particularlythe sympathetic division. The sympatheticpostganglionic neurotransmitter norepinephrinebinds to receptors in smooth muscle inblood vessels in the gut and other tissues notessential for “fight or flight” and causes thesevessels to constrict, resulting in reduced blood flow throughthem and an elevation in MAP. In skeletal muscle, however, specializedsympathetic neurons release acetylcholine, causing thesmooth muscle of these arterioles to relax and the vessels todilate, increasing blood to flow to the muscle. As we discussedearlier in this chapter, increased sympathetic activity increasesheart rate, and by increasing the strength of the cardiac musclecontraction, it also increases stroke volume.Hormones also play a role in regulating arterial pressure. Epinephrinehas actions similar to those of norepinephrine and is releasedfrom the adrenal medulla during massive sympatheticactivation stimulated by a fall in arterial pressure or by activationof the fight-or-flight response to a dangerous threat. Anotherhormone, angiotensin, is produced when blood pressure to thekidneys falls (Figure 50.17). These hormones influence arterioleslocated for the most part in peripheral tissues (extremities)or in tissues whose functions need not be maintained continuously(such as the gut). By reducing blood flow in those arterioles,these hormones increase central blood pressure and bloodflow to essential organs such as the heart, brain, and kidneys.The autonomic nervous system activity that controls heartrate and constriction of blood vessels originates in a cardiovascularcontrol center in the medulla. Many inputs converge onthis central integrative network and influence the commandsit issues via parasympathetic and sympathetic nerves (Figure50.18). Of special importance is incoming information aboutchanges in blood pressure and composition from both baroreceptors(stretch receptors) and chemoreceptors in the walls of thelarge arteries leading to the brain—the aorta and the carotidarteries.50.5 | HOW IS THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM CONTROLLED AND REGULATED? 1063...or they can shut off bloodsupply to the capillary bed.Blood flow through a capillary bed iscontrolled by the constriction of smoothmuscle in the arteries and arterioles.VeinArteryBedclosedBedopenArterioleMusclefibers(cells)CapillaryVenuleThroughfarevesselPrecapillary sphincters canopen in response to localhypoxia, low pH, or cytokines...50.16 Local Control of Blood Flow Low O2 concentrations or high levelsof metabolic by-products cause the smooth muscle of the arteries andarterioles to relax, thus increasing the supply of blood to the capillary bed.ADH stimulateswater resorptionby kidneysFiring in arterialstretch sensorsdecreasesCirculatingrenin activatesangiotensinHypothalamusreleasesADHKidney releasesreninKidney functionfailsAutoregulatorywideningof vesselsAutoregulationresults inpositivefeedbackNegativefeedbackNegativefeedbackLocalaccumulation ofmetabolic wastesDecreasedblood flow totissueArterialpressure fallsAngiotensincauses vessels toconstrict andstimulates thirstArterialpressure risesSTART50.17 Control of Blood Pressure through Local and Systemic Mechanisms A drop inarterial pressure reduces blood flow to tissues, resulting in local accumulation of metabolic wastes.This change in the extracellular environment stimulates autoregulatory opening of the arteries. A fallin central blood pressure is prevented by negative feedback mechanisms that constrict arteries inless essential tissues and stimulate maintenance of blood volume and blood pressure.Increased activity in baroreceptors of the large arteries signalsrising blood pressure and inhibits sympathetic nervous systemsignaling to arteries and arterioles while increasingparasympathetic signaling to the heart’s pacemaker (see Figure50.5). As a result, the heart slows and arterioles in peripheraltissues dilate, reducing blood pressure. If pressure in the largearteries falls, the activity of the baroreceptors decreases, stimulatingsympathetic output to the arteries and arterioles whilereducing parasympathetic output to the heart’s pacemaker. Asa result, the heart beats faster and the arterioles in peripheraltissues constrict, increasing blood pressure.Another hormone that helps stabilize blood pressure is antidiuretichormone (ADH, also called vasopressin), which is secretedby the posterior pituitary in response to a fall in the activityof the baroreceptors, signaling a fall in arterial pressure.ADH causes the kidneys to resorb more water and therebymaintain blood volume and increase blood pressure. Increasedactivity of the baroreceptors inhibits the release of ADH, and asa result the kidneys excrete more water, reducing blood volumeand contributing to a fall in arterial pressure (see Figure 50.17).Other information that causes the cardiovascular control centerto increase heart rate and blood pressure comes fromchemoreceptors in the medulla, aorta, and the carotid arteries.As we discussed in Section 49.5, the medullary chemosensorsare activated by increases in arterial CO2 levels, and the carotidand aortic bodies are activated by falls in arterial O2 levels.Chemosensors send signals to the cardiovascular regulatorycenter as well as to the respiratory regulatory center.50.5 RECAPThe delivery of blood to tissues is controlled locallyby autoregulatory mechanisms that dilate or constrictarterioles. These local actions are translatedinto alterations in central blood pressure and compositionthat are detected by neural and hormonalmechanisms, which then mediate corrective cardiovascularadjustments.• How do autoregulatory changes in blood flow tocapillary beds result in adjustments to MAP? See pp.1062–1063 and Figure 50.16• What are the roles of hormones in regulating bloodpressure? See p. 1063 and Figure 50.17• Describe the role of baroreceptors and chemoreceptorsin regulating blood pressure. See pp. 1063–1064and Figure 50.181064 CHAPTER 50 | CIRCULATORY SYSTEMSIncreasedheart rateand arterialpressureKidneyChemoreceptors onaorta and carotid arteriesare activated whenblood Po2 falls.Medullary cardiovascularcontrol centerHigher brain centers• Emotion• Anticipation• StressDecreasedheart rate andarterial pressureAdrenalglandSympatheticEpinephrineParasympatheticBaroreceptors inaorta and carotid arteryare activated whenblood pressure rises.Chemoreceptors inmedulla signal highPco2 in blood.AcetylcholineNorepinephrine50.18 Regulating Cardiac Output The autonomic nervous system controlsheart rate in response to information about blood pressure and blood compositionoriginating in baroreceptors and chemosensors shown at the bottom of thefigure. Information from these sensors goes to the cardiovascular control centerin the medulla, where it is integrated with other information. The medullary centergenerates responses in the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systemsthat control cardiac output.50.1 Why Do Animals Need a Circulatory System?• The metabolic needs of the cells of many small animals are metby direct exchange of materials with the external medium. Themetabolic needs of the cells of larger animals are met by a circulatorysystem that transports nutrients, respiratory gases,and metabolic wastes throughout the body.• In open circulatory systems, extracellular fluid leaves vesselsand percolates through tissues. In closed circulatory systems,the blood is contained in a system of vessels. Closed circulatorysystems have several advantages, including the ability to selectivelydirect blood, hormones, and nutrients to specific tissues.Review Figure 50.1CHAPTER SUMMARY
50.1 Why Do Animals Need a Circulatory System?• The metabolic needs of the cells of many small animals are metby direct exchange of materials with the external medium. Themetabolic needs of the cells of larger animals are met by a circulatorysystem that transports nutrients, respiratory gases,and metabolic wastes throughout the body.• In open circulatory systems, extracellular fluid leaves vesselsand percolates through tissues. In closed circulatory systems,the blood is contained in a system of vessels. Closed circulatorysystems have several advantages, including the ability to selectivelydirect blood, hormones, and nutrients to specific tissues.Review Figure 50.1
50.2 How Have Vertebrate Circulatory SystemsEvolved?SEE WEB ACTIVITY 50.1• The circulatory system of vertebrates consists of a heart and aclosed system of vessels containing blood that is separate fromthe interstitial fluid. Arteries and arterioles carry blood from theheart; capillaries are the site of exchange between blood andinterstitial fluid; venules and veins carry blood back to theheart.• The vertebrate heart evolved from two chambers in fishes tothree in amphibians and some reptiles and four in crocodilians,birds, and mammals. This evolutionary progression has led toan increasing separation of blood that flows to the gasexchange organs and blood that flows to the rest of the body.• The simplest (two-chambered heart) has an atrium thatreceives blood from the body and a ventricle that pumps bloodout of the heart. An aorta distributes blood to arteries.• In birds and mammals, blood circulates through two completelyseparate circuits: the pulmonary, which transports bloodbetween the heart and lungs, and the systemic, which transportsoxygen-rich blood between the heart and tissues.50.3 How Does the Mammalian Heart Function?• The human heart has four chambers. Valves in the heart preventthe backflow of blood. Review Figure 50.2, WEBACTIVITY 50.2• The cardiac cycle has two phases: systole, in which the ventriclescontract, and diastole, in which the ventricles relax. Thesequential heart sounds (“lub-dup”) are made by the closing ofthe heart valves. Review Figure 50.3, ANIMATED TUTORIAL50.1• Blood pressure can be measured using a sphygmomanometerand a stethoscope. Review Figure 50.4• The autonomic nervous system controls heart rate: sympatheticactivity increases heart rate, and parasympathetic activitydecreases it. Norepinephrine increases and acetylcholinedecreases the rate of depolarization of the plasma membranesof pacemaker cells, affecting heart rate. Review Figure 50.5• The sinoatrial node controls the cardiac cycle by initiating awave of depolarization in the atria, which is conducted to theventricles through a system consisting of the atrioventricularnode, bundle of His, and Purkinje fibers. Review Figure 50.6• Sustained contraction of ventricular muscle cells is due to longdurationaction potentials that are generated by voltage-gatedNa+ and Ca2+ channels. Review Figure 50.7• An electrocardiogram (ECG) records electrical events associatedwith the contraction and relaxation of the cardiac muscles.Review Figure 50.850.4 What Are the Properties of Blood and BloodVessels?• Blood can be divided into a plasma portion (water, salts, andproteins) and a cellular portion (erythrocytes or red blood cells,platelets, and white blood cells). All of the cellular componentsare produced from stem cells in the bone marrow. ReviewFigure 50.9• Erythrocytes transport oxygen. Their production in the bonemarrow is stimulated by erythropoietin, which is produced inresponse to hypoxia (low oxygen levels) in the tissues.• Platelets, along with circulating proteins, are involved in bloodclotting, which results in a meshwork of fibrin threads that helpseal vessels. Review Figure 50.10• Abundant smooth muscle cells allow vessels to change theirdiameter, altering their resistance and thus blood flow. Arteriesand arterioles have many elastic fibers that enable them towithstand high pressures. Review Figure 50.11, WEBACTIVITY 50.3• Capillary beds are the site of exchange of materials betweenblood and tissue fluid.• Starling’s forces suggest that blood volume is maintained inthe capillary beds by an exchange of fluids driven by bothblood pressure and osmotic pressure. Review Figure 50.13• An accumulation of fluid in the extracellular spaces leads toedema. Bicarbonate ions in the blood plasma contribute to theosmotic forces that draw water back into capillaries.• The ability of a specific molecule to cross a capillary walldepends on the architecture of the capillary, the type of substance,and the concentration gradient between the blood andthe tissue fluid.• Veins have a high capacity for storing blood. Aided by gravity,by contractions of skeletal muscle, and by the actions of breathing,they return blood to the heart. Review Figure 50.14• The Frank–Starling law describes forces that increase cardiacoutput, such as stretch of the cardiac muscles cells caused byincreased venous return.• The lymphatic system returns the interstitial fluid to the blood.50.5 How Is the Circulatory System Controlled andRegulated?• Blood flow through capillary beds is controlled by localautoregulatory mechanisms, hormones, and the autonomicnervous system. Review Figure 50.16• Blood pressure is controlled in part by the hormones ADH andangiotensin, which stimulate contraction of blood vessels.Review Figure 50.17• Heart rate is controlled by the autonomic nervous system,which responds to information about blood pressure and bloodcomposition that is integrated by regulatory centers in themedulla. Review Figure 50.18