It is a day in the not-too-distant future. Decades of eatingfatty foods, combined with an inherited tendency todeposit cholesterol in his arteries, have finally caught upwith 70-year-old Don. A blood clot has closed off bloodflow to part of his heart, leading to a heart attack and severedamage to that vital organ.If this had happened today, Don would have been facedwith a long period of rehabilitation, taking medications tomanage his weakened heart. Instead, his physicians take apinch of skin tissue from his arm and bring it to a laboratory.After certain DNA sequences are added, Don’s skincells no longer look and act like skin cells: They are undifferentiated(unspecialized) and reproduce continuously inthe laboratory dish. These cells are also multipotent stemcells, able to differentiate into almost any type of cell in thebody if given the right environment. When they are injecteddirectly into Don’s heart, his stem cells soon becomeheart muscle cells, repairing the damage caused bythe heart attack. Don leaves the hospital with full cardiacfunction and recommendations for a healthy diet.You are probably familiar with another type of multi–potent cell, the fertilized human egg. This single cell ultimatelyproduces the tens of trillions of cells that make upthe human body. The fertilized egg is programmed togenerate an entire organism—not just the heart and skin,but blood, nerves, liver, brain, and even bones—and forthis reason is called totipotent (“toti” means all; “multi”means most). In contrast, the stem cells derived fromDon’s skin need specific external signals to differentiateinto other kinds of cells, andcould not develop into an entire person.The potential uses of stem cells in medicinehave generated a lot of excitement inrecent years. Such widely read periodicalsas Time have hailed advances in stem cellresearch as “breakthroughs of the year.”Patients with the neurological disorderParkinson’s disease dream of the day whentheir skin cells can be turned into brain cellsto fix their damaged nervous systems. Peoplewith diabetes hope for stem cells to repairtheir pancreases. The list is long.Behind all of this hope and the research itinspires is a cornerstone of biological science:the cell theory. As you saw in the lastHow to mend a broken heart5 PART TWO CELLSA New Heart Cell This cardiac stem cell isdeveloping into a fully differentiated heart cell.The hope is to be able to coax stem cells to followthis path or to produce other cell types to repairdamaged tissues.What Features Make Cells the 5.1 Fundamental Units of Life?In Chapter 1 we introduced some of the characteristics of life:chemical complexity, growth and reproduction, the ability to refashionsubstances from the environment, and the ability to determinewhat substances can move into and out of the organism.These characteristics are all demonstrated by cells. Just asatoms are the building blocks of chemistry, cells are the buildingblocks of life.The cell theory is described in Section 1.1 as the first unifyingprinciple of biology. There are three critical components ofthe cell theory:• Cells are the fundamental units of life.• All living organisms are composed of cells.• All cells come from preexisting cells.Cells contain water and the other small and large molecules,which we examined in Chapters 2–4. Each cell contains at least10,000 different types of molecules, most of them present inmany copies. Cells use these molecules to transform matter andenergy, to respond to their environments, and to reproducethemselves.The cell theory has three important implications:• Studying cell biology is in some sense the same as studyinglife. The principles that underlie the functions of the singlecell of a bacterium are similar to those governing the approximately60 trillion cells of your body.• Life is continuous. All those cells in your body came from asingle cell, a fertilized egg. That egg came from the fusionof two cells, a sperm and an egg, from your parents. Thecells of your parents’ bodies were all derived from theirparents, and so on back through generations and evolutionto the first living cell.• The origin of life on Earth was marked by the origin of thefirst cells (see Chapter 4).Even the largest creatures on Earth are composed of cells, butthe cells themselves are usually too small for the naked eye tosee. Why are cells so small?Cell size is limited by the surface area-to-volume ratioMost cells are tiny. In 1665, the early microscopist Robert Hookeestimated that in one square inch of cork, which he examinedunder his magnifying lens, there were 1,259,712,000 cells! Thevolumes of cells range from 1 to 1,000 cubic micrometers (μm3).There are some exceptions: the eggs of birds are single cells thatIN THIS CHAPTER we examine the structure andsome of the functions of cells. We will begin with a fuller explanationof cell theory. Then, we will examine the relativelysimple cells of prokaryotes. This is followed by a tour of themore complex eukaryotic cell and its various internal compartments,each of which performs specific functions. Finally,we discuss ideas on how complex cells evolved.chapter, a key event in the emergence of life was the enclosureof biochemical reactions inside a cell, thus concentratingthem and separating them from the externalenvironment. These are the first two tenets of the celltheory, that the cell is the unit of life and that the activitiesof life either happen inside cells or are caused bythem. Don’s stem cells contain not just the activities of aliving entity, but also the potential to change those activitiesin new directions. The third tenet of the cell theory—equally important—is that the cell is the unit of reproduction:all cells come from pre-existing cells. Stemcell therapy does not create new cells out of thin air; itcoaxes existing ones to differentiate and reproducealong the desired path.CHAPTER OUTLINE5.1 What Features Make Cells the FundamentalUnits of Life?5.2 What Features Characterize Prokaryotic Cells?5.3 What Features Characterize Eukaryotic Cells?5.4 What Are the Roles of Extracellular Structures?5.5 How Did Eukaryotic Cells Originate?Open Heart Surgery Stem cell therapies may provide alternativeapproaches to treating heart disease in the future.are, relatively speaking, enormous, and individual cells of severaltypes of algae and bacteria are large enough to be viewedwith the unaided eye (Figure 5.1). And although neurons (nervecells) have volumes that are within the “usual” range, they oftenhave fine projections that may extend for meters, carryingsignals from one part of a large animal to another. So there isenormous diversity among cells in their dimensions and volumes,but cells are usually very small.Small cell size is a practical necessity arising from the changein the surface area-to-volume ratio of any object as it increasesin size. As an object increases in volume, its surface area also increases,but not at the same rate (Figure 5.2). This phenomenonhas great biological significance for two reasons:• The volume of a cell determines the amount of chemicalactivity it carries out per unit of time.• The surface area of a cell determines the amount ofsubstances that can enter it from the outside environment,and the amount of waste products that can exit to theenvironment.78 CHAPTER 5 | CELLS: THE WORKING UNITS OF LIFEThis scale is logarithmic. Each unit is 10Most cell diameters are times bigger than the previous unit.in the range of 1–100 μm.AtomsSmallmoleculesLipidProteinT4 phage(virus)Most bacteriaMost plant andanimal cellsHummingbirdChloroplast Frog eggHumanBlue whaleCaliforniaredwood0.1 nm 1 nm 10 nm 100 nm 1 μm 10 μm 100 μm 1 mm 1 cm 0.1 m 1 m 10 m 100 m 1 kmElectron microscopeLight microscopeUnaided eye5.1 The Scale of Life This logarithmicscale shows the relative sizes of molecules,cells, and multicellular organisms.GO TO Web Activity 5.1 • The Scale of LifeyourBioPortal.com6 sides × 12= 6 mm213 = 1 mm31-mm cube(A) Cubes(B) Spheres6 sides × 22= 24 mm223 = 8 mm32-mm cube6 sides × 42= 96 mm243 = 64 mm34-mm cubeSurface areaVolumeSurface areato-volume ratioDiameter 1 μm 2 μm 3 μm3.14 μm2 12.56 μm2 28.26 μm20.52 μm3 4.19 μm3 14.18 μm36:1 3:1 2:16:1 3:1 1.5:1Surface area4 π r2Volume4/3 π r3Surface areato-volume ratioLarger surface areacompared to volume.Smaller surface areacompared to volume.5.2 Why Cells Are Small Whether it is cuboid (A) or spheroid (B), asan object grows larger its volume increases more rapidly than its surfacearea. Cells must maintain a large surface area-to-volume ratio in order tofunction. This fact explains why large organisms must be composed ofmany small cells rather than a few huge ones.As a living cell grows larger, its chemical activity, and thusits need for resources and its rate of waste production, increasesfaster than its surface area. (The surface area increases in proportionto the square of the radius, while the volume increasesmuch more—in proportion to the cube of the radius.) In addition,substances must move from one site to another within thecell; the smaller the cell, the more easily this is accomplished.This explains why large organisms must consist of many smallcells: cells must be small in volume in order to maintain a largeenough surface area-to-volume ratio and an ideal internal volume.The large surface area represented by the many small cellsof a multicellular organism enables it to carry out the many differentfunctions required for survival.Microscopes reveal the features of cellsMicroscopes do two different things to allow cells and detailswithin them to be seen by the human eye. First, they increase theapparent size of the object: this is called magnification. But justincreasing the magnification does not necessarily mean thatthe object will be seen clearly. In addition to being larger, a magnifiedobject must be sharp, or clear. This is a property called resolution.Formally defined, resolution is the minimum distancetwo objects can be apart and still be seen as two objects. Resolutionfor the human eye is about 0.2 mm (200 μm). Most cellsare much smaller than 200 μm, and thus are invisible to the humaneye. Microscopes magnify and increase resolution so thatcells and their internal structures can be seen clearly (Figure 5.3).There are two basic types of microscopes—light microscopesand electron microscopes—that use different forms of radiation(see Figure 5.3). While the resolution is better in electron microscopy,we should emphasize that because cells are preparedin a vacuum, only dead, dehydrated cells are visualized. Therefore,the preparation of cells for electron microscopy may alterthem, and this must be taken into consideration when interpretingthe images produced. On the other hand, light microscopescan be used to visualize living cells (for example, by phasecontrastmicroscopy; see Figure 5.3).Before we delve into the details of cell structure, it is usefulto consider the many uses of microscopy. An entire branch ofmedicine, pathology, makes use of many different methods of microscopyto aid in the analysis of cells and the diagnosis of diseases.For instance, a surgeon might remove from a body sometissue suspected of being cancerous. The pathologist might:• examine the tissue quickly by phase-contrast microscopy orinterference-contrast microscopy to determine the size,shape, and spread of the cells• stain the tissue with a general dye and examine it by brightfieldmicroscopy to bring out features such as the shape ofthe nucleus, or cell division characteristics• stain the tissue with a fluorescent dye and examine it byfluorescence microscopy or confocal microscopy for thepresence of specific proteins that are diagnostic of a particularcancer• examine the tissue under the electron microscope to observeits most minute internal structures, such as the shapesof the mitochondria and the chromatin. (These structuresare described in Section 5.3.)The plasma membrane forms the outer surfaceof every cellWhile the structural diversity of cells can often be observed usinglight microscopy, the plasma membrane is best observedwith an electron microscope. This very thin structure forms theouter surface of every cell, and it has more or less the samethickness and molecular structure in all cells. Biochemical methodshave shown that membranes have great functional diversity.These methods have revealed that the thin, almost invisibleplasma membrane is actively involved in many cellularfunctions—it is not a static structure. The plasma membraneseparates the interior of the cell from its outside environment,creating a segregated (but not isolated) compartment. The presenceof this outer limiting membrane is a feature of all cells.What is the composition and molecular architecture of thisamazing structure?The plasma membrane is composed of a phospholipid bilayer(or simply lipid bilayer), with the hydrophilic “heads” of thelipids facing the cell’s aqueous interior on one side of the membraneand the extracellular environment on the other (see Figure3.20). Proteins and other molecules are embedded in thelipids. The membrane is not a rigid, static structure. Rather, it isan oily fluid, in which the proteins and lipids are in constantmotion. This allows the membrane to move and change theshape of the cell. A detailed description of the structure andfunctions of the plasma membrane is given in Chapter 6. Hereis a brief summary:• The plasma membrane acts as a selectively permeable barrier,preventing some substances from crossing it while permittingother substances to enter and leave the cell. For example,macromolecules such as DNA and proteins cannot normallycross the plasma membrane, but some smallermolecules such as oxygen can. In addition to size, other factorssuch as polarity determine a molecule’s ability to crossthe plasma membrane: because the membrane is composedmostly of hydrophobic fatty acids, nonpolar moleculescross it more easily than polar or charged molecules.• The plasma membrane allows the cell to maintain a moreor less constant internal environment. A self-maintaining, constantinternal environment (known as homeostasis) is a keycharacteristic of life that will be discussed in detail in Chapter40. One way that the membrane does this is by activelyregulating the transport of substances across it. This dynamicprocess is distinct from the more passive process ofdiffusion, which is dependent on the size of a molecule.• As the cell’s boundary with the outside environment, theplasma membrane is important in communicating with adjacentcells and receiving signals from the environment. Wewill describe this function in Chapter 7.• The plasma membrane often has proteins protruding fromit that are responsible for binding and adhering to adjacent5.1 | WHAT FEATURES MAKE CELLS THE FUNDAMENTAL UNITS OF LIFE? 79cells. Thus the plasma membrane plays an important structuralrole and contributes to cell shape.All cells are classified as either prokaryotic or eukaryoticAs we learned in Section 1.2, biologists classify all living thingsinto three domains: Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya. The organismsin Archaea and Bacteria are collectively called prokaryotesbecause they have in common a prokaryotic cell organization.Aprokaryotic cell does not typically have membrane-enclosedinternal compartments; in particular, it does not have a nucleus.The first cells were probably similar in organization to those ofmodern prokaryotes.80 CHAPTER 5 | CELLS: THE WORKING UNITS OF LIFETOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE5.3 Looking at CellsThe six images on this page show some techniques used in light microscopy. The three images on the following page were createdusing electron microscopes. All of these images are of a particular type of cultured cell known as HeLa cells. Note that the images inmost cases are flat, two-dimensional views. As you look at images of cells, keep in mind that they are three-dimensional structures.In a light microscope, glass lenses and visible light are used to forman image. The resolution is about 0.2 μm, which is 1,000 times greaterthan that of the human eye. Light microscopy allows visualization of cellsizes and shapes and some internal cell structures. Internal structuresare hard to see under visible light, so cells are often chemically treatedand stained with various dyes to make certain structures stand out byincreasing contrast.30 μm 30 μmIn bright-field microscopy, light passesdirectly through these human cells. Unlessnatural pigments are present, there is littlecontrast and details are not distinguished.In phase-contrast microscopy, contrast inthe image is increased by emphasizingdifferences in refractive index (the capacity tobend light), thereby enhancing light and darkregions in the cell.Differential interference-contrastmicroscopy uses two beams of polarizedlight. The combined images look as if the cellis casting a shadow on one side.140 μmIn fluorescence microscopy, a naturalsubstance in the cell or a fluorescent dye thatbinds to a specific cell material is stimulatedby a beam of light, and the longer-wavelengthfluorescent light is observed coming directlyfrom the dye.Confocal microscopy uses fluorescentmaterials but adds a system of focusing boththe stimulating and emitted light so that asingle plane through the cell is seen. Theresult is a sharper two-dimensional imagethan with standard fluorescence microscopy.20 μm 20 μmIn stained bright-field microscopy, a stainenhances contrast and reveals details nototherwise visible. Stains differ greatly in theirchemistry and their capacity to bind to cellmaterials, so many choices are available.30 μmEukaryotic cell organization, on the other hand, is found inmembers of the domain Eukarya (eukaryotes), which includesthe protists, plants, fungi, and animals. As we will discuss laterin this chapter, eukaryotic cells probably evolved from prokaryotes.In contrast to the prokaryotes, the genetic material (DNA)of eukaryotic cells is contained in a special membrane-enclosedcompartment called the nucleus. Eukaryotic cells also containother membrane-enclosed compartments in which specificchemical reactions occur. For example, some of the key reactionsthat generate usable chemical energy for cells take place in mitochondria.The internal membranes that enclose these compartmentshave the same basic composition, structure and propertiesas the plasma membrane. The efficiency afforded by thesecompartments has led to the impressive functions that can occurin eukaryotic cells, and their specialization into tissues asdiverse as the parts of a flower, muscles, and nerves.5.1 RECAPThe cell theory is a unifying principle of biology. Surfacearea-to-volume ratios limit the sizes of cells.Both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells are enclosedwithin a plasma membrane, but prokaryotic cellslack the membrane-enclosed internal compartmentsfound in eukaryotes.• How does cell biology embody all the principles oflife? See p. 77• Why are cells small? See pp. 77–79 and Figure 5.2• Explain the importance of the plasma membrane tocells. See pp. 79–80As we mentioned in this section, there are two structural themesin cell architecture: prokaryotic and eukaryotic. We now turn tothe organization of prokaryotic cells.5.1 | WHAT FEATURES MAKE CELLS THE FUNDAMENTAL UNITS OF LIFE? 81TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE5.3 Looking at Cells (continued)In an electron microscope, electromagnets are used tofocus an electron beam, much as a light microscopeuses glass lenses to focus a beam of light. Since wecannot see electrons, the electron microscope directsthem through a vacuum at a fluorescent screen orphotographic film to create a visible image. Theresolution of electron microscopes is about 2 nm,which is about 100,000 times greater than that of thehuman eye. This resolution permits the details of manysubcellular structures to be distinguished.In transmission electron microscopy (TEM),a beam of electrons is focused on the objectby magnets. Objects appear darker if theyabsorb the electrons. If the electrons passthrough they are detected on a fluorescentscreen.Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)directs electrons to the surface of thesample, where they cause other electrons tobe emitted. These electrons are viewed on ascreen. The three-dimensional surface of theobject can be visualized.In freeze-fracture microscopy, cells are frozenand then a knife is used to crack them open.The crack often passes through the interior ofplasma and internal membranes. The “bumps”that appear are usually large proteins oraggregates embedded in the interior of themembrane.10 μm 20 μm 0.1 μmGO TO Web Activity 5.2 • Know Your TechniquesyourBioPortal.com200 nmCytoplasmRibosomesNucleoidPlasmamembraneFlagellumPlasmamembraneCapsulePeptidoglycanCell wall Outer membrane(absent in somebacteria)What Features Characterize 5.2 Prokaryotic Cells?Prokaryotes can derive energy from more diverse sources thanany other living organisms. They can tolerate environmental extremes—such as very hot springs with temperatures up to 100oC(Thermus aquaticus) or very salty water (Halobacterium)—thatwould kill other organisms. As we examine prokaryotic cells inthis section, bear in mind that there are vast numbers ofprokaryotic species, and that the Bacteria and Archaea are distinguishedin numerous ways. These differences, and the vastdiversity of organisms in these two domains, will be the subjectof Chapter 26.The volume of a prokaryotic cell is generally about one fiftiethof the volume of a eukaryotic cell. Prokaryotic cells rangefrom about 1 to 10 μm in length or diameter. Each individualprokaryote is a single cell, but many types of prokaryotes areusually seen in chains or small clusters, and some occur in largeclusters containing hundreds of cells. In this section we will firstconsider the features shared by cells in the domains Bacteriaand Archaea. Then we will examine structural features thatare found in some, but not all, prokaryotes.Prokaryotic cells share certain featuresAll prokaryotic cells have the same basic structure (Figure 5.4):• The plasma membrane encloses the cell, regulating the trafficof materials into and out of the cell, and separating itsinterior from the external environment.• The nucleoid is a region in the cell where the DNA is located.As we described in Section 4.1, DNA is the hereditarymaterial that controls cell growth, maintenance, andreproduction.The rest of the material enclosed in the plasma membrane iscalled the cytoplasm. The cytoplasm has two components: thecytosol and insoluble suspended particles, including ribosomes:• The cytosol consists mostly of water that contains dissolvedions, small molecules, and soluble macromolecules such asproteins.• Ribosomes are complexes of RNA and proteins that areabout 25 nm in diameter. They can only be visualized withthe electron microscope. They are the sites of protein synthesis,where information coded for in nucleic acids directsthe sequential linking of amino acids to form proteins.The cytoplasm is not a static region. Rather, the substances inthis environment are in constant motion. For example, a typicalprotein moves around the entire cell within a minute, and itcollides with many other molecules along the way.Although they are structurally less complex than eukaryoticcells, prokaryotic cells are functionally complex, carrying outthousands of biochemical reactions. Based on our currentknowledge about the origins of the first cells (see Section 4.4),some prokaryotic cell lineages must stretch back in time formore than 3 billion years. Thus, prokaryotes are very successfulorganisms from an evolutionary perspective.82 CHAPTER 5 | CELLS: THE WORKING UNITS OF LIFE5.4 A Prokaryotic Cell The bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa illustrates the typical structuresshared by all prokaryotic cells. This bacterium also has a protective outer membrane that not all prokaryoteshave. The flagellum and capsule are also structures found in some, but not all, prokaryotic cells.Specialized features are found in some prokaryotesAs they evolved, some prokaryotes developed specialized structuresthat gave a selective advantage to those that had them:cells with these structures were better able to survive and reproducein particular environments than cells lacking them.These structures include a protective cell wall, an internal membranefor compartmentalization of some chemical reactions, flagellafor cell movement through the watery environment, anda rudimentary internal skeleton.CELL WALLS Most prokaryotes have a cell wall located outsidethe plasma membrane. The rigidity of the cell wall supportsthe cell and determines its shape. The cell walls of most bacteria,but not archaea, contain peptidoglycan, a polymer of aminosugars that are cross-linked by covalent bonds to peptides, toform a single giant molecule around the entire cell. In somebacteria, another layer, the outer membrane (a polysacchariderichphospholipid membrane), encloses the peptidoglycanlayer (see Figure 5.4). Unlike the plasma membrane, this outermembrane is not a major barrier to the movement of moleculesacross it.Enclosing the cell wall in some bacteria is a slimy layer composedmostly of polysaccharides, and referred to as a capsule.In some cases these capsules protect the bacteria from attack bywhite blood cells in the animals they infect. Capsules also helpto keep the cells from drying out, and sometimes they help bacteriaattach to other cells. Many prokaryotes produce no capsule,and those that do have capsules can survive even if theylose them, so the capsule is not essential to prokaryotic life.As you will see later in this chapter, eukaryotic plant cellsalso have a cell wall, but it differs in composition and structurefrom the cell walls of prokaryotes.INTERNAL MEMBRANES Some groups of bacteria—including thecyanobacteria—carry out photosynthesis: they use energy fromthe sun to convert carbon dioxide and water into carbohydrates.These bacteria have an internal membrane system that containsmolecules needed for photosynthesis. The development of photosynthesis,which requires membranes, was an important eventin the early evolution of life on Earth. Other prokaryotes haveinternal membrane folds that are attached to the plasma membrane.These folds may function in cell division or in variousenergy-releasing reactions.FLAGELLA AND PILI Some prokaryotes swim by using appendagescalled flagella, which sometimes look like tinycorkscrews (Figure 5.5A). In bacteria a single flagellum is madeof a protein called flagellin. Acomplex motor protein spins theflagellum on its axis like a propeller, driving the cell along. Themotor protein is anchored to the plasma membrane and, in somebacteria, to the outer membrane of the cell wall (Figure 5.5B).We know that the flagella cause the motion of cells because ifthey are removed, the cells do not move.Pili are structures made of protein that project from the surfacesof some types of bacterial cells. These hairlike structures areshorter than flagella, and are used for adherence. The sex-pili helpbacteria join to one another to exchange genetic material. The fimbriaeare similar to pili but shorter, and help cells to adhere to surfacessuch as animal cells, for food and protection.5.2 | WHAT FEATURES CHARACTERIZE PROKARYOTIC CELLS? 83The flagellum is rotated by a complex motorprotein secured in the plasma membrane.L ringTransportapparatusFilamentof flagellumP ringC ringRotorPeptidoglycanOutermembranePlasmamembrane(A) (B)Drive shaftOutsideof cellInsideof cell45 nmFlagella5.5 Prokaryotic Flagella (A) Flagella contribute to the movement and adhesionof prokaryotic cells. (B) Complex protein ring structures anchored in the plasmamembrane form a motor unit that rotates the flagellum and propels the cell.CYTOSKELETON Some prokaryotes, especially rod-shaped bacteria,have a helical network of filamentous structures that extenddown the length of the cell just inside the plasma membrane.The proteins that make up this structure are similar inamino acid sequence to actin in eukaryotic cells. Since actin ispart of the cytoskeleton in eukaryotes (see Section 5.3), it hasbeen suggested that the helical filaments in prokaryotes play arole in maintaining the rod-like cell shape.5.2 RECAPProkaryotic organisms can live on diverse energysources and in extreme environments. Unlike eukaryoticcells, prokaryotic cells do not have extensiveinternal compartments.• What structures are present in all prokaryotic cells?See p. 82 and Figure 5.4• Describe the structure and function of a specializedprokaryotic cell feature, such as the cell wall, capsule,flagellum, or pilus. See pp. 83–84 and Figure 5.5As we mentioned earlier, the prokaryotic cell is one of two typesof cell structure recognized in cell biology. The other is the eukaryoticcell. Eukaryotic cells, and multicellular eukaryotic organisms,are more structurally and functionally complex thanprokaryotic cells.What Features Characterize 5.3 Eukaryotic Cells?Eukaryotic cells generally have dimensions up to 10 timesgreater than those of prokaryotes; for example, the sphericalyeast cell has a diameter of about 8 μm, in contrast to a typicalbacterium with a diameter of 1 μm. Like prokaryotic cells, eukaryoticcells have a plasma membrane, cytoplasm, and ribosomes.But as you learned earlier in this chapter, eukaryotic cellsalso have compartments within the cytoplasm whose interiorsare separated from the cytosol by membranes.Compartmentalization is the key toeukaryotic cell functionThe membranous compartments of eukaryotic cells are calledorganelles. Each type of organelle has a specific role in its particularcell. Some of the organelles have been characterized asfactories that make specific products. Others are like powerplants that take in energy in one form and convert it into a moreuseful form. These functional roles are defined by the chemicalreactions each organelle can carry out:• The nucleus contains most of the cell’s genetic material (DNA).The replication of the genetic material and the first steps inexpressing genetic information take place in the nucleus.• The mitochondrion is a power plant and industrial park,where energy stored in the bonds of carbohydrates andfatty acids is converted into a form that is more useful tothe cell (ATP; see Section 9.1).• The endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus are compartmentsin which some proteins synthesized by the ribosomesare packaged and sent to appropriate locations in the cell.• Lysosomes and vacuoles are cellular digestive systems inwhich large molecules are hydrolyzed into usable monomers.• Chloroplasts (found in only some cells) perform photosynthesis.The membrane surrounding each organelle has two essentialroles. First, it keeps the organelle’s molecules away fromother molecules in the cell, to prevent inappropriate reactions.Second, it acts as a traffic regulator, letting important raw materialsinto the organelle and releasing its products to the cytoplasm.In some organelles, the membrane also has proteins thathave functional roles in chemical reactions that occur at the organellesurface.There are a number of other structures in eukaryotic cells thathave specialized functions, but are not generally called organellesbecause they lack membranes:• Ribosomes, where protein synthesis takes place• The cytoskeleton, composed of several types of proteinbasedfilaments, which has both structural and functionalroles• The extracellular matrix, which also has structural andfunctional rolesThe evolution of compartments was an important developmentthat enabled eukaryotic cells to specialize, forming the organsand tissues of complex multicellular organisms.Organelles can be studied by microscopyor isolated for chemical analysisCell organelles and structures were first detected by light andthen by electron microscopy. The functions of the organellescould sometimes be inferred by observations and experiments,leading, for example, to the hypothesis (later confirmed) thatthe nucleus contained the genetic material. Later, the use ofstains targeted to specific macromolecules allowed cell biologiststo determine the chemical compositions of organelles (seeFigure 5.17, which shows a single cell stained for three differentproteins).Another way to analyze cells is to take them apart in aprocess called cell fractionation. This process permits cell organellesand other cytoplasmic structures to be separated fromeach other and examined using chemical methods. Cell fractionationbegins with the destruction of the plasma membrane,which allows the cytoplasmic components to flow out into a testtube. The various organelles can then be separated from one anotheron the basis of size or density (Figure 5.6). Biochemicalanalyses can then be done on the isolated organelles.Microscopy and cell fractionation have complemented eachother, giving us a more complete picture of the composition andfunction of each organelle and structure.84 CHAPTER 5 | CELLS: THE WORKING UNITS OF LIFEMicroscopy of plant and animal cells has revealed that manyof the organelles are similar in appearance in each cell type (Figure5.7). By comparing the illustrations in Figure 5.7 and Figure5.4 you can see some of the prominent differences between eukaryoticcells and prokaryotic cells.Ribosomes are factories for protein synthesisThe ribosomes of prokaryotes and eukaryotes are similar in thatboth types consist of two different-sized subunits. Eukaryoticribosomes are somewhat larger than those of prokaryotes, butthe structure of prokaryotic ribosomes is better understood.Chemically, ribosomes consist of a special type of RNA calledribosomal RNA (rRNA). Ribosomes also contain more than 50different protein molecules, which are noncovalentlybound to the rRNA.In prokaryotic cells, ribosomes float freely in thecytoplasm. In eukaryotic cells they are found in twoplaces: in the cytoplasm, where they may be free orattached to the surface of the endoplasmic reticulum(a membrane-bound organelle, see below), and insidemitochondria and chloroplasts. In each of theselocations, the ribosomes are molecular factorieswhere proteins are synthesized with their amino acidsequences specified by nucleic acids. Although theyseem small in comparison to the cells that containthem, by molecular standards ribosomes are hugecomplexes (about 25 nm in diameter), made up ofseveral dozen different molecules.The nucleus contains most of thegenetic informationOrganisms depend on accurate information—internalsignals, environmental cues, and stored instructions—in order to respond appropriately to changingconditions, to maintain a constant internalenvironment, and to reproduce. In the cell, hereditaryinformation is stored in the sequence of nucleotidesin DNA molecules. Most of the DNA in eukaryoticcells resides in the nucleus (see Figure 5.7).Information encoded in the DNA is translated intoproteins at the ribosomes. This process is describedin detail in Chapter 14.Most cells have a single nucleus, which is usuallythe largest organelle (Figure 5.8). The nucleus ofa typical animal cell is approximately 5 μm in diameter—substantially larger than most prokaryotic cells.The nucleus has several functions in the cell:• It is the location of the DNA and the site of DNAreplication.• It is the site where gene transcription is turnedon or off.• Aregion within the nucleus, the nucleolus, iswhere ribosomes begin to be assembled fromRNA and proteins.The nucleus is surrounded by two membranes, which togetherform the nuclear envelope (see Figure 5.8). This structureseparates the genetic material from the cytoplasm. Functionally,it separates DNA transcription (which occurs in the nucleus)from translation (in the cytoplasm) (see Figure 4.5). The twomembranes of the nuclear envelope are perforated by thousandsof nuclear pores, each measuring approximately 9 nm in diameter,which connect the interior of the nucleus with the cytoplasm(see Figure 5.8). The pores regulate the traffic betweenthese two cellular compartments by allowing some moleculesto enter the nucleus and blocking others. This allows the nucleusto regulate the information-processing functions.At the nuclear pore, small substances, including ions andother molecules with molecular weights of less than 10,000 dal-5.3 | WHAT FEATURES CHARACTERIZE EUKARYOTIC CELLS? 85TOOLS FOR INVESTIGATING LIFE5.6 Cell FractionationOrganelles can be separated from one another after cells are broken openand their contents suspended in an aqueous medium. The medium isplaced in a tube and spun in a centrifuge, which rotates about an axis athigh speed. Centrifugal forces cause particles to sediment at the bottomof the tube where they may be collected for biochemical study. Heavierparticles sediment at lower speeds than do lighter particles. By adjustingthe speed of centrifugation, cellular organelles and even large particles likeribosomes can be separated and partially purified.The cell homogenatecontains large andsmall organelles.2A centrifuge is used toseparate the organellesbased on size and density.1 A piece of tissue is homogenizedby grinding it.3The heaviest organelles canbe removed and the remainingsuspension re-centrifuged untilthe next heaviest organellesreach the bottom of the tube.4 GolgiMitochondriaNuclei86 CHAPTER 5 | CELLS: THE WORKING UNITS OF LIFEInside of cellMitochondria are thecell’s power plants.The rough endoplasmic reticulumis the site of much protein synthesis.The plasma membrane separates the cellfrom its environment and regulates trafficof materials into and out of the cell.Centrioles are associatedwith nuclear division.The nucleus is the site ofmost cellular DNA, which,with associated proteins,comprises chromatin.A cytoskeleton composed ofmicrotubules, intermediate filaments,and microfilaments supports the celland is involved in cell and organellemovement.Mitochondrion CytoskeletonGolgiapparatusCentriolesPlasmamembraneNucleusRoughendoplasmicreticulumPeroxisomeRibosomes(bound to RER)FreeribosomesNucleolusRibosomesNucleolusOutside of cell1.5 μm0.8 μm 25 nm0.5 μm30 nm0.1 μmAN ANIMAL CELLSmoothendoplasmicreticulum5.7 Eukaryotic Cells In electron micrographs,many plant cell organelles are nearlyidentical in form to those observed in animalcells. Cellular structures unique to plant cellsinclude the cell wall and the chloroplasts. Notethat the images are two-dimensional “slices,”while cells are three-dimensional structures.5.3 | WHAT FEATURES CHARACTERIZE EUKARYOTIC CELLS? 87Chloroplasts harvest the energy ofsunlight to produce sugar.The Golgi apparatus processesand packages proteins.Peroxisomes breakdown toxic peroxides.A cell wall supportsthe plant cell.Proteins and other molecules arechemically modified in thesmooth endoplasmic reticulum.Ribosomes manufactureproteins.VacuoleChloroplastPlasmamembraneSmoothendoplasmicreticulumGolgiapparatusMitochondrionNucleusNucleolusFreeribosomesPlasmodesmataRoughendoplasmicreticulumPeroxisomeCell wall0.5 μm25 nm0.5 μm0.75 μm0.75 μm1 μmA PLANT CELLtons, freely diffuse through the pore. Larger molecules, suchas many proteins that are made in the cytoplasm and importedinto the nucleus, cannot get through without a certain shortsequence of amino acids that is part of the protein. We knowthat this sequence is the nuclear localization signal (NLS) fromseveral lines of evidence (see also Figure 14.20):• The NLS occurs in most proteins targeted to the nucleus,but not in proteins that remain in the cytoplasm.• If the NLS is removed from a protein, the protein stays inthe cytoplasm.• If the NLS is added to a protein that normally stays in thecytoplasm, that protein moves into the nucleus.• Some viruses have an NLS that allows them to enter thenucleus; viruses without the signal sequence do not enterthe nucleus as virus particles.The NLS binds to a receptor protein at the pore, and the signaledprotein slides through the pore and across the nuclearenvelope.Inside the nucleus, DNA is combined with proteins to forma fibrous complex called chromatin. Chromatin occurs in theform of exceedingly long, thin threads called chromosomes. Differenteukaryotic organisms have different numbers of chromosomes(ranging from two in one kind of Australian ant to hundredsin some plants). Prior to cell division, the chromatinbecomes tightly compacted and condensed so that the individualchromosomes are visible under a light microscope. Thisoccurs to facilitate distribution of the DNA during cell division.(Figure 5.9). Surrounding the chromatin are water and dissolvedsubstances collectively referred to as the nucleoplasm.Within the nucleoplasm, a network of structural proteins calledthe nuclear matrix helps organize the chromatin.At the interior periphery of the nucleus, the chromatin isattached to a protein meshwork, called the nuclear lamina, whichis formed by the polymerization of proteins called lamins intolong thin structures called intermediate filaments. The nuclearlamina maintains the shape of the nucleus by its attachment toboth the chromatin and the nuclear envelope. There is some evidencethat the nuclear lamina may be involved with humanaging. As people age, the nuclear lamina begins to disintegrateand in the process the structural integrity of the nucleus declines.In people with the rare disease called progeria, this declinebegins very early in life and their aging is accelerated.During most of a cell’s life cycle, the nuclear envelope is astable structure. When the cell reproduces, however, the nuclearenvelope breaks down into small, membrane-bound droplets,called vesicles, containing pore complexes. The envelope reformsafter the replicated DNA has been distributed to thedaughter cells (see Section 11.3).At certain sites, the outer membrane of the nuclear envelopefolds outward into the cytoplasm and is continuous with the88 CHAPTER 5 | CELLS: THE WORKING UNITS OF LIFEThe nuclear lamina isa network of filamentsjust inside the nuclearenvelope. It interactswith chromatin and helpssupport the envelope towhich it is attached.Eight protein complexessurround each nuclearpore. Protein fibrils onthe nuclear side form abasketlike structure.The nuclear envelope is continuouswith the endoplasmic reticulum.Inside nucleusCytoplasmicfilamentOutside nucleus(cytoplasm)NuclearbasketNuclearenvelopeOuter membraneInner membraneNucleolusChromatinNuclearenvelopeNuclearpore1 μmNucleoplasm5.8 The Nucleus Is Enclosed by a Double Membrane The nuclear envelope (made upof two membranes), nucleolus, nuclear lamina, and nuclear pores are common features of allcell nuclei. The pores are the gateways through which proteins from the cytoplasm enter thenucleus, and genetic material (mRNA) exits the nucleus into the cytoplasm.membrane of another organelle, the endoplasmic reticulum,which we will discuss next.The endomembrane system is a group ofinterrelated organellesMuch of the volume of some eukaryotic cells is taken up by anextensive endomembrane system. This is an interconnectedsystem of membrane-enclosed compartments that are sometimesflattened into sheets and sometimes have other characteristicshapes (see Figure 5.7). The endomembrane systemincludes the plasma membrane, nuclear envelope, endoplasmicreticulum, Golgi apparatus, and lysosomes, which are derivedfrom the Golgi. Tiny, membrane-surrounded dropletscalled vesicles shuttle substances between the various componentsof the endomembrane system (Figure 5.10). In drawingsand electron microscope pictures this system appearsstatic, fixed in space and time. But these depictions are justsnapshots; in the living cell, membranes and the materials theycontain are in constant motion. Membrane components havebeen observed to shift from one organelle to another within theendomembrane system. Thus, all these membranes must befunctionally related.ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM Electron micrographs of eukaryoticcells reveal networks of interconnected membranes branchingthroughout the cytoplasm, forming tubes and flattened sacs.These membranes are collectively called the endoplasmic reticulum,or ER. The interior compartment of the ER, referred to asthe lumen, is separate and distinct from the surrounding cytoplasm(see Figure 5.10). The ER can enclose up to 10 percent ofthe interior volume of the cell, and its foldings result in a surfacearea many times greater than that of the plasma membrane.There are two types of endoplasmic reticulum, the so-calledrough and smooth.Rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) is called “rough” becauseof the many ribosomes attached to the outer surface ofthe membrane, giving it a “rough” appearance in electron microscopy(see Figure 5.7). The attached ribosomes are activelyinvolved in protein synthesis, but that is not the entire story:• The RER receives into its lumen certain newly synthesizedproteins, segregating them away from the cytoplasm. TheRER also participates in transporting these proteins to otherlocations in the cell.• While inside the RER, proteins can be chemically modifiedto alter their functions and to chemically ‘tag’ them for deliveryto specific cellular destinations.• Proteins are shipped to cellular destinations enclosedwithin vesicles that pinch off from the ER.• Most membrane-bound proteins are made in the RER.A protein enters the lumen of the RER through a pore as it issynthesized. As with a protein passing through a nuclear pore,this is accomplished via a sequence of amino acids on the protein,which acts as a RER localization signal (see Section 14.6).Once in the lumen of the RER, proteins undergo severalchanges, including the formation of disulfide bridges and foldinginto their tertiary structures (see Figure 3.7).Some proteins are covalently linked to carbohydrate groupsin the RER, thus becoming glycoproteins. In the case of proteinsdirected to the lysosomes, the carbohydrate groups are part ofan “addressing” system that ensures that the right proteins aredirected to those organelles. This addressing system is very importantbecause the enzymes within the lysosomes are someof the most destructive the cell makes. Were they not properlyaddressed and contained, they could destroy the cell.The smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) lacks ribosomesand is more tubular (and less like flattened sacs) than the RER,but it shows continuity with portions of the RER (see Figure5.10). Within the lumen of the SER, some proteins that have beensynthesized on the RER are chemically modified. In addition,the SER has three other important roles:• It is responsible for the chemical modification of small moleculestaken in by the cell, including drugs and pesticides.These modifications make the targeted molecules more polar,so they are more water-soluble and more easily removed.• It is the site for glycogen degradation in animal cells. Wediscuss this important process in Chapter 9.• It is the site for the synthesis of lipids and steroids.5.3 | WHAT FEATURES CHARACTERIZE EUKARYOTIC CELLS? 89(A) (B)1 μm 1.4 μmDense chromatin (dark) nearthe nuclear envelope isattached to the nuclear lamina.Diffuse chromatin (light)is in the nucleoplasm.5.9 Chromatin and Chromosomes(A) When a cell is not dividing, the nuclear DNAis aggregated with proteins to form chromatin,which is dispersed throughout the nucleus. Thistwo-dimensional image was made using atransmission electron microscope. (B) The chromosomesin dividing cells become highly condensed.This three-dimensional image of isolatedmetaphase chromosomes was produced bya scanning electron microscope.90 CHAPTER 5 | CELLS: THE WORKING UNITS OF LIFELumenProtein-containing vesicles from theendoplasmic reticulum transfer substancesto the cis region of the Golgi apparatus.The Golgi apparatus chemicallymodifies proteins in its lumen……and “targets” them tothe correct destinations.The Golgi apparatus processesand packages proteins.Rough endoplasmicreticulum is studdedwith ribosomes that aresites for protein synthesis.They produce its roughappearance.Smooth endoplasmic reticulum is a site for lipidsynthesis and chemical modification of proteins.321NucleuscisregiontransregionProteins for usewithin the cellProteins for useoutside the cellPlasmamembraneCytosolOutside of cell0.5 μmmedialregionCisterna5.10 The Endomembrane System Membranes ofthe nucleus, ER, and Golgi form a network, connectedby vesicles. Membrane flows through theseorganelles. Membrane synthesized in the smoothendoplasmic reticulum becomes sequentially part ofthe rough ER, then the Golgi, then vesicles formedfrom the Golgi. Membrane making up the Golgiproducedvesicles may eventually become part ofthe plasma membrane.Cells that synthesize a lot of protein for export are usuallypacked with RER. Examples include glandular cells that secretedigestive enzymes and white blood cells that secrete antibodies.In contrast, cells that carry out less protein synthesis (suchas storage cells) contain less RER. Liver cells, which modify molecules(including toxins) that enter the body from the digestivesystem, have abundant SER.GOLGI APPARATUS The Golgi apparatus (or Golgi complex),more often referred to merely as the Golgi, is another part of thediverse, dynamic, and extensive endomembrane system (seeFigure 5.10). The exact appearance of the Golgi apparatus(named for its discoverer, Camillo Golgi) varies from species tospecies, but it almost always consists of two components: flattenedmembranous sacs called cisternae (singular cisterna) thatare piled up like saucers, and small membrane-enclosed vesicles.The entire apparatus is about 1 μm long.The Golgi has several roles:• When protein-containing vesicles from the RER fuse withthe Golgi membranes, the Golgi receives the proteins andmay further modify them.• It concentrates, packages, and sorts proteins before they aresent to their cellular or extracellular destinations.• It adds some carbohydrates to proteins and modifies othersthat were attached to proteins in the ER.• It is where some polysaccharides for the plant cell wall aresynthesized.While there is a characteristic form for all Golgi, there are alsovariations in its size and appearance in different cell types. Inthe cells of plants, protists, fungi, and many invertebrate animals,the stacks of cisternae are individual units scatteredthroughout the cytoplasm. In vertebrate cells, a few such stacksusually form a single, larger, more complex Golgi apparatus. GO TO Animated Tutorial 5.1 • The Golgi ApparatusyourBioPortal.comThe cisternae of the Golgi apparatus appear to have threefunctionally distinct regions: the cis region lies nearest to the nucleusor a patch of RER, the trans region lies closest to the plasmamembrane, and the medial region lies in between (see Figure5.10). (The terms cis, trans, and medial derive from Latin wordsmeaning, respectively, “on the same side,” “on the oppositeside,” and “in the middle.”) These three parts of the Golgi apparatuscontain different enzymes and perform different functions.The Golgi apparatus receives proteins from theER, packages them, and sends them on their way.Since there is often no direct membrane continuitybetween the ER and Golgi apparatus, how does aprotein get from one organelle to the other? The proteincould simply leave the ER, travel across the cytoplasm,and enter the Golgi apparatus. But thatwould expose the protein to interactions with othermolecules in the cytoplasm. On the other hand, segregationfrom the cytoplasm could be maintained ifa piece of the ER could “bud off,” forming a membranousvesicle that contains the protein—and that is exactlywhat happens.Proteins make the passage from the ER to theGolgi apparatus safely enclosed in vesicles. Once itarrives, a vesicle fuses with the cis membrane of theGolgi apparatus, releasing its cargo into the lumen ofthe Golgi cisterna. Other vesicles may move betweenthe cisternae, transporting proteins, and it appearsthat some proteins move from one cisterna to the nextthrough tiny channels. Vesicles budding off from thetrans region carry their contents away from the Golgiapparatus. These vesicles go to the plasma membrane,or to another organelle in the endomembranesystem called the lysosome.LYSOSOMES The primary lysosomes originate from theGolgi apparatus. They contain digestive enzymes, andthey are the sites where macromolecules—proteins,polysaccharides, nucleic acids, and lipids—are hydrolyzedinto their monomers (see Figure 3.4). Lysosomesare about 1 μm in diameter; they are surroundedby a single membrane and have a densely staining, featurelessinterior (Figure 5.11). There may be dozens oflysosomes in a cell, depending on its needs.Lysosomes are sites for the breakdown of food,other cells, or foreign objects that are taken up by thecell. These materials get into the cell by a processcalled phagocytosis (phago, “eat”; cytosis, “cellular”). Inthis process, a pocket forms in the plasma membraneand then deepens and encloses material from outsidethe cell. The pocket becomes a small vesicle called a phagosome,containing food or other material, which breaks free of theplasma membrane to move into the cytoplasm. The phagosomefuses with a primary lysosome to form a secondary lysosome,in which digestion occurs.The effect of this fusion is rather like releasing hungry foxesinto a chicken coop: the enzymes in the secondary lysosomequickly hydrolyze the food particles. These reactions are en-5.3 | WHAT FEATURES CHARACTERIZE EUKARYOTIC CELLS? 91Undigested materialsare released.The primary lysosomeis generated by the Golgi.43 Small moleculesgenerated bydigestion diffuseinto the cytoplasm.The lysosome fuseswith a phagosome.1aFood particlesare taken in byphagocytosis.1b2GolgiapparatusInside of cellOutside of cellPrimarylysosomePhagosomeFood particlestaken in byphagocytosisSecondarylysosomePlasmamembranePrimarylysosomeSecondarylysosomePhagosome1 μm5.11 Lysosomes Isolate Digestive Enzymes from theCytoplasm Lysosomes are sites for the hydrolysis of material takeninto the cell by phagocytosis.GO TO Web Activity 5.3 • Lysosomal DigestionyourBioPortal.comhanced by the mild acidity of the lysosome’s interior, where thepH is lower than in the surrounding cytoplasm. The productsof digestion pass through the membrane of the lysosome, providingenergy and raw materials for other cellular processes.The “used” secondary lysosome, now containing undigestedparticles, then moves to the plasma membrane, fuses with it,and releases the undigested contents to the environment.Phagocytes are specialized cells that have an essential role intaking up and breaking down materials; they are found innearly all animals and many protists. You will encounter themand their activities again at many places in this book, but at thispoint one example suffices: in the human liver and spleen,phagocytes digest approximately 10 billion aged or damagedblood cells each day! The digestion products are then used tomake new cells to replace those that are digested.Lysosomes are active even in cells that do not performphagocytosis. Because cells are such dynamic systems, somecell components are frequently destroyed and replaced by newones. The programmed destruction of cell components is calledautophagy, and lysosomes are where the cell breaks down itsown materials. With the proper signal, lysosomes can engulf entireorganelles, hydrolyzing their constituents.How important is autophagy? An entire class of human diseasescalled lysosomal storage diseases occur when lysosomesfail to digest internal components; these diseases are invariablyvery harmful or fatal. An example is Tay-Sachs disease, in whicha particular lipid called a ganglioside is not broken down inlysosomes and instead accumulates in brain cells. In the mostcommon form of this disease, a baby starts exhibiting neurologicalsymptoms and becomes blind, deaf, and unable to swallowafter six months of age. Death occurs before age 4.Plant cells do not appear to contain lysosomes, but the centralvacuole of a plant cell (which we will describe below) mayfunction in an equivalent capacity because it, like lysosomes,contains many digestive enzymes.Some organelles transform energyAll living things require external sources of energy. The energyfrom such sources must be transformed so that it can beused by cells. A cell requires energy to make the molecules itneeds for activities such as growth, reproduction, responsiveness,and movement. Energy is transformed from one form toanother in mitochondria (found in all eukaryotic cells) and inchloroplasts (found in eukaryotic cells that harvest energy fromsunlight). In contrast, energy transformations in prokaryoticcells are associated with enzymes attached to the inner surfaceof the plasma membrane or to extensions of the plasma membranethat protrude into the cytoplasm.MITOCHONDRIA In eukaryotic cells, the breakdown of fuel moleculessuch as glucose begins in the cytosol. The molecules thatresult from this partial degradation enter the mitochondria (singularmitochondrion), whose primary function is to convert thechemical energy of those fuel molecules into a form that the cellcan use, namely the energy-rich molecule ATP (adenosinetriphosphate) (see Section 8.2). The production of ATP in the mitochondria,using fuel molecules and molecular oxygen (O2), iscalled cellular respiration.Typical mitochondria are somewhat less than 1.5 μm in diameterand 2–8 μm in length—about the size of many bacteria.They can divide independently of the central nucleus. The numberof mitochondria per cell ranges from one gigantic organellein some unicellular protists to a few hundred thousand in largeegg cells. An average human liver cell contains more than athousand mitochondria. Cells that are active in movement andgrowth require the most chemical energy, and these tend to havethe most mitochondria per unit of volume.Mitochondria have two membranes. The outer membrane issmooth and protective, and it offers little resistance to the movementof substances into and out of the organelle. Immediately insidethe outer membrane is an inner membrane, which folds inwardin many places, and thus has a surface area much greaterthan that of the outer membrane (Figure 5.12). The folds tend tobe quite regular, giving rise to shelf-like structures called cristae.92 CHAPTER 5 | CELLS: THE WORKING UNITS OF LIFEThe cristae contain keymolecules for the generationof ATP from fuel molecules.The matrix contains ribosomes,DNA, and several of the enzymesused for energy conversions.The inner membrane is the primarybarrier between the cytosol andmitochondrial enzymes.Matrix Cristae InnermembraneOutermembraneIntermembranespace0.6 μm5.12 A Mitochondrion ConvertsEnergy from Fuel Molecules into ATPThe electron micrograph is a two-dimensionalslice through a three-dimensionalorganelle. As the drawing emphasizes,the cristae are extensions of the innermitochondrial membrane.The inner membrane exerts much more control over what entersand leaves the space it encloses than does the outer membrane.Embedded in the inner mitochondrial membrane are many largeprotein complexes that participate in cellular respiration.The space enclosed by the inner membrane is referred to asthe mitochondrial matrix. In addition to many enzymes, the matrixcontains ribosomes and DNA that are used to make someof the proteins needed for cellular respiration. As you will seelater in this chapter, this DNA is the remnant of a much larger,complete chromosome of a prokaryote that may have been themitochondrion’s progenitor (see Figure 5.26). In Chapter 9 wediscuss how the different parts of the mitochondrion work togetherin cellular respiration.PLASTIDS One class of organelles—the plastids—is present onlyin the cells of plants and certain protists. Like mitochondria,plastids can divide autonomously. There are several types ofplastids, with different functions.Chloroplasts contain the green pigment chlorophyll and arethe sites of photosynthesis (Figure 5.13). In photosynthesis, lightenergy is converted into the chemical energy of bonds betweenatoms. The molecules formed by photosynthesis provide foodfor the photosynthetic organism and for other organisms thateat it. Directly or indirectly, photosynthesis is the energy sourcefor most of the living world.Chloroplasts are variable in size and shape (Figure 5.14). Likea mitochondrion, a chloroplast is surrounded by two membranes.In addition, there is a series of internal membraneswhose structure and arrangement vary from one group of photosyntheticorganisms to another. Here we concentrate on thechloroplasts of the flowering plants.The internal membranes of chloroplasts look like stacks offlat, hollow pita bread. Each stack, called a granum (pluralgrana), consists of a series of flat, closely packed, circular compartmentscalled thylakoids (see Figure 5.13). Thylakoid lipidsare distinctive: only 10 percent are phospholipids, while the restare galactose-substituted diglycerides and sulfolipids. Becauseof the abundance of chloroplasts, these are the most abundantlipids in the biosphere.In addition to lipids and proteins, the membranes of the thylakoidscontain chlorophyll and other pigments that harvestlight energy for photosynthesis (we see how they do this in Section10.2). The thylakoids of one granum may be connected tothose of other grana, making the interior of the chloroplast ahighly developed network of membranes, much like the ER.The fluid in which the grana are suspended is called thestroma. Like the mitochondrial matrix, the chloroplast stromacontains ribosomes and DNA, which are used to synthesizesome, but not all, of the proteins that make up the chloroplast.Animal cells typically do not contain chloroplasts, but somedo contain functional photosynthetic organisms. The green colorof some corals and sea anemones comes from chloroplasts in algaethat live within those animals (see Figure 5.14C). The animalsderive some of their nutrition from the photosynthesis thattheir chloroplast-containing “guests” carry out. Such an intimaterelationship between two different organisms is calledsymbiosis.5.3 | WHAT FEATURES CHARACTERIZE EUKARYOTIC CELLS? 93Thylakoid membranes are siteswhere light energy is harvestedby the green pigment chlorophylland converted into ATP.ATP is used in converting CO2 toglucose in the stroma, the areaoutside the thylakoid membranes.Thylakoid StromaInner membraneOuter membraneGranum (stack ofthylakoids)1 μm0.5 μm5.13 Chloroplasts Feed the World The electronmicrographs show chloroplasts from a leaf of corn.Chloroplasts are large compared with mitochondria andcontain extensive networks of thylakoid membranes.These membranes contain the green pigment chlorophyll,where light energy is converted into chemical energy forthe synthesis of carbohydrates from CO2 and H2O.Other types of plastids such as chromoplasts and leucoplastshave functions different from those of chloroplasts (Figure 5.15).Chromoplasts make and store red, yellow, and orange pigments,especially in flowers and fruits. Leucoplasts are storage organellesthat do not contain pigments. An amyloplast is a leucoplastthat stores starch.There are several other membrane-enclosed organellesThere are several other organelles whose boundary membranesseparate their specialized chemical reactions and contents fromthe cytoplasm: peroxisomes, glyoxysomes, and vacuoles, includingcontractile vacuoles.Peroxisomes are organelles that accumulate toxic peroxides,such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), that occur as byproducts ofsome biochemical reactions. These peroxides can be safely brokendown inside the peroxisomes without mixing with other partsof the cell. Peroxisomes are small organelles, about 0.2 to 1.7 μmin diameter. They have a single membrane and a granular interiorcontaining specialized enzymes. Peroxisomes are found in atleast some of the cells of almost every eukaryotic species.94 CHAPTER 5 | CELLS: THE WORKING UNITS OF LIFE5 μm1 μmStarchgrainsLeucoplast(A)Chromoplast(B)5.15 Chromoplasts and Leucoplasts (A) Colorful pigmentsstored in the chromoplasts of flowers like this poppymay help attract pollinating insects. (B) Leucoplasts in thecells of a potato are filled with white starch grains.The chloroplasts in these filamentousgreen algae have assembled into spirals.Chloroplast-filled green algae livein the tissues of this sea anemone.(A) Chloroplasts Leaf cell (B) (C)50 μm 150 μmAlgal cell5.14 Chloroplasts Are Everywhere (A) In green plants, chloroplastsare concentrated in the leaf cells. (B) Green algae are photosynthetic andfilled with chloroplasts. (C) No animal species produces its own chloroplasts,but this sea anemone (an animal) is nourished by the chloroplastsof unicellular green algae living within its tissues, in what is termed a symbioticrelationship.Glyoxysomes are similar to peroxisomes and are found onlyin plants. They are most abundant in young plants, and arethe locations where stored lipids are converted into carbohydratesfor transport to growing cells.Vacuoles occur in many eukaryotic cells, but particularlythose of plants and protists. Plant vacuoles (Figure 5.16) haveseveral functions:• Storage: Plant cells produce a number of toxic by-productsand waste products, many of which are simply stored withinvacuoles. Because they are poisonous or distasteful, thesestored materials deter some animals from eating the plants,and may thus contribute to plant defenses and survival.• Structure: In many plant cells, enormous vacuoles take upmore than 90 percent of the cell volume and grow as the cellgrows. The presence of dissolved substances in the vacuolecauses water to enter it from the cytoplasm, making the vacuoleswell like a balloon. The plant cell does not swell whenthe vacuole fills with water, since it has a rigid cell wall. Instead,it stiffens from the increase in water pressure (calledturgor), which supports the plant (see Figure 6.10).• Reproduction: Some pigments (especially blue and pinkones) in the petals and fruits of flowering plants are containedin vacuoles. These pigments—the anthocyanins—arevisual cues that help attract the animals that assist in pollinationor seed dispersal.• Digestion: In some plants, vacuoles in seeds contain enzymesthat hydrolyze stored seed proteins into monomersthat the developing plant embryo can use as food.Contractile vacuoles are found in many freshwater protists.Their function is to get rid of the excess water that rushes intothe cell because of the imbalance in solute concentration betweenthe interior of the cell and its freshwater environment. The contractilevacuole enlarges as water enters, then abruptly contracts,forcing the water out of the cell through a special pore structure.So far, we have discussed numerous membrane-enclosed organelles.Now we turn to a group of cytoplasmic structureswithout membranes.The cytoskeleton is important in cell structureand movementFrom the earliest observations, light microscopy revealed distinctiveshapes of cells that would sometimes change, andwithin cells rapid movements were observed. With the adventof electron microscopy, a new world of cellular substructure wasrevealed, including a meshwork of filaments inside cells. Experimentationshowed that this cytoskeleton fills several importantroles:• It supports the cell and maintains its shape.• It holds cell organelles in position within the cell.• It moves organelles within the cell.• It is involved with movements of the cytoplasm, calledcytoplasmic streaming.• It interacts with extracellular structures, helping to anchorthe cell in place.There are three components of the cytoskeleton: microfilaments(smallest diameter), intermediate filaments, and microtubules(largest diameter). These filaments have very differentfunctions.MICROFILAMENTS Microfilaments can exist as single filaments,in bundles, or in networks. They are about 7 nm in diameterand up to several micrometers long. Microfilaments have twomajor roles:• They help the entire cell or parts of the cell to move.• They determine and stabilize cell shape.Microfilaments are assembled from actin monomers, a proteinthat exists in several forms and has many functions, especiallyin animals. The actin found in microfilaments (which are alsoknown as actin filaments) has distinct ends designated “plus”and “minus.” These ends permit actin monomers to interactwith one another to form long, double helical chains (Figure5.17A). Within cells, the polymerization of actin into microfilamentsis reversible, and the microfilaments can disappear fromcells by breaking down into monomers of free actin. Specialactin-binding proteins mediate these events.In the muscle cells of animals, actin filaments are associatedwith another protein, the “motor protein” myosin, and the interactionsof these two proteins account for the contraction of muscles(described in Section 48.1). In non-muscle cells, actin filamentsare associated with localized changes in cell shape. Forexample, microfilaments are involved in the flowing movementof the cytoplasm called cytoplasmic streaming, in amoeboidmovement, and in the “pinching” contractions that divide an animalcell into two daughter cells. Microfilaments are also involvedin the formation of cellular extensions called pseudopodia (pseudo,“false”; podia, “feet”) that enable some cells to move (Figure 5.18).As you will see in Chapter 42, cells of the immune system mustmove toward other cells during the immune response.In some cell types, microfilaments form a meshwork justinside the plasma membrane. Actin-binding proteins then crosslinkthe microfilaments to form a rigid net-like structure thatsupports the cell. For example, microfilaments support the tiny5.3 | WHAT FEATURES CHARACTERIZE EUKARYOTIC CELLS? 95Vacuole2 μm5.16 Vacuoles in Plant Cells Are Usually Large The large centralvacuole in this cell is typical of mature plant cells. Smaller vacuoles arevisible toward each end of the cell.microvilli that line the human intestine, giving it a larger surfacearea through which to absorb nutrients (Figure 5.19).INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS There are at least 50 different kindsof intermediate filaments, many of them specific to a few celltypes. They generally fall into six molecular classes (based onamino acid sequence) that share the same general structure. Oneof these classes consists of fibrous proteins of the keratin family,which also includes the proteins that make up hair and fingernails.The intermediate filaments are tough, ropelike proteinassemblages 8 to 12 nm in diameter (Figure 5.17B). Intermediatefilaments are more permanent than the other two types; incells they do not form and re-form, as the microtubules andmicrofilaments do.Intermediate filaments have two major structural functions:• They anchor cell structures in place. In some cells, intermediatefilaments radiate from the nuclear envelope and helpmaintain the positions of the nucleus and other organelles inthe cell. The lamins of the nuclear lamina are intermediatefilaments (see Figure 5.8). Other kinds of intermediate filamentshelp hold in place the complex apparatus of microfilamentsin the microvilli of intestinal cells (see Figure 5.19).• They resist tension. For example, they maintain rigidity inbody surface tissues by stretching through the cytoplasmand connecting specialized membrane structures calleddesmosomes (see Figure 6.7).96 CHAPTER 5 | CELLS: THE WORKING UNITS OF LIFE25 nmTubulin dimerFibrous subunit β-tubulinmonomerβ α7 nmα-tubulinmonomerActin monomer8–12 nmMicrofilamentsMade up of strands of the protein actin;often interact with strands of other proteins.Intermediate filamentsMade up of fibrous proteins organizedinto tough, ropelike assemblages thatstabilize a cell’s structure and helpmaintain its shape.MicrotubulesLong, hollow cylinders made up of manymolecules of the protein tubulin. Tubulinconsists of two subunits, α-tubulin andβ-tubulin.20 μm 10 μm 10 μm– End + End– End + End(A) (B) (C)5.17 The Cytoskeleton Three highly visible and important structuralcomponents of the cytoskeleton are shown here in detail. These structuresmaintain and reinforce cell shape and contribute to cell movement.Growth of actin filamentscauses the cell to protrude.Myosin-mediatedmovement ofcross-linked actinbundles squeezesthe cytoplasmforward.PseudopodBundles of actin filaments at the cellperiphery are crosslinked by myosin.Actin filaments hereare not cross-linked.ActinMyosinCell5.18 Microfilaments and Cell Movements Microfilaments mediatethe movement of whole cells (as illustrated here for amoebic movement),as well as the movement of cytoplasm within a cell.MICROTUBULES The largest diameter components of the cytoskeletalsystem, microtubules, are long, hollow, unbranchedcylinders about 25 nm in diameter and up to several micrometerslong. Microtubules have two roles in the cell:• They form a rigid internal skeleton for some cells.• They act as a framework along which motor proteins canmove structures within the cell.Microtubules are assembled from dimers of the protein tubulin.A dimer is a molecule made up of two monomers. Thepolypeptide monomers that make up a tubulin dimer areknown as α-tubulin and β-tubulin. Thirteen chains of tubulindimers surround the central cavity of the microtubule (Figure5.17C; see also Figure 5.20). The two ends of a microtubule aredifferent: one is designated the plus (+) end, and the other theminus (–) end. Tubulin dimers can be rapidly added or subtracted,mainly at the plus end, lengthening or shorteningthe microtubule. This capacity to change length rapidly makesmicrotubules dynamic structures, permitting some animalcells to rapidly change shape.Many microtubules radiate from a region of the cell called themicrotubule organizing center. Tubulin polymerization results in arigid structure, and tubulin depolymerization leads to its collapse.In plants, microtubules help control the arrangement of thecellulose fibers of the cell wall. Electron micrographs of plantsfrequently show microtubules lying just inside the plasma membranesof cells that are forming or extending their cell walls. Experimentalalteration of the orientation of these microtubulesleads to a similar change in the cell wall and a new shape forthe cell.Microtubules serve as tracks for motor proteins, specializedmolecules that use cellular energy to change their shape andmove. Motor proteins bond to and move along the microtubules,carrying materials from one part of the cell to another.Microtubules are also essential in distributing chromosomesto daughter cells during cell division. Because of this, drugssuch as vincristine and taxol that disrupt microtubule dynamicsalso disrupt cell division. These drugs are useful for treatingcancer, where cell division is excessive.CILIA AND FLAGELLA Microtubules are also intimately associatedwith movable cell appendages: the cilia and flagella. Manyeukaryotic cells have one or both of these appendages. Cilia aresmaller than flagella—only 0.25 μm in length. They may movesurrounding fluid over the surface of the cell (for example, protistsor cells lining tubes through which eggs move, theoviducts). Eukaryotic flagella are 0.25 μm in diameter and100–200 μm in length. (The structure and operation of eukaryoticflagella are very different from those of prokaryotic flagella;see Figure 5.5.) They may push or pull the cell throughits aqueous environment (for example, protists or sperm). Ciliaand eukaryotic flagella are both assembled from specializedmicrotubules and have identical internal structures, but differin their length and pattern of beating:• Cilia (singular cilium) are usually present in great numbers(Figure 5.20A). They beat stiffly in one direction and recoverflexibly in the other direction (like a swimmer’s arm),so that the recovery stroke does not undo the work of thepower stroke.• Eukaryotic flagella are usually found singly or in pairs.Waves of bending propagate from one end of a flagellum tothe other in a snakelike undulation. Forces exerted by thesewaves on the surrounding fluid medium move the cell.In cross section, a typical cilium or eukaryotic flagellum is surroundedby the plasma membrane and contains a “9 + 2” arrayof microtubules. As Figure 5.20B shows, nine fused pairs of microtubules—called doublets—form an outer cylinder, and onepair of unfused microtubules runs up the center. Aspoke radiatesfrom one microtubule of each doublet and connects thedoublet to the center of the structure. These structures are essentialto the bending motions of both cilia and flagella.In the cytoplasm at the base of every eukaryotic flagellumand cilium is an organelle called a basal body. The nine microtubuledoublets extend into the basal body. In the basal body,each doublet is accompanied by another microtubule, makingnine sets of three microtubules. The central, unfused microtubulesin the cilium do not extend into the basal body.Centrioles are almost identical to the basal bodies of cilia andflagella. Centrioles are found in the microtubule organizing centers(sites of tubulin storage where microtubules polymerize) ofall eukaryotes except the seed plants and some protists. Underthe light microscope, a centriole looks like a small, featureless particle,but the electron microscope reveals that it contains a precisebundle of microtubules arranged in nine sets of three. Centriolesare involved in the formation of the mitotic spindle, to which thechromosomes attach during cell division (see Figure 11.10).5.3 | WHAT FEATURES CHARACTERIZE EUKARYOTIC CELLS? 97IntermediatefilamentsPlasmamembrane0.25 μmProtein capCross-linkingactin-bindingproteinsActinmicrofilaments5.19 Microfilaments for Support Cells that line the intestine arefolded into tiny projections called microvilli, which are supported bymicrofilaments. The microfilaments interact with intermediate filamentsat the base of each microvillus. The microvilli increase the surface areaof the cells, facilitating their absorption of small molecules.MOTOR PROTEINS AND MOVEMENT The nine microtubule doubletsof cilia and flagella are linked by proteins. The motion ofcilia and flagella results from the sliding of the microtubule doubletspast each other. This sliding is driven by a motor proteincalled dynein, which can change its three-dimensional shape.All motor proteins work by undergoing reversible shapechanges powered by energy from ATP hydrolysis. Dynein moleculesthat are attached to one microtubule doublet bind to aneighboring doublet. As the dynein molecules change shape,they move the doublets past one another (Figure 5.21). Anothermolecule, nexin, can cross-link the doublets and prevent themfrom sliding past one another; in this case, the cilium bends.Another motor protein, kinesin, carries protein-laden vesiclesfrom one part of the cell to another (Figure 5.22). Kinesin andsimilar motor proteins bind to a vesicle or other organelle, then“walk” it along a microtubule by a repeated series of shapechanges. Recall that microtubules are directional, with a plusend and a minus end. Dynein moves attached organelles towardthe minus end, while kinesin moves them toward the plus end(see Figure 5.17).DEMONSTRATING CYTOSKELETON FUNCTIONS How do we knowthat the structural fibers of the cytoskeleton can achieve all thesedynamic functions? We can observe an individual structure underthe microscope and a function in a living cell that containsthat structure. These observations may suggest that the structurecarries out that function, but in science mere correlationdoes not show cause and effect. For example, light microscopyof living cells reveals that the cytoplasm is activelystreaming around the cell, and that cytoplasmflows into an extended portion of anamoeboid cell during movement. The observedpresence of cytoskeletal components suggests,but does not prove, their role in this process. Scienceseeks to show the specific links that relateone process, “A,” to a function, “B.” In cell biology,there are two ways to show that a structureor process “A” causes function “B”:98 CHAPTER 5 | CELLS: THE WORKING UNITS OF LIFEThe beating of the cilia covering thesurface of this unicellular protist propelsit through the water of its environment.Cross section reveals the “9+2”pattern of microtubles, includingnine pairs of fused microtubles……and two unfusedinner microtubules.Radial “spokes”Motor protein (dynein; see Figure 5.22)Linker protein (nexin)Three cilia(A) (B)250 nm~50 nmMicrotubuledoublet25 μm5.20 Cilia (A) This unicellular eukaryoticorganism (a ciliate protist) can coordinatethe beating of its cilia, allowing rapidmovement. (B) A cross section of a singlecilium shows the arrangement of themicrotubules and proteins.In isolated cilia without nexin cross-links,movement of dynein motor proteins causesmicrotubule doublets to slide past one another.When nexin is present to cross-link the doublets,they cannot slide and the force generated bydynein movement causes the cilium to bend.+ + ++– – ––Dynein Microtubule doublet Nexin+ + + +– – – –5.21 A Motor Protein Moves Microtubules in Ciliaand Flagella A motor protein, dynein, causes microtubuledoublets to slide past one another. In a flagellumor cilium, anchorage of the microtubule doubletsto one another results in bending.• Inhibition: use a drug that inhibits Aand see if B still occurs.If it does not, then Ais probably a causative factor for B.Figure 5.23 shows an experiment with such a drug (an inhibitor)that demonstrates cause and effect in the case of thecytoskeleton and cell movement.• Mutation: examine a cell that lacks the gene (or genes) for Aand see if B still occurs. If it does not, then Ais probably acausative factor for B. Part Four of this book describesmany experiments using this genetic approach.5.3 RECAPThe hallmark of eukaryotic cells is compartmentalization.Membrane-enclosed organelles process information,transform energy, form internal compartmentsfor transporting proteins, and carry outintracellular digestion. An internal cytoskeleton playsseveral structural roles.• What are some advantages of organelle compartmentalization?See p. 84• Describe the structural and functional differencesbetween rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum.See pp. 89–90 and Figure 5.10• Explain how motor proteins and microtubules movematerials within the cell. See pp. 95–98 and Figures5.21 and 5.22All cells interact with their environments, and many eukaryoticcells are parts of multicellular organisms and must interact, andclosely coordinate activities, with other cells. The plasma membraneplays a crucial role in these interactions, but other structuresoutside that membrane are involved as well.5.3 | WHAT FEATURES CHARACTERIZE EUKARYOTIC CELLS? 99GO TO Animated Tutorial 5.2 • Eukaryotic Cell TouryourBioPortal.comKinesin cross-linksthe vesicle to themicrotubule.Detachment andreattachment of kinesincauses it to “walk”along microtubule.+– – –+ +KinesinMicrotubuleVesicle(A) (B)5.22 A Motor Protein Drives Vesicles along Microtubules(A) Kinesin delivers vesicles or organelles to various parts of the cell bymoving along microtubule “railroad tracks.” Kinesin moves things fromthe minus toward the plus end of a microtubule; dynein works similarly,but moves from the plus toward the minus end. (B) Powered by kinesin,a vesicle moves along a microtubule track in the protist Dictyostelium.The time sequence (time-lapse micrography at half-second intervals) isshown by the color gradient of purple to blue.CONCLUSION5.23 The Role of Microfilaments in Cell Movement—Showing Cause and Effect in BiologyAfter a test tube demonstration that the drug cytochalasin Bprevented microfilament formation from monomeric precursors,the question was asked: Will the drug work like this in living cellsand inhibit cell movement in Amoeba? Complementary experimentsshowed that the drug did not poison other cellular processes.HYPOTHESIS Amoeboid cell movements are caused bythe cytoskeleton.METHODRESULTSAmoeba proteus is a single-celledeukaryote that moves by extendingits membrane.Cytochalasin Bis a drug thatblocks theformation ofmicrofilaments,part of thecytoskeleton.Control:Injectedbut withoutdrugControlAmoebacontinuesto moveAmoebatreated withcytochalasin BTreated Amoebarounds up anddoes not moveMicrofilaments of the cytoskeleton are essentialfor amoeboid cell movement.FURTHER INVESTIGATION: The drug colchicine breaks apartmicrotubules. How would you show thatthese components of the cytoskeleton arenot involved in cell movement in Amoeba?Go to yourBioPortal.com for original citations, discussions,and relevant links for all INVESTIGATING LIFE figures.INVESTIGATING LIFEWhat Are the Roles of Extracellular 5.4 Structures?Although the plasma membrane is the functional barrier betweenthe inside and the outside of a cell, many structures areproduced by cells and secreted to the outside of the plasmamembrane, where they play essential roles in protecting, supporting,or attaching cells to each other. Because they are outsidethe plasma membrane, these structures are said to be extracellular.The peptidoglycan cell wall of bacteria is an example of anextracellular structure (see Figure 5.4). In eukaryotes, other extracellularstructures—the cell walls of plants and the extracellularmatrices found between the cells of animals—play similarroles. Both of these structures are made up of two components:• a prominent fibrous macromolecule• a gel-like medium in which the fibers are embeddedThe plant cell wall is an extracellular structureThe plant cell wall is a semirigid structure outside the plasmamembrane (Figure 5.24). We consider the structure and role ofthe cell wall in more detail in Chapter 34. For now, we note thatit is typical of a two-component extracellular matrix, with cellulosefibers (see Figure 3.16) embedded in other complex polysaccharidesand proteins. The plant cell wall has three major roles:• It provides support for the cell and limits its volume by remainingrigid.• It acts as a barrier to infection by fungi and other organismsthat can cause plant diseases.• It contributes to plant form by growing as plant cells expand.Because of their thick cell walls, plant cells viewed under a lightmicroscope appear to be entirely isolated from one another. Butelectron microscopy reveals that this is not the case. The cytoplasmsof adjacent plant cells are connected by numerousplasma membrane–lined channels, called plasmodesmata, thatare about 20–40 nm in diameter and extend through the cellwalls (see Figures 5.7 and 6.7). Plasmodesmata permit the diffusionof water, ions, small molecules, RNA, and proteins betweenconnected cells, allowing for utilization of these substancesfar from their site of synthesis.The extracellular matrix supports tissue functionsin animalsAnimal cells lack the semirigid wall that is characteristic of plantcells, but many animal cells are surrounded by, or in contact with,an extracellular matrix. This matrix is composed of three typesof molecules: fibrous proteins such as collagen (the most abundantprotein in mammals, constituting over 25 percent of the proteinin the human body); a matrix of glycoproteins termed proteoglycans,consisting primarily of sugars; and a third group ofproteins that link the fibrous proteins and the gel-like proteoglycanmatrix together (Figure 5.25). These proteins and proteoglycansare secreted, along with other substances that are specific tocertain body tissues, by cells that are present in or near the matrix.The functions of the extracellular matrix are many:• It holds cells together in tissues. In Chapter6 we see how there is an intercellular “glue”that is involved in both cell recognition andadhesion.• It contributes to the physical properties ofcartilage, skin, and other tissues. For example,the mineral component of bone is laiddown on an organized extracellular matrix.• It helps filter materials passing between differenttissues. This is especially important inthe kidney.• It helps orient cell movements during embryonicdevelopment and during tissuerepair.• It plays a role in chemical signaling fromone cell to another. Proteins connect thecell’s plasma membrane to the extracellularmatrix. These proteins (for example,integrin) span the plasma membrane and areinvolved with transmitting signals to the interiorof the cell. This allows communicationbetween the extracellular matrix and the cytoplasmof the cell.100 CHAPTER 5 | CELLS: THE WORKING UNITS OF LIFECell wallof cell 2Interiorof cell 2Interiorof cell 1Cell wallof cell 11.5 μmMiddlelamellaPlasmamembrane5.24 The Plant Cell Wall The semirigid cell wall provides support for plant cells. Itis composed of cellulose fibrils embedded in a matrix of polysaccharides and proteins.5.4 RECAPExtracellular structures are produced by cells andsecreted outside the plasma membrane. Most consistof a fibrous component in a gel-like medium.• What are the functions of the cell wall in plants andthe extracellular matrix in animals? See p. 100We have now discussed the structures and some functions ofprokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Both exemplify the cell theory,showing that cells are the basic units of life and of biological continuity.Much of the rest of this part of the book will deal withthese two aspects of cells. There is abundant evidence that thesimpler prokaryotic cells are more ancient than eukaryotic cells,and that the first cells were probably prokaryotic. We now turnto the next step in cellular evolution, the origin of eukaryotic cells.5.5 How Did Eukaryotic Cells Originate?For about 2 billion years, life on Earth was entirely prokaryotic—from the time when prokaryotic cells first appeared until about1.5 billion years ago, when eukaryotic cells arrived on the scene.The advent of compartmentalization—the hallmark of eukaryotes—was a major event in the history of life, as it permitted manymore biochemical functions to coexist in the same cell than hadpreviously been possible. Compared to the typical eukaryote, asingle prokaryotic cell is often biochemically specialized, limitedin the resources it can use and the functions it can perform.What is the origin of compartmentalization? We will describethe evolution of eukaryotic organelles in more detail in Section27.1. Here, we outline two major themes in this process.Internal membranes and the nuclear envelope probablycame from the plasma membraneWe noted earlier that some bacteria contain internal membranes.How could these arise? In electron micrographs, the internalmembranes of prokaryotes often appear to be inward folds ofthe plasma membrane. This has led to a theory that the endomembranesystem and cell nucleus originated by a relatedprocess (Figure 5.26A). The close relationship between the ERand the nuclear envelope in today’s eukaryotes is consistentwith this theory.A bacterium with enclosed compartments would have severalevolutionary advantages. Chemicals could be concentratedwithin particular regions of the cell, allowing chemical reactionsto proceed more efficiently. Biochemical activities could be segregatedwithin organelles with, for example, a different pH fromthe rest of the cell, creating more favorable conditions for certainmetabolic processes. Finally, gene transcription could beseparated from translation, providing more opportunities forseparate control of these steps in gene expression.Some organelles arose by endosymbiosisSymbiosis means “living together,” and often refers to two organismsthat coexist, each one supplying something that theother needs. Biologists have proposed that some organelles—the mitochondria and the plastids—arose not by an infoldingof the plasma membrane but by one cell ingesting another cell,giving rise to a symbiotic relationship. Eventually, the ingestedcell lost its autonomy and some of its functions. In addition,many of the ingested cell’s genes were transferred to the host’sDNA. Mitochondria and plastids in today’s eukaryotic cells arethe remnants of these symbionts, retaining some specializedfunctions that benefit their host cells. This is the essence of theendosymbiosis theory for the origin of organelles.Consider the case of the plastid. About 2.5 billion years agosome prokaryotes (the cyanobacteria) developed photosynthesis(see Figure 1.9). The emergence of these prokaryotes wasa key event in the evolution of complex organisms, becausethey increased the O2 concentration in Earth’s atmosphere (seeSection 1.2).The basal lamina is an extracellularmatrix (ECM). Here it separateskidney cells from the blood vessel.The ECM is composed of a tangledcomplex of enormous molecules made ofproteins and long polysaccharide chains.Proteoglycans have long polysaccharide chainsthat provide a viscous medium for filtering.The fibrous protein collagenprovides strength to the matrix.KidneycellBloodvesselProteoglycanCollagen20 nm100 nm5.25 An Extracellular Matrix Cells in the kidney secrete a basal lamina,an extracellular matrix that separates them from a nearby blood vesseland is also involved in filtering materials that pass between the kidneyand the blood.The plasma membranefolds inward. Manymodern-day prokaryoteshave membraneinfoldings.An ancientprokaryotic cell.2An ancestral eukaryoticcell endocytoses aphotosyntheticcyanobacterium.1The endocytosedcyanobacterium losesmost of its geneticmaterial to the hostnucleus but retains theability to photosynthesize.It is now a plastid.21Further membraneinfoldings begin theformation of the ER,creating a segregatedcompartment. The ERsurrounds the nucleiodand forms the nucleus.3DNA in nucleoid(A) (B)Cell membraneNucleusMitochondrionCyanobacteriumChloroplastCell wallAccording to endosymbiosis theory, photosynthetic prokaryotesalso provided the precursor of the modern-day plastid.Cells without cell walls can engulf relatively large particles byphagocytosis (see Figure 5.11). In some cases, such as that ofphagocytes in the human immune system, the engulfed particlecan be an entire cell, such as a bacterium. Plastids may havearisen by a similar event involving an ancestral eukaryote anda cyanobacterium (Figure 5.26B).Among the abundant evidence supporting the endosymbioticorigin of plastids (see Section 27.1), perhaps the most remarkablecomes from a sandy beach in Japan. Noriko Okamoto and IsaoInouye recently discovered a single-celled eukaryote that containsa large “chloroplast,” and named it Hatena (Figure 5.27). Itturns out that the “chloroplast” is the remains of a green alga,Nephroselmis, which lives among the Hatena cells. When livingautonomously, this algal cell has flagella, a cytoskeleton, ER,Golgi, and mitochondria in addition to a plastid. Once ingestedby Hatena, all of these structures, and presumably their associatedfunctions, are lost. What remains is essentially a plastid.When Hatena divides, only one of the two daughter cells endsup with the “chloroplast.” The other cell finds and ingests itsown Nephroselmis alga—almost like a “replay” of what mayhave occurred in the evolution of eukaryotic cells. No wonderthe Japanese scientists call the host cell Hatena: in Japanese, itmeans “how odd”!5.5 RECAPEukaryotic cells arose long after prokaryotic cells.Some organelles may have evolved by infolding ofthe plasma membrane, while others evolved by endosymbiosis.• How could membrane infolding in a prokaryotic celllead to the endomembrane system? See p. 101 andFigure 5.26A• Explain the endosymbiosis theory for the origin ofchloroplasts. See Figure 5.26BIn this chapter, we presented an overview of the structures ofcells, with some ideas about their relationships and origins. Asyou now embark on the study of major cell functions, keep in5.26 The Origin of Organelles (A) The endomembrane system andcell nucleus may have been formed by infolding and then fusion of theplasma membrane. (B) The endosymbiosis theory proposes that someorganelles may be descended from prokaryotes that were engulfed byother, larger cells.102 CHAPTER 5 | CELLS: THE WORKING UNITS OF LIFE5.5 | HOW DID EUKARYOTIC CELLS ORIGINATE? 103Daughter cellsCell with ingested greenphotosynthetic plastid.After cell division, only one of the daughtercells inherits the plastid; the other cell mustingest a new one from the environment.5.27 Endosymbiosis in Action A Hatena cell engulfs an algal cell,which then loses most of its cellular functions other than photosynthesis.This re-enacts a possible event in the origin of plastids in eukaryotic cells.mind that the structures in a cell do not exist in isolation. Theyare part of a dynamic, interacting cellular system. In Chapter 6we show that the plasma membrane is far from a passive barrier,but instead is a multi-functional system that connects theinside of the cell with its extracellular environment.5.1 What Features Make Cells the Fundamental Unitsof Life?SEE WEB ACTIVITIES 5.1 AND 5.2• All cells come from preexisting cells.• Cells are small because a cell’s surface area must be large comparedwith its volume to accommodate exchanges with its environment.Review Figure 5.2• All cells are enclosed by a selectively permeable plasmamembrane that separates their contents from the externalenvironment.• While certain biochemical processes, molecules, and structuresare shared by all kinds of cells, two categories of cells—prokaryotes and eukaryotes—are easily distinguished.5.2 What Features Characterize Prokaryotic Cells?• Prokaryotic cells have no internal compartments, but have anucleoid region containing DNA, and a cytoplasm containingcytosol, ribosomes, proteins, and small molecules. Someprokaryotes have additional protective structures, including acell wall, an outer membrane, and a capsule. Review Figure 5.4• Some prokaryotes have folded membranes that may be photosyntheticmembranes, and some have flagella or pili for motilityor attachment. Review Figure 5.55.3 What Features Characterize Eukaryotic Cells?• Eukaryotic cells are larger than prokaryotic cells and containmany membrane-enclosed organelles. The membranes thatenvelop organelles ensure compartmentalization of their functions.Review Figure 5.7• Ribosomes are sites of protein synthesis.• The nucleus contains most of the cell’s DNA and participates inthe control of protein synthesis. Review Figure 5.8• The endomembrane system—consisting of the endoplasmicreticulum and Golgi apparatus—is a series of interrelated compartmentsenclosed by membranes. It segregates proteins andmodifies them. Lysosomes contain many digestive enzymes.Review Figures 5.10 and 5.11, WEB ACTIVITY 5.3,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 5.1• Mitochondria and chloroplasts are semi-autonomousorganelles that process energy. Mitochondria are present inmost eukaryotic organisms and contain the enzymes neededfor cellular respiration. The cells of photosynthetic eukaryotescontain chloroplasts that harvest light energy for photosynthesis.Review Figures 5.12 and 5.13• Vacuoles are prominent in many plant cells and consist of amembrane-enclosed compartment full of water and dissolvedsubstances.• The microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubulesof the cytoskeleton provide the cell with shape, strength, andmovement. Review Figure 5.18SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 5.25.4 What Are the Roles of Extracellular Structures?• The plant cell wall consists principally of cellulose. Cell walls arepierced by plasmodesmata that join the cytoplasms of adjacentcells.• In animals, the extracellular matrix consists of different kindsof proteins, including collagen and proteoglycans. ReviewFigure 5.255.5 How Did Eukaryotic Cells Originate?• Infoldings of the plasma membrane could have led to the formationof some membrane-enclosed organelles, such as theendomembrane system and the nucleus. Review Figure 5.26A• The endosymbiosis theory states that mitochondria andchloroplasts originated when larger prokaryotes engulfed, butdid not digest, smaller prokaryotes. Mutual benefits permittedthis symbiotic relationship to be maintained, allowing thesmaller cells to evolve into the eukaryotic organelles observedtoday. Review Figure 5.26BCHAPTER SUMMARY
5.1 What Features Make Cells the Fundamental Unitsof Life?SEE WEB ACTIVITIES 5.1 AND 5.2• All cells come from preexisting cells.• Cells are small because a cell’s surface area must be large comparedwith its volume to accommodate exchanges with its environment.Review Figure 5.2• All cells are enclosed by a selectively permeable plasmamembrane that separates their contents from the externalenvironment.• While certain biochemical processes, molecules, and structuresare shared by all kinds of cells, two categories of cells—prokaryotes and eukaryotes—are easily distinguished.5.2 What Features Characterize Prokaryotic Cells?• Prokaryotic cells have no internal compartments, but have anucleoid region containing DNA, and a cytoplasm containingcytosol, ribosomes, proteins, and small molecules. Someprokaryotes have additional protective structures, including acell wall, an outer membrane, and a capsule. Review Figure 5.4• Some prokaryotes have folded membranes that may be photosyntheticmembranes, and some have flagella or pili for motilityor attachment. Review Figure 5.55.3 What Features Characterize Eukaryotic Cells?• Eukaryotic cells are larger than prokaryotic cells and containmany membrane-enclosed organelles. The membranes thatenvelop organelles ensure compartmentalization of their functions.Review Figure 5.7• Ribosomes are sites of protein synthesis.• The nucleus contains most of the cell’s DNA and participates inthe control of protein synthesis. Review Figure 5.8• The endomembrane system—consisting of the endoplasmicreticulum and Golgi apparatus—is a series of interrelated compartmentsenclosed by membranes. It segregates proteins andmodifies them. Lysosomes contain many digestive enzymes.Review Figures 5.10 and 5.11, WEB ACTIVITY 5.3,ANIMATED TUTORIAL 5.1• Mitochondria and chloroplasts are semi-autonomousorganelles that process energy. Mitochondria are present inmost eukaryotic organisms and contain the enzymes neededfor cellular respiration. The cells of photosynthetic eukaryotescontain chloroplasts that harvest light energy for photosynthesis.Review Figures 5.12 and 5.13• Vacuoles are prominent in many plant cells and consist of amembrane-enclosed compartment full of water and dissolvedsubstances.• The microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubulesof the cytoskeleton provide the cell with shape, strength, andmovement. Review Figure 5.18SEE ANIMATED TUTORIAL 5.25.4 What Are the Roles of Extracellular Structures?• The plant cell wall consists principally of cellulose. Cell walls arepierced by plasmodesmata that join the cytoplasms of adjacentcells.• In animals, the extracellular matrix consists of different kindsof proteins, including collagen and proteoglycans. ReviewFigure 5.255.5 How Did Eukaryotic Cells Originate?• Infoldings of the plasma membrane could have led to the formationof some membrane-enclosed organelles, such as theendomembrane system and the nucleus. Review Figure 5.26A• The endosymbiosis theory states that mitochondria andchloroplasts originated when larger prokaryotes engulfed, butdid not digest, smaller prokaryotes. Mutual benefits permittedthis symbiotic relationship to be maintained, allowing thesmaller cells to evolve into the eukaryotic organelles observedtoday. Review Figure 5.26B