This NASA image is a composite of several satellite-based views of Earth. To make the whole-Earth image,NASA scientists combine observations of different parts of the planet.
Viewed from space, Earth offers no clues about the diversity of life forms that reside there. The first forms of life on Earthare thought to have been microorganisms that existed for billions of years in the ocean before plants and animals appeared.The mammals, birds, and flowers so familiar to us are all relatively recent, originating 130 to 200 million years ago. Humanshave inhabited this planet for only the last 2.5 million years, and only in the last 200,000 years have humans started lookinglike we do today.
Figure 1.2 Formerly called blue-green algae, these (a) cyanobacteria, shown here at 300x magnification under a lightmicroscope, are some of Earth’s oldest life forms. These (b) stromatolites along the shores of Lake Thetis in WesternAustralia are ancient structures formed by the layering of cyanobacteria in shallow waters. (credit a: modification ofwork by NASA; credit b: modification of work by Ruth Ellison; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)What is biology? In simple terms, biology is the study of living organisms and their interactions with one another and theirenvironments. This is a very broad definition because the scope of biology is vast. Biologists may study anything fromthe microscopic or submicroscopic view of a cell to ecosystems and the whole living planet (Figure 1.2). Listening to thedaily news, you will quickly realize how many aspects of biology are discussed every day. For example, recent news topicsinclude Escherichia coli (Figure 1.3) outbreaks in spinach and Salmonella contamination in peanut butter. Other subjectsinclude efforts toward finding a cure for AIDS, Alzheimer’s disease, and cancer. On a global scale, many researchers arecommitted to finding ways to protect the planet, solve environmental issues, and reduce the effects of climate change. Allof these diverse endeavors are related to different facets of the discipline of biology.
Figure 1.3 Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacteria, seen in this scanning electron micrograph, are normal residents of ourdigestive tracts that aid in the absorption of vitamin K and other nutrients. However, virulent strains are sometimesresponsible for disease outbreaks. (credit: Eric Erbe, digital colorization by Christopher Pooley, both of USDA, ARS,EMU)The Process of ScienceBiology is a science, but what exactly is science? What does the study of biology share with other scientific disciplines?Science (from the Latin scientia, meaning “knowledge”) can be defined as knowledge that covers general truths or theoperation of general laws, especially when acquired and tested by the scientific method. It becomes clear from this definitionthat the application of the scientific method plays a major role in science. The scientific method is a method of researchwith defined steps that include experiments and careful observation.The steps of the scientific method will be examined in detail later, but one of the most important aspects of this method isthe testing of hypotheses by means of repeatable experiments. A hypothesis is a suggested explanation for an event, whichcan be tested. Although using the scientific method is inherent to science, it is inadequate in determining what science is.This is because it is relatively easy to apply the scientific method to disciplines such as physics and chemistry, but when it
comes to disciplines like archaeology, psychology, and geology, the scientific method becomes less applicable as it becomesmore difficult to repeat experiments.These areas of study are still sciences, however. Consider archeology—even though one cannot perform repeatableexperiments, hypotheses may still be supported. For instance, an archeologist can hypothesize that an ancient culture existedbased on finding a piece of pottery. Further hypotheses could be made about various characteristics of this culture, andthese hypotheses may be found to be correct or false through continued support or contradictions from other findings. Ahypothesis may become a verified theory. A theory is a tested and confirmed explanation for observations or phenomena.Science may be better defined as fields of study that attempt to comprehend the nature of the universe.What would you expect to see in a museum of natural sciences? Frogs? Plants? Dinosaur skeletons? Exhibits about how thebrain functions? A planetarium? Gems and minerals? Or, maybe all of the above? Science includes such diverse fields asastronomy, biology, computer sciences, geology, logic, physics, chemistry, and mathematics (Figure 1.4). However, thosefields of science related to the physical world and its phenomena and processes are considered natural sciences. Thus, amuseum of natural sciences might contain any of the items listed above.
Figure 1.4 The diversity of scientific fields includes astronomy, biology, computer science, geology, logic, physics,chemistry, mathematics, and many other fields. (credit: “Image Editor”/Flickr)There is no complete agreement when it comes to defining what the natural sciences include, however. For some experts,the natural sciences are astronomy, biology, chemistry, earth science, and physics. Other scholars choose to divide naturalsciences into life sciences, which study living things and include biology, and physical sciences, which study nonlivingmatter and include astronomy, geology, physics, and chemistry. Some disciplines such as biophysics and biochemistry buildon both life and physical sciences and are interdisciplinary. Natural sciences are sometimes referred to as “hard science”because they rely on the use of quantitative data; social sciences that study society and human behavior are more likely touse qualitative assessments to drive investigations and findings.Not surprisingly, the natural science of biology has many branches or subdisciplines. Cell biologists study cell structureand function, while biologists who study anatomy investigate the structure of an entire organism. Those biologists studyingphysiology, however, focus on the internal functioning of an organism. Some areas of biology focus on only particular typesof living things. For example, botanists explore plants, while zoologists specialize in animals.
Scientific ReasoningOne thing is common to all forms of science: an ultimate goal “to know.” Curiosity and inquiry are the driving forces for thedevelopment of science. Scientists seek to understand the world and the way it operates. To do this, they use two methodsof logical thinking: inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning.Inductive reasoning is a form of logical thinking that uses related observations to arrive at a general conclusion. This typeof reasoning is common in descriptive science. A life scientist such as a biologist makes observations and records them.These data can be qualitative or quantitative, and the raw data can be supplemented with drawings, pictures, photos, orvideos. From many observations, the scientist can infer conclusions (inductions) based on evidence. Inductive reasoninginvolves formulating generalizations inferred from careful observation and the analysis of a large amount of data. Brainstudies provide an example. In this type of research, many live brains are observed while people are doing a specific activity,such as viewing images of food. The part of the brain that “lights up” during this activity is then predicted to be the partcontrolling the response to the selected stimulus, in this case, images of food. The “lighting up” of the various areas of thebrain is caused by excess absorption of radioactive sugar derivatives by active areas of the brain. The resultant increase inradioactivity is observed by a scanner. Then, researchers can stimulate that part of the brain to see if similar responses result.Deductive reasoning or deduction is the type of logic used in hypothesis-based science. In deductive reason, the patternof thinking moves in the opposite direction as compared to inductive reasoning. Deductive reasoning is a form of logicalthinking that uses a general principle or law to forecast specific results. From those general principles, a scientist canextrapolate and predict the specific results that would be valid as long as the general principles are valid. Studies in climatechange can illustrate this type of reasoning. For example, scientists may predict that if the climate becomes warmer in aparticular region, then the distribution of plants and animals should change. These predictions have been made and tested,and many such changes have been found, such as the modification of arable areas for agriculture, with change based ontemperature averages.Both types of logical thinking are related to the two main pathways of scientific study: descriptive science and hypothesisbasedscience. Descriptive (or discovery) science, which is usually inductive, aims to observe, explore, and discover, whilehypothesis-based science, which is usually deductive, begins with a specific question or problem and a potential answer orsolution that can be tested. The boundary between these two forms of study is often blurred, and most scientific endeavorscombine both approaches. The fuzzy boundary becomes apparent when thinking about how easily observation can lead tospecific questions. For example, a gentleman in the 1940s observed that the burr seeds that stuck to his clothes and his dog’sfur had a tiny hook structure. On closer inspection, he discovered that the burrs’ gripping device was more reliable thana zipper. He eventually developed a company and produced the hook-and-loop fastener popularly known today as Velcro.Descriptive science and hypothesis-based science are in continuous dialogue.The Scientific MethodBiologists study the living world by posing questions about it and seeking science-based responses. This approach iscommon to other sciences as well and is often referred to as the scientific method. The scientific method was used even inancient times, but it was first documented by England’s Sir Francis Bacon (1561–1626) (Figure 1.5), who set up inductivemethods for scientific inquiry. The scientific method is not exclusively used by biologists but can be applied to almost allfields of study as a logical, rational problem-solving method.
Sir Francis Bacon (1561–1626) is credited with being the first to define the scientific method. (credit: Paulvan Somer)The scientific process typically starts with an observation (often a problem to be solved) that leads to a question. Let’s thinkabout a simple problem that starts with an observation and apply the scientific method to solve the problem. One Mondaymorning, a student arrives at class and quickly discovers that the classroom is too warm. That is an observation that alsodescribes a problem: the classroom is too warm. The student then asks a question: “Why is the classroom so warm?”Proposing a HypothesisRecall that a hypothesis is a suggested explanation that can be tested. To solve a problem, several hypotheses may beproposed. For example, one hypothesis might be, “The classroom is warm because no one turned on the air conditioning.”But there could be other responses to the question, and therefore other hypotheses may be proposed. A second hypothesismight be, “The classroom is warm because there is a power failure, and so the air conditioning doesn’t work.”Once a hypothesis has been selected, the student can make a prediction. A prediction is similar to a hypothesis but ittypically has the format “If . . . then . . . .” For example, the prediction for the first hypothesis might be, “If the student turnson the air conditioning, then the classroom will no longer be too warm.”Testing a HypothesisA valid hypothesis must be testable. It should also be falsifiable, meaning that it can be disproven by experimentalresults. Importantly, science does not claim to “prove” anything because scientific understandings are always subject tomodification with further information. This step—openness to disproving ideas—is what distinguishes sciences from nonsciences.The presence of the supernatural, for instance, is neither testable nor falsifiable. To test a hypothesis, a researcherwill conduct one or more experiments designed to eliminate one or more of the hypotheses. Each experiment will have oneor more variables and one or more controls. A variable is any part of the experiment that can vary or change during theexperiment. The control group contains every feature of the experimental group except it is not given the manipulationthat is hypothesized about. Therefore, if the results of the experimental group differ from the control group, the differencemust be due to the hypothesized manipulation, rather than some outside factor. Look for the variables and controls inthe examples that follow. To test the first hypothesis, the student would find out if the air conditioning is on. If the airconditioning is turned on but does not work, there should be another reason, and this hypothesis should be rejected. Totest the second hypothesis, the student could check if the lights in the classroom are functional. If so, there is no powerfailure and this hypothesis should be rejected. Each hypothesis should be tested by carrying out appropriate experiments.Be aware that rejecting one hypothesis does not determine whether or not the other hypotheses can be accepted; it simplyeliminates one hypothesis that is not valid (Figure 1.6). Using the scientific method, the hypotheses that are inconsistentwith experimental data are rejected.While this “warm classroom” example is based on observational results, other hypotheses and experiments might haveclearer controls. For instance, a student might attend class on Monday and realize she had difficulty concentrating on the
lecture. One observation to explain this occurrence might be, “When I eat breakfast before class, I am better able to payattention.” The student could then design an experiment with a control to test this hypothesis.In hypothesis-based science, specific results are predicted from a general premise. This type of reasoning is called deductivereasoning: deduction proceeds from the general to the particular. But the reverse of the process is also possible: sometimes,scientists reach a general conclusion from a number of specific observations. This type of reasoning is called inductivereasoning, and it proceeds from the particular to the general. Inductive and deductive reasoning are often used in tandem toadvance scientific knowledge (Figure 1.7).
The scientific method may seem too rigid and structured. It is important to keep in mind that, although scientists oftenfollow this sequence, there is flexibility. Sometimes an experiment leads to conclusions that favor a change in approach;often, an experiment brings entirely new scientific questions to the puzzle. Many times, science does not operate in a linearfashion; instead, scientists continually draw inferences and make generalizations, finding patterns as their research proceeds.Scientific reasoning is more complex than the scientific method alone suggests. Notice, too, that the scientific method canbe applied to solving problems that aren’t necessarily scientific in nature.
Two Types of Science: Basic Science and Applied ScienceThe scientific community has been debating for the last few decades about the value of different types of science. Is itvaluable to pursue science for the sake of simply gaining knowledge, or does scientific knowledge only have worth if wecan apply it to solving a specific problem or to bettering our lives? This question focuses on the differences between twotypes of science: basic science and applied science.Basic science or “pure” science seeks to expand knowledge regardless of the short-term application of that knowledge.It is not focused on developing a product or a service of immediate public or commercial value. The immediate goal ofbasic science is knowledge for knowledge’s sake, though this does not mean that, in the end, it may not result in a practicalapplication.In contrast, applied science or “technology,” aims to use science to solve real-world problems, making it possible, forexample, to improve a crop yield, find a cure for a particular disease, or save animals threatened by a natural disaster (Figure1.8). In applied science, the problem is usually defined for the researcher.
Figure 1.8 After Hurricane Ike struck the Gulf Coast in 2008, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service rescued this brownpelican. Thanks to applied science, scientists knew how to rehabilitate the bird. (credit: FEMA)Some individuals may perceive applied science as “useful” and basic science as “useless.” A question these people mightpose to a scientist advocating knowledge acquisition would be, “What for?” A careful look at the history of science,however, reveals that basic knowledge has resulted in many remarkable applications of great value. Many scientists thinkthat a basic understanding of science is necessary before an application is developed; therefore, applied science relies onthe results generated through basic science. Other scientists think that it is time to move on from basic science and insteadto find solutions to actual problems. Both approaches are valid. It is true that there are problems that demand immediateattention; however, few solutions would be found without the help of the wide knowledge foundation generated throughbasic science.One example of how basic and applied science can work together to solve practical problems occurred after the discovery ofDNA structure led to an understanding of the molecular mechanisms governing DNA replication. Strands of DNA, uniquein every human, are found in our cells, where they provide the instructions necessary for life. During DNA replication,DNA makes new copies of itself, shortly before a cell divides. Understanding the mechanisms of DNA replication enabledscientists to develop laboratory techniques that are now used to identify genetic diseases, pinpoint individuals who were ata crime scene, and determine paternity. Without basic science, it is unlikely that applied science would exist.Another example of the link between basic and applied research is the Human Genome Project, a study in which eachhuman chromosome was analyzed and mapped to determine the precise sequence of DNA subunits and the exact locationof each gene. (The gene is the basic unit of heredity; an individual’s complete collection of genes is his or her genome.)Other less complex organisms have also been studied as part of this project in order to gain a better understanding of humanchromosomes. The Human Genome Project (Figure 1.9) relied on basic research carried out with simple organisms and,later, with the human genome. An important end goal eventually became using the data for applied research, seeking curesand early diagnoses for genetically related diseases.
Figure 1.9 The Human Genome Project was a 13-year collaborative effort among researchers working in severaldifferent fields of science. The project, which sequenced the entire human genome, was completed in 2003. (credit:the U.S. Department of Energy Genome Programs (http://genomics.energy.gov))While research efforts in both basic science and applied science are usually carefully planned, it is important to note thatsome discoveries are made by serendipity, that is, by means of a fortunate accident or a lucky surprise. Penicillin wasdiscovered when biologist Alexander Fleming accidentally left a petri dish of Staphylococcus bacteria open. An unwantedmold grew on the dish, killing the bacteria. The mold turned out to be Penicillium, and a new antibiotic was discovered.Even in the highly organized world of science, luck—when combined with an observant, curious mind—can lead tounexpected breakthroughs.Reporting Scientific WorkWhether scientific research is basic science or applied science, scientists must share their findings in order for otherresearchers to expand and build upon their discoveries. Collaboration with other scientists—when planning, conducting,and analyzing results—are all important for scientific research. For this reason, important aspects of a scientist’s work arecommunicating with peers and disseminating results to peers. Scientists can share results by presenting them at a scientificmeeting or conference, but this approach can reach only the select few who are present. Instead, most scientists present theirresults in peer-reviewed manuscripts that are published in scientific journals. Peer-reviewed manuscripts are scientificpapers that are reviewed by a scientist’s colleagues, or peers. These colleagues are qualified individuals, often expertsin the same research area, who judge whether or not the scientist’s work is suitable for publication. The process of peerreview helps to ensure that the research described in a scientific paper or grant proposal is original, significant, logical, andthorough. Grant proposals, which are requests for research funding, are also subject to peer review. Scientists publish theirwork so other scientists can reproduce their experiments under similar or different conditions to expand on the findings. Theexperimental results must be consistent with the findings of other scientists.A scientific paper is very different from creative writing. Although creativity is required to design experiments, there arefixed guidelines when it comes to presenting scientific results. First, scientific writing must be brief, concise, and accurate.A scientific paper needs to be succinct but detailed enough to allow peers to reproduce the experiments.The scientific paper consists of several specific sections—introduction, materials and methods, results, and discussion. Thisstructure is sometimes called the “IMRaD” format. There are usually acknowledgment and reference sections as well as anabstract (a concise summary) at the beginning of the paper. There might be additional sections depending on the type ofpaper and the journal where it will be published; for example, some review papers require an outline.The introduction starts with brief, but broad, background information about what is known in the field. A good introductionalso gives the rationale of the work; it justifies the work carried out and also briefly mentions the end of the paper, wherethe hypothesis or research question driving the research will be presented. The introduction refers to the published scientificwork of others and therefore requires citations following the style of the journal. Using the work or ideas of others withoutproper citation is considered plagiarism.
The materials and methods section includes a complete and accurate description of the substances used, and the methodand techniques used by the researchers to gather data. The description should be thorough enough to allow anotherresearcher to repeat the experiment and obtain similar results, but it does not have to be verbose. This section will alsoinclude information on how measurements were made and what types of calculations and statistical analyses were used toexamine raw data. Although the materials and methods section gives an accurate description of the experiments, it does notdiscuss them.Some journals require a results section followed by a discussion section, but it is more common to combine both. If thejournal does not allow the combination of both sections, the results section simply narrates the findings without any furtherinterpretation. The results are presented by means of tables or graphs, but no duplicate information should be presented.In the discussion section, the researcher will interpret the results, describe how variables may be related, and attempt toexplain the observations. It is indispensable to conduct an extensive literature search to put the results in the context ofpreviously published scientific research. Therefore, proper citations are included in this section as well.Finally, the conclusion section summarizes the importance of the experimental findings. While the scientific paper almostcertainly answered one or more scientific questions that were stated, any good research should lead to more questions.Therefore, a well-done scientific paper leaves doors open for the researcher and others to continue and expand on thefindings.Review articles do not follow the IMRAD format because they do not present original scientific findings, or primaryliterature; instead, they summarize and comment on findings that were published as primary literature and typically includeextensive reference sections.response, but it is not always easy to define life. For example, a branch of biology called virology studies viruses, whichexhibit some of the characteristics of living entities but lack others. It turns out that although viruses can attack livingorganisms, cause diseases, and even reproduce, they do not meet the criteria that biologists use to define life. Consequently,virologists are not biologists, strictly speaking. Similarly, some biologists study the early molecular evolution that gave riseto life; since the events that preceded life are not biological events, these scientists are also excluded from biology in thestrict sense of the term.From its earliest beginnings, biology has wrestled with three questions: What are the shared properties that make something“alive”? And once we know something is alive, how do we find meaningful levels of organization in its structure? And,finally, when faced with the remarkable diversity of life, how do we organize the different kinds of organisms so that wecan better understand them? As new organisms are discovered every day, biologists continue to seek answers to these andother questions.Properties of LifeAll living organisms share several key characteristics or functions: order, sensitivity or response to the environment,reproduction, adaptation, growth and development, regulation, homeostasis, energy processing, and evolution. Whenviewed together, these nine characteristics serve to define life.
Organisms are highly organized, coordinated structures that consist of one or more cells. Even very simple, single-celledorganisms are remarkably complex: inside each cell, atoms make up molecules; these in turn make up cell organelles andother cellular inclusions. In multicellular organisms (Figure 1.10), similar cells form tissues. Tissues, in turn, collaborate tocreate organs (body structures with a distinct function). Organs work together to form organ systems.
Figure 1.11 The leaves of this sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica) will instantly droop and fold when touched. After a fewminutes, the plant returns to normal. (credit: Alex Lomas)Organisms respond to diverse stimuli. For example, plants can bend toward a source of light, climb on fences and walls, orrespond to touch (Figure 1.11). Even tiny bacteria can move toward or away from chemicals (a process called chemotaxis)or light (phototaxis). Movement toward a stimulus is considered a positive response, while movement away from a stimulusis considered a negative response.
ReproductionSingle-celled organisms reproduce by first duplicating their DNA, and then dividing it equally as the cell prepares to divideto form two new cells. Multicellular organisms often produce specialized reproductive germline cells that will form newindividuals. When reproduction occurs, genes containing DNA are passed along to an organism’s offspring. These genesensure that the offspring will belong to the same species and will have similar characteristics, such as size and shape.Growth and DevelopmentOrganisms grow and develop following specific instructions coded for by their genes. These genes provide instructions thatwill direct cellular growth and development, ensuring that a species’ young (Figure 1.12) will grow up to exhibit many ofthe same characteristics as its parents.
Figure 1.12 Although no two look alike, these kittens have inherited genes from both parents and share many of thesame characteristics. (credit: Rocky Mountain Feline Rescue)RegulationEven the smallest organisms are complex and require multiple regulatory mechanisms to coordinate internal functions,respond to stimuli, and cope with environmental stresses. Two examples of internal functions regulated in an organism arenutrient transport and blood flow. Organs (groups of tissues working together) perform specific functions, such as carryingoxygen throughout the body, removing wastes, delivering nutrients to every cell, and cooling the body.
Figure 1.13 Polar bears (Ursus maritimus) and other mammals living in ice-covered regions maintain their bodytemperature by generating heat and reducing heat loss through thick fur and a dense layer of fat under their skin.(credit: “longhorndave”/Flickr)In order to function properly, cells need to have appropriate conditions such as proper temperature, pH, and appropriateconcentration of diverse chemicals. These conditions may, however, change from one moment to the next. Organismsare able to maintain internal conditions within a narrow range almost constantly, despite environmental changes, throughhomeostasis (literally, “steady state”)—the ability of an organism to maintain constant internal conditions. For example,an organism needs to regulate body temperature through a process known as thermoregulation. Organisms that live in coldclimates, such as the polar bear (Figure 1.13), have body structures that help them withstand low temperatures and conserve
body heat. Structures that aid in this type of insulation include fur, feathers, blubber, and fat. In hot climates,
Figure 1.14 The California condor (Gymnogyps californianus) uses chemical energy derived from food to power flight.California condors are an endangered species; this bird has a wing tag that helps biologists identify the individual.(credit: Pacific Southwest Region U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)All organisms use a source of energy for their metabolic activities. Some organisms capture energy from the sun and convertit into chemical energy in food; others use chemical energy in molecules they take in as food (Figure 1.14).Levels of Organization of Living ThingsLiving things are highly organized and structured, following a hierarchy that can be examined on a scale from small tolarge. The atom is the smallest and most fundamental unit of matter. It consists of a nucleus surrounded by electrons. Atomsform molecules. A molecule is a chemical structure consisting of at least two atoms held together by one or more chemicalbonds. Many molecules that are biologically important are macromolecules, large molecules that are typically formed bypolymerization (a polymer is a large molecule that is made by combining smaller units called monomers, which are simplerthan macromolecules). An example of a macromolecule is deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) (Figure 1.15), which contains theinstructions for the structure and functioning of all living organisms.
Some cells contain aggregates of macromolecules surrounded by membranes; these are called organelles. Organelles aresmall structures that exist within cells. Examples of organelles include mitochondria and chloroplasts, which carry outindispensable functions: mitochondria produce energy to power the cell, while chloroplasts enable green plants to utilizethe energy in sunlight to make sugars. All living things are made of cells; the cell itself is the smallest fundamental unit ofstructure and function in living organisms. (This requirement is why viruses are not considered living: they are not made ofcells. To make new viruses, they have to invade and hijack the reproductive mechanism of a living cell; only then can theyobtain the materials they need to reproduce.) Some organisms consist of a single cell and others are multicellular. Cells areclassified as prokaryotic or eukaryotic. Prokaryotes are single-celled or colonial organisms that do not have membraneboundnuclei; in contrast, the cells of eukaryotes do have membrane-bound organelles and a membrane-bound nucleus.In larger organisms, cells combine to make tissues, which are groups of similar cells carrying out similar or relatedfunctions. Organs are collections of tissues grouped together performing a common function. Organs are present not only
in animals but also in plants. An organ system is a higher level of organization that consists of functionally related organs.Mammals have many organ systems. For instance, the circulatory system transports blood through the body and to and fromthe lungs; it includes organs such as the heart and blood vessels. Organisms are individual living entities. For example,each tree in a forest is an organism. Single-celled prokaryotes and single-celled eukaryotes are also considered organismsand are typically referred to as microorganisms.All the individuals of a species living within a specific area are collectively called a population. For example, a forest mayinclude many pine trees. All of these pine trees represent the population of pine trees in this forest. Different populationsmay live in the same specific area. For example, the forest with the pine trees includes populations of flowering plantsand also insects and microbial populations. A community is the sum of populations inhabiting a particular area. Forinstance, all of the trees, flowers, insects, and other populations in a forest form the forest’s community. The forest itselfis an ecosystem. An ecosystem consists of all the living things in a particular area together with the abiotic, non-livingparts of that environment such as nitrogen in the soil or rain water. At the highest level of organization (Figure 1.16), thebiosphere is the collection of all ecosystems, and it represents the zones of life on earth. It includes land, water, and eventhe atmosphere to a certain extent.
The biological levels of organization of living things are shown. From a single organelle to the entirebiosphere, living organisms are parts of a highly structured hierarchy. (credit “organelles”: modification of work byUmberto Salvagnin; credit “cells”: modification of work by Bruce Wetzel, Harry Schaefer/ National Cancer Institute;credit “tissues”: modification of work by Kilbad; Fama Clamosa; Mikael Häggström; credit “organs”: modificationof work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal; credit “organisms”: modification of work by "Crystal"/Flickr; credit “ecosystems”:modification of work by US Fish and Wildlife Service Headquarters; credit “biosphere”: modification of work by
The fact that biology, as a science, has such a broad scope has to do with the tremendous diversity of life on earth. Thesource of this diversity is evolution, the process of gradual change during which new species arise from older species.Evolutionary biologists study the evolution of living things in everything from the microscopic world to ecosystems.The evolution of various life forms on Earth can be summarized in a phylogenetic tree (Figure 1.17). A phylogenetic tree isa diagram showing the evolutionary relationships among biological species based on similarities and differences in geneticor physical traits or both. A phylogenetic tree is composed of nodes and branches. The internal nodes represent ancestorsand are points in evolution when, based on scientific evidence, an ancestor is thought to have diverged to form two newspecies. The length of each branch is proportional to the time elapsed since the split.This phylogenetic tree was constructed by microbiologist Carl Woese using data obtained fromsequencing ribosomal RNA genes. The tree shows the separation of living organisms into three domains: Bacteria,Archaea, and Eukarya. Bacteria and Archaea are prokaryotes, single-celled organisms lacking intracellular organelles.(credit: Eric Gaba; NASA Astrobiology Institute)Carl Woese and the Phylogenetic TreeIn the past, biologists grouped living organisms into five kingdoms: animals, plants, fungi, protists, andbacteria. The organizational scheme was based mainly on physical features, as opposed to physiology,biochemistry, or molecular biology, all of which are used by modern systematics. The pioneering work ofAmerican microbiologist Carl Woese in the early 1970s has shown, however, that life on Earth has evolvedalong three lineages, now called domains—Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. The first two are prokaryoticcells with microbes that lack membrane-enclosed nuclei and organelles. The third domain contains theeukaryotes and includes unicellular microorganisms together with the four original kingdoms (excludingbacteria). Woese defined Archaea as a new domain, and this resulted in a new taxonomic tree (Figure1.17). Many organisms belonging to the Archaea domain live under extreme conditions and are calledextremophiles. To construct his tree, Woese used genetic relationships rather than similarities based onmorphology (shape).Woese’s tree was constructed from comparative sequencing of the genes that are universally distributed,present in every organism, and conserved (meaning that these genes have remained essentially unchangedthroughout evolution). Woese’s approach was revolutionary because comparisons of physical features areinsufficient to differentiate between the prokaryotes that appear fairly similar in spite of their tremendousbiochemical diversity and genetic variability (Figure 1.18). The comparison of homologous DNA and RNAsequences provided Woese with a sensitive device that revealed the extensive variability of prokaryotes,and which justified the separation of the prokaryotes into two domains: bacteria and archaea.These images represent different domains. The (a) bacteria in this micrograph belong to DomainBacteria, while the (b) extremophiles (not visible) living in this hot vent belong to Domain Archaea. Both the(c) sunflower and (d) lion are part of Domain Eukarya. (credit a: modification of work by Drew March; credit b:modification of work by Steve Jurvetson; credit c: modification of work by Michael Arrighi; credit d: modification ofwork by Leszek Leszcynski)Branches of Biological StudyThe scope of biology is broad and therefore contains many branches and subdisciplines. Biologists may pursue one ofthose subdisciplines and work in a more focused field. For instance, molecular biology and biochemistry study biologicalprocesses at the molecular and chemical level, including interactions among molecules such as DNA, RNA, and proteins,as well as the way they are regulated. Microbiology, the study of microorganisms, is the study of the structure and functionof single-celled organisms. It is quite a broad branch itself, and depending on the subject of study, there are also microbialphysiologists, ecologists, and geneticists, among others.
Forensic science is the application of science to answer questions related to the law. Biologists as wellas chemists and biochemists can be forensic scientists. Forensic scientists provide scientific evidence foruse in courts, and their job involves examining trace materials associated with crimes. Interest in forensicscience has increased in the last few years, possibly because of popular television shows that featureforensic scientists on the job. Also, the development of molecular techniques and the establishment of DNAdatabases have expanded the types of work that forensic scientists can do. Their job activities are primarilyrelated to crimes against people such as murder, rape, and assault. Their work involves analyzing samplessuch as hair, blood, and other body fluids and also processing DNA (Figure 1.19) found in many differentenvironments and materials. Forensic scientists also analyze other biological evidence left at crime scenes,such as insect larvae or pollen grains. Students who want to pursue careers in forensic science will mostlikely be required to take chemistry and biology courses as well as some intensive math courses.
Another field of biological study, neurobiology, studies the biology of the nervous system, and although it is considereda branch of biology, it is also recognized as an interdisciplinary field of study known as neuroscience. Because of itsinterdisciplinary nature, this subdiscipline studies different functions of the nervous system using molecular, cellular,developmental, medical, and computational approaches.
Paleontology, another branch of biology, uses fossils to study life’s history (Figure 1.20). Zoology and botany are thestudy of animals and plants, respectively. Biologists can also specialize as biotechnologists, ecologists, or physiologists, toname just a few areas. This is just a small sample of the many fields that biologists can pursue.Biology is the culmination of the achievements of the natural sciences from their inception to today. Excitingly, it is thecradle of emerging sciences, such as the biology of brain activity, genetic engineering of custom organisms, and the biologyof evolution that uses the laboratory tools of molecular biology to retrace the earliest stages of life on earth. A scan ofnews headlines—whether reporting on immunizations, a newly discovered species, sports doping, or a genetically-modifiedfood—demonstrates the way biology is active in and important to our everyday world.

