chapter  one   studying life 
scientists are studying how corals are affected by global climate change .  
key concepts  
living organisms share similarities and a common origin 
biologists investigate life through experiments that test hypotheses 
understanding biology is important for health ,  well - being ,  and public - policy decisions 
investigatinglife 
corals in hot water 
coral reefs support the largest diversity of life in the oceans .  
they provide fisheries and storm protection for about a billion people ,  and are a magnificent source of natural beauty .  
but coral reefs are endangered .  
over the past  two  zero  years about half of the world   s reef - building corals have been destroyed by rising water temperature and other factors .  
high temperatures disrupt a fascinating aspect of coral biology .  
corals are animals ,  yet most corals have algae  ( dinoflagellates )  growing within their cells .  
dinoflagellates use the energy of sunlight to produce carbohydrates .  
corals provide a home for the dinoflagellates ,  which in turn provide nutrients for the corals .  
when high temperature impairs the dinoflagellates ,  the corals eject them   a process called bleaching .  
then ,  without nutrients from the dinoflagellates ,  the corals die ,  unless they can take in new dinoflagellates that are more resistant to the higher temperatures .  
understanding the effects of heat on corals was the motivation of graduate student rachael bay and her colleagues working with professor steve palumbi at stanford university   s hopkins marine station .  
while studying corals in small back - reef pools in american samoa ,  they observed that during low tides some pools reached higher temperatures than others .  
the researchers predicted that corals in the warmer pools had mechanisms enabling them to resist bleaching .  
to test their prediction ,  the researchers brought corals into the laboratory ,  subjected them to temperature fluctuations ,  and showed that the corals from the warm pools were more resistant to bleaching .  
they also transplanted corals between the different temperature environments in nature .  
as a result of these experiments ,  rachael and her colleagues proposed that two different processes contribute to the different abilities of the corals to survive heat stress .  
first ,  corals growing in the warmer pools could have genetic traits contributing to heat resistance ,  and second ,  individual corals may have the same genetic make - up but differ in their ability to adjust to their environment by changing the expression levels of certain genes .  
more knowledge of the mechanisms of heat stress and heat resistance in corals could lead to new strategies to decrease their losses as their environments change .  
how might experiments on heat stress in corals be used to predict the response of corals to global warming ?  
chapter  one  continues with 
 one  .  one  living organisms share similarities and a common origin 
life arose from non - life via chemical evolution 
cellular structure evolved in the common ancestor of life 
photosynthesis allows some organisms to capture energy from the sun 
biological information is stored in a genetic code common to all organisms 
populations of all living organisms evolve 
biologists trace the evolutionary tree of life 
cellular differentiation and specialization underlie multicellular life 
organisms extract energy and raw materials from the environment 
living organisms must regulate their internal environment 
living organisms interact intuitively we all know what life is ,  but try to define it  it isn   t easy .  
you can easily designate the things around you as living or nonliving ,  but what are the essential differences ?  
we call the living things organisms .  
in contrast to nonliving things ,  organisms sustain and renew themselves .  
the loss of the ability to sustain and renew means the loss of life ,  and organisms that die become part of the nonliving world .  
biology is the scientific study of organisms ,  both living and after death  ( e .  g .   ,  the study of fossils )  with the goal of discovering and understanding the diversity and the complex processes that make up life .  
focus your learning 
major characteristics are shared among all living things .  
living organisms have influenced the history of the planet earth .  
biological populations change over time .  
figure  one  .  one  the many faces of life 
the processes of evolution have led to the millions of diverse organisms living on earth today .  
prokaryotic archaea  ( a )  and bacteria  ( b )  are all single - celled organisms ,  as described in chapter  two  five  .  
 ( c )  many protists are unicellular but ,  as discussed in chapter  two  six  ,  their cell structures are more complex than those of the prokaryotes .  
this protist has manufactured    plates   ?  of calcium carbonate that surround and protect its single cell .  
 ( d   g )  most of the visible life on earth is multicellular .  
chapters  two  seven  and  two  eight  cover the green plants  ( d )  .  
the other broad groups of multicellular organisms are the fungi  ( e )  ,  discussed in chapter  two  nine  ,  and the animals  ( f )  ,  covered in chapters  three  zero     three  two  .  
life on our planet is quite diverse  ( figure  one  .  one  )  ,  yet its many diverse forms share common features .  
what characteristics do organisms share that distinguish them from the nonliving world ?  
most organisms  
are composed of a common set of chemical compounds  mainly carbohydrates ,  fatty acids ,  nucleic acids ,  and amino acids .  
are made up of cells .  
use molecules obtained from the environment to synthesize new biological molecules .  
extract energy from the environment and use it to do work .  
contain genetic information   genomes   that enables them to develop ,  maintain themselves ,  function ,  and reproduce .  
use a universal molecular code to build proteins from their genomic information .  
regulate their internal environments .  
exist in populations that evolve over time .  
how do you think all organisms came to have these similarities ?  
if life had multiple origins ,  we would not expect to see such striking similarities in chemical composition ,  cell structure ,  cell functions ,  and genetic codes across the living world .  
instead ,  these common characteristics logically lead to the conclusion that all life has a common ancestry ,  and that the diverse organisms alive today all originated from one life form .  
organisms from a separate origin of life   say ,  on another planet   might be similar in superficial ways to life on earth ,  but they would not have the same genetic code ,  chemical composition ,  or cellular structures and functions that we see widely shared among living organisms on earth .  
all evidence points to a common origin of life on our planet about  four  billion years ago .  
some forms of life may not display all characteristics listed above all of the time .  
for example ,  the seed of a desert plant may go for many years without extracting energy from the environment ,  converting molecules ,  regulating its internal environment ,  or reproducing  yet the seed is alive .  
viruses present a special case as well .  
viruses are not composed of cells and cannot carry out physiological functions on their own .  
viruses depend on the cells of host organisms to carry out these functions for them .  
yet viruses contain genetic information ,  and their populations evolve over time ,  as we know from witnessing changes in the flu viruses each flu season .  
even though viruses are not independent cellular organisms ,  their existence depends on cells ,  and it is highly probable that viruses evolved from cellular life forms .  
thus most biologists consider viruses to be a part of life .  
as you go through this book ,  you will explore details of the common characteristics of life ,  how these characteristics arose ,  and how they work together so that organisms survive and reproduce .  
because organisms do not all survive and reproduce with equal success ,  you will see again and again that through differential survival and reproduction populations of organisms evolve and become adapted to earth   s many environments .  
the processes of evolution have generated the enormous diversity of life on earth ,  and evolution is a central theme of biology .  
earth formed between  four  .  six  and  four  .  five  billion years ago ,  but it was not a place hospitable to life .  
the cooling of earth ,  the formation of surface water ,  and the evolution of the first life forms took about  six  zero  zero  million years .  
if we picture the  four  .  six  - billion - year history of earth as a  three  zero  - day month ,  life first appeared some time around the end of the first week  ( figure  one  .  two  )  .  
figure  one  .  two  life   s timeline the young earth   s atmosphere ,  oceans ,  and climate were very different than they are today ,  but experiments simulating those conditions have confirmed that the generation of complex molecules through random physical association of chemicals is possible ,  even inevitable .  
the critical step for the evolution of life was the appearance of nucleic acids   molecules that could reproduce themselves and serve as templates for the synthesis of proteins ,  large molecules with complex but stable shapes .  
the variation in the shapes of these proteins enabled them to participate in increasing numbers and kinds of chemical reactions with other molecules .  
these subjects are covered in part one of this book .  
an important step in the evolution of life was the enclosure of complex proteins and other biological molecules by membranes that contained them in a compact internal environment separate from the surrounding  ( external )  environment .  
fatty acid molecules played a critical role in membrane evolution because these molecules do not dissolve in water .  
think of shaking an oil and vinegar salad dressing .  
the oil breaks up into small droplets ,  but the droplets do not dissolve in the vinegar and they rapidly coalesce .  
similarly ,  fatty acids can form membranous films on the surface of water .  
when these films are agitated ,  they can form spherical structures called liposomes .  
such structures are now used for delivering drugs to cells  ( figure  one  .  three a )  .  
in a primordial ocean ,  such membranous structures could have enveloped assemblages of complex biological molecules .  
the origin of an internal environment that concentrated reactants and products of chemical reactions led to the first cells with the ability to replicate themselves   the evolution of the first cellular organisms .  
figure  one  .  three  cells are building blocks for life these photographs were taken with electron microscopes  ( see figure  five  .  three  )  and enhanced with added color to highlight details .  
 ( a )  liposomes are tiny round bubbles known as vesicles and are made out of the same material as a cell membrane .  
liposomes can be filled with drugs and used to deliver drugs to cells .  
 ( b )  two prokaryotic cells of an enterococcus bacterium that lives in the human digestive system .  
prokaryotes are unicellular organisms with genetic and biochemical material enclosed inside a single membrane .  
 ( c )  a human white blood cell  ( lymphocyte )  represents one of the many specialized cell types that make up a multicellular eukaryote .  
multiple membranes within the cell - enclosing outer membrane segregate the different biochemical processes of eukaryotic cells .  
for billions of years all the organisms existing on earth were unicellular and were enclosed by a single outer membrane .  
such organisms ,  like the bacteria that are abundant on you ,  in you ,  and all around you ,  are called prokaryotes  ( figure  one  .  three b )  .  
two main groups diverged early in life   s history  the bacteria and archaea .  
the third major category of life on earth ,  the eukarya ,  arose billions of years later from one group of archaea .  
in addition to its outer membrane ,  a eukaryotic cell  ( figure  one  .  three c )  has internal membranes that enclose specialized internal compartments called organelles .  
the organelle that gives eukaryotes their name is the nucleus   the organelle that contains the cell   s genetic information .  
the word    eukaryote   ?  comes from two greek words meaning    a true kernel .    ?  
other organelles carry out specific functions such as synthesizing biological molecules or providing energy .  
how might eukaryotes have arisen from prokaryotes ?  
infoldings of the prokaryote cell membrane could have formed internal compartments   the organelles   that isolated cell functions from each other ,  resulting in greater integration or efficiency of cell functions .  
another possibility ,  similar to that seen in the relationship between corals and dinoflagellates described at the beginning of this chapter ,  is that close ,  interdependent relationships may have developed between different prokaryote cells ,  leading to a merger of sorts .  
suppose a prokaryote good at converting energy was engulfed  ( but not digested )  by a prokaryote good at synthesizing biological molecules .  
each would supply a valuable service for the other ,  but now one would be an organelle inside the other .  
the structure of prokaryote and eukaryote cells ,  their membranes ,  and their evolution are the subjects of part two .  
single - celled organisms were the only forms of life for over half of the history of life on earth  ( see figure  one  .  two  )  .  
however ,  at some point the cells of some eukaryotes didn   t separate after cell division ,  instead they remained attached to each other .  
such colonial aggregations of cells made it possible for some of the associated cells to specialize in certain functions ,  such as reproduction ,  while other cells specialized in other functions ,  such as absorbing nutrients or motility .  
this cellular specialization enabled multicellular eukaryotes to increase in size and become more efficient at gathering resources and adapting to specific environments .  
living cells require energy to function .  
the earliest prokaryotes supplied their energy needs   their metabolism   by taking in small molecules from their environment ,  breaking the chemical bonds of these molecules ,  and using the energy released from those chemical bonds to do cellular work .  
many modern prokaryotes still function this way ,  and they function very successfully .  
but about  two  .  five  billion years ago ,  the emergence of photosynthesis changed the nature of life on earth .  
figure  one  .  four   photosynthetic organisms changed earth   s atmosphere  ( a )  photosynthesis transforms the energy of sunlight into a form of *chemical energy that can be used to do work such as the synthesis of large molecules .  
these large molecules can then be used to build cell structures or can be broken down to provide metabolic energy .  
photosynthesis is the basis of much of life on earth today because its energy - capturing processes provide food for other organisms .  
early photosynthetic cells were probably similar to present - day prokaryotes called cyanobacteria  ( figure  one  .  four  )  .  
over time ,  photosynthetic prokaryotes became so abundant that vast quantities of oxygen gas  ( o two  )  ,  which is a by - product of photosynthesis ,  began to accumulate in the atmosphere .  
*connect the concepts the pathways that harvest chemical energy to do all the kinds of biological work necessary to support metabolism are presented in chapter  nine  .  
during the early history of prokaryotic life ,  there was no o two  in earth   s atmosphere .  
in fact ,  o two  was toxic to many of the prokaryotes living at that time ,  and its buildup in the atmosphere resulted in a huge mass extinction .  
but those organisms that could tolerate o two  proliferated .  
atmospheric o two  opened up vast new avenues of evolution because aerobic metabolism   a biochemical process that uses o two  to extract energy from nutrient molecules   is far more efficient than anaerobic metabolism  ( which does not use o two  )  .  
most organisms today use aerobic metabolism .  
oxygen in the atmosphere also made it possible for life to move onto land .  
for most of life   s history ,  uv radiation falling on earth   s surface was so intense that it destroyed any organism that was not shielded by water .  
the atmospheric accumulation of photosynthetically generated o two  over a period of more than  two  billion years gradually produced a thick layer of ozone  ( o three  )  in the upper atmosphere .  
by about  five  zero  zero  million years ago ,  the ozone layer was sufficiently dense and absorbed enough of the sun   s uv radiation to make it possible for organisms to leave the protection of the water and live on land .  
figure  one  .  five  genetics developed as the study of discrete heritable traits figure  one  .  six  dna is life   s blueprint before there was a science of biology ,  humans recognized that offspring resemble parents ,  and this fact was used by plant and animal breeders to produce variants with desirable qualities .  
however ,  not until the famous plant breeding experiments of the austrian monk gregor mendel in the mid -  one  eight  zero  zero s was it demonstrated that inherited traits existed in discrete units  ( figure  one  .  five  )  .  
these discrete units of inheritance were termed genes in the early  one  nine  zero  zero s ,  giving rise to the science of genetics .  
an enormous body of information about traits of organisms represented by single genes was created before the chemical structure of a gene was known ,  and hence before the nature of the information that is passed from parent to offspring was known .  
that mystery was solved in the mid -  one  nine  zero  zero s with the discovery that the molecule deoxyribonucleic acid ,  dna ,  is the genetic information that specifies what an organism will look like and how it will function .  
this    blueprint   ?  for the existence of each individual organism is contained in the sum total of all the dna molecules contained in each of the organism   s cells   its genome .  
dna molecules are long sequences of four different subunits called nucleotides .  
genes are specific segments of dna that encode the information the cell uses to build proteins .  
therefore each gene is defined by a specific sequence of the four nucleotides .  
the genetic code spells out how sequences of nucleotides are *translated into sequences of amino acids ,  which are the building blocks of proteins .  
this translation process involves first transcribing some of the dna information of a gene into the structure of another smaller molecule called ribonucleic acid  ( rna )   ( figure  one  .  six  )  .  
rna serves as the template for synthesis of a protein .  
protein molecules govern the chemical reactions within cells and form much of an organism   s structure .  
*connect the concepts how the structure of dna codes for and is translated into proteins is discussed in concept  four  .  one  and in more detail in chapters  one  three  and  one  four  .  
by analogy with a book ,  the nucleotides of dna are like the letters of an alphabet ,  and protein molecules are the words .  
combinations of proteins that form structures and control specific biochemical processes are the sentences and paragraphs .  
the structures and processes that are organized into different complex systems with specific tasks  ( such as digestion or movement )  are the chapters of the book ,  and the complete book is the organism .  
if you were to write out your own genome using four letters to represent the four nucleotides ,  you would write more than  three  billion letters .  
using the size type you are reading now ,  your genome would fill about  one  ,  zero  zero  zero  books the size of this one .  
the processes of evolution are the authors and editors of all the books in the library of life .  
even though all the cells of a multicellular organism contain essentially the same genome ,  different cells of the organism have different functions and form different structures   contractile proteins form in muscle cells ,  hemoglobin in red blood cells ,  digestive enzymes in gut cells ,  and so on .  
we thus surmise that different types of cells in an organism express different parts of the genome .  
how cells control gene expression to enable a complex organism to develop and function is a major focus of current biological research .  
the genome of an organism consists of thousands of genes .  
this entire genome must be replicated as new cells are produced .  
however ,  the replication process is not perfect ,  and a few errors ,  known as mutations ,  are likely to occur when the genome is replicated .  
mutations occur spontaneously and can be induced by environmental factors such as chemicals and radiation .  
most mutations are either harmful or have no effect ,  but occasionally a mutation improves the functioning of the organism under the environmental conditions it encounters .  
the discovery of the structure of dna by james watson and francis crick in the middle of the twentieth century ,  and the subsequent elucidation of the mechanisms by which this material encodes and transmits information ,  transformed biology .  
these crucial discoveries are detailed in parts four and five of this book .  
a population is a group of individuals of the same type of organism that interbreed .  
the processes of evolution result in changes in the genetic makeup of populations through time .  
evolution is the major unifying principle of biology .  
charles darwin compiled factual evidence for evolution in his  one  eight  five  nine  book on the origin of species .  
darwin argued that differential survival and reproduction among individuals in a population ,  which he termed *natural selection ,  could account for much of the evolution of biodiversity .  
*connect the concepts the story of darwin   s formulation of evolution by natural selection is covered in key concept  two  zero  .  one  .  
although darwin proposed that all organisms are descended from a common ancestor and therefore are related to one another ,  he did not have knowledge of the mechanisms of genetic inheritance .  
even so ,  he understood the process of selective breeding of plants and animals to obtain breeds with desired traits .  
darwin himself was a pigeon breeder and knew that he could produce pigeons with different colorations ,  feather patterns ,  or tail shapes by selecting mates  ( see figure  two  zero  .  five  )  .  
the steps in such selective breeding can be described as follows  
observe trait variation in a population .  
selectively breed pairs based on a desired trait to produce that trait in their offspring .  
repeat such crosses in subsequent generations to amplify the trait .  
darwin realized that if humans could select for specific traits in domesticated plants and animals ,  the same process could operate in nature  hence the term    natural selection   ?  as opposed to artificial  ( human - imposed )  selection .  
he reasoned that the reproductive capacity of plants and animals ,  if unchecked ,  would result in unlimited growth of populations ,  but we do not observe such growth in nature .  
in most species ,  only a small percentage of an individual   s offspring survive to reproduce .  
thus any trait that confers even a small increase in the probability that its possessor will survive and reproduce increases in the population across generations .  
figure  one  .  seven  adaptations to the environment because organisms with certain traits survive and reproduce best under specific sets of conditions ,  natural selection leads to adaptations  structural ,  physiological ,  or behavioral traits that enhance an organism   s chances of survival and reproduction in its environment  ( figure  one  .  seven  )  .  
the opening story of this chapter described experiments aimed at understanding adaptations that might enable corals to survive in a warmer environment .  
in addition to natural selection ,  evolutionary processes such as sexual selection  ( selection due to mate choice )  and genetic drift  ( the random fluctuation of gene frequencies in a population due to chance events )  contribute to biodiversity .  
these processes operating over evolutionary history have contributed to the remarkable diversity of life on earth .  
part six describes how natural selection and other evolutionary processes are supported and explained by the massive body of genetic and molecular genetic knowledge mostly produced over the past hundred years .  
figure  one  .  eight  the blueprint of life over most of the history of biology ,  the diversity of life was described and catalogued based on structural characteristics of organisms .  
with the rapid development of molecular genetic tools in recent years ,  it is now possible to obtain the dna sequences of parts or all of the genomes of organisms .  
now it is possible to compare organisms on the basis of their dna blueprints ,  which has given rise to the field of genomics .  
for example ,  a structural feature that differentiates humans with african or european origins versus east asian origins is hair .  
europeans have fine hair that can be curly ,  as is the hair of africans .  
east asians have thick hair that is straight .  
this difference is due to a gene called edar and to a single nucleotide substitution in that gene resulting in a single amino acid change in the protein product of that gene  ( figure  one  .  eight  )  .  
the ability to sequence the billions of letters in genetic codes generates enormous amounts of data ,  and to manage and analyze that data ,  the field of bioinformatics has grown in parallel with genomics .  
genomics has enormous applications throughout biology ,  from evolutionary studies to investigations of human health .  
advances in genomics and bioinformatics make current initiatives in precision medicine possible .  
populations geographically isolated from one another evolve differences .  
as populations diverge from one another ,  individuals from one population become less likely to reproduce successfully with individuals of the other populations .  
eventually these differences between the populations become so great that they are considered to be different species .  
thus species that share a fairly recent evolutionary history are generally more similar to each other than are species that share an ancestor in the more distant past .  
by identifying ,  analyzing ,  and quantifying similarities and differences among species ,  biologists can construct phylogenetic trees that portray the evolutionary histories of the different groups of organisms .  
as an example ,  we can show the evolutionary relationships among humans and our closest living relatives in a branching diagram that shows how they diverged from a common ancestor .  
in this tree ,  the living species are shown at the tips of the branches ,  and the branches show when these groups diverged from one another along a time scale .  
our convention in this book will be to place phylogenetic trees on their sides ,  with the oldest lineages on the left and the most recent to the right .  
tens of millions of species exist on earth today  many times that number lived in the past but are now extinct .  
biologists give each of these species a distinctive scientific name formed from two latinized names   a binomial .  
the first part of the name identifies the species    genus  ( plural genera )    a group of species that share a recent common ancestor .  
the second part of the scientific name identifies a particular species within the genus .  
for example ,  the scientific name for modern - day humans is homo sapiens  homo is our genus ,  sapiens refers to our species .  
homo is latin for    man ,    ?  and sapiens is from the latin word for    wise   ?  or    rational .    ?  
the binomial for our close but extinct relatives ,  the neanderthals ,  is homo neanderthalensis .  
note that it is conventional to write the binomial in italics with the genus capitalized but the second part not capitalized .  
figure  one  .  nine  the tree of life the earliest division of life was between the bacteria and archaea .  
later ,  one lineage of archaea incorporated specializations  ( including a cell nucleus )  that allowed the repeated evolution of multicellularity  we call this specialized group eukarya .  
the aqua branches within eukarya represent various groups of microbial eukaryotes ,  more commonly known as    protists .    ?  
the organisms on any one branch share a common ancestor .  
q  according to this phylogenetic tree ,  are fungi more closely related to plants or to animals ?  
much of biology is based on comparisons among species .  
meaningful interpretations of those comparisons require an understanding of evolutionary relationships of the respective species .  
our ability to reconstruct evolutionary relationships has been greatly enhanced in recent decades by gene sequencing .  
genomic sequence analysis and other molecular techniques have enabled biologists to augment evolutionary knowledge based on the fossil record with a vast array of molecular evidence .  
the result is the ongoing compilation of phylogenetic trees that document and diagram evolutionary relationships .  
the broadest categories of the tree of life are shown in figure  one  .  nine  ,  and they will be surveyed in more detail in part seven .  
 ( the tree is expanded in appendix a ,  and you can also explore the tree interactively online .   )  
although many details remain to be clarified ,  the broad outlines of the tree of life have been determined .  
its branching patterns are based on a rich array of evidence from fossils ,  structures ,  metabolic processes ,  behavior ,  and molecular analyses of genomes .  
recall that the primary division of life   into archaea and bacteria   occurred among the early single - celled prokaryotes .  
members of these two groups differ so fundamentally that they are believed to have separated into distinct evolutionary lineages early in the history of life .  
one of the lineages of archaea incorporated a nucleus and internal ,  membrane - bound organelles and gave rise to the major group eukarya .  
plants ,  fungi ,  and animals are examples of familiar multicellular eukaryotes that evolved independently ,  from different groups of the unicellular eukaryotes known as protists .  
we know that plants ,  fungi ,  and animals had independent origins of multicellularity because each of these three groups is most closely related to different groups of protists ,  as can be seen from the branching pattern of figure  one  .  nine  .  
single - celled organisms must provide for all of their own needs ,  but the cells of multicellular organisms can evolve specializations to carry out certain functions exclusively and efficiently because they can depend on other cells to carry out other functions .  
thus the cells of a multicellular organism can have different developmental fates .  
similar cell types can develop together into tissues that accomplish tasks that a single cell cannot .  
for example ,  muscle cells develop cellular mechanisms for generating force .  
a single muscle cell cannot generate much force ,  but many cells of a muscle tissue can work together to generate considerable force ,  and working with structural tissues such as bones ,  they can produce large movements .  
different tissue types develop together into organs that accomplish specific functions .  
the heart ,  brain ,  and stomach are each composed of several types of tissues ,  as are the roots ,  stems ,  and leaves of plants .  
organs whose functions are interrelated can be grouped into organ systems  the esophagus ,  stomach ,  and intestines ,  for example ,  are all part of the digestive system .  
the hierarchy of biological organization from atom to organism is shown in figure  one  .  one  zero a .  
the biology of the two major groups of multicellular organisms ,  plants and animals ,  is discussed in detail in parts eight and nine ,  respectively .  
figure  one  .  one  zero  biology is studied at many levels of organization  ( a )   life   s properties emerge when dna and other molecules are organized in cells ,  which form building blocks for organisms .  
 ( b )  organisms exist in populations and interact with other populations to form communities ,  which interact with the physical environment to make up the many ecosystems of the biosphere .  
living organisms acquire nutrients from the environment .  
biochemical reactions break down complex nutrient molecules into smaller chemical units .  
some of those smaller units are used as building blocks for structures the organism requires .  
the breakdown of nutrient molecules does more than supply raw materials .  
the breaking of the chemical bonds of nutrient molecules releases energy that the cell transfers to high - energy molecules that it uses to do work .  
figure  one  .  one  one  energy can be used immediately or stored  ( a )  one kind of work cells do is mechanical   moving molecules from one cellular location to another ,  moving whole cells or tissues ,  or even moving the organism itself  ( figure  one  .  one  one a )  .  
the cell also does biochemical work in the building ,  or synthesis ,  of new complex molecules and structures from smaller chemical units .  
for example ,  we are all familiar with the fact that carbohydrates eaten today may be deposited in the body as fat tomorrow  ( figure  one  .  one  one b )  .  
still another kind of work is the electrical work that is the essence of information processing in nervous systems .  
the many biochemical reactions that take place in cells are integrally linked in that the products of one reaction are the raw materials of the next .  
these complex networks of reactions must be integrated and precisely controlled  when they are not ,  the result is malfunction and disease .  
if different specialized cells ,  tissues ,  and organs provide for different needs of the multicellular organism ,  how are these specific services shared by the cells of the whole organism ?  
all of the cells of the body share an internal environment that is made up of extracellular fluids .  
cells derive their nutrients from these extracellular fluids ,  and they deposit their wastes into the extracellular fluid .  
this internal environment serves the needs of all cells of the body ,  and therefore its physical and chemical composition must be maintained within a narrow range of physiological conditions that support survival and function .  
the maintenance of this narrow range of conditions is known as homeostasis .  
a relatively stable internal environment means that cells can function efficiently even when external conditions could not support the lives of individual cells .  *homeostasis requires that the activities of the cells and systems of the body be regulated .  
regulation requires information   information about internal conditions ,  external conditions ,  and what is optimal .  
thus organisms must have sensory mechanisms to monitor conditions ,  effector mechanisms to alter those conditions ,  and signaling mechanisms to integrate information and enable communication between sensors and effectors .  
the major informational systems of animals   nervous ,  hormonal ,  and immune   use chemical and electrical signals to process information .  
*connect the concepts the regulation of body temperature is an important example of homeostasis that is discussed in chapter  four  zero  .  
the concept of homeostasis also applies to the intracellular environment .  
both unicellular and multicellular organisms must regulate the composition of their intracellular environments within a range that allows those cells to survive and function .  
individual cells regulate these properties through actions of their membranes and ,  in the case of eukaryotes ,  their organelles .  
thus self - regulation to maintain a more or less constant internal environment is a general attribute of all life .  
organisms do not live in isolation .  
besides the internal hierarchy of the individual organism ,  there is also an external hierarchy of the biological world  ( figure  one  .  one  zero b )  .  
the populations of all the species that live and interact in a defined area are called a community .  
communities together with their abiotic ,  or physical ,  environment constitute an ecosystem .  
individuals in a population interact in many different ways .  
animals eat plants and other animals and compete with other species for food and other resources .  
some animals prevent other individuals of their own species from exploiting a resource ,  be it food ,  nesting sites ,  or mates .  
animals may also cooperate with members of their own species ,  forming social units such as a termite colony or a flock of birds .  
such interactions have resulted in the evolution of social behaviors such as communication and courtship displays .  
plants also interact with their external biotic and abiotic environment .  
plants living on land depend on partnerships with fungi ,  bacteria ,  and animals .  
some of these partnerships are necessary to obtain nutrients ,  some to produce fertile seeds ,  and still others to disperse seeds .  
plants compete with each other for light and water and have ongoing evolutionary interactions with the animals that eat them .  
through time ,  many adaptations such as thorns and toxins have evolved that protect plants from predation .  
other adaptations such as flowers and fruits help attract the animals that assist in plant reproduction .  
the interactions of populations of plant and animal species in a community are major evolutionary forces that produce specialized adaptations .  
the major ecosystems of earth that cover broad geographic areas with distinguishing physical features and communities of organisms are known as biomes .  
examples of biomes include arctic tundra ,  coral reefs ,  and tropical rainforests .  
all of the biomes on our planet make up the biosphere .  
the ways in which species interact with one another and with their environment in populations ,  communities ,  and ecosystems is the subject of ecology ,  covered in part ten of this book .  
 one  .  one  recap all organisms are related by common descent from a single origin of life .  
they contain genetic information that encodes how they look and how they function .  
they also reproduce ,  extract energy from their environment ,  use energy to do biological work ,  synthesize complex molecules to build biological structures ,  regulate their internal environment ,  and interact with one another .  
evolution has produced an enormous diversity of organisms that make up communities and ecosystems .  
genomics helps scientists establish the evolutionary relationships between organisms .  
learning outcomes 
you should be able to  
explain how photosynthesis influenced the history of life on earth .  
describe evidence that supports the common origin of all life on earth .  
explain how natural selection can produce evolutionary change .  
explain how scientists classify organisms according to evolutionary relationships .  
how were atmospheric oxygen levels related to the colonization of terrestrial environments ?  
if we discovered life on another planet ,  how could we tell if it had a separate origin from life on earth ?  
assume a population of fish becomes isolated in a dark cave environment ,  with no access to light from the surface .  
what major change might you expect in the population over time ,  and why ?  
what information do biologists use to construct phylo - genetic trees ?  
the preceding section outlined the major features of life   features that we will cover in depth in subsequent chapters of this book .  
before going into the details of what we know about life ,  however ,  it is important to understand how scientists obtain information and how they use that information to broaden our understanding of life and to put that understanding to practical use .  
chapter  one  continues with 
 one  .  two  biologists investigate life through experiments that test hypotheses 
observing and quantifying are important skills 
scientific methods combine observation ,  experimentation ,  and logic 
good experiments have the potential to falsify hypotheses 
statistical methods are essential scientific tools 
discoveries in biology can be generalized 
not all forms of inquiry are scientific 
scientific investigations are based on observation ,  experimentation ,  data analysis ,  and logic .  
scientists use many different tools and methods in making observations ,  collecting data ,  experimenting ,  analyzing data ,  and applying logic .  
focus your learning 
scientific methods produce biological knowledge .  
biologists observe the world around them .  
our ability to observe has been greatly enhanced by technologies such as electron microscopes ,  rapid genome sequencing ,  magnetic resonance imaging ,  and global positioning satellites .  
these technologies allow us to observe everything from the distribution of molecules in the body to the movement of animals across continents and oceans .  
observation is a basic tool of biology ,  but as scientists we must be able to quantify the information ,  or data ,  we collect and observe .  
whether we are testing a new drug or mapping the migrations of whales ,  it is essential to apply mathematical and statistical methods to the data we collect .  
in our opening discussion of the responses of corals to temperature ,  it was essential for rachael to measure temperatures accurately and to have a physical measure of bleaching so she could compare the responses of her corals to different conditions and conclude that the differences were more than just random variation .  
textbooks often describe    the scientific method ,    ?  as if there were a single ,  simple flow chart that all scientists follow .  
this is an oversimplification .  
although flow charts such as the one shown in figure  one  .  one  two  incorporate much of what scientists do ,  you should not conclude that scientists necessarily progress through the steps of the process in one prescribed ,  linear order .  
figure  one  .  one  two  scientific methodology 
observations lead to questions .  
to answer those questions ,  scientists make additional observations ,  formulate possible answers ,  and do experiments to test those possibilities .  
this investigative approach traditionally has five steps   (  one  )  making observations   (  two  )  asking questions   (  three  )  forming hypotheses ,  which are tentative answers to the questions   (  four  )  making predictions based on the hypotheses  and  (  five  )  testing the predictions by making additional observations or conducting experiments .  
after posing a question ,  a scientist often uses inductive logic to propose a tentative answer .  
inductive logic involves taking observations or facts and formulating a new proposition that is compatible with those observations or facts .  
such a tentative proposition is a hypothesis  ( plural hypotheses )  .  
for example ,  in the opener to this chapter ,  you learned that rachael bay observed corals growing in pools that reached temperatures known to kill corals .  
she formulated two hypotheses  
the populations of corals in the warm pools have evolved genetic differences that enable them to survive heat stress  ( adaptations )  ,  or 
individual corals have the ability to adjust physiologically to different thermal conditions  ( acclimation )  .  
rachael and her colleagues conducted experiments and made observations to test these hypotheses .  
how do scientists design experiments to test hypotheses ?  
the next step in the scientific method is to apply a different form of logic   deductive logic   that starts with a statement believed to be true  ( the hypothesis )  and then goes on to predict what facts would also have to be true to be compatible with that statement .  
rachael   s team tested their hypotheses by measuring how corals from the warm and cool pools responded to laboratory experiments that simulated the heat - stress conditions that occurred sometimes in the warm pools .  
they predicted that the cool - pool corals would bleach at higher rates under the experimental conditions than the warm - pool corals would .  
that experiment revealed differences between the two populations ,  but did not reveal whether the differences were a result of long - term evolutionary changes in the populations  ( adaptations )  or short - term acclimation of individuals to their current environments .  
the researchers therefore looked for genetic differences in the corals living in the warm and cool pools  ( adaptations )  .  
they also looked for differences in gene expression patterns when the corals were transplanted to different environments  ( acclimation )  .  
did the two populations have fundamental genetic differences ,  or did the environments they lived in stimulate different patterns of gene expression and therefore physiological acclimation ?  
once predictions are made from a hypothesis ,  experiments can be designed to test those predictions .  
the most informative experiments are those that have the ability to show that the prediction is wrong .  
if the prediction is wrong ,  the hypothesis must be questioned ,  modified ,  or rejected .  
there are two general types of experiments ,  both of which compare data from different groups or samples  
controlled experiments manipulate one factor of interest while holding other variables constant as a means of testing the influence of the manipulated variable .  
comparative experiments compare data gathered from different populations that differ in multiple ,  unknown ways .  
rachael bay and her colleagues conducted both types of experiments ,  to reveal genetic differences between the coral populations as well as their abilities to acclimate to different temperature environments .  
in a controlled experiment ,  we predict on the basis of our hypothesis that some critical factor ,  or variable ,  has an effect on the phenomenon we are investigating .  
we devise some method to manipulate only that variable in an    experimental   ?  group and compare the resulting data with data from an unmanipulated    control   ?  group .  
if the predicted difference occurs ,  we then apply statistical tests to ascertain the probability that the manipulation caused the difference  ( as opposed to the difference being the result of random chance )  .  
investigating life  corals in hot water describes a controlled experiment examining the effect of pool of origin on the response of corals to heat stress done by rachael bay and other members of the palumbi laboratory .  
a good controlled experiment is not easy to design because biological variables are so interrelated that it is sometimes difficult to alter just one .  
in this experiment ,  the controlled variable was whether the experimental corals came from the cool - pool or the warm - pool environment .  
they were then subjected to the same thermal stresses and their responses measured as extent of bleaching .  
the control groups were corals not exposed to the thermal stress protocol .  
a comparative experiment starts with the prediction that there will be a difference between samples or groups based on the hypothesis .  
unlike in a controlled experiment ,  we cannot control all the variables in a comparative experiment  often we cannot even identify all the variables involved .  
we are simply gathering and comparing data from different sample groups .  
rachael and her colleagues did a comparative experiment in addition to the controlled experiment shown in investigating life  corals in hot water .  
they analyzed and compared the genetic makeup of corals taken from the warm and cool pools .  
whether we do comparative or controlled experiments ,  we have to decide whether there is a real difference between the samples ,  individuals ,  groups ,  or populations in the study .  
how do we decide whether a measured difference is enough to support or falsify a hypothesis ?  
in other words ,  how do we decide in an unbiased ,  objective way that the measured difference is significant ?  
significance is measured with statistical methods .  
random variation is almost always present in any set of measurements .  
statistical tests calculate the probability that the differences observed in an experiment could be due to random variation .  
the results of statistical tests are therefore probabilities .  
a statistical test starts with a null hypothesis   the premise that observed differences are the result of random variation that arises from drawing two finite samples from the same population .  
when quantified observations ,  or data ,  are collected ,  statistical methods are applied to those data to see if there is sufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis .  
investigatinglife 
corals in hot water 
experiment 
original paper  palumbi ,  s .  r .  ,  d .  j .  barshis ,  n .  traylor - knowles and r .  a .  bay .   two  zero  one  four  .  
mechanisms of reef coral resistance to future climate change .  
science  three  four  four    eight  nine  five     eight  nine  eight  .  
rachael bay and her colleagues did a controlled experiment by bringing corals from the warm and the cool tidal pools into the laboratory and then subjecting them to cycles of heat stress that simulated the conditions that sometimes occurred in the warm tidal pools .  
the outcome measure was bleaching   the loss of photosynthetic symbionts  ( dinoflagellates )  from the coral bodies .  
hypothesis  heat stress results in coral bleaching ,  but corals from warm pools are less subject to bleaching under heat stress than are corals from cool pools .  
method 
transplant corals from warm and cool pools into laboratory aquaria maintained at a safe temperature .  
subject experimental corals to heat stress  ( the experimental condition )  by simulating the daily temperature cycle in the warm pools .  
measure coral bleaching  ( the dependent variable )  as the ratio of chlorophyll  ( the photosynthetic pigment of the symbionts )  in the corals exposed to heat stress versus in the controls in non - stressed conditions .  
a ratio of less than  one  .  zero  indicates higher bleaching in the heat - stressed corals than in the controls .  
results corals from both cool pools and warm pools exhibited higher bleaching under heat stress than controls did ,  but the cool - pool corals showed higher average levels of bleaching than the warm - pool corals did .  
 ( you will calculate the statistical significance of this difference in the following work with the data exercise .   )  
conclusion  the warm - pool corals showed lower effects of heat stress than the cool - pool corals did ,  although both populations showed increased bleaching under heat stress .  
the difference in the populations could be explained either by genetic adaptation to heat stress in the populations of warm - pool corals or by physiological acclimatization of individuals exposed to warm - pool conditions ,  or by some combination of the two .  
work with the data 
the bar graph in the results section of the experiment shows that both cool - pool corals and warm - pool corals showed increased levels of bleaching under heat stress ,  relative to controls .  
it also shows that the cool - pool corals showed greater relative bleaching under heat stress than did the warm - pool corals .  
but how do we know that these differences are greater than would be expected if the variation within and between samples represents nothing more than random variation ?  
here we will use some simple tests to see if the differences measured are significant  ( unlikely due to random variation )  .  
average chlorophyll ratio cool - pool corals warm - pool corals  zero  .  zero   zero   zero   zero  .  one   zero   zero   zero  .  two   one   zero   zero  .  three   one   zero   zero  .  four   four   zero   zero  .  five   seven   zero   zero  .  six   one   zero   zero  .  seven   one   one   zero  .  eight   two   three   zero  .  nine   zero   three   one  .  zero   zero   one  
questions 
prepare a bar graph based on these data .  
display the chlorophyll ratios on the x axis ,  and show the number of corals that exhibited each ratio on the y axis .  
first ,  let   s consider if there is a significant effect of heat stress in each of the two groups .  
at the outset we assume that there is no effect of heat stress in either group   this is called our null hypothesis  ( h zero  )  .  
we use statistical tests to decide if we can reject the null hypothesis and conclude that there is an effect of heat stress .  
if the null hypothesis is true ,  then we would expect that any differences in chlorophyll levels between control and experimental populations are due to random variation ,  and so we would expect the chlorophyll ratios to be greater than  one  .  zero  as often as they are less than  one  .  zero  .  
in other words ,  the expected distribution of values  and lt   one  and  and gt   one  is like the expected distribution of heads and tails in a coin toss .  
let   s first consider the cool - pool corals .  
there are  one  seven  samples ,  and all  one  seven  had chlorophyll ratios  and lt   one  .  zero  .  
the probability of this happening at random is the same as getting  one  seven  heads in  one  seven  flips of a fair coin  ( by a    fair coin   ?  we mean the probability of heads in one flip =  zero  .  five  )  .  
using this criterion ,  calculate the probability of the null hypothesis  ( h zero   no effect of heat stress on bleaching )  for each of the two populations .  
now let   s consider if there is a significant difference in the level of bleaching in the cool - pool versus the warm - pool corals .  
our null hypothesis in this case is that the levels of bleaching are the same in both groups .  
if the null hypothesis is true ,  then we would expect  ( on average )  the same distribution of chlorophyll ratios in the samples of both groups .  
from the results section in the experiment ,  we see that the average chlorophyll ratio observed in the cool - pool samples is  zero  .  five  ,  and the average chlorophyll ratio observed in the warm - pool samples is  zero  .  eight  five  .  
would we expect a difference this great if the distributions of the two samples were drawn from the same underlying distribution of values ?  
to find out ,  write each of the  two  five  observed chlorophyll ratios  ( from both groups )  on an index card .  
thoroughly mix and shuffle the cards to randomize their order ,  and then deal them into two groups of the same size as the cool - pool samples  (  one  seven  )  and warm - pool samples  (  eight  )  .  
calculate the average ratios in these randomized samples .  
repeat this procedure or combine the results of your randomization test with those of other students in your class .  
how often do you see a difference as great as the observed difference in the two samples  (  zero  .  eight  five     zero  .  five  ,  or a difference of  zero  .  three  five  )  ?  
what do these results suggest about the possible response of coral populations in different environments to ocean warming ?  
a similar work with the data exercise may be assigned in launchpad .  
more specifically ,  statistical methods tell us the probability of obtaining the same results by chance even if the null hypothesis were true .  
we need to eliminate ,  insofar as possible ,  the chance that any differences showing up in the data are merely the result of random variation in the samples tested .  
scientists generally conclude that the differences they measure are significant if statistical tests show that the probability of error  ( that is ,  the probability that a difference as large as the one observed could be obtained by mere chance )  is  five  percent or lower .  
they often use more stringent criteria for rejecting the null hypothesis ,  however ,  depending on the consequences of accepting a wrong hypothesis .  
appendix b of this book offers a short primer on statistical methods to which you can refer as you analyze data that will be presented throughout the text .  
all life is related by descent from a common ancestor ,  shares a genetic code ,  and consists of similar biochemical building blocks .  
therefore knowledge gained from investigations of one type of organism can ,  with thought and care ,  be generalized to other organisms .  
biologists use model systems for research ,  knowing that they can extend their findings from such systems to other organisms .  
for example ,  our basic understanding of the chemical reactions in cells came from research on bacteria but is applicable to all cells ,  including those of humans .  
similarly ,  the biochemistry of photosynthesis   the process by which all green plants use sunlight to produce biological molecules   was worked out largely from experiments on chlorella ,  a unicellular green alga .  
much of what we know about the genes that control plant development is the result of work on arabidopsis thaliana ,  a relative of the mustard plant .  
knowledge about how animals ,  including humans ,  develop has come from work on sea urchins ,  frogs ,  chickens ,  roundworms ,  mice ,  and fruit flies .  
being able to generalize from model systems is a powerful tool in biology .  
science is a unique human endeavor that has certain standards of practice .  
other areas of scholarship share with science the practice of making observations and asking questions ,  but scientists are distinguished by what they do with their observations ,  how they frame their questions ,  and how they determine their answers .  
quantifiable data ,  subjected to appropriate statistical analysis ,  are critical in evaluating hypotheses .  
the investigating life boxes and the work with the data exercises you will find throughout this book are intended to reinforce this way of thinking .  
scientific observation ,  hypothesis generation ,  and experimental testing constitute the most powerful approach humans have devised for learning about the world and how it works .  
scientific explanations for natural processes are objective and reliable because a hypothesis must be testable and a hypothesis must have the potential of being rejected by direct observations and experiments .  
scientists must clearly describe the methods they use to test hypotheses so that other scientists can repeat their results .  
not all experiments are repeated ,  but surprising or controversial results are always subjected to independent verification .  
scientists worldwide share this process of testing and rejecting hypotheses ,  contributing to a common body of scientific knowledge .  
if you understand the methods of science ,  you can distinguish science from non - science .  
art ,  music ,  and literature all contribute to the quality of human life ,  but they are not science .  
they do not use scientific methods to establish what is fact .  
religion is not science ,  although religions have historically attempted to explain natural events ranging from unusual weather patterns to crop failures to human diseases .  
most such phenomena that at one time were mysterious can now be explained in terms of scientific principles .  
fundamental tenets of religious faith ,  such as the existence of a supreme deity or deities ,  cannot be confirmed or refuted by experimentation and are thus outside the realm of science .  
the power of science derives from strict objectivity and absolute dependence on evidence based on reproducible and quantifiable observations .  
a religious or spiritual explanation of a natural phenomenon may be coherent and satisfying for the person holding that view ,  but it is not testable and therefore it is not science .  
to invoke a supernatural explanation  ( such as a    creator   ?  or    intelligent designer   ?  with no known bounds )  is to depart from the world of science .  
science does not necessarily say that religious beliefs are wrong  they are simply not part of the world of science and are untestable using scientific methods .  
science describes how the world works .  
it is silent on the question of how the world    ought to be .    ?  
many scientific advances that contribute to human welfare also raise major ethical issues .  
recent developments in genetics and developmental biology may enable us to select the sex of our children ,  to use stem cells to repair our bodies ,  and to modify the human genome .  
although scientific knowledge may enable us to do these things ,  science cannot tell us whether or not we should do so ,  or if we choose to do them ,  how we should regulate them .  
such issues are as crucial to human society as the science itself ,  and a responsible scientist does not lose sight of these questions or neglect the contributions of the humanities and social sciences in attempting to come to grips with them .  
 one  .  two  recap 
scientific methods of inquiry start with the formulation of hypotheses based on observations and data .  
comparative and controlled experiments are carried out to test hypotheses .  
statistics are essential for drawing conclusions from the data obtained in experiments .  
because organisms can be compared through their evolutionary relationships ,  the results of experiments can frequently be generalized to apply to other species .  
learning outcomes 
you should be able to  
explain the roles of inductive logic and deductive logic in scientific inquiry .  
describe how a controlled experiment is designed .  
differentiate between controlled experiments and comparative experiments .  
explain why model organisms are used in biological research .  
what is the relationship between a hypothesis and an experiment ?  
what is controlled in a controlled experiment ?  
what features characterize questions that can be answered using a comparative approach rather than through a controlled experiment ?  
why is it often possible to generalize the results of biological research on one species to very different species ?  
the vast body of scientific knowledge accumulated over centuries of human civilization allows us to understand and manipulate aspects of the natural world in ways that no other species can .  
these abilities present us with challenges ,  opportunities ,  and above all ,  responsibilities .  
chapter  one  continues with 
 one  .  three  understanding biology is important for health ,  well - being ,  and public - policy decisions 
modern agriculture depends on biology 
biology is the basis of medical practice 
biology can inform public policy 
biology is crucial for understanding ecosystems 
biodiversity helps us understand ,  enjoy ,  and appreciate our world 
human beings exist in and depend on a world of living organisms .  
the oxygen we breathe is produced by the photosynthetic activity of countless billions of individual organisms .  
the food that fuels our bodies comes from the tissues of other living organisms .  
the fuels that power our cars ,  trucks ,  and planes are carbon molecules produced by living organisms   mostly millions of years ago .  
inside and out ,  our bodies are covered in complex communities of living unicellular organisms .  
some help us be healthy ,  but others can invade our bodies and cause mild to serious diseases ,  or even death .  
these interactions with other species are not limited to humans .  
ecosystems depend on thousands of complex interactions among the millions of species that inhabit earth .  
understanding biological principles is essential for us to lead healthy productive lives and to be good stewards of our planet .  
focus your learning 
biology contributes many things to society .  
agriculture represents some of the earliest human applications of biological principles .  
beginning about  one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  years ago ,  humans began to cultivate and harvest grains .  
it is probable that even in those early times farmers selected the most productive or otherwise favorable plants and animals to use as seed stock for propagation ,  and over generations farmers continued and refined these practices .  
by  one  nine  six  zero  ,  the worldwide yield of food grains reached a billion tons ,  but human population growth outpaced agricultural productivity and starvation was common in developing countries .  
catastrophic famine was predicted for the  one  nine  seven  zero s .  
in response to those predictions ,  developed countries initiated huge efforts to produce genetically improved ,  higher - yielding food grain varieties .  
these highly successful research programs resulted in what has been called the green revolution ,  and by the year  two  zero  zero  zero  the worldwide yield of food grains ,  which make up about  five  zero  percent of the calories in the human diet ,  reached  two  billion tons .  
increasing knowledge of plant and animal biology has transformed agriculture in many ways and has resulted in huge boosts in food production .  
figure  one  .  one  three  a green revolution 
a new threat to agriculture and the world food supply is global climate change .  
some regions are becoming wetter and others drier ,  and those changes affect traditional agricultures .  
an example is rice ,  which normally grows in shallow water in rice paddies  ( figure  one  .  one  three  )  .  
but ,  common rice varieties cannot survive complete submergence for more than a few days ,  and are therefore killed by flooding caused by too much rain .  
in india and bangladesh alone ,  annual flooding can destroy about  four  million tons of rice ,  enough to feed  three  zero  million people .  
in recent years plant geneticists pam ronald ,  david mackill ,  and their colleagues at the university of california at davis have discovered a single gene from an ancient variety of rice that when genetically engineered into the current rice varieties makes them capable of surviving total submergence for many days .  
advances such as this may help save the benefits of the green revolution from the new problems generated by global climate change .  
over the past few decades ,  detailed knowledge of the genomes of many domestic species and the development of technology for directly recombining genes have allowed biologists to develop new breeds and strains of animals ,  plants ,  and fungi of agricultural interest .  
new strains of crop plants are being developed that are resistant to pests or tolerant of drought or ,  in the case of rice ,  flooding .  
moreover ,  understanding evolutionary theory allows biologists to devise strategies for the application of pesticides that minimize the evolution of pest resistance .  
and better understanding of plant   fungus relationships results in better plant health and higher productivity .  
these are just a few of the many ways that biology continues to inform and improve agricultural practice .  
people have speculated about the causes of diseases and searched for methods to combat them since ancient times .  
long before the microbial causes of many diseases were known ,  people recognized that infections could be passed from one person to another ,  and the isolation of infected persons has been practiced as long as written records have been available .  
modern biological research informs us about how living organisms work ,  and about why they develop the problems and infections that we call disease .  
in addition to diseases caused by infectious organisms ,  we now know that many diseases are genetic   meaning that variants of genes in our genomes cause particular problems in the way we function .  
developing appropriate treatments or cures for diseases depends on understanding the origin ,  basis ,  and effects of these diseases ,  as well as understanding the consequences of any changes we make .  
for example ,  the recent resurgence of tuberculosis is the result of the evolution of bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics .  
dealing with future tuberculosis epidemics will require understanding aspects of molecular biology ,  physiology ,  microbial ecology ,  and evolution   in other words ,  many of the general principles of modern biology .  
figure  one  .  one  four  medical applications of biology improve human health 
many of the microbial organisms that are periodically epidemic in human populations have short generation times and high mutation rates .  
for example ,  we need yearly vaccines for flu because of the high rate of evolution of influenza viruses ,  the causative agent of flu .  
evolutionary principles help us understand how influenza viruses are changing ,  and can even help us predict which strains of influenza virus are likely to lead to future flu epidemics .  
this medical understanding   which combines an application of molecular biology ,  evolutionary theory ,  and basic principles of ecology   allows medical researchers to develop effective vaccines and other strategies for the control of major epidemics  ( figure  one  .  one  four  )  .  
thanks to the deciphering of genomes and our newfound ability to manipulate them ,  vast new possibilities now exist for controlling human diseases and increasing agricultural productivity   but these capabilities raise ethical and policy issues .  
how much and in what ways should we tinker with the genes of humans and other species ?  
does it matter whether the genomes of our crop plants and domesticated animals are changed by traditional methods of controlled breeding or by the biotechnology of gene transfer ?  
what rules should govern the release of genetically modified organisms into the environment ?  
science alone cannot provide all the answers ,  but wise policy decisions must be based on accurate scientific information .  
figure  one  .  one  five  bluefin tuna do not recognize boundaries  ( a )  
marine biologist barbara block attaches computerized data - recording tracking tags to a live bluefin tuna before returning it to the atlantic ocean ,  where its travels will be monitored .  
 ( b )  tracking data from eastern  ( mediterranean )  and western  ( gulf of mexico )  breeding populations of bluefin tuna .  
at one time commercial fishing regulatory agencies assumed that bluefins from western -  and eastern - breeding populations fed on their respective sides of the atlantic .  
to speed recovery of the endangered western population ,  fishing quotas were created for each side of the mid - atlantic ocean  ( dashed line )  .  
q  based on dr .  block   s data ,  does it seem likely that fishing quotas based on the mid - atlantic boundary line would protect the western - breeding population of bluefin tuna ?  
biologists are increasingly called on to advise government agencies concerning the laws ,  rules ,  and regulations by which society deals with the increasing number of challenges that have a biological basis .  
as an example of the value of scientific knowledge for the assessment and formulation of public policy ,  consider a management problem .  
scientists and fishermen have long known that atlantic bluefin tuna  ( thunnus thynnus )  have a western breeding ground in the gulf of mexico and an eastern breeding ground in the mediterranean sea  ( figure  one  .  one  five  )  .  
overfishing led to declining numbers of bluefin tuna ,  especially in the western - breeding populations ,  to the point of these populations being endangered .  
initially it was assumed by scientists ,  fishermen ,  and policy makers alike that the eastern and western populations had geographically separate feeding grounds as well as separate breeding grounds .  
acting on this assumption ,  an international commission drew a line down the middle of the atlantic ocean and established strict fishing quotas on the western side of the line ,  with the intent of allowing the western population to recover .  
modern tracking data ,  however ,  revealed that in fact the eastern and western bluefin populations mix freely on their feeding grounds across the entire north atlantic   a swath of ocean that includes the most heavily fished waters in the world .  
tuna caught on the eastern side of the line could just as likely be from the western - breeding population as the eastern  thus the established policy could not achieve its intended goal .  
scientific knowledge can make significant contributions to the formulation of wise public policy ,  but economic and political factors frequently outweigh scientific recommendations .  
it is particularly lamentable when solid scientific evidence is discounted or ignored because it is inconvenient .  
an example is the rejection by many policy makers of strong evidence for and scientific consensus on global climate change .  
figure  one  .  one  six  a warmer world 
earth has been changing since its formation and continues to change .  
human activity ,  however ,  is resulting in an unprecedented rate of change in the world   s ecosystems .  
for example ,  the mining and consumption of fossil fuels is releasing massive quantities of carbon dioxide into earth   s atmosphere .  
this anthropogenic  ( human - generated )  increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide is largely responsible for the rapid rate of global climate warming recorded over the last  five  zero  years  ( figure  one  .  one  six  )  .  
our use of natural resources is putting stress on the ability of earth   s ecosystems to continue to produce the goods and services on which our society depends .  
human activities are changing global climates at an unprecedented rate and are leading to the extinctions of large numbers of species  ( such as the reef - building corals featured in this chapter )  .  
the modern ,  warmer world is also experiencing the spread of new diseases and the resurgence of old ones .  
biological knowledge is vital for determining the causes of these changes and for devising policies to deal with them .  
figure  one  .  one  seven  exploring life on earth 
beyond issues of policy and pragmatism lies the human    need to know .    ?  
most people are fascinated by the richness and diversity of life and want to know more about organisms ,  how they function ,  and how they interact  ( figure  one  .  one  seven  )  .  
for the biologist ,  biodiversity offers an inexhaustible source of new questions and opportunities for new investigations and experiments .  
new discoveries and greater knowledge generate questions no one thought to ask before .  
science is a never - ending quest .  
apart from scientific endeavors ,  biodiversity enriches our lives .  
you may be an avid birdwatcher ,  or enjoy gardening ,  or seek out particular species if you hunt or fish .  
some people observe or collect butterflies ,  or mushrooms ,  or other groups of plants and animals .  
displays of spring wildflowers bring out throngs of human viewers .  
hiking and camping in natural areas full of diverse species are activities enjoyed by millions .  
learning about biology greatly increases our enjoyment of the world around us .  
investigatinglife 
how might experiments on heat stress in corals be used to predict the response of corals to global warming ?  
how can we put studies like the one conducted by rachael and her colleagues to use ?  
one way is to use the information to make predictions .  
as we and # eight  two  one  seven  ve noted in this chapter ,  abundant evidence shows that earth and # eight  two  one  seven  s climate is warming as a result of increased levels of co two  in our atmosphere .  
can corals survive this global warming ,  or will they all lose their photosynthetic dinoflagellates and die ?  
the experiments and observations done by rachael and # eight  two  one  seven  s team suggest that higher temperatures will lead to increased coral bleaching ,  but that some short - term acclimation of individuals can occur .  
if global warming is slowed sufficiently ,  longer - term processes of evolution will act on the surviving corals that have genetic adaptations that increase their tolerance to warmer waters .  
this selection process should result in genetic changes in populations ,  which will allow more corals to survive .  
how well acclimation and adaptation can work to ensure the survival of corals depends on many factors ,  including the average life span of individual corals ,  the rate of global warming ,  and the availability of alternative heat - resistant dinoflagellates .  
the basic research conducted by rachael and # eight  two  one  seven  s team is a first ,  but critical ,  step in predicting the future response of corals to global warming .  
future directions 
as described ,  the corals in rachael and # eight  two  one  seven  s study have certain species of dinoflagellates growing within their cells .  
the corals provide a suitable environment for the dinoflagellates and the dinoflagellates provide nutrients for the corals .  
such a mutually beneficial relationship is called symbiosis .  
the bleaching response to high temperature implies dysfunction in the dinoflagellates ,  leading to their expulsion from the corals .  
understanding thermal tolerance of the corals therefore requires greater understanding of genetic changes and acclimation of the symbiotic dinoflagellates .  
other studies have shown that some corals contain multiple strains of dinoflagellates ,  and these strains change in abundance when the corals are grown at different temperatures ,  perhaps contributing to thermal tolerance .  
there are many species and strains of dinoflagellates ,  but coral species usually are associated with specific species .  
future research could focus on thermal tolerance of dinoflagellates to identify genes that confer thermal tolerance .  
additional research could be to find ways of transferring those genes into other species of dinoflagellates or to find ways of infecting corals endangered by rising temperatures with strains of temperature - tolerant symbionts .  
 one  .  three  recap 
biology informs us about the structure ,  processes ,  and interactions of the living organisms that make up our world .  
informed decisions about food and energy production ,  health ,  and our environment depend on biological knowledge .  
biology also addresses the human need to understand the world around us ,  and helps us appreciate the diverse planet we call home .  
learning outcomes 
you should be able to  
explain the relevance of biology to people   s daily lives .  
apply biological knowledge to answer a question that pertains to everyday life .  
describe an example of how modern biology is applied to agriculture .  
discuss an example of a biological problem that is directly related to global climate change .  
why are some antibiotics no longer as effective for treating bacterial diseases as they were when these drugs were introduced ?  
this chapter has provided a brief roadmap of the rest of the book .  
thinking about the principles outlined here may help you clarify and make sense of the pages of detailed description to come .  
chapter  one  continues with 
chapter summary 
 one  .  one  
living organisms share similarities and a common origin 
biology is the scientific study of organisms ,  including their characteristics ,  evolution ,  functions ,  and interactions .  
all living organisms are related to one another through common descent .  
shared features among organisms support the concept of a common ancestry for all life on earth .  
these features include  a common set of chemical building blocks ,  a nearly universal genetic code ,  sequence similarities across fundamental genes ,  and similarities in cellular structure and function .  
cells evolved early in the history of life .  
cellular specialization allowed multicellular organisms to increase in size and diversity .  
review figure  one  .  two  
photosynthesis provided a means of capturing energy directly from sunlight ,  and over time changed earth   s atmosphere .  
the instructions for a cell are contained in its genome ,  which consists of dna molecules made up of sequences of nucleotides .  
specific segments of dna called genes contain the information the cell uses to make proteins through processes of transcription and translation .  
review figure  one  .  six  .  
evolution   change in the genetic makeup of biological populations through time   is a fundamental principle of life .  
populations evolve by means of several different processes ,  including natural selection ,  which is responsible for the diversity of adaptations found in living organisms .  
biologists use fossils ,  anatomical similarities and differences ,  and molecular comparisons of genomes to reconstruct the history of life .  
life is divided into two major lineages   bacteria ,  archaea .  
one lineage of archaea became specialized as eukarya ,  which includes all multicellular organisms .  
review figure  one  .  nine  
life can be studied at different levels of organization within a biological hierarchy .  
the specialized cells of multicellular organisms are organized into tissues ,  organs ,  and organ systems .  
living organisms ,  whether unicellular or multicellular ,  must regulate their internal environment to maintain homeostasis ,  the range of physical conditions necessary for their survival and function .  
individual organisms form populations and interact with other organisms of their own and other species .  
the populations that live and interact in a defined area form a community ,  and communities together with their abiotic  ( nonliving )  environment constitute an ecosystem .  
review figure  one  .  one  zero  ,  activity  one  .  one   one  .  two  
biologists investigate life through experiments that test hypotheses 
scientific methods combine observation ,  the gathering of information  ( data )  ,  experimentation ,  and the application of logic to study the natural world .  
many scientific investigations involve five steps  making observations ,  asking questions ,  forming hypotheses ,  making predictions ,  and testing those predictions .  
review figure  one  .  one  two  
hypotheses are tentative explanations of observations or answers to questions .  
predictions made on the basis of a hypothesis are tested with additional observations and experiments .  
the two general types of experiments are comparative and controlled .  
review investigating life  corals in hot water ,  animation  one  .  one  
quantifiable data are critical in evaluating hypotheses .  
statistical methods are applied to quantitative data to establish whether the differences observed could be the result of chance .  
these methods start with the null hypothesis that there are no differences apart from random variation .  
see appendix b 
biological knowledge obtained from a model system may be generalized to other species .   one  .  three  
understanding biology is important for health ,  well - being ,  and public - policy decisions 
application of biological knowledge is responsible for vastly increased agricultural production .  
understanding and treating human disease requires integrating a wide range of biological principles ,  from molecular biology to cell biology ,  physiology ,  evolution ,  and ecology .  
biologists are often called on to advise government agencies on the solutions to important problems that have a biological component .  
biology is increasingly important for understanding how organisms interact in a rapidly changing world .  
biology helps us understand ,  appreciate ,  and enjoy the diverse living world .  
go to learningcurve  ( in launchpad )  for dynamic quizzing that helps you solidify your understanding of this chapter .  
learningcurve adapts to your responses ,  giving you the practice you need to master each key concept .  
apply what you   ve learned 
review 
 one  .  one  living organisms have influenced the history of the planet earth .  
 one  .  one  major characteristics are shared among all living things .  
 one  .  one  biological populations change over time .  
 one  .  two  scientific methods produce biological knowledge .  
 one  .  three  biology contributes many things to society .  
original paper  lindsey ,  h .  a .  ,  j .  gallie ,  s .  taylor ,  and b .  kerr .   two  zero  one  three  .  
evolutionary rescue from extinction is contingent on a lower rate of environmental change .  
nature  four  nine  four    four  six  three     four  six  seven  .  
as many as half of the antibiotics that are used in human medicine may be incorrectly prescribed or completely unnecessary .  
antibiotics are also given to food animals in an effort to prevent disease .  
a general overuse of these drugs has contributed to a significant increase in drug - resistant pathogens .  
if you were raising animals for food ,  what evidence could you use to decide if it is better to treat the animals routinely with a low dose of antibiotics or wait until symptoms occur and then administer a high dose ?  
researchers used serial transfer to propagate  one  ,  two  five  five  populations of the bacterium escherichia coli in an environment in which concentrations of the antibiotic rifampicin were increased over time .  
each population began in liquid medium containing no antibiotic and ended at the same maximum concentration of rifampicin .  
during the serial transfers ,  populations received one of three treatments .  
populations designated as    sudden   ?  were exposed to the maximum rifampicin concentration immediately after their first transfer and continued to receive this maximum concentration in each subsequent transfer .  
populations designated as    moderate   ?  were exposed to moderately increasing concentrations of rifampicin  the maximum concentration of rifampicin was reached halfway through the transfers .  
populations designated as    gradual   ?  were exposed to more gradual increases of rifampicin  the maximum concentration of rifampicin was reached at the very end of the transfers .  
figure a summarizes the treatment conditions and figure b shows the percentage of populations in each treatment that survived the experiment .  
the number above each bar shows how many of the initial  one  ,  two  five  five  populations underwent each type of treatment .  
questions 
 one  .  
what do the results of this investigation show about the effects of sudden versus gradual environmental changes on the evolution of biological populations ?  
explain how these results help explain extinctions and adaptations of populations in changing environments .  
 two  .  
in what ways does this investigation model events that shaped the history of life on earth ?  
 three  .  
explain what makes it reasonable for us to infer that similar results would be observed if this investigation were repeated using a plant ,  insect ,  or mammal population in a changing environment .  
 four  .  
identify this investigation as either a comparative or a controlled study .  
design an experiment of the other type of study that tests the hypothesis that organisms can develop adaptations to changing surroundings .  
explain your reasoning .  
 five  .  
suppose a research organization has requested funding for long - term research to develop a continuous pipeline of new antibiotics over the next  five  zero  years .  
could the organization use results from this investigation to support their request ?  
explain .  
go to launchpad for the ebook ,  learningcurve ,  animations ,  activities ,  flashcards ,  and additional resources and assignments .  
end of chapter  one  .  
the atoms in water can become part of the bodies of animals that drink it .  
key concepts  
atomic structure explains the properties of matter 
atoms bond to form molecules 
atoms change partners in chemical reactions 
water is critical for life 
investigatinglife 
tracking a dinosaur 
 and #x two  zero  one c you are what you eat and # eight  two  one  two  and that applies to teeth and #x two  zero  one d  is a modification of a famous saying about body chemistry .  
one of the important atoms in organisms is oxygen  ( o )  ,  which is part of water  ( h two o )  .  
oxygen has two naturally occurring variants called isotopes  they have the same chemical properties but different weights because their nuclei have different numbers of neutrons .  
both isotopes of o are incorporated into the bodies of animals that consume the isotopes in water and food .  
the hard surface of teeth ,  called enamel ,  is made up largely of calcium phosphate ,  which contains oxygen atoms .  
the iso - topic composition of the oxygen in enamel varies depending on where an animal was living when the enamel was made .  
when water evaporates from the ocean ,  it forms clouds that move inland and release rain .  
water with the heavier isotope of o is heavier ,  and tends to fall more readily than water containing the lighter isotope .  
as a result ,  regions of the world that are closer to the ocean receive rain containing more heavy water than do regions farther away ,  and these differences are reflected in the bodies of animals that dwell in these regions .  
this property has been used to reveal an astounding fact about dinosaurs that lived in the great basins of southwestern north america about  one  five  zero  million years ago .  
camarasaurus was big and # eight  two  one  one  up to  two  five  meters long and weighing up to  four  five  metric tons .  
henry ficke from colorado college analyzed the oxygen isotopes in the enamel of camarasaurus fossils and found two kinds of teeth  some had the heavy oxygen content typical of rains and rocks in the basin region .  
but others ,  surprisingly ,  had a lower proportion of heavy oxygen ,  indicating that these animals had lived at higher elevations  three  zero  zero  km to the west .  
this indicated for the first time that dinosaurs migrated a long way from west to east .  
the reason for this migration is not clear .  
camarasaurus ate a plant - based diet ,  and perhaps the migration was directed at finding food .  
many biological phenomena are analyzed and understood in the context of chemistry .  
you will learn ,  for example ,  that adding even one atom to a large molecule can change its character and function .  
analyzing the isotopes in dinosaur teeth is but one example of how chemical analysis has led to advances in biological science .  
what insights into biological systems have been discovered through isotope analysis ?  
chapter  two  continues with 
 two  .  one   atomic structure explains the properties of matter 
what are atoms ?  
an element consists of only one kind of atom 
each element has a unique number of protons 
the number of neutrons differs among isotopes 
the behavior of electrons determines chemical bonding and geometry 
all matter is composed of atoms .  
atoms are tiny and # eight  two  one  two  more than a trillion  (  one  zero  one  two  )  of them could make up the period at the end of this sentence .  
atoms and their component particles have volume and mass ,  which are characteristics of all matter .  
mass is a measure of the quantity of matter present  the greater the mass ,  the greater the quantity of matter .  
atoms also have electric charges .  
focus your learning 
six elements  ( carbon ,  hydrogen ,  oxygen ,  nitrogen ,  phosphorus ,  and sulfur )  make up most of the matter found in living organisms .  
reactive atoms tend to gain or lose electrons from their valence  ( outer )  shell in order to achieve a full valence shell ,  because a full valence shell confers stability .  
the structure of an atom determines its properties .  
figure  two  .  one  the structure of an atom 
each atom consists of a dense ,  positively charged nucleus ,  around which one or more negatively charged electrons move  ( figure  two  .  one  )  .  
the nucleus contains one or more positively charged protons and may contain one or more neutrons with no electric charge .  
the mass of a proton serves as a standard unit of measure called the dalton  ( named after the english chemist john dalton )  .  
a single proton or neutron has a mass of about  one  dalton  ( da )  ,  which is  one  .  seven   and # two  one  five    one  zero  and # eight  two  one  one   two  four  grams  (  zero  .  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  one  seven  g )  ,  but an electron is even tinier at  nine   and # two  one  five    one  zero  and # eight  two  one  one   two  eight  g  (  zero  .  zero  zero  zero  five  da )  .  
because the mass of an electron is negligible compared with the mass of a proton or a neutron ,  the contribution of electrons to the mass of an atom can usually be ignored when measurements and calculations are made .  
it is electrons ,  however ,  that determine how atoms will combine with other atoms to form stable associations .  
each proton has a positive electric charge ,  defined as + one  unit of charge .  
an electron has a negative charge equal and opposite to that of a proton  (  and # eight  two  one  one   one  )  .  
the neutron ,  as its name suggests ,  is electrically neutral ,  so its charge is  zero  .  
charges that are different  ( + /  and # eight  two  one  one   )  attract each other ,  whereas charges that are alike  ( + / + ,   and # eight  two  one  one   /  and # eight  two  one  one   )  repel each other .  
generally ,  atoms are electrically neutral because the number of electrons in an atom equals the number of protons .  
an element is a pure substance that contains only one kind of atom .  
the element hydrogen consists only of hydrogen atoms  the element iron consists only of iron atoms .  
the atoms of each element have certain characteristics or properties that distinguish them from the atoms of other elements .  
these physical and chemical properties  ( how they interact with other atoms )  depend on the numbers of particles the atoms contain .  
there are  nine  four  elements in nature ,  and at least another  two  four  have been made in physics laboratories .  
about  nine  eight  percent of the tissue of every living organism  ( except in skeletons )  is composed of just six elements  carbon  ( symbol c )  hydrogen  ( h )  nitrogen  ( n )  oxygen  ( o )  phosphorus  ( p )  sulfur  ( s )  
the biological roles of these elements will be our major concern in this book ,  but other elements are found in living organisms as well .  
sodium and potassium ,  for example ,  are essential for nerve function  calcium can act as a biological signal  iodine is a component of a vital hormone  and magnesium is bound to chlorophyll in plants .  
an element differs from other elements by the number of protons in the nucleus of each of its atoms  the number of protons is designated the atomic number .  
this atomic number is unique to each element and does not change .  
the atomic number of helium is  two  ,  and an atom of helium always has two protons  the atomic number of oxygen is  eight  ,  and an atom of oxygen always has eight protons .  
since the number of protons  ( and electrons )  determines how an element behaves in chemical reactions ,  it is possible to arrange the elements in a table such that those with similar chemical properties are grouped together .  
this is the familiar periodic table you see in figure  two  .  two  .  
figure  two  .  two  the periodic table 
the periodic table groups all the elements according to their physical and chemical properties .  
elements  one     nine  four  occur in nature  elements with atomic numbers greater than  nine  four  were created in the laboratory .  
along with a definitive number of protons ,  every element except hydrogen has one or more neutrons in its nucleus .  
the mass number of an atom is the total number of protons and neutrons in its nucleus .  
the nucleus of a carbon atom contains six protons and six neutrons and has a mass number of  one  two  .  
oxygen has eight protons and eight neutrons and has a mass number of  one  six  .  
since the mass of an electron is negligible ,  the mass number is essentially the mass of the atom in daltons .  
by convention ,  we often print the symbol for an element with the atomic number at the lower left and the mass number at the upper left ,  both immediately preceding the symbol .  
thus hydrogen ,  carbon ,  and oxygen can be written as  one  one h ,   one  two  six c ,  and  one  six  eight o ,  respectively .  
in some elements ,  the number of neutrons in the atomic nucleus may vary .  
different isotopes of the same element have the same number of protons but different numbers of neutrons ,  as you saw in the story opening this chapter .  
many elements have several isotopes .  
generally ,  isotopes are formed when atoms combine and / or release particles  ( decay )  .  
the isotopes of hydrogen shown here have special names ,  but for most elements their isotopes do not have special names .  
the natural isotopes of carbon ,  for example ,  are  one  two c  ( six neutrons in the nucleus )  ,   one  three c  ( seven neutrons )  ,  and  one  four c  ( eight neutrons )  .  
note that all three  ( called carbon -  one  two  ,  carbon -  one  three  ,  and carbon -  one  four  )  have six protons ,  so they are all carbon .  
most carbon atoms are  one  two c ,  about  one  .  one  percent are  one  three c ,  and a tiny fraction are  one  four c .  
the carbon atoms that make up complex biological molecules are mostly  one  two c ,  but some are  one  three c .  
the ratio of  one  three c  one  two c varies with location and can be used to identify biological samples whose origin is not known  ( investigating life  determining beef source in big macs using isotope analysis )  .  
all carbon isotopes have virtually the same chemical reactivity ,  which is an important property for their use in experimental biology and medicine .  
an element   s atomic weight  ( or relative atomic mass )  is equivalent to the average of the mass numbers of a representative sample of atoms of that element ,  with all the isotopes in their normally occurring proportions .  
more precisely ,  an element   s atomic weight is defined as the ratio of the average mass per atom of the element to  one  /  one  two  of the mass of an atom of  one  two c .  
because it is a ratio ,  atomic weight is a dimensionless physical quantity and # eight  two  one  two  it is not expressed in units .  
the atomic weight of hydrogen ,  taking into account all of its isotopes and their typical abundances ,  is  one  .  zero  zero  seven  nine  four  .  
this number is fractional because it is the average of the contributing masses of all of the isotopes .  
this definition implies that in any given sample of hydrogen atoms of a particular element found on earth ,  the average composition of isotopes will be constant .  
but as you saw in the opening to this chapter ,  that is not necessarily so .  
some water has more of the heavy o isotopes .  
so chemists are now listing atomic weights as ranges ,  for example ,  h   one  .  zero  zero  seven  eight  four  and # eight  two  one  one   one  .  zero  zero  eight  one  one  .  
investigatinglife 
determining beef source in big macs using isotope analysis 
experiment 
original paper  martinelli ,  l .  ,  g .  nardoto ,  l .  chesson ,  f .  rinaldi ,  j .  p .  h . b .  ometto ,  t .  cerling and j .  ehleringer .   two  zero  one  one  .  
worldwide stable carbon and nitrogen isotopes of big mac patties  an example of a truly  and # eight  two  two  zero  glocal and # eight  two  two  one   food .  
food chemistry  one  two  seven    one  ,  seven  one  two  and # eight  two  one  one   one  ,  seven  one  eight  .  
the big mac hamburger can be purchased in  three  five  ,  zero  zero  zero  outlets in  one  two  zero  countries .  
the recipe for the big mac is virtually the same everywhere  it is claimed that the burger has the same quality meat and nutritional quality everywhere it is served .  
to investigate this claim ,  lesley chesson and james ehleringer at the university of utah compared the ratio of  one  three c  one  two c in big mac patties around the world to determine whether the meat had a local or a common source .  
beef cattle eat plant food ,  and carbon atoms from this food end up in meat .  
in some types of plants ,  the ratio of  one  three c  one  two c is higher than in others .  
depending on which type of plants the cattle consume ,  the beef will also have a different  one  three c  one  two c ratio .  
hypothesis   beef in big macs served in different countries comes from the same source .  
method 
results 
conclusion  the big mac burger patties in the two countries have a different isotopic ratio of  one  three c  one  two c atoms ,  which reflects local sources for the beef .  
the hypothesis is rejected .  
work with the data 
the experiment compared the meat in big macs served in  two  five  different countries by measuring the ratio of stable carbon isotopes  (  one  three c  one  two c )  in samples of ten beef patties from each country .  
the hypothesis was based on claims that the beef used in big macs comes from a single source ,  and that the  one  three c  one  two c ratio in patties found everywhere should thus be the same .  
table a shows the average the  one  three c  one  two c ratio for each of the  two  five  countries .  
a higher number means more of the rare ,  stable isotope  one  three c than of the much more common  one  two c .  
table a country  one  three c  one  two c ratioa country  one  three c  one  two c ratio country  one  three c  one  two c ratio all  one  five  .  eight  germany  two  one  .  seven  portugal  two  zero  .  seven  argentina  one  seven  .  two  hungary  two  two  .  zero  scotland  two  five  .  two  australia  one  nine  .  four  indonesia  one  nine  .  five  slovakia  two  one  .  zero  austria  two  two  .  zero  israel  two  zero  .  four  south africa  one  three  .  zero  brazil  one  one  .  one  japan  one  one  .  eight  spain  two  one  .  one  canada  two  one  .  six  malaysia  two  one  .  five  sweden  two  three  .  two  china  one  three  .  nine  mexico  one  three  .  nine  turkey  two  zero  .  five  england  two  five  .  four  netherlands  two  zero  .  seven  usa  one  four  .  five  france  two  one  .  eight  paraguay  one  two  .  one  uruguay  one  six  .  seven  
ameasured in parts per million atoms  (     one  zero  zero  )  .  
questions 
do the average local ratios differ from the  two  five  - country average ratio ?  
what statistical test would you perform to show that the differences between the individual country averages and the allcountries average are significant ?  
 ( refer to appendix b .  )  
the countries from which the hamburgers were analyzed are in different locations on earth .  
one way to compare locations is by geographic latitude .  
you may recall that in latitude ,   zero  degrees defines the equator and  nine  zero  degrees defines the poles .  
table b shows average  one  three c  one  two c ratios of big mac beef patties from different latitudes .  
plot the data on a graph of ratio versus latitude .  
what can you conclude from these data ?  
table b latitude  one  three c  one  two c ratioa  two  zero os and # eight  two  one  one   two  zero on  one  one  .  four   two  zero o and # eight  two  one  one   four  zero ob  one  five  .  three   four  zero o and # eight  two  one  one   six  zero ob  two  one  .  eight  
a average value measured in parts per million atoms  ( x  one  zero  zero  )  .  
b  two  zero os and # eight  two  one  one   four  zero os and  two  zero on and # eight  two  one  one   four  zero on   four  zero os and # eight  two  one  one   six  zero os and  four  zero on and # eight  two  one  one   six  zero on .  
a work with the data exercise that accompanies this figure may be assigned in launchpad .  
most isotopes are stable .  
however ,  some ,  called radioisotopes ,  are unstable and spontaneously give off energy in the form of     ( alpha )  ,      ( beta )  ,  or     ( gamma )  radiation from the atomic nucleus .  
known as radioactive decay ,  this release of energy transforms the original atom .  
the type of transformation varies depending on the radioisotope ,  but some transformations result in a different number of protons ,  so that the original atom becomes a different element .  
figure  two  .  three  tagging the brain 
q  how could this technique be used in the clinic ?  
scientists can detect released radiation from *radioisotopes .  
for instance ,  if you feed an earthworm food containing a radioisotope ,  you can follow the worm   s path through the soil by using a detector called a geiger counter .  
most atoms in living organisms are organized into stable associations called molecules .  
if a radioisotope is incorporated into a molecule ,  it acts as a tag or label ,  allowing a researcher or physician to track the molecule in an experiment or in the body  ( figure  two  .  three  )  .  
*connect the concepts radioisotopes are also used to analyze biochemical pathways  ( see key concept  one  zero  .  three  )  and to date fossils  ( see key concept  two  four  .  one  )  .  
although radioisotopes are useful in research and in medicine ,  even a low dose of the radiation they emit has the potential to damage molecules and cells .  
however ,  these damaging effects are sometimes used to our advantage  for example ,  the radiation from  six  zero co  ( cobalt -  six  zero  )  is used in medicine to kill cancer cells .  
the number of electrons in an atom determines how it will combine with other atoms .  
biologists are interested in how chemical changes take place in living cells .  
when considering atoms ,  they are concerned primarily with electrons because the behavior of electrons explains how chemical reactions occur .  
chemical reactions alter the atomic compositions of substances and thus alter their properties .  
reactions usually involve changes in the distribution of electrons between atoms .  
the location of a given electron in an atom at any given time is impossible to determine .  
we can only describe a volume of space within the atom where the electron is likely to be .  
the region of space where the electron is found at least  nine  zero  percent of the time is the electron   s orbital .  
orbitals have characteristic shapes and orientations ,  and a given orbital can be occupied by a maximum of two electrons .  
thus any atom larger than helium  ( atomic number  two  )  must have electrons in two or more orbitals .  
as we move from lighter to heavier atoms in the periodic table ,  the orbitals are filled in a specific sequence ,  in a series of what are known as electron shells ,  or energy levels ,  around the nucleus .  
first shell  the innermost electron shell consists of just one orbital .  
a hydrogen atom  (  one h )  has one electron in its first shell  helium  (  two he )  has two .  
atoms of all other elements have two or more shells to accommodate orbitals for additional electrons .  
second shell  the second shell contains four orbitals and hence holds up to eight electrons .  
additional shells  elements with more than ten electrons have three or more electron shells .  
the farther a shell is from the nucleus ,  the higher the energy level is for an electron occupying that shell .  
the s orbitals fill with electrons first ,  and their electrons have the lowest energy level .  
subsequent shells have different numbers of orbitals ,  but the outermost shells usually hold only eight electrons .  
in any atom ,  the outermost electron shell  ( the valence shell )  determines how the atom combines with other atoms and # eight  two  one  two  that is ,  how the atom behaves chemically .  
when a valence shell with four orbitals contains eight electrons ,  there are no unpaired electrons and the atom is stable and # eight  two  one  two  it is least likely to react with other atoms  ( figure  two  .  four  )  .  
examples of chemically stable elements are helium ,  neon ,  and argon .  
by contrast ,  atoms that have one or more unpaired electrons in their outer shells are capable of reacting with other atoms .  
figure  two  .  four  electron shells determine the reactivity of atoms each shell can hold a specific maximum number of electrons .  
going out from the nucleus ,  each shell must be filled before electrons can occupy the next shell .  
the energy level of an electron is higher in a shell farther from the nucleus .  
an atom with unpaired electrons in its outermost shell can react  ( bond )  with other atoms .  
note that the atoms in this figure are arranged similarly to their arrangement in the periodic table .  
atoms with unpaired electrons  ( i .  e .   ,  partially filled orbitals )  in their outermost electron shells are unstable and will undergo reactions in order to fill their outermost shells .  
reactive atoms can attain stability either by sharing electrons with other atoms or by losing or gaining one or more electrons .  
in either case ,  the atoms involved are bonded together into stable associations called molecules .  
the tendency of atoms to form stable molecules so that they have eight electrons in their outermost shells is known as the octet rule .  
many atoms in biologically important molecules and # eight  two  one  two  for example ,  carbon  ( c )  and nitrogen  ( n )  and # eight  two  one  two  follow this rule .  
an important exception is hydrogen  ( h )  ,  which attains stability when two electrons occupy its single shell  ( consisting of just one s orbital )  .  
 two  .  one  recap 
living organisms are composed of the same set of chemical elements as the rest of the universe .  
an atom consists of a nucleus of protons and neutrons and a characteristic configuration of electrons in orbitals around the nucleus .  
an atom   s chemical properties are determined by its atomic structure .  
learning outcomes 
you should be able to  
compare the elements found in living tissue with elements found in nonliving matter .  
explain the role that the outermost electron shell plays in determining how an atom may combine with other atoms .  
explain how elements can be grouped according to their chemical properties in a periodic fashion .  
describe how the configuration of the valence shell influences the placement of an element in the periodic table .  
how does bonding help a reactive atom achieve stability ?  
would you expect the elemental composition of earth and # eight  two  one  seven  s crust to be the same as that of the human body ?  
explain your answer .  
you have been introduced to the individual players on the biochemical stage and # eight  two  one  two  the atoms .  
we have shown how the number of unpaired electrons in an atom   s valence shell drives its    quest for stability .    ?  
next we will describe the different types of chemical bonds that can lead to stability and # eight  two  one  two  joining atoms together into molecular structures with hosts of different properties .  
chapter  two  continues with 
 two  .  two  atoms bond to form molecules 
covalent bonds consist of shared pairs of electrons 
strength and stability 
orientation 
multiple covalent bonds 
unequal sharing of electrons 
ionic attractions form by electrical attraction 
hydrogen bonds may form within or between molecules with polar covalent bonds 
hydrophobic interactions bring together nonpolar molecules 
van der waals forces involve contacts between atoms 
a chemical bond is an attractive force that links two atoms together in a molecule .  
there are several kinds of chemical bonds  ( table  two  .  one  )  .  
in this section we will begin with covalent bonds ,  the strong bonds that result from the sharing of electrons .  
next we will examine ionic attractions ,  which form when an atom gains or loses one or more electrons to achieve stability .  
we will then consider other ,  weaker kinds of interactions ,  including hydrogen bonds .  
focus your learning 
covalent bonds are very stable and break only with a large input of energy .  
polar covalent bonds occur when two atoms share bonding electrons in an unequal fashion ,  whereas nonpolar covalent bonds occur when the bonding electrons are shared equally .  
hydrophilic interactions occur between polar molecules ,  and hydrophobic interactions occur between nonpolar molecules .  
van der waals forces are weak ,  noncovalent attractive forces that occur between any two atoms .  
a covalent bond forms when two atoms attain stable electron numbers in their outermost shells by sharing one or more pairs of electrons .  
consider two hydrogen atoms coming close to one another ,  each with an unpaired electron in its single shell  ( figure  two  .  five  )  .  
when the electrons pair up ,  a stable association is formed ,  and this links the two hydrogen atoms in a covalent bond ,  forming the molecule h two  .  
figure  two  .  five  electrons are shared in covalent bonds 
a compound is a pure substance made up of two or more different elements bonded together in a fixed ratio .  
chemical symbols identify the different elements in a compound ,  and subscript numbers indicate how many atoms of each element are present  ( e .  g .   ,  h two o has two atoms of hydrogen bonded to a single oxygen atom )  .  
every compound has a molecular weight that is the sum of the atomic weights of all atoms in the molecule .  
looking at the periodic table in figure  two  .  two  ,  you can calculate the molecular weight of water to be  one  eight  .  zero  one  .  
 ( but remember that this value comes from the average atomic weights of hydrogen and oxygen  the molecular weight of the heavy water in our opening story is higher because it is formed from heavier isotopes .   )  
molecules that make up living organisms can have molecular weights of up to half a billion .  
table  two  .  one  chemical bonds and interactions name basis of interaction structure bond energya covalent bond sharing of electron pairs  five  zero  -  one  one  zero  ionic attraction attraction of opposite charge  three  -  seven  hydrogen bond electrical attraction between a covalently bonded h atom and an electronegative atom  three  -  seven  hydrophobic interaction interaction of nonpolar substances in the presence of polar substances  ( especially water )   one  -  two  van der waals interaction interaction of electrons of nonpolar substances  one  
abond energy is the amount of energy in kcal / mol needed to separate two bonded or interacting atoms under physiological conditions .  
focus  key figure 
figure  two  .  six  covalent bonding can form compounds 
 ( a )  bohr models showing the formation of covalent bonds in methane ,  whose molecular formula is ch four  .  
electrons are shown in shells around the nucleus .  
 ( b )  three additional ways of representing the structure of methane .  
in a structural formula ,  a covalent bond can be indicated with a single line or a shared pair of electron dots .  
the ball - and - stick model and the space - filling model show the spatial orientations of the bonds .  
the space - filling model indicates the overall shape and surface of the molecule .  
in the chapters that follow ,  different conventions will be used to depict molecules .  
bear in mind that these are models to illustrate certain properties ,  not accurate portrayals of how atoms would actually appear .  
q  draw the four representations for carbon dioxide .  
how are the covalent bonds formed in a molecule of methane gas  ( ch four  )  ?  
the carbon atom has six electrons  two electrons fill its inner shell ,  and four unpaired electrons travel in its outer shell .  
because its outer shell can hold up to eight electrons ,  carbon can share electrons with up to four other atoms and # eight  two  one  two  it can form four covalent bonds  ( focus  key figure  two  .  six a )  .  
when an atom of carbon reacts with four hydrogen atoms ,  methane forms .  
thanks to electron sharing ,  the outer shell of methane   s carbon atom is now filled with eight electrons ,  a stable configuration .  
the outer shell of each of the four hydrogen atoms is also filled .  
four covalent bonds and # eight  two  one  two  four shared electron pairs and # eight  two  one  two  hold methane together .  
focus  key figure  two  .  six b shows several different ways to represent the molecular structure of methane .  
table  two  .  two  shows the covalent bonding capacities of some biologically significant elements .  
covalent bonds are very strong ,  meaning that it takes a lot of energy to break them .  
at temperatures where life exists ,  the covalent bonds of biological molecules are quite stable ,  as are their three - dimensional structures .  
however ,  this stability does not preclude change ,  as you will see .  
for a given pair of elements  and # eight  two  one  two   for example ,  carbon bonded to hydrogen  and # eight  two  one  two   the length of the covalent bond is always the same .  
and for a given atom within a molecule ,  the angle of each of its covalent bonds ,  with respect to the other bonds ,  is generally the same .  
this is true regardless of the type of larger molecule that contains the atom .  
for example ,  the four filled orbitals around the carbon atom in methane are always distributed in space so that the bonded hydrogen atoms point to the corners of a regular tetrahedron ,  with carbon in the center  ( see figure  two  .  six b )  .  
even when carbon is bonded to four atoms other than hydrogen ,  this three - dimensional orientation is more or less maintained .  
the orientation of covalent bonds in space gives the molecules their three - dimensional geometry ,  and the shapes of molecules contribute to their biological functions  ( see key concept  three  .  one  )  .  
table  two  .  two  covalent bonding capabilities of some biologically important elements element usual number of covalent bonds hydrogen  ( h )   one  oxygen  ( o )   two  sulfur  ( s )   two  nitrogen  ( n )   three  carbon  ( c )   four  phosphorus  ( p )   five  
even though the orientations of bonds around each atom are fairly stable ,  the shapes of molecules can change .  
think of a single covalent bond as an axle around which the two atoms ,  along with their other bonded atoms ,  can rotate .  
bond rotation has enormous implications for the large molecules that make up living tissues .  
since long chains of atoms  ( especially carbons )  can rotate freely ,  there are many possibilities for the arrangement of atoms within the chain .  
this allows molecules to alter their structures ,  for example ,  to fit other molecules .  
two atoms can share more than one pair of electrons ,  forming multiple covalent bonds .  
these can be represented by lines between the chemical symbols for the linked atoms  
a single bond involves the sharing of a single pair of electrons  ( for example ,  h and # eight  two  one  two  h or c and # eight  two  one  two  h )  .  
a double bond involves the sharing of four electrons  ( two pairs )   ( c=c )  .  
triple bonds and # eight  two  one  two  six shared electrons and # eight  two  one  two  are rare ,  but there is one in nitrogen gas  ( n   n )  ,  which is the major component of the air we breathe .  
if two atoms of the same element are covalently bonded ,  there is an equal sharing of the pair ( s )  of electrons in their outermost shells .  
however ,  when the two atoms are of different elements ,  the sharing is not necessarily equal .  
one nucleus may exert a greater attractive force on the electron pair than the other nucleus ,  so that the pair tends to be closer to that atom .  
the attractive force that an atomic nucleus exerts on electrons is called its electronegativity .  
the electronegativity of an atom depends roughly on how many positive charges it has  ( atoms with more protons are more positive and thus more attractive to electrons )  and on the distance between the nucleus and the electrons in the outer  ( valence )  shell  ( the closer the electrons ,  the greater the electronegative pull )  .  
table  two  .  three  shows the electronegativities  ( which are calculated to produce dimensionless quantities )  of some elements important in biological systems .  
note that oxygen  ( o )  is very electronegative  in fact ,  oxygen is the second most electronegative element  ( after fluorine )  .  
many organisms exploit the negativity of oxygen  moving electrons between c and o atoms powers living systems ,  as you will see in many subsequent examples in this text .  
table  two  .  three  some electronegativities element electronegativity oxygen  ( o )   three  .  five  chlorine  ( cl )   three  .  one  nitrogen  ( n )   three  .  zero  carbon  ( c )   two  .  five  phosphorus  ( p )   two  .  one  hydrogen  ( h )   two  .  one  sodium  ( na )   zero  .  nine  potassium  ( k )   zero  .  eight  
if two atoms are close to one another in electronegativity ,  they will share electrons equally in what is called a nonpolar covalent bond .  
two oxygen atoms ,  for example ,  each with an electronegativity of  three  .  five  ,  will share electrons equally .  
so will two hydrogen atoms  ( each with an electronegativity of  two  .  one  )  .  
but when hydrogen bonds with oxygen to form water ,  the electrons involved are unequally shared  they tend to be nearer to the oxygen nucleus because it is more electronegative than hydrogen .  
when electrons are drawn to one nucleus more than to the other ,  the result is a polar covalent bond  ( figure  two  .  seven  )  .  
figure  two  .  seven  water and # eight  two  one  seven  s covalent bonds are polar 
because of this unequal sharing of electrons ,  the oxygen end of the hydrogen and # eight  two  one  one  oxygen bond has a slightly negative charge  ( symbolized by    and # eight  two  one  one   and spoken of as    delta negative ,    ?  meaning a partial unit of charge )  ,  and the hydrogen end has a slightly positive charge  (   + )  .  
the bond is polar because these opposite charges are separated at the two ends ,  or poles ,  of the bond .  
the partial charges that result from polar covalent bonds produce polar molecules or polar regions of large molecules .  
polar bonds within molecules greatly influence the interactions they have with other polar molecules .  
water  ( h two o )  is a polar compound ,  and this polarity has significant effects on its physical properties and chemical reactivity ,  as you will see in later chapters .  
when one interacting atom is much more electronegative than the other ,  a complete transfer of one or more electrons may take place .  
consider sodium  ( electronegativity  zero  .  nine  )  and chlorine  ( electronegativity  three  .  one  )  .  
a sodium atom has only one electron in its outermost shell  this condition is unstable .  
a chlorine atom has seven electrons in its outermost shell and # eight  two  one  two  another unstable condition .  
since the electronegativity of chlorine is so much greater than that of sodium ,  any electrons involved in bonding will tend to transfer completely from sodium   s outermost shell to that of chlorine  ( figure  two  .  eight  )  .  
this reaction between sodium and chlorine makes the resulting atoms more stable because they both have eight fully paired electrons in their outer shells .  
the result is two ions .  
figure  two  .  eight  formation of sodium and chloride ions 
q  what ions are formed when calcium ion reacts with chlorine ?  
see the periodic table in figure  two  .  two  .  
ions are electrically charged particles that form when atoms gain or lose one or more electrons  
the sodium ion  ( na+ )  in our example has a + one  unit of charge because it has one less electron than it has protons .  
the outermost electron shell of the sodium ion is full ,  with eight electrons ,  so the ion is stable .  
positively charged ions are called cations .  
other biologically important cations include ca two + ,  h+ ,  mg two + ,  and k+ .  
the chloride ion  ( cl and # eight  two  one  one   )  has a  and # eight  two  one  one   one  unit of charge because it has one more electron than it has protons .  
this additional electron gives cl and # eight  two  one  one   a stable outermost shell with eight electrons .  
negatively charged ions are called anions .  
some elements can form ions with multiple charges by losing or gaining more than one electron .  
examples are ca two +  ( the calcium ion ,  a calcium atom that has lost two electrons )  and mg two +  ( the magnesium ion )  .  
two biologically important elements can each yield more than one stable ion .  
iron yields fe two +  ( the ferrous ion )  and fe three +  ( the ferric ion )  ,  and copper yields cu+  ( the cuprous ion )  and cu two +  ( the cupric ion )  .  
groups of covalently bonded atoms that carry an electric charge are called complex ions  examples include nh four +  ( the ammonium ion )  ,  so four  two  and # eight  two  one  one    ( the sulfate ion )  ,  and po four  three  and # eight  two  one  one    ( the phosphate ion )  .  
once formed ,  ions are usually stable and no more electrons are lost or gained .  
ionic attractions are bonds formed as a result of the electrical attraction between ions bearing opposite charges .  
ions can form bonds that result in stable solid compounds ,  which we call salts .  
you   re familiar with sodium chloride  ( nacl )  and # eight  two  one  two  table salt  its cations  ( na+ )  and anions  ( cl and # eight  two  one  one   )  are held together by ionic attractions .  
in solids ,  the attractions are strong because the ions are close together .  
however ,  when ions are dispersed in water ,  the distances between them can be large ,  greatly reducing the strength of the attraction .  
under the conditions in living cells ,  an ionic attraction is less strong than a covalent bond  ( see table  two  .  one  )  .  
figure  two  .  nine  water molecules surround ions 
q  what happens at the chemical and physical levels when a salt solution evaporates ?  
not surprisingly ,  ions can interact with polar molecules ,  since both are charged .  
this interaction results when a solid salt such as nacl dissolves in water .  
water molecules surround the individual ions ,  separating them  ( figure  two  .  nine  )  .  
the negatively charged chloride ions attract the positive poles of the water molecules ,  while the positively charged sodium ions attract the negative poles of the water molecules .  
this special property of water  ( its polarity )  is one reason it is such a good biological solvent  ( see key concept  two  .  four  )  .  
in liquid water ,  the negatively charged oxygen  (    and # eight  two  one  one   )  atom of one water molecule is attracted to the positively charged hydrogen  (   + )  atoms of another water molecule  ( figure  two  .  one  zero a )  .  
the bond resulting from this attraction is called a hydrogen bond .  
later in this chapter you   ll see how hydrogen bonding between water molecules contributes to many of the properties that make water so important for living systems .  
hydrogen bonds are not restricted to water molecules .  
such a bond can also form between a strongly electronegative atom in one molecule and a hydrogen atom that is involved in a polar covalent bond in another molecule ,  or another part of the same molecule  ( figure  two  .  one  zero b )  .  
figure  two  .  one  zero  hydrogen bonds can form between or within molecules 
q  what happens to a large molecule if increasing heat is applied ?  
which bonds or interactions are affected ?  
a hydrogen bond is weaker than most ionic attractions because its formation is due to partial charges  (   + and    and # eight  two  one  one   )  .  
it is much weaker than a covalent bond between a hydrogen atom and an oxygen atom  ( see table  two  .  one  )  .  
although individual hydrogen bonds are weak ,  there can be many of them within a single molecule or between two molecules .  
in these cases ,  the hydrogen bonds together have considerable strength and can greatly influence the structure and properties of substances .  
for example ,  hydrogen bonds play important roles in determining and maintaining the three - dimensional shapes of giant molecules such as dna and proteins  ( see key concept  three  .  two  )  .  
figure  two  .  one  one  hydrophilic and hydrophobic 
just as water molecules can interact with one another through hydrogen bonds ,  any molecule that is polar can interact with other polar molecules through the weak  (   + to    and # eight  two  one  one   )  attractions of hydrogen bonds .  
if a polar molecule interacts with water in this way ,  it is called hydrophilic  (    water - loving   ?  )   ( figure  two  .  one  one a )  .  
nonpolar molecules ,  in contrast ,  tend to interact with other nonpolar molecules .  
for example ,  carbon  ( electronegativity  two  .  five  )  forms nonpolar bonds with hydrogen  ( electronegativity  two  .  one  )  ,  and molecules containing only hydrogen and carbon atoms and # eight  two  one  two  called hydrocarbon molecules and # eight  two  one  two  are nonpolar .  
in water these molecules tend to aggregate with one another rather than with the polar water molecules .  
therefore nonpolar molecules are known as hydrophobic  (    water - hating   ?  )  ,  and the interactions between them are called hydrophobic interactions  ( figure  two  .  one  one b )  .  
of course ,  hydrophobic substances do not really    hate   ?  water  they can form weak interactions with it ,  since the electronegativities of carbon and hydrogen are not exactly the same .  
but these interactions are far weaker than the hydrogen bonds between the water molecules  ( see table  two  .  one  )  ,  so the nonpolar substances tend to aggregate .  
the interactions between nonpolar substances are enhanced by van der waals forces ,  which occur when the atoms of two molecules are in close proximity .  
these brief interactions result from random variations in the electron distribution in one molecule ,  which can create opposite charge distributions in the adjacent molecule .  
so there will be a weak ,  temporary   + to    and # eight  two  one  one   attraction .  van der waals forces occur in polar and nonpolar molecules .  
in the latter case ,  they can induce cohesion between molecules that do not form ionic attractions of hydrogen bonds .  
although a single van der waals interaction is brief and weak ,  the sum of many such interactions over the entire span of a large nonpolar molecule can result in substantial attraction .  
this is important when hydrophobic regions of different molecules such as an enzyme and a substrate come together  ( see chapter  eight  )  .  
 two  .  two  recap 
some atoms form strong covalent bonds with other atoms by sharing one or more pairs of electrons .  
unequal sharing of electrons produces polarity .  
other atoms become ions by losing or gaining electrons ,  and they interact with other ions or polar molecules .  
weak forces such as hydrogen bonds also act to attract atoms to one another .  
learning outcomes 
you should be able to  
explain why covalent bonds are so strong .  
identify examples of polar covalent and nonpolar covalent bonds .  
distinguish between hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions using examples .  
identify instances in which van der waals forces are important .  
why is a covalent bond stronger than an ionic attraction when a molecule is in water ?  
consider the following pairs of bonded atoms  c  and # eight  two  one  one   hc = oo and # eight  two  one  one  pc and # eight  two  one  two  c 
for each pair ,  use tables  two  .  two  and  two  .  three  to determine  
whether the bond is polar or nonpolar 
if the bond is polar ,  which end is    and # eight  two  one  one   
whether the atom pair contributes hydrophilic or hydrophobic properties to a molecule 
geckos are lizards that are amazing climbers .  
a gecko can climb up a glass surface and stick to it with a single toe .  
professor kellar autumn at lewis and clark college and his students and collaborators have shown that each toe of a gecko has millions of micrometer - sized hairs ,  and that each hair splits into hundreds of  two  zero  zero  - nanometer tips that provide intimate contact with a surface .  
careful measurements show that a million of these tips could easily support the animal ,  but it has far more .  
the toes stick well on hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces .  
bending the hairs allows the gecko to detach .  
what kind of noncovalent force is involved in gecko sticking ?  
the bonding of atoms into molecules is not necessarily a permanent affair .  
the dynamic aspect of life involves constant change ,  even at the molecular level .  
in the next section we will examine how molecules interact with one another and # eight  two  one  two  how they break up ,  how they find new partners ,  and what the consequences of those changes can be .  
chapter  two  continues with 
 two  .  three   atoms change partners in chemical reactions 
a hallmark of life is that it is dynamic .  
things don   t sit still ,  especially at the chemical level .  
atoms bonded to other atoms can leave a binding relationship and find a new partner .  
bear in mind that this does not happen all the time  your skin is a biological tissue ,  and its atoms form a stable structure .  
but change is common ,  especially among the atoms and molecules dissolved in water .  
a chemical reaction occurs when moving atoms collide with sufficient energy to combine or to change their bonding partners .  
focus your learning 
chemical reactions obey the laws of conservation of energy and conservation of matter .  
chemical reactions are accompanied by changes in energy .  
figure  two  .  one  two  bonding partners and energy may change in a chemical reaction 
consider the combustion reaction that takes place in the flame of a propane stove .  
when propane  ( c three h eight  )  reacts with oxygen gas  ( o two  )  ,  the carbon atoms become bonded to oxygen atoms instead of hydrogen atoms ,  and the hydrogen atoms become bonded to oxygen instead of carbon  ( figure  two  .  one  two  )  .  
as the covalently bonded atoms change partners ,  the composition of the matter changes  propane and oxygen gas become carbon dioxide and water .  
this chemical reaction can be represented by the equation c three h eight  +  five  o two       three  co two  +  four  h two o + energy reactants     products 
in this equation ,  propane and oxygen are the reactants ,  and carbon dioxide and water are the  products .  
this example is an oxidation - reduction  ( redox )  reaction   a special type of chemical reaction that involves a transfer of electrons between two species  
the electron acceptor ,  or oxidizing agent ,  gains electrons and is said to be reduced  in a chemical reaction .  
the electron donor ,  or reducing agent ,  loses electrons and is said to be is oxidized in a chemical reaction .  
can you identify the oxidizing and reducing agents in our example ?  
because electrons and protons  ( i .  e .   ,  hydrogen atoms )  are transferred from propane ,  propane is the reducing agent and oxygen is the oxidizing agent ,  which in this example forms water upon accepting the hydrogens .  
you will see many examples of redox reactions involving electron / proton transfer in later chapters .  
figure  two  .  one  three  hydrogen bonding and the properties of water 
the products of a chemical reaction can have very different properties from the reactants .  
the reaction shown in figure  two  .  one  three  is said to be complete  all the propane and oxygen are used up in forming the two products .  
the arrow symbolizes the direction of the chemical reaction .  
the numbers preceding the molecular formulas indicate how many molecules are used or produced .  
note that in this and all other chemical reactions ,  matter is neither created nor destroyed .  
the total number of carbon atoms on the left side of the equation  (  three  )  equals the total number of carbon atoms on the right  (  three  )  .  
in other words ,  the equation is balanced .  
however ,  there is another aspect of this reaction  the heat and light of the stove   s flame reveal that the reaction between propane and oxygen releases a great deal of energy .  
energy is defined as the capacity to do work ,  but in the context of chemical reactions ,  it can be thought of as the capacity for change .  
chemical reactions do not create or destroy energy ,  but changes in the form of energy usually accompany chemical reactions .  
in the reaction between propane and oxygen ,  a large amount of heat energy is released .  
this energy was present in another form ,  called potential chemical energy ,  in the covalent bonds within the propane and oxygen gas molecules .  
not all reactions release energy  indeed ,  many chemical reactions require that energy be supplied from the environment .  
some of this energy is then stored as potential chemical energy in the bonds formed in the products .  
we will see in future chapters how reactions that release energy and reactions that require energy are often coupled .  
many chemical reactions take place in living cells ,  and some of these have a lot in common with the oxidation   reduction reaction we saw in the combustion of propane .  
in cells ,  the reactants are different  ( they may be sugars or fats )  ,  and the reactions proceed by many intermediate steps that permit the released energy to be harvested and put to use by the cells .  
but the products are the same  carbon dioxide and water .  
 two  .  three  recap 
in a chemical reaction ,  a set of reactants is converted to a set of products with different chemical compositions .  
a chemical reaction involves breaking old bonds and making new ones .  
a reaction may release energy or require its input .  
learning outcomes 
you should be able to  
demonstrate an example to show that chemical reactions obey the law of conservation of matter .  
explain how energy is involved in a chemical reaction .  
using the example of the chemical equation c six h one  two o six  + o two   and # eight  five  nine  four   co two  + h two o ,  insert numbers so that the numbers of atoms on both sides of the equation are balanced .  
use an example to explain how the form of energy can change during a chemical reaction .  
we will return to chemical reactions and how they occur in living systems in chapter  eight  ,   nine  ,  and  one  zero  ,  focusing particularly on energy transformations that fuel biological processes .  
first ,  however ,  we will examine the unique properties of the substance in which most biochemical reactions take place  water .  
chapter  two  continues with 
 two  .  four   water is critical for life 
water has a unique structure and special properties 
ice floats 
melting ,  freezing ,  and heat capacity 
cohesion and surface tension 
the reactions of life take place in aqueous solutions 
acids release h+ 
bases accept h+ 
aqueous solutions may be acidic or basic 
acid and # eight  two  one  one  base reactions may be reversible 
water is a weak acid and a weak base 
ph  hydrogen ion concentration 
buffers 
your body is more than  seven  zero  percent water by weight ,  excluding the minerals contained in bones .  
water is the dominant component of virtually all living organisms ,  and most biochemical reactions take place in this watery ,  or aqueous ,  environment .  
water is an unusual substance with unusual properties .  
under conditions on earth ,  water exists in solid ,  liquid ,  and gas forms ,  all of which have relevance to living systems .  
water allows chemical reactions to occur inside living organisms ,  and it is necessary for the formation of certain biological structures .  
in this section we will explore how the structure and interactions of water molecules make water essential to life .  
focus your learning 
biochemical reactions within cells occur in an aqueous environment .  
moles are used to quantify substances in biological fluids .  
the acid - base properties of water and other compounds in cells allow reversible changes that affect biological functions .  
the molecule h two o has unique chemical features .  
as you have already learned ,  water is a polar molecule that can form hydrogen bonds .  
the four pairs of electrons in the outer shell of the oxygen atom repel one another ,  giving the water molecule a tetrahedral shape  
the chemical features of water explain some of its interesting properties ,  such as the ability of ice to float ,  the melting and freezing temperatures of water ,  the ability of water to store heat ,  the formation of water droplets ,  water and # eight  two  one  seven  s ability to dissolve many substances ,  and its inability to dissolve many others .  
in water and # eight  two  one  seven  s solid state  ( ice )  ,  individual water molecules are held in place by hydrogen bonds .  
each molecule is bonded to four other molecules in a rigid ,  crystalline structure  ( figure  two  .  one  three  )  .  
although the molecules are held firmly in place ,  they are farther apart from one another than they are in liquid water ,  where the molecules are moving about .  
in ice ,  there are cavities between individual water molecules .  
in other words ,  solid water is less dense than liquid water ,  which is why ice floats .  
think of the biological consequences if ice were to sink in water .  
a pond would freeze from the bottom up ,  becoming a solid block of ice in winter and killing most of the organisms living there .  
once the whole pond was frozen ,  its temperature could drop well below the freezing point of water .  
but because ice floats ,  it forms an insulating layer on the top of the pond ,  and reduces heat flow to the cold air above .  
thus fish ,  plants ,  and other organisms in the pond are not subjected to temperatures lower than  zero   c ,  which is the freezing point of pure water .  
compared with many other substances that have molecules of similar size ,  ice requires a great deal of heat energy to melt .  
the amount of heat energy required to raise the temperature of  one  gram of a substance by  one   c is called its specific heat .  
water has a relatively high specific heat because so many hydrogen bonds connecting the water molecules in ice must be broken to change water from solid to liquid .  
in the opposite process and # eight  two  one  two  freezing and # eight  two  one  two  a great deal of energy is released to the environment .  
we say water has a high heat capacity .  
for example ,  water has twice the specific heat of ethyl alcohol and five times that of sand .  
this is why when you are on the beach as the sun sets ,  the sand cools much more quickly than the water .  
because it takes a lot of energy to change the physical state of water ,  water temperatures in oceans and other large bodies of water are remarkably constant throughout the year .  
the temperature changes of coastal land masses are in turn moderated by large bodies of water .  
indeed ,  water helps minimize variations in atmospheric temperature across the planet .  
water and # eight  two  one  seven  s ability to moderate heat helps it function as an insulator ,  helping prevent an organism and # eight  two  one  seven  s body temperature from rising during a sunny day .  
figure  two  .  one  four  water in biology 
water also has a high heat of vaporization ,  which means that a lot of heat is required to change water from its liquid to its gaseous state  ( the process of evaporation )  .  
once again ,  much of the heat energy is used to break the many hydrogen bonds between the water molecules .  
this heat must be absorbed from the environment in contact with the water .  *evaporation thus has a cooling effect on the environment and # eight  two  one  two  whether a leaf ,  a forest ,  or an entire land mass .  
this effect explains why sweating cools the human body  as sweat evaporates from the skin ,  it uses up some of the adjacent body heat  ( figure  two  .  one  four a )  .  
*connect the concepts living systems use the evaporation of water ,  which disrupts hydrogen bonds ,  to dissipate excess heat that would otherwise cause problems .  
see key concept  three  nine  .  three  for examples in plants ,  and key concepts  four  zero  .  three  and # eight  two  one  one   four  zero  .  five  for examples in animals .  
in liquid water ,  individual molecules are able to move about .  
the hydrogen bonds between the molecules continually form and break  ( see figure  two  .  one  four  )  .  
chemists estimate that this occurs about a trillion times a minute for a single water molecule !  
at any given time ,  a water molecule forms on average  three  .  four  hydrogen bonds with other water molecules .  
these hydrogen bonds explain the cohesive strength of liquid water .  
this cohesive strength ,  or cohesion ,  is defined as the capacity of water molecules to resist coming apart from one another when placed under tension .  
water and # eight  two  one  seven  s *cohesive strength permits narrow columns of liquid water to move from the roots to the leaves of tall trees .  
when water evaporates from the leaves ,  the entire column moves upward in response to the pull of the molecules at the top  ( figure  two  .  one  four b )  .  
a related property is adhesion ,  the attraction of water molecules to other molecules of a different type .  
for example ,  when you put a straw into a cup with water ,  it  " climbs "  up the straw so the column is higher than the level in the cup .  
this adhesive behavior of water and # eight  two  one  two  sticking to the sides of the straw and # eight  two  one  two  reflects the adhesion of water forming the column .  *connect the concepts as described in key concept  three  five  .  two  ,  the transpiration and # eight  two  one  one  cohesion and # eight  two  one  one  tension mechanism accounts for the movement of water from roots to leaves .  
because of the cohesion between water molecules ,  water is pulled upward in continuous columns .  
the surface of liquid water exposed to the air is difficult to puncture because the water molecules at the surface are hydrogen - bonded to other water molecules below them .  
this surface tension of water permits a container to be filled slightly above its rim without overflowing ,  and it permits spiders to walk on the surface of a pond  ( figure  two  .  one  four c )  .  
a solution is produced when a substance  ( the solute )  is dissolved in a liquid  ( the solvent )  .  
if the solvent is water ,  then the solution is called an aqueous solution .  
as you know by now ,  water is polar .  
because many important molecules in biological systems are polar ,  they readily dissolve in water .  
being soluble doesn and # eight  two  one  seven  t mean that the molecules lose their identity and properties .  
they can still react ,  and indeed many important biochemical reactions occur in aqueous solutions .  
biologists who are interested in the biochemical reactions within cells identify the reactants and products and determine their amounts using two different types of analyses  
qualitative analyses focus on identifying the substances involved in chemical reactions .  
for example ,  a qualitative analysis would be used to investigate the steps involved and the products formed during respiration ,  when carbon - containing compounds are broken down to release energy in living tissues .  
quantitative analyses measure concentrations or amounts of substances .  
for example ,  a biochemist would use a quantitative analysis to measure how much of a certain product is formed in a chemical reaction .  
what follows is a brief introduction to some of the quantitative chemical terms you will see in this book .  
fundamental to quantitative thinking in chemistry and biology is the concept of the mole .  
a mole is the amount of a substance  ( in grams )  that is numerically equal to its molecular weight .  
so a mole of hydrogen gas  ( h two  )  weighs  two  g ,  a mole of sodium ion  ( na+ )  weighs  two  three  g ,  and a mole of table sugar  ( c one  two h two  two o one  one  )  weighs about  three  four  two  g .  
quantitative analyses do not yield counts of molecules .  
because the amount of a substance in  one  mole is directly related to its molecular weight ,  it follows that the number of molecules in  one  mole is constant for all substances .  
so  one  mole of salt contains the same number of molecules as  one  mole of table sugar .  
this constant number of molecules in a mole is called avogadro and # eight  two  one  seven  s number ,  and it is  six  .  zero  two   and # two  one  five    one  zero  two  three  molecules per mole .  
chemists work with moles of substances  ( which can be weighed in the laboratory )  instead of actual molecules ,  which are too numerous to be counted .  
consider  three  four  .  two  g  ( just over  one  ounce )  of table sugar ,  c one  two h two  two o one  one  .  
this is one - tenth of a mole ,  or one - tenth of avogadro and # eight  two  one  seven  s number   six  .  zero  two   and # two  one  five    one  zero  two  two  molecules .  
a chemist can dissolve  one  mole of table sugar  (  three  four  two  g )  in water to make  one  liter of solution ,  knowing that the mole contains  six  .  zero  two   and # two  one  five    one  zero  two  three  individual sugar molecules .  
this solution and # eight  two  one  two   one  mole of a substance dissolved in water to make  one  liter and # eight  two  one  two  is called a  one  molar  (  one  m )  solution .  
when a physician injects a certain volume and molar concentration of a drug into the bloodstream of a patient ,  a rough calculation can be made of the actual number of drug molecules that will interact with the patient and # eight  two  one  seven  s cells .  
as you know ,  the dose is important .  
the many molecules dissolved in the water of living tissues are not present at concentrations anywhere near  one  molar .  
most are in the micromolar  ( millionths of a mole per liter of solution    m )  to millimolar  ( thousandths of a mole per liter  mm )  range .  
some ,  such as hormone molecules ,  are even less concentrated than that .  
while these molarities seem to indicate very low concentrations ,  remember that even a  one    m solution has  six  .  zero  two   and # two  one  five    one  zero  one  seven  molecules of the solute per liter .  
when some substances dissolve in water ,  they release hydrogen ions  ( h+ )  ,  which are actually single ,  positively charged protons .  
hydrogen ions can interact with other molecules and change their properties .  
for example ,  the protons in  and # eight  two  two  zero  acid rain and # eight  two  two  one   can damage plants ,  and you probably have experienced the excess of hydrogen ions that we call  and # eight  two  two  zero  acid indigestion .   and # eight  two  two  one    ?  
here we will examine the properties of acids  ( defined as substances that release h+ )  and bases  ( defined as substances that accept h+ )  .  
we will distinguish between strong and weak acids and bases ,  and provide a quantitative means for stating the concentration of h+ in solutions  the ph scale .  
when hydrochloric acid  ( hcl )  is added to water ,  it dissolves ,  releasing the ions h+ and cl and # eight  two  one  one    hcl     h+ + cl and # eight  two  one  one   
because its h+ concentration has increased ,  the solution is acidic .  
acids are substances that release h+ ions in solution .  
hcl is an acid ,  as is h two so four   ( sulfuric acid )  .  
one molecule of sulfuric acid will ionize to yield two h+ and one so four  two  and # eight  two  one  one   .  
biological compounds that contain  and # eight  two  one  two  cooh  ( called a carboxyl group )  are acids because the carboxyl group can ionize to  and # eight  two  one  two  coo and # eight  two  one  one   ,  releasing h+   and # eight  two  one  two  cooh  and #x two  one  nine  two    and # eight  two  one  two  coo and # eight  two  one  one   + h+ 
acids that fully ionize in solution ,  such as hcl and h two so four  ,  are called strong acids .  
however ,  not all acids ionize fully in water .  
for example ,  if acetic acid  ( ch three cooh )  is added to water ,  some of it will dissociate into two ions  ( ch three coo and # eight  two  one  one   and h+ )  ,  but some of the original acetic acid will remain as well .  
because the reaction is not complete ,  acetic acid is a weak acid .  
bases are substances that accept h+ in solution .  
as with acids ,  there are strong and weak bases .  
if naoh  ( sodium hydroxide )  is added to water ,  it dissolves and ionizes ,  releasing oh and # eight  two  one  one   and na+ ions  naoh  and #x two  one  nine  two   na+ + oh and # eight  two  one  one   
because oh and # eight  two  one  one   absorbs h+ to form water ,  such a solution is basic .  
this reaction is complete ,  and so naoh is a strong base .  
weak bases include the bicarbonate ion  ( hco three  and # eight  two  one  one   )  ,  which can accept an h+ ion and become carbonic acid  ( h two co three  )  ,  and ammonia  ( nh three  )  ,  which can accept h+ and become an ammonium ion  ( nh four + )  .  
biological compounds that contain  and # eight  two  one  two  nh two   ( the amino group )  are also bases because  and # eight  two  one  two  nh two  accepts h+   and # eight  two  one  two  nh two  + h+  and #x two  one  nine  two    and # eight  two  one  two  nh three + 
when acetic acid is dissolved in water ,  two reactions happen .  
first ,  the acetic acid forms its ions  ch three cooh  and #x two  one  nine  two   ch three coo and # eight  two  one  one   + h+ 
then ,  once the ions are formed ,  some of them re - form acetic acid  ch three coo and # eight  two  one  one   + h+  and #x two  one  nine  two   ch three cooh 
this pair of reactions is reversible .  
a reversible reaction can proceed in either direction and # eight  two  one  two  left to right or right to left and # eight  two  one  two  depending on the relative starting concentrations of the reactants and products .  
the formula for a reversible reaction can be written using a double arrow  ch three cooh ~ ch three coo and # eight  two  one  one   + h+ 
in terms of acids and bases ,  there are two types of reactions ,  depending on the extent of the reversibility  
the ionization of strong acids and bases in water is virtually irreversible .  
the ionization of weak acids and bases in water is somewhat reversible .  
the water molecule has a slight but significant tendency to ionize into a hydroxide ion  ( oh and # eight  two  one  one   )  and a hydrogen ion  ( h+ )  .  
actually ,  two water molecules participate in this reaction .  
one of the two molecules  and #x two  zero  one c captures and #x two  zero  one d  a hydrogen ion from the other molecule ,  forming a hydroxide ion and a hydronium ion  
the hydronium ion is ,  in effect ,  a hydrogen ion bound to a water molecule .  
for simplicity ,  biochemists tend to use a modified representation of the ionization of water  h two o  and #x two  one  nine  two   h+ + oh and # eight  two  one  one   
the ionization of water is important to all living creatures .  
this fact may seem surprising ,  since only about  one  water molecule in  five  zero  zero  million is ionized at any given time .  
but this is less surprising if we focus on the abundance of water in living systems ,  and the reactive nature of the h+ ions produced by ionization .  
as we have seen ,  compounds can be either acids or bases ,  and thus solutions can be either acidic or basic .  
we can measure how acidic or basic a solution is by measuring its concentration of h+ in moles per liter  ( its molarity  see p .  xx )  .  
here are some examples  
pure water has a h+ concentration of  one  zero  and # eight  two  one  one   seven  m .  
a  one  m hcl solution has a h+ concentration of  one  m  ( recall that all the hcl dissociates into its ions )  .  
a  one  m naoh solution has a h+ concentration of  one  zero  and # eight  two  one  one   one  four  m .  
this is a very wide range of numbers to work with and # eight  two  one  two  think about the decimals !  
it is easier to work with the logarithm of the h+ concentration ,  because logarithms compress this range  the log one  zero  of  one  zero  zero  ,  for example ,  is  two   and the log one  zero  of  zero  .  zero  one  is  and # eight  two  one  one   two  .  
because most h+ concentrations in living systems are less than  one  m ,  their log one  zero  values are negative .  
for convenience ,  we convert these negative numbers into positive ones by using the negative of the logarithm of the h+ molar concentration .  
this number is called the ph of the solution  ph =  and # eight  two  one  one  log ( h+ )  where  ( h+ )  is the concentration of free h+ in solution 
since the h+ concentration of pure water is  one  zero  and # eight  two  one  one   seven  m ,  its ph is  and # eight  two  one  one  log (  one  zero  and # eight  two  one  one   seven  )  =  and # eight  two  one  one   (  and # eight  two  one  one   seven  )  ,  or  seven  .  
a smaller negative logarithm means a larger number .  
in practical terms ,  a lower ph means a higher h+ concentration ,  or greater acidity .  
in  one  m hcl ,  the h+ concentration is  one  m ,  so the ph is the negative logarithm of  one   (  and # eight  two  one  one  log  one  zero  zero  )  ,  or  zero  .  
the ph of  one  m naoh is the negative logarithm of  one  zero  and # eight  two  one  one   one  four  ,  or  one  four  .  
a solution with a ph of less than  seven  is acidic and # eight  two  one  two  it contains more h+ ions than oh and # eight  two  one  one   ions .  
a solution with a ph of  seven  is referred to as neutral ,  and a solution with a ph value greater than  seven  is basic .  
figure  two  .  one  five  shows the ph values of some common substances .  
figure  two  .  one  five  ph values of some familiar substances 
why is this discussion of ph so relevant to biology ?  
many reactions involve the transfer of an ion or charged group from one molecule to another ,  and the presence of positive or negative ions in the environment can greatly influence the rates of such reactions .  
furthermore ,  ph can influence the shapes of molecules .  
many biologically important molecules contain charged groups  ( e .  g .   ,   and # eight  two  one  two  coo and # eight  two  one  one   )  that can interact with the polar regions of water ,  and these interactions influence the way such molecules fold up into three - dimensional shapes .  
if these charged groups combine with h+ or other ions in their environment to form uncharged groups  ( e .  g .   ,   and # eight  two  one  two  cooh  see above )  ,  they will have a reduced tendency to interact with water .  
these uncharged  ( hydrophobic )  groups might induce the molecule to fold up differently so that they are no longer in contact with the watery environment .  
since the three - dimensional structures of biological molecules greatly affect the way they function ,  organisms do all they can to minimize changes in the ph of their cells and tissues .  
an important way to do this is with buffers .  
the maintenance of internal constancy and # eight  two  one  two  homeostasis and # eight  two  one  two  is a hallmark of all living things and extends to ph .  
if biological molecules lose or gain h+ ions ,  their properties can change ,  thus upsetting homeostasis .  
for example ,  people who exercise strenuously produce lactic acid ,  which ionizes to produce h+ .  
internal constancy within tissues can be achieved with buffers  solutions that maintain a relatively constant ph even when substantial amounts of acid or base are added .  
how does this work ?  
a buffer is a mixture of a weak acid and its corresponding base ,  or a weak base and its corresponding acid .  
for example ,  a weak acid is carbonic acid  ( h two co three  )  ,  and its corresponding base is the bicarbonate ion  ( hco three  and # eight  two  one  one   )  .  
if another acid is added to a solution containing this mixture  ( a buffered solution )  ,  not all the h+ ions from the acid remain in solution .  
instead ,  many of them combine with the bicarbonate ions to produce more carbonic acid  hco three  and # eight  two  one  one   + h+   and #x two  one cc   h two co three  figure  two  .  one  six  buffers minimize changes in ph 
this reaction uses up some of the h+ ions in the solution and decreases the acidifying effect of the added acid .  
if a base is added ,  the reaction essentially reverses .  
some of the carbonic acid ionizes to produce bicarbonate ions and more h+ ,  which counteracts some of the added base .  
the buffer minimizes the effect that an added acid or base has on ph .  
the carbonic acid / bicarbonate buffering system is present in the blood ,  where it is important for preventing significant changes in ph that could disrupt the ability of the blood to carry vital oxygen to tissues .  
a given amount of acid or base causes a smaller ph change in a buffered solution than in a non - buffered one  ( figure  two  .  one  six  )  .  
buffers illustrate an important chemical principle of reversible reactions ,  called the law of mass action .  
addition of a reactant on one side of a reversible system drives the reaction in the direction that uses up that compound .  
in the case of buffers ,  addition of an acid drives the reaction in one direction  addition of a base drives the reaction in the other direction .  
you may occasionally use a buffer to relieve indigestion .  
the lining of the stomach constantly secretes hydrochloric acid ,  making the stomach contents acidic .  
but excessive stomach acid can cause discomfort .  
we can relieve this discomfort by ingesting a salt such as nahco three   ( sodium bicarbonate )  ,  which acts as a buffer .  
investigatinglife 
what insights into biological systems have been discovered through isotope analysis ?  
the opening investigation of dinosaurs  ( oxygen atoms )  and the investigating life experiment of hamburgers  ( carbon atoms )  are examples of identifying the life history of organisms through isotopic analysis .  
recently ,  this has been applied to humans as well .  
hair is a living tissue ,  with a lot of o and h atoms derived from water in the diet .  
ecologist jim ehleringer and chemist thure cerling have shown that like the dinosaurs ,  the isotopic ratios of o and h in hair reflect the geographical region where a person drank the water .  
this can be useful evidence in a forensic investigation ,  placing a person at a location .  
isotopic ratios are also used to identify where plants are grown ,  because their tissues also have unique ratios .  
for example ,  ratios have revealed the geographical origin of poppies used to make heroin .  
the mass spectrometer ,  a chemical analysis instrument that detects isotopes ,  is fast becoming an important tool for biologists .  
future directions 
tracking the isotopes of oxygen and hydrogen in precipitation is useful in understanding patterns of climate change .  
water evaporates in warmer regions at the tropical latitudes on earth and moves toward the cooler poles .  
as an air mass moves from a warmer to a cooler region ,  water vapor condenses and is removed as precipitation .  
the heavy isotopes of h and o tend to fall as precipitation more readily than the lighter isotopes ,  so as the water vapor moves toward the poles ,  it becomes enriched in the lighter isotopes .  
the ratio of heavy to light isotopes that reach the poles depends on the climate and # eight  two  one  one  the cooler the climate ,  the lower the ratio ,  because more water precipitates as it moves toward the poles ,  depleting more of the heavier isotopes .  
analyses of polar ice cores show that heavy - to - light isotope ratios vary over geological time scales .  
this has allowed scientists to reconstruct climate change in the past ,  and to relate it to fossil organisms that lived at those times .  
isotope ratios may be useful in monitoring climate change that is happening today .  
 two  .  four  recap 
most of the chemistry of life occurs in water ,  which has unique properties that make it an ideal medium for supporting life .  
these properties include hydrogen bonding between molecules ,  high specific heat ,  and cohesion between molecules .  
aqueous solutions can be acidic or basic ,  depending on the concentration of hydrogen ions .  
the cells and tissues of organisms are buffered ,  however ,  because changes in ph can change the properties of biological molecules .  
learning outcomes 
you should be able to  
explain why water and # eight  two  one  seven  s solvent properties are important in understanding events taking place inside cells .  
perform quantitative analyses of biochemical compounds using the mole concept .  
predict and explain changes in ph caused by changes in concentration of weak acids or bases in living tissue .  
what is a solution ,  and why do we call water  and #x two  zero  one c the medium of life and #x two  zero  one d  ?  
a substance in a cell has a concentration of  zero  .  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  one  molar .  
what does this mean in terms of the number of molecules in a cell that has a volume of  zero  .  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  one  liters ?  
in human tissues ,  co two  is formed as a by - product of oxidation of more complex molecules .  
co two  enters the blood - stream and in red blood cells is removed from the blood by the reaction co two  + h two o  and #x two  one  nine  two   hco three  and # eight  two  one  one   + h+ .  
what is the consequence of this reaction on the ph of the blood ?  
what chemical reaction would restore the ph of the blood ?  
chapter  two  continues with 
chapter  two  summary 
 two  .  one  
atomic structure explains the properties of matter 
matter is composed of atoms .  
each atom consists of a positively charged nucleus made up of protons and neutrons ,  surrounded by electrons bearing negative charges .  
review figure  two  .  one  
the number of protons in the nucleus defines an element .  
there are many elements in the universe ,  but only a few of them make up the bulk of living organisms  c ,  h ,  o ,  p ,  n ,  and s .  review figure  two  .  two  
isotopes of an element differ in their numbers of neutrons .  
radioisotopes are radioactive ,  emitting radiation as they break down .  
electrons are distributed in electron shells ,  which are volumes of space defined by specific numbers of orbitals .  
each orbital contains a maximum of two electrons .  
review figures  two  .  four  ,  activity  two  .  one  
in losing ,  gaining ,  or sharing electrons to become more stable ,  an atom can combine with other atoms to form a molecule .   two  .  two  
atoms bond to form molecules 
a chemical bond is an attractive force that links two atoms together in a molecule .  
review table  two  .  one  ,  animation  two  .  one  
a compound is a substance made up of molecules with two or more different atoms bonded together in a fixed ratio ,  such as water  ( h two o )  .  
covalent bonds are strong bonds formed when two atoms share one or more pairs of electrons .  
review focus  key figure  two  .  four  ,  figure  two  .  five  
when two atoms of unequal electronegativity bond with each other ,  a polar covalent bond is formed .  
the two ends ,  or poles ,  of the bond have partial charges  (   + or    and # eight  two  one  one   )  .  
review figure  two  .  seven  
an ion is an electrically charged particle that forms when an atom gains or loses one or more electrons in order to form a more stable electron configuration .  
anions and cations are negatively and positively charged ions ,  respectively .  
different charges attract each other ,  and like charges repel each other .  
ionic attractions occur between oppositely charged ions .  
ionic attractions are strong in solids  ( salts )  but weaken when the ions are separated from one another in solution .  
review figure  two  .  nine  
a hydrogen bond is a weak electrical attraction that forms between a   + hydrogen atom in one molecule and a    and # eight  two  one  one   atom in another molecule  ( or in another part of the same ,  large molecule )  .  
hydrogen bonds are abundant in water .  
review figure  two  .  one  zero  
nonpolar molecules interact very little with polar molecules ,  including water .  
nonpolar molecules are attracted to one another by very weak bonds called van der waals forces .   two  .  three  
atoms change partners in chemical reactions 
in chemical reactions ,  atoms combine or change their bonding partners .  
reactants are converted into products .  
some chemical reactions release energy as one of their products  other reactions can occur only if energy is provided to the reactants .  
neither matter nor energy is created or destroyed in a chemical reaction ,  but both change form .  
review figure  two  .  one  two  
in organisms ,  chemical reactions take place in multiple steps so that released energy can be harvested for cellular activities .   two  .  four  
water is critical for life 
water   s molecular structure and its capacity to form hydrogen bonds give it unique properties that are significant for life .  
review figure  two  .  one  three  
the high specific heat of water means that water gains or loses a great deal of heat when it changes state .  
water   s high heat of vaporization ensures effective cooling when water evaporates .  
the cohesion of water molecules refers to their capacity to resist coming apart from one another .  
hydrogen bonding between the water molecules plays an essential role in this property .  
a solution is produced when a solid substance  ( the solute )  dissolves in a liquid  ( the solvent )  .  
water is the critically important solvent for life .  
the ability of molecules to lose or accept protons  ( h+ )  is important in biological structure and function .  
go to learningcurve  ( in launchpad )  for dynamic quizzing that helps you solidify your understanding of this chapter .  
learningcurve adapts to your responses ,  giving you the practice you need to master each key concept .  
apply what you   ve learned 
review 
 two  .  four  the acid - base properties of water and other compounds in cells allow reversible changes that affect biological functions .  
scientists are developing methods to sample a person and # eight  two  one  seven  s breath and test it for higher - than - normal levels of compounds that contain ketones .  
the buildup of these compounds in the body can indicate type i diabetes .  
this work could lead to development of a portable device that will allow earlier diagnosis of diabetes ,  especially in children .  
insulin is a hormone that stimulates cells in the body to take up glucose from the blood .  
cells use glucose as a source of energy for normal cell function .  
in type i diabetes ,  insulin is not produced ,  and glucose does not enter cells from the blood .  
lacking an incoming supply of glucose ,  cells begin breaking down fats as a source of energy .  
when fats break down ,  several ketone - containing compounds are produced and they can be detected by a breath analysis device .  
a ketone has the general structure rcor '  ,  where r and r '  are the same or different groups of atoms .  
one of the ketone - containing products of fat breakdown is acetoacetic acid ,  which has the structure below .  
acetoacetic acid is very harmful when it builds up in high concentration in the body .  
questions 
 one  .  
in water ,  acetoacetic acid can ionize to form protons and acetoacetate ions .  
write the chemical structures for this reaction .  
 two  .  
now write out the reversible chemical reaction for the ionization of carbonic acid in blood ,  which can act as a buffer .  
would the ph of blood change if a small amount of acetoacetic acid produced normally in tissues were added to the blood ?  
explain .  
 three  .  
what would happen to the ph of the blood if more and more acetoacetic acid built up ,  as in a case of untreated diabetes ?  
explain ,  using what you found in question  two  above .  
what would happen to the body and # eight  two  one  seven  s ability to maintain a constant blood ph ?  
how does this explain why people with this condition become severely ill ?  
 four  .  
acetone is one of the compounds produced from fat breakdown and expelled in the breath .  
it is targeted for detection by a breath - analysis device .  
its chemical structure is shown below .  
analyze the structure to determine whether it would be expected to affect the carbonic acid or bicarbonate buffer system in the blood .  
 five  .  
suppose scientists succeed in developing a device that detects ketone buildup in the breath .  
if a person tested positive for higher - than - normal ketones with the breath test ,  what are some blood tests that could be done to follow up ?  
suggest three or four different blood tests ,  other than acetoacetic acid or ketone levels ,  that could be used to detect the existence of insulin insufficiency .  
describe the outcome of each test in the case of a positive result .  
go to launchpad for the ebook ,  learningcurve ,  animations ,  activities ,  flashcards ,  and additional resources and assignments .  
end of chapter  two  .  
spider silk ,   ( purple )  being spun from a gland by the shiny black spider ,  castercantha ,  is an example of a complex macromolecule .  
key concepts  
macromolecules characterize living things 
the function of a protein depends on its three - dimensional structure 
simple sugars are the basic structural unit of carbohydrates 
lipids are defined by their solubility rather than by chemical structure 
investigatinglife 
weaving a web 
a spider web is an amazing structure .  
it is not only beautiful to look at ,  but an architectural wonder serving as the spider   s home ,  its mating place ,  and its way to capture food .  
consider a fly that chances to interact with a spider web .  
the fibers of the web must slow down the fly ,  but they cannot break ,  so they need to stretch to dissipate the energy of the fly   s movement .  
the fibers holding the fly cannot stretch too much  they must be strong enough to hold the web in place .  
web fibers are far thinner than a human hair ,  yet they are very strong .  
the fibers can also be long  for example ,  the darwin   s bark spider makes strands up to  two  five  meters long .  
chemical investigations reveal that spider silk is made of variations on a single type of large molecule called a protein .  
proteins are polymers  long chains of individual smaller units called amino acids .  
the proteins in spider silks have characteristic structures and amino acid compositions that determine particular functions .  
proteins in the stretchy web fibers have amino acids that allow them to curl into spirals ,  and these spirals can slip along one another to change the fiber   s length .  
another kind of spider silk is the dragline silk ,  which is less stretchy and used to construct the outline of the web ,  its spokes ,  and the lifeline of the spider .  
the proteins in these strong fibers are made up of amino acids that cause the proteins to fold into flat sheets with ratchets ,  so that parallel sheets can fit together like lego blocks .  
this arrangement makes these fibers hard to pull apart .  
just how strong is spider silk ?  
a popular series of films features the fictional character spider - man .  
he often uses his web to ensnare evildoers and protect the innocent .  
in one scene ,  he stops a train by using ten ropes made of spider silk ,  each about  one  centimeter thick .  
scientists who study spider silk have estimated the number of silk fibers in each rope and calculated that this scene would indeed be possible .  
all of this from covalent bonds holding long chains of amino acids together and weaker forces between the chains !  
given the amazing strength shown by these proteins ,  it is not surprising that there is a lot of interest in using spider silk for human activities .  
what are practical uses for spider silk ?  
chapter  three  continues with 
 three  .  one   macromolecules characterize living things 
chemical groupings determine the structures of macromolecules 
the structures of macromolecules reflect their functions 
most macromolecules are formed by condensation and broken down by hydrolysis 
four kinds of molecules are characteristic of living things  proteins ,  carbohydrates ,  lipids ,  and nucleic acids .  
with the exception of the lipids ,  these biological molecules are polymers  ( poly ,     many ,    ?  + mer ,     unit   ?  )  constructed by the covalent bonding of smaller molecules called monomers .  
each kind of biological molecule is made up of monomers with similar chemical structures  
proteins are formed from different combinations of  two  zero  amino acids ,  all of which share chemical similarities .  
carbohydrates can form giant molecules by linking together chemically similar sugar monomers  ( monosaccharides )  to form polysaccharides .  
nucleic acids are formed from four kinds of nucleotide monomers linked together in long chains .  
lipids also form large structures from a limited set of smaller molecules ,  but in this case noncovalent forces maintain the interactions between the lipid monomers that are held together by covalent bonds .  
polymers containing thousands or more atoms are called macromolecules .  
the proteins ,  carbohydrates ,  and nucleic acids of living systems certainly fall into this category .  
although large lipid structures are not polymers in the strictest sense ,  it is convenient to treat them as macromolecules  ( see key concept  three  .  four  )  .  
green plants have the living world   s most abundant protein  ( rubisco  see chapter  one  zero  )  ,  most abundant carbohydrate  ( cellulose in plant cell walls )  ,  and most abundant lipid  ( monogalactosyl diglyceride in leaves )  .  
focus your learning 
isomers are molecules having the same composition but different structures .  
monomers are chemically linked via condensation reactions to form polymers .  
certain small groups of atoms ,  called functional groups ,  occur frequently in biological molecules  ( figure  three  .  one  )  .  
each functional group has specific chemical properties ,  and when it is attached to a larger molecule ,  it confers those properties on the larger molecule .  
one of these properties is polarity .  
looking at the structures in figure  three  .  one  ,  can you determine which functional groups are the most polar ?  
 ( hint  look for c   o ,  n   h ,  and p   o bonds .   )  
the consistent chemical behavior of functional groups helps us understand the properties of the molecules that contain them .  
figure  three  .  one  some functional groups important to living systems 
some functional groups important to living systems highlighted here are the eight functional groups most commonly found in biologically important molecules .  
r   ?  is a variable chemical grouping .  
macromolecules have many different functional groups .  
a single large protein may contain nonpolar ,  polar ,  and charged functional groups ,  each of which gives different specific properties to local sites on the macromolecule .  
as we will see ,  sometimes these different groups interact within the same macromolecule .  
they help determine the shape of the macromolecule as well as how it interacts with other macromolecules and with smaller molecules .  
using the same atoms ,  molecules can differ from one another because their functional groups can be arranged differently .  
isomers are molecules that have the same  (    iso   ?  )  chemical formula   the same kinds and numbers of atoms   but with the atoms arranged differently .  
of the different kinds of isomers ,  we will consider three  structural isomers ,  cis - trans isomers ,  and optical isomers .  
structural isomers differ in how their atoms are joined together .  
consider two simple molecules ,  each composed of four carbon and ten hydrogen atoms bonded covalently ,  both with the formula c four h one  zero  .  
these atoms can be linked in two different ways ,  resulting in different molecules  ( figure  three  .  two a )  .  
cis - trans isomers typically involve a double bond between two carbon atoms ,  where the carbons share two pairs of electrons .  
when the remaining two bonds of each of these carbons are to two different atoms or groups of atoms  ( e .  g .   ,  a hydrogen and a methyl group  figure  three  .  two b )  ,  these can be oriented on the same side or different sides of the doublebonded molecule .  
if the different atoms or groups of atoms are on the same side ,  the double bond is called cis  if they are on opposite sides ,  the bond is trans .  
these molecules can have very different properties .  
optical isomers occur when a carbon atom has four different atoms or groups of atoms attached to it .  
this pattern allows for two different ways of making the attachments ,  each the mirror image of the other  ( figure  three  .  two c )  .  
such a carbon atom is called an asymmetric carbon ,  and the two resulting molecules are optical isomers of one another .  
you can envision your right and left hands as optical isomers .  
just as a glove is specific for a particular hand ,  some biochemical molecules that can interact with one optical isomer of a carbon compound are unable to    fit   ?  the other .  
figure  three  .  two   isomers 
isomers have the same chemical formula ,  but the atoms are arranged differently .  
pairs of isomers often have different chemical properties and functions .  
the four kinds of biological macromolecules are present in roughly the same proportions in all living organisms  ( figure  three  .  three  )  .  
also ,  a protein that has a certain structure ,  and therefore function ,  in an apple tree probably has a similar structure and function in a human being ,  because the protein   s chemistry is the same wherever it is found .  
this impressive biochemical unity reflects the evolution of all life from a common ancestor ,  by descent with modification .  
an important advantage of biochemical unity is that some organisms can acquire needed raw materials by eating other organisms .  
when you eat an apple ,  the molecules you take in include carbohydrates ,  lipids ,  and proteins that can be broken down and rebuilt into the varieties of those molecules needed by humans .  
figure  three  .  three   substances found in living tissues 
each kind of macromolecule performs one or more functions such as energy storage ,  structural support ,  catalysis  ( speeding up of chemical reactions )  ,  transport of other molecules ,  regulation of other molecules ,  defense ,  movement ,  or information storage .  
these roles are not necessarily exclusive  for example ,  both carbohydrates and proteins can play structural roles ,  supporting and protecting tissues and organs .  
however ,  only the nucleic acids specialize in information storage and transmission .  
these macromolecules function as hereditary material ,  carrying the traits of both species and individuals from generation to generation .  
investigatinglife 
making spider silk 
experiment 
original paper  teule ,  f .  ,  y .  - g .  miao ,  b .  - h .  sohn ,  y .  - s .  kim ,  j .  hull ,  m .  j .  fraser ,  r .  v .  lewis and d .  l .  jarvis .   two  zero  one  two  .  
silkworms transformed with chimeric silkworm / spider silk genes spin composite silk fibers with improved mechanical properties .  
proceedings of the national academy of sciences usa .   one  zero  nine    nine  two  three     nine  two  eight  .  
spider silk is one of the strongest materials known ,  but it is very hard to harvest in quantity .  
industrial biologists are therefore using genetic engineering to produce the protein fibers .  
the scientists have coaxed silkworms ,  insect larvae that make silk fibers used in clothing ,  to make a much stronger composite of silkworm and spider silk .  
hypothesis  genetically engineered silkworms can produce silk with physical properties like those of silk made by spiders .  
method 
results 
both silks had identical physical properties of stress  ( force needed to break )  and strain  ( stretching )  .  
conclusion   silkworms can make composite silk fiber with the same properties as those of the native spider silk protein .  
work with the data 
spider silk is a protein - based material that is very strong because of its secondary structure .  
because of its potential uses by humans ,  it is desirable to obtain large amounts of these fibers .  
spiders spin out the silk fibers for their web ,  but the amounts are insufficient for human use .  
silkworms make abundant silk fibers that are used in textiles but are much weaker than spider silk .  
an international team of scientists led by randy lewis at the university of wyoming genetically engineered silkworms to make composite silkworm and #x two  zero  one  three  spider silk fibers in large quantities .  
they then tested the properties of these fibers and compared them with those of native spider silk .  
questions 
to evaluate the properties of the protein fibers ,  researchers stretched them and measured the forces involved as well as the resulting lengthening of the fibers .  
you can liken this to stretching a rubber band until it breaks .  
stress is the force required to break the fiber  it is measured in millipascals  ( mpa   one  pa is the force in newtons per unit area in m two  )  .  
strain is a measure of how much the fiber lengthens  ( as a percentage of its original length )  .  
table a compares the results from silk from spiders and from genetically engineered silkworms .  
did the genetically engineered silkworms make fibers that were similar to native spider silk ?  
why was thickness  ( diameter )  reported in the data ?  
what statistical test would you perform to determine if the measured properties were significantly different  ( see appendix b )  ?  
the scientists measured the properties composite of spider silk compared with those of kevlar  ( a synthetic fiber with many uses ,  including in bicycle tires ,  racing sails ,  and body armor )  and steel .  
the results are shown in table b .  what can you conclude about the spider silk ?  
table a silk diameter  (  and #x zero  three bc m )  max .  strain  ( % )  silkworms  two  one  .  eight   and #x zero  zero b one    one  .  six   two  two  .  zero   and #x zero  zero b one    five  .  eight  silkworms ,  gen .   and # one  six  zero   and # one  six  zero  engineer .   two  one  .  one   and #x zero  zero b one    one  .  four   three  one  .  eight   and #x zero  zero b one    five  .  two  spiders  and # one  six  zero   and # one  six  zero   eight  .  one   and #x zero  zero b one    zero  .  four   one  nine  .  seven   and #x zero  zero b one    four  .  eight  
table b material energy required to break filament and # one  six  zero   ( joules / kg )  weight  ( g / mm three  )  spider and # one  six  zero  silk  and # one  six  zero   one  two  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero   one  .  three  kevlar  and # one  six  zero   and # one  six  zero   and # one  six  zero   four  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero   one  .  four  steel  and # one  six  zero   and # one  six  zero   and # one  six  zero   and # one  six  zero   and # one  six  zero   three  ,  five  zero  zero   seven  .  eight  four  
a similar work with the data exercise may be assigned in launchpad .  
the sequence and chemical properties of the chain of monomers in a macromolecule determine its three - dimensional shape and function .  
some macromolecules fold into compact forms with surface features that make them water - soluble and capable of intimate interactions with other molecules .  
some proteins and carbohydrates form long ,  fibrous structures  ( such as those found in spider silk or hair )  that provide strength and rigidity .  
the specific structure of a macromolecule determines its function in a given environment ,  regardless of its origin .  
for example ,  composite spider silk fiber made by another organism  ( e .  g .   ,  the silkworm ,  a moth larva )  has the same properties as spider silk made by a spider  ( investigating life  making spider silk )  .  
figure  three  .  four  condensation and hydrolysis of polymers 
polymers are formed from monomers by a series of condensation reactions  ( in this case called dehydration reactions  both terms refer to the loss of water )  .  
condensation reactions result in the formation of covalent bonds between monomers .  
a molecule of water is released with each covalent bond formed  ( figure  three  .  four a )  .  
the condensation reactions that produce the different kinds of polymers differ in detail ,  but in all cases polymers form only if water molecules are removed and energy is added to the system .  
in living systems ,  specific energy - rich molecules supply the necessary energy .  
the reverse of a condensation reaction is a hydrolysis reaction  ( hydro    water ,    ?  + lysis ,     break   ?  )  .  
hydrolysis reactions result in the breakdown of polymers into their component monomers .  
water reacts with the covalent bonds that link the polymer together .  
for each covalent bond that is broken ,  a water molecule splits into two ions  ( h+ and oh -  )  ,  each of which becomes part of one of the products  ( figure  three  .  four b )  .  
 three  .  one  recap 
the four kinds of large molecules that distinguish living tissues are proteins ,  lipids ,  carbohydrates ,  and nucleic acids .  
most are polymers  chains of linked monomers .  
very large polymers are called macromolecules .  
biological molecules carry out a variety of life - sustaining functions .  
learning outcomes 
you should be able to  
distinguish between structural ,  cis - trans and optical isomers .  
give an example of two molecules that have the same functional groups but different properties ,  and explain the reason for the differences .  
sketch the chemical structures of two biological monomers ,  and show how a condensation reaction produces a covalent bond between the two .  
what are the differences between structural ,  cis - trans ,  and optical isomers ?  
examine the isomers mannose and galactose below .  
what makes them isomers of each other ?  
which functional groups do these carbohydrates contain ,  and what properties do these functional groups give to the molecules ?  
below are the general structures of three monomers in a biological polymer where a ,  b ,  and c are numerous atoms .  
draw the reaction that links them together to form a polymer abc .  
h and #x two  zero  one  four  a and #x two  zero  one  four  ohh and #x two  zero  one  four  b and #x two  zero  one  four  ohh and #x two  zero  one  four  c and #x two  zero  one  four  oh 
the four types of macromolecules can be seen as the building blocks of life .  
we will cover the unique properties of the nucleic acids in chapter  four  .  
the remainder of this chapter will describe the structures and functions of the proteins ,  carbohydrates ,  and lipids .  
chapter  three  continues with 
 three  .  two  the function of a protein depends on its three - dimensional structure 
monomers of proteins link together to make the macromolecule 
peptide linkages form the backbone of a protein 
the primary structure of a protein is its amino acid sequence 
the secondary structure of a protein requires hydrogen bonding 
the alpha helix 
the beta pleated sheet 
the tertiary structure of a protein is formed by bending and folding 
the quaternary structure of a protein consists of subunits 
shape and surface chemistry contribute to protein function 
environmental conditions affect protein structure 
protein shapes can change 
molecular chaperones help shape proteins 
proteins have very diverse roles .  
you   ll learn about the many functions of proteins  ( table  three  .  one  )  in virtually every chapter of this book .  
proteins are polymers made up of  two  zero  amino acids in different proportions and sequences .  
proteins range in size ,  from small ones such as the human hormone insulin ,  which has  five  one  amino acids and a molecular weight of  five  ,  seven  three  three  ,  to huge molecules such as the muscle protein titin ,  with  two  six  ,  nine  two  six  amino acids and a molecular weight of  two  ,  nine  nine  three  ,  four  five  one  .  
proteins consist of one or more polypeptide chains and #x two  zero  one  four  unbranched  ( linear )  polymers of covalently linked amino acids .  
variation in the sequences of amino acids in the polypeptide chains allows for the vast diversity in protein structure and function .  
each chain folds into a particular three - dimensional shape that is specified by the sequence of amino acids present in the chain .  
table  three  .  one  proteins and their functions category function enzymes catalyze  ( speed up )  biochemical reactions structural proteins provide physical stability and movement defensive proteins recognize and respond to nonself substances  ( e .  g .   ,  antibodies )  signaling proteins control physiological processes  ( e .  g .   ,  hormones )  receptor proteins receive and respond to chemical signals membrane transporters regulate passage of substances across cellular membranes storage proteins store amino acids for later use transport proteins bind and carry substances within the organism gene regulatory proteins determine the rate of expression of a gene motor proteins cause movement of structures in the cell 
focus your learning 
a protein   s tertiary structure describes its three - dimensional shape and is stabilized by hydrogen bonds ,  hydrophobic interactions ,  ionic attractions ,  and in some proteins ,  disulfide bonds .  
exposed surface groups on a protein provide both shapes and chemical groups that can interact specifically with other molecules or ions .  
the forces that stabilize a protein   s secondary ,  tertiary ,  and quaternary structures make the protein vulnerable to disruption by environmental factors .  
each amino acid has both a carboxyl functional group and an amino functional group  ( see figure  three  .  one  )  attached to the same carbon atom ,  called the     ( alpha )  carbon .  
also attached to the    carbon atom are a hydrogen atom and a side chain ,  or r group ,  designated by the letter r .  
the    carbon in this example is asymmetrical because it is bonded to four different atoms or groups of atoms .  
therefore amino acids can exist as optical isomers called d - amino acids and l - amino acids .  
d and l are abbreviations of the latin terms for right  ( dextro )  and left  ( levo )  .  
only l - amino acids  ( with the configuration shown above )  are commonly found in the proteins of most organisms ,  and their presence is an important chemical    signature   ?  of life .  
at the ph levels typically found in cells  ( usually about ph  seven  )  ,  both the carboxyl and amino groups of amino acids are ionized  the carboxyl group has lost a hydrogen ion  cooh        coo    + h+ 
and the amino group has gained a hydrogen ion  nh two  + h+        nh three + 
thus amino acids are simultaneously acids and bases .  
the side chains  ( or r groups )  of amino acids contain functional groups that are important in determining the three - dimensional structure and thus the function of the protein .  
as table  three  .  two  shows ,  the  two  zero  amino acids found in living organisms are grouped and distinguished by their side chains  
table  three  .  two  the twenty amino acids 
five amino acids have electrically charged  ( ionized )  side chains at ph levels typical of living cells .  
these side chains attract water  ( are hydrophilic )  and attract oppositely charged ions of all sorts .  
five amino acids have polar side chains .  
they are also hydrophilic and attract other polar or charged molecules .  
seven amino acids have side chains that are nonpolar and thus hydrophobic .  
in the watery environment of the cell ,  these hydrophobic groups may cluster together in the interior of the protein .  
three amino acids   cysteine ,  glycine ,  and proline   are special cases ,  although the side chains of the latter two are generally hydrophobic .  
the cysteine side chain ,  which has a terminal    sh group ,  can react with another cysteine side chain in an oxidation reaction to form a covalent bond  ( figure  three  .  five  )  .  
such a bond ,  called a disulfide bridge or disulfide bond  (    s   s    )  ,  helps determine how a polypeptide chain folds .  
the glycine side chain consists of a single hydrogen atom .  
it is small enough to fit into tight corners in the interiors of protein molecules where larger side chains could not fit .  
proline possesses a modified amino group that lacks a hydrogen atom and instead forms a covalent bond with the hydrocarbon side chain ,  resulting in a ring structure .  
this limits both its hydrogen - bonding ability and its ability to rotate around the    carbon .  
so proline is often found where a protein bends or loops .  
figure  three  .  five   a disulfide bridge 
two cysteine molecules in a polypeptide chain can form a disulfide bridge  (    s   s    )  by oxidation  ( removal of h atoms )  .  
linking amino acids involves a reaction between carboxyl and amino groups attached to the    carbon .  
the carboxyl group of one amino acid reacts with the amino group of another ,  undergoing a condensation reaction that forms a peptide linkage  ( also called a peptide bond )  .  
figure  three  .  six  depicts this reaction .  
figure  three  .  six   formation of peptide linkages 
just as a sentence begins with a capital letter and ends with a period ,  polypeptide chains have a beginning and an end .  
the    capital letter   ?  marking the beginning of a polypeptide is the amino group of the first amino acid added to the chain and is known as the n terminus .  
the    period   ?  is the carboxyl group of the last amino acid added  this is the c terminus .  
two characteristics of the peptide bond are especially important in the three - dimensional structures of proteins  
in the c   n linkage ,  the adjacent    carbons  (    c   c   n      c )  are not free to rotate fully ,  which limits the folding of the polypeptide chain .  
the oxygen bound to the carbon  ( c==o )  in the carboxyl group carries a slight negative charge  (       )  ,  whereas the hydrogen bound to the nitrogen  ( n   h )  in the amino group is slightly positive  (   + )  .  
this asymmetry of charge favors hydrogen bonding within the protein molecule itself and between molecules .  
these bonds contribute to the structures and functions of many proteins .  
in addition to these characteristics of the peptide linkage ,  the particular sequence of amino acids   with their various r groups   in the polypeptide chain also plays a vital role in determining a protein   s structure  ( focus key figure  three  .  seven a )  and function .  
focus  key figure 
figure  three  .  seven  the four levels of protein structure 
secondary ,  tertiary ,  and quaternary structure all arise from the primary structure of the protein .  
q  if a protein is gently heated to break hydrogen bonds ,  what level ( s )  of structure will be unaffected ,  and why ?  
the precise sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide chain held together by peptide bonds constitutes the primary structure of a protein  ( see figure  three  .  seven a )  .  
the backbone of the polypeptide chain consists of the repeating sequence    n   c   c    made up of the n atom from the amino group ,  the    c atom ,  and the c atom from the carboxyl group in each amino acid .  
the single - letter abbreviations for amino acids  ( see table  three  .  two  )  are used to record the amino acid sequence of a protein .  
here ,  for example ,  are the first  two  zero  amino acids  ( out of a total of  one  two  four  )  in the protein ribonuclease from a cow  ketaaakferqhmdsstsaa 
the theoretical number of different proteins is enormous .  
since there are  two  zero  different amino acids ,  there could be  two  zero      two  zero  =  four  zero  zero  distinct dipeptides  ( two linked amino acids )  and  two  zero      two  zero      two  zero  =  eight  ,  zero  zero  zero  different tripeptides  ( three linked amino acids )  .  
imagine this process of multiplying by  two  zero  extended to a protein made up of  one  zero  zero  amino acids  ( which would be considered a small protein )  .  
there could be  two  zero  one  zero  zero   ( that   s approximately  one  zero  one  three  zero  )  such small proteins ,  each with its own distinctive primary structure .  
how large is the number  two  zero  one  zero  zero  ?  
physicists tell us there aren   t that many electrons in the entire universe !  
the sequence of amino acids in the polypeptide chain determines its final shape .  
the properties associated with each functional group in the side chains of the amino acids  ( see table  three  .  two  )  determine how the protein can twist and fold ,  thus adopting a specific stable structure that distinguishes it from every other protein .  
a protein   s secondary structure consists of regular ,  repeated spatial patterns in different regions of a polypeptide chain .  
there are two basic types of secondary structure ,  both determined by hydrogen bonding between the amino acids that make up the primary structure  the    helix and the    pleated sheet .  
figure  three  .  eight   left -  and right - handed helices 
the     ( alpha )  helix is a right - handed coil that turns in the same direction as a standard wood screw  ( see figure  three  .  seven b and figure  three  .  eight  )  .  
the r groups extend outward from the peptide backbone of the helix .  
the coiling results from hydrogen bonds that form between the   + hydrogen of the n   h of one amino acid and the       oxygen of the c==o of another .  
when this pattern of hydrogen bonding is established repeatedly over a segment of the protein ,  it stabilizes the coil .  
a     ( beta )  pleated sheet is formed from two or more polypeptide chains that are almost completely extended and aligned .  
the sheet is stabilized by hydrogen bonds between the n   h groups on one chain and the c==o groups on the other  ( see figure  three  .  seven b )  .  
a    pleated sheet may form between separate polypeptide chains or between different regions of a single polypeptide chain that is bent back on itself .  
the ratcheted ,  stacked sheets in dragline spider silks  ( described at the beginning of the chapter and in investigating life  making spider silk )  are made up of    pleated sheets .  
many proteins contain regions of both    helix and    pleated sheet in the same polypeptide chain .  
in many proteins ,  the polypeptide chain is bent at specific sites and then folded back and forth ,  resulting in the tertiary structure of the protein  ( see figure  three  .  seven c )  .  
although    helices and    pleated sheets contribute to the tertiary structure ,  usually only portions of the macromolecule have these secondary structures ,  and large regions consist of tertiary structure unique to a particular protein .  
for example ,  the proteins found in stretchy spider silks  ( see the opening story )  have repeated amino acid sequences that cause the proteins to fold into spirals .  
tertiary structure is a macromolecule   s definitive three - dimensional shape ,  often including a buried interior as well as a surface that is exposed to the environment .  
the protein   s exposed outer surfaces present functional groups capable of interacting with other molecules in the cell .  
these molecules might be other macromolecules ,  including proteins ,  nucleic acids ,  carbohydrates ,  and lipid structures ,  or smaller chemical substances .  
you saw that hydrogen bonding between the n   h and c==o groups within and between chains is responsible for secondary structure .  
for tertiary structure ,  the interactions between r groups   the amino acid side chains   and between r groups and the environment are key .  
recall the various strong and weak interactions between atoms described in key concept  two  .  two  .  
here is how these interactions are involved in determining and maintaining tertiary structure  
covalent disulfide bridges can form between specific cysteine side chains  ( see figure  three  .  five  )  ,  holding a folded polypeptide in place .  
hydrogen bonds between side chains also stabilize folds in proteins .  
hydrophobic side chains can aggregate together in the interior of the protein ,  away from water ,  folding the polypeptide in the process .  
close interactions between the hydrophobic side chains are stabilized by van der waals forces .  
ionic attractions can form between positively and negatively charged side chains ,  forming salt bridges between amino acids .  
salt bridges can be near the surfaces of polypeptides or buried deep within a protein ,  away from water .  
these interactions occur between positively and negatively charged amino acids ,  for example glutamic acid  ( which has a negatively charged r group )  and arginine  ( which is positively charged )   ( see table  three  .  two  )   
figure  three  .  nine  three representations of lysozyme different molecular representations of a protein emphasize different aspects of its tertiary structure  surface features ,  sites of bends and folds ,  or sites where alpha or beta structures predominate .  
these three representations of lysozyme are similarly oriented .  
q  can you identify regions of the protein that are hydrophilic ?  
hydrophobic ?  
a protein folds into its final shape in a way that maximizes all the interactions noted and minimizes inappropriate interactions ,  such as two positively charged residues  ( a term identifying monomers in a polymer )  being near one another ,  or a hydrophobic residue being near water .  
a complete description of a protein   s tertiary structure would specify the location of every atom in the molecule in three - dimensional space relative to all the other atoms .  
figure  three  .  nine  shows three ways of modeling the structure of the protein lysozyme .  
each way has its uses .  
the space - filling model might be used to study how other molecules interact with specific sites and r groups on the protein   s surface .  
the stick model emphasizes the sites where bends occur ,  resulting in folds in the polypeptide chain .  
the ribbon model ,  perhaps the most widely used ,  shows the different types of secondary structure and how they fold into the tertiary structure .  
remember that both secondary and tertiary structure derive from primary structure .  
if a protein is heated slowly and moderately ,  the heat energy will disrupt only the weak interactions ,  causing the secondary and tertiary structure to break down .  
the protein is then said to be denatured .  
a comparison of native  ( untreated )  and denatured proteins shows major differences  
native proteins are compact  denatured proteins have a larger volume .  
native proteins exist in one ,  preferred shape  denatured proteins can take many shapes .  
native proteins have hydrogen bonds that stabilize the structure internally  denatured proteins have hydrogen bonds on the exterior ,  to water .  
you can   t    unboil   ?  an egg after it has been hard - boiled  the egg proteins are irreversibly denatured .  
amazingly ,  in some cases a protein can return to its normal tertiary structure when it cools ,  demonstrating that all the information needed to specify the unique shape of a protein is contained in its primary structure .  
this was first shown  ( using chemicals instead of heat to denature the protein )  by biochemist christian anfinsen for the protein ribonuclease  ( figure  three  .  one  zero  )  .  
experiment 
figure  three  .  one  zero a  primary structure specifies tertiary structure 
original paper  anfinsen ,  c .  b .  ,  e .  haber ,  m .  sela and f .  white ,  jr .   one  nine  six  one  .  
the kinetics of formation of native ribonuclease during oxidation of the reduced polypeptide chain .  
proceedings of the national academy of sciences usa  four  seven    one  ,  three  zero  nine  and #x two  zero  one  three   one  ,  three  one  four  .  
white ,  jr .   ,  f .   one  nine  six  one  .  
regeneration of native secondary and tertiary structures by air oxidation of reduced ribonuclease .  
journal of biological chemistry  two  three  six    one  ,  three  five  three  and #x two  zero  one  three   one  ,  three  six  zero  .  
using the protein ribonuclease ,  christian anfinsen showed that proteins spontaneously fold into functionally correct three - dimensional configurations .  
as long as the primary structure is not disrupted ,  the information for correct folding  ( under the right conditions )  is retained .  
hypothesis  under controlled conditions that simulate the normal cellular environment ,  a denatured protein can refold into a functional three - dimensional structure .  
method chemically denature a functional ribonuclease so that only its primary structure  ( i .  e .   ,  an unfolded polypeptide chain )  remains .  
once denaturation is complete ,  remove the disruptive chemicals .  
result when the disruptive agents are removed ,  three - dimensional structure is restored and the protein once again is functional .  
conclusion in normal cellular conditions ,  the primary structure of a protein specifies how it folds into a functional ,  three - dimensional structure .  
work with the data 
figure  three  .  one  zero b primary structure specifies tertiary structure 
original paper  anfinsen ,  c .  b .  et al .   one  nine  six  one   white ,  jr .   ,  f .   one  nine  six  one  .  
after the tertiary structures of proteins were shown to be highly specific ,  the question arose as to how the order of amino acids determined the three - dimensional structure .  
the second protein whose structure was determined was ribonuclease a  ( rnase a )  .  
this enzyme was readily available from cow pancreases at slaughterhouses and ,  because it works in the highly acidic environment of the cow stomach ,  was stable compared with most proteins and easy to purify .  
rnase a has  one  two  four  amino acids .  
among these are eight cysteine residues ,  which form four disulfide bridges .  
were these covalent links between cysteines essential for the three - dimensional structure of rnase a ?  
as outlined in figure  three  .  one  zero a ,  christian anfinsen and his colleagues set out to answer this question .  
questions 
initially ,  the disulfide bonds  ( s and #x two  zero  one  four  s )  in rnase a were eliminated because the sulfur atoms in cysteine residues were all reduced  (  and #x two  zero  one  four  sh )  .  
at time zero ,  reoxidation began  and at various times ,  the amount of s and #x two  zero  one  four  s bond re - formation and the activity of the enzyme were measured by chemical methods .  
the data are shown in figure a .  at what time did disulfide bonds begin to form ?  
at what time did enzyme activity begin to appear ?  
explain the difference between these times .  
the three - dimensional structure of rnase a was examined by ultraviolet spectroscopy .  
in this technique ,  the protein was exposed to different wavelengths of ultraviolet light  ( measured in nanometers )  and the amount of light absorbed by the protein at each wavelength was measured  ( e )  .  
the results are plotted in figure b .  
look carefully at the plots .  
what are the differences between the peak absorbances of native  ( untreated )  and reduced  ( denatured )  rnase a ?  
what happened when reduced rnase a was reoxidized  ( renatured )  ?  
what can you conclude about the structure of rnase a from these experiments ?  
a similar work with the data exercise may be assigned in launchpad .  
many functional proteins contain two or more polypeptide chains ,  called subunits ,  each of them folded into its own unique tertiary structure .  
the protein   s quaternary structure results from the ways in which these subunits bind together and interact  ( see figure  three  .  seven d )  .  
figure  three  .  one  one  quaternary structure of a protein 
hemoglobin has four polypeptide chains interacting to form quaternary structure  ( figure  three  .  one  one  )  .  
hydrophobic interactions ,  van der waals forces ,  hydrogen bonds ,  and ionic attractions all help hold the four subunits together to form a hemoglobin molecule .  
however ,  the weak nature of these forces permits small changes in the quaternary structure to aid the protein   s function   which is to carry oxygen in red blood cells .  
as hemoglobin binds one o two  molecule ,  the four subunits shift their relative positions slightly ,  changing the quaternary structure .  
ionic attractions are broken ,  exposing buried side chains that enhance the binding of additional o two  molecules .  
the quaternary structure changes back when hemoglobin releases its o two  molecules to the cells of the body .  
the shapes of proteins allow specific sites on their exposed surfaces to bind noncovalently to other molecules ,  which may be large or small .  
the binding is usually very specific because only certain compatible chemical groups will bind to one another .  
the specificity of protein binding depends on two general properties of the protein  its shape ,  and the chemistry of its exposed surface groups .  
figure  three  .  one  two  noncovalent interactions between proteins and other molecules 
q  why are these interactions sensitive to heat ?  
 ( hint  see table  two  .  one  .   )  
shape .  
when a small molecule collides with and binds to a much larger protein ,  it is like a baseball being caught by a catcher   s mitt  the mitt has a shape that binds to the ball and fits around it .  
just as a hockey puck or a pingpong ball does not fit a baseball catcher   s mitt ,  a given molecule will not bind to a protein unless there is a general    fit   ?  between their three - dimensional shapes .  
chemistry .  
the exposed r groups on the surface of a protein permit chemical interactions with other substances  ( figure  three  .  one  two  )  .  
three types of interactions may be involved  ionic ,  hydrophobic ,  or hydrogen bonding .  
many important functions of proteins involve interactions between surface r groups and other molecules .  
because they are determined by weak forces ,  the three - dimensional structures of proteins are influenced by environmental conditions .  
conditions that would not break covalent bonds can disrupt the weaker ,  noncovalent interactions that determine secondary ,  tertiary ,  and quaternary structure .  
such alterations may affect a protein   s shape and thus its function .  
various conditions can alter the weak ,  noncovalent interactions  
increases in temperature cause more rapid molecular movements and thus can break hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions .  
changes in ph can change the pattern of ionization of exposed carboxyl and amino groups in the r groups of amino acids ,  thus disrupting the pattern of ionic attractions and repulsions .  
high concentrations of polar substances such as urea can disrupt the hydrogen bonding that is crucial to protein structure .  
urea was used in the experiment on reversible protein denaturation shown in figure  three  .  one  zero  .  
nonpolar substances may also disrupt normal protein structure in cases where hydrophobic interactions are essential to maintain the structure .  
as we saw in the case of hemoglobin ,  which undergoes subtle shape changes when it binds oxygen ,  the shapes of proteins can change as a result of their interactions with other molecules .  
proteins can also change shape if they undergo covalent modifications .  
figure  three  .  one  three  protein structure can change 
proteins can change their tertiary structure when they bind to other molecules  ( a )  or are modified chemically  ( b )  .  
proteins interact with other molecules .  
proteins do not exist in isolation .  
in fact ,  if a biochemist    goes fishing   ?  with a particular protein ,  by attaching the protein to a chemical    hook   ?  and inserting it into cells ,  the protein will often be attached to something else when it is    reeled in .    ?  
these molecular interactions are reminiscent of the interactions that make up quaternary structure  ( see above )  .  
if a polypeptide comes into contact with another molecule ,  r groups on its surface may form weak interactions  ( e .  g .   ,  hydrophobic ,  van der waals )  with groups on the surface of the other molecule .  
this may disrupt some of the interactions between r groups within the polypeptide ,  causing it to undergo a change in shape  ( figure  three  .  one  three a )  .  
you will see many instances of this in the coming chapters .  
proteins undergo *covalent modifications .  
after it is made ,  the structure of a protein can be modified by the covalent bonding of a chemical group to the side chain of one or more of its amino acids .  
the chemical modification of just one amino acid can alter the shape and function of a protein .  
an example is the addition of a charged phosphate group to a relatively nonpolar r group .  
this can cause the amino acid to become more hydrophilic and to move to the outer surface of the protein ,  altering the shape of the protein in the region near the amino acid  ( figure  three  .  one  three b )  .  
*connect the concepts covalent modifications of proteins with subsequent changes in shape and function underlie many biological processes ,  ranging from signaling within the cell  ( see key concept  seven  .  three  )  to the action of plant hormones on growth  ( see key concept  three  seven  .  two  )  .  
within a living cell ,  a polypeptide chain is sometimes in danger of binding the wrong substance .  
there are two major situations when this can occur  
just after a protein is made .  
when a protein has not yet folded completely ,  it can present a surface that binds the wrong molecule .  
following denaturation .  
certain conditions ,  such as moderate heat ,  can cause some proteins in a living cell to denature without killing the organism .  
before the protein can refold ,  it may present a surface that binds the wrong molecule .  
in these cases ,  the inappropriate binding may be irreversible .  
figure  three  .  one  four  molecular chaperones protect proteins from inappropriate binding 
q  why are heat shock proteins important for a cell ?  
many cells have a special class of proteins ,  called chaperones ,  that protect the three - dimensional structures of other proteins .  
they bind to their partner proteins just as they are being made and also when they become denatured .  
like the chaperones at a high school dance ,  chaperone proteins prevent inappropriate interactions and enhance appropriate ones .  
typically ,  a chaperone protein has a cagelike structure that pulls in a polypeptide ,  causes it to fold into the correct shape ,  and then releases it  ( figure  three  .  one  four  )  .  
tumors make chaperone proteins ,  possibly to stabilize proteins important in the cancer process ,  and so chaperone - inhibiting drugs are being designed for use in chemotherapy .  
in some clinical situations ,  treatment with these inhibitors results in the inappropriate folding of proteins in tumor cells ,  causing the tumors to stop growing .  
 three  .  two  recap 
proteins are polymers of amino acids .  
the sequence of amino acids in a protein is its primary structure .  
secondary ,  tertiary ,  and quaternary structures arise through interactions among the amino acids .  
a protein   s three - dimensional shape and exposed chemical groups establish its binding specificity for other substances .  
learning outcomes 
you should be able to  
predict how a protein   s tertiary structure will be affected by a change in an amino acid in its primary structure .  
analyze data to determine why an amino acid change in a protein leads to a change in the protein   s shape .  
predict the effects of various environmental factors on a protein   s structure .  
suppose that ,  in a given protein ,  one lysine is replaced by aspartic acid  ( see table  three  .  two  )  .  
does this change occur in the primary structure or in the secondary structure ?  
how might it result in a change in tertiary structure ?  
in quaternary structure ?  
a single amino acid change in a protein can change its shape .  
for example ,  the amino acid glycine may normally reside at a certain position in a protein .  
if glycine is replaced with either glutamic acid or arginine ,  the protein shape near that amino acid changes significantly .  
there are two possible explanations for this  
a .  a small amino acid at that position in the polypeptide is necessary for normal shape .  
b .  an uncharged amino acid is necessary for normal shape .  
further amino acid substitutions are done to distinguish between these possibilities .  
replacing glycine with serine or alanine results in normal shape ,  but replacing glycine with valine changes the shape .  
which of the two possible explanations is supported by the observations ?  
explain your answer .  
human hair is composed of the protein keratin .  
at the hair salon ,  two techniques are used to modify the three - dimensional shape of hair .  
styling involves heat ,  and a perm involves cleaving and re - forming disulfide bonds .  
how would you investigate these phenomena in terms of protein structure ?  
chapter  three  continues with 
 three  .  three  simple sugars are the basic structural unit of carbohydrates 
monosaccharides are simple sugars 
glycosidic linkages bond monosaccharides 
polysaccharides store energy and provide structural materials 
starch 
glycogen 
cellulose 
chemically modified carbohydrates contain additional functional groups 
carbohydrates make up a large group of molecules that all have similar atomic compositions but differ greatly in size ,  chemical properties ,  and biological functions .  
carbohydrates usually have the general formula  ( c one h two o one  ) n ,   ( n stands for a number )  ,  which makes them appear as    hydrates of carbon   ?   ( a hydrate refers to water )  ,  hence their name .  
however ,  carbohydrates are not really    hydrates   ?  because the water molecules are not intact .  
rather ,  the linked carbon atoms are bonded with hydrogen atoms  (  and #x two  zero  one  four  h )  and hydroxyl groups  (  and #x two  zero  one  four  oh )  ,  the components of water .  
carbohydrates have four major biochemical roles  
they are a source of stored energy that can be released in a form usable by organisms .  
they are used to transport stored energy within complex organisms .  
they serve as carbon skeletons that can be rearranged to form new molecules .  
they form extracellular assemblies such as cell walls that provide structure to organisms .  
some carbohydrates are relatively small ,  with molecular weights of less than  one  zero  zero  .  
others are true macromolecules ,  with molecular weights in the hundreds of thousands .  
focus your learning 
carbohydrates function primarily in storing and transporting chemical energy and as sources of carbon for building new macromolecules .  
polysaccharides of glucose all provide energy storage and structural functions but vary in branching patterns and type of glycosidic linkages between glucose units .  
there are four categories of biologically important carbohydrate defined by the number of monomers  
monosaccharides  ( mono ,     one ,    ?  + saccharide ,     sugar   ?  )  ,  such as glucose ,  are simple sugars .  
they are the monomers from which the larger carbohydrates are constructed .  
disaccharides  ( di ,     two   ?  )  consist of two monosaccharides linked together by covalent bonds .  
the most familiar is sucrose ,  which is made up of covalently bonded glucose and fructose molecules .  
oligosaccharides  ( oligo ,     several   ?  )  are made up of several  (  three  and #x two  zero  one  three   two  zero  )  monosaccharides .  
polysaccharides  ( poly ,     many   ?  )  ,  such as starch ,  glycogen ,  and cellulose ,  are polymers made up of hundreds or thousands of monosaccharides .  
all living cells contain the monosaccharide glucose  it is the    blood sugar   ?  used to store and transport energy in humans .  
cells use glucose as an energy source ,  breaking it down through a series of reactions that converts stored energy to more usable chemical energy and produce carbon dioxide  this is a cellular form of the combustion reaction you saw in key concept  two  .  three  .  
glucose exists in straight chains and in ring forms .  
the ring forms predominate in virtually all biological circumstances because they are more stable in water .  
there are two versions of the glucose ring ,  called  and #x zero  three b one   -  and  and #x zero  three b two   - glucose ,  which differ only in the orientation of the    h and    oh groups attached to carbon  one   ( figure  three  .  one  five  )  .  
the    and    forms interconvert and exist in equilibrium when dissolved in water .  
figure  three  .  one  five  from one form of glucose to the other 
all glucose molecules have the formula c six h one  two o six  ,  but their structures vary .  
when dissolved in water ,  the  and #x zero  three b one   and  and #x zero  three b two    and #x two  zero  one c ring and #x two  zero  one d  forms of glucos interconvert .  
the convention used here for numbering the carbon atoms is standard in biochemistry .  
different monosaccharides contain different numbers of carbons .  
some monosaccharides are structural isomers ,  with the same kinds and numbers of atoms but in different arrangements  ( figure  three  .  one  six  )  .  
such seemingly small structural changes can significantly alter their properties .  
most of the monosaccharides in living systems belong to the d  ( right - handed )  series of optical isomers .  
figure  three  .  one  six  monosaccharides are simple sugars 
monosaccharides are made up of varying numbers of carbons .  
some hexoses are structural isomers that have the same kind and number of atoms ,  but the atoms are arranged differently .  
fructose ,  for example ,  is a hexose but forms a five - membered ring like the pentoses .  
pentoses  ( pente ,     five   ?  )  are five - carbon sugars .  
two pentoses are of particular biological importance  the backbones of the nucleic acids rna and dna contain ribose and deoxyribose ,  respectively  ( see key concept  four  .  one  )  .  
these two pentoses are not isomers of each other  rather ,  one oxygen atom is missing from carbon  two  in deoxyribose  ( de -  ,     absent   ?  )  .  
the absence of this oxygen atom is an important distinction between rna and dna .  
the hexoses  ( hex ,     six   ?  )  shown in figures  three  .  one  five  and  three  .  one  six  are a group of structural isomers with the formula c six h one  two o six  .  
common hexoses are glucose ,  fructose  ( so named because it was first found in fruits )  ,  mannose ,  and galactose .  
the disaccharides ,  oligosaccharides ,  and polysaccharides are all constructed from monosaccharides that are covalently bonded together by condensation reactions that form glycosidic linkages  ( figure  three  .  one  seven  )  .  
a single glycosidic linkage between two monosaccharides forms a disaccharide .  
for example ,  sucrose   common table sugar  ( the real stuff ,  not artificial sweetener )  in the human diet and the major disaccharide in plants   is formed from a glucose and a fructose molecule .  
figure  three  .  one  seven  disaccharides form by glycosidic linkages 
glycosidic linkages between two monosaccharides can create many different disaccharides .  
the particular disaccharide formed depends on which monosaccharides are linked ,  on the site of linkage  ( i .  e .   ,  which carbon atoms are involved )  ,  and on the form  (  and #x zero  three b one   or  and #x zero  three b two   )  of the linkage .  
the disaccharides maltose and cellobiose are made from two glucose molecules  ( see figure  three  .  one  seven  )  .  
maltose and cellobiose are structural isomers ,  both having the formula c one  two h two  two o one  one  .  
however ,  they have different chemical properties and are recognized by different *enzymes in biological tissues .  
for example ,  maltose can be hydrolyzed into its monosaccharides in the human body ,  whereas cellobiose cannot .  
*connect the concepts enzymes are an important class of proteins that may change shape when they come into contact with a reactant in a biochemical reaction .  
each enzyme is specific for the reactant it binds .  
see key concept  eight  .  four  .  
oligosaccharides contain several monosaccharides bound by glycosidic linkages at various sites .  
many oligosaccharides have additional functional groups ,  which give them special properties .  
oligosaccharides are often covalently bonded to proteins and lipids on the outer cell surface ,  where they serve as recognition signals .  
the different human blood groups  ( e .  g .   ,  the abo blood types )  get their specificities from oligosaccharide chains .  
polysaccharides are large  ( sometimes gigantic )  polymers of monosaccharides connected by glycosidic linkages  ( figure  three  .  one  eight  )  .  
in contrast to polypeptides ,  polysaccharides are not necessarily linear chains of monomers .  
each monomer unit has several sites that are capable of forming glycosidic linkages ,  and thus branched molecules are possible .  
starches comprise a family of large molecules with similar structures .  
while all starches are polysaccharides of glucose with    - glycosidic linkages  (       one  ,  four  and       one  ,  six  glycosidic bonds  see figure  three  .  one  eight a )  ,  the different starches can be distinguished by the amount of branching that occurs at carbons  one  and  six   ( see figure  three  .  one  eight b )  .  
starch is the principal energy storage compound of plants .  
some plant starches ,  such as amylose ,  are unbranched  others are moderately branched  ( for example ,  amylopectin )  .  
starch readily binds water  if you   re a cook you know this .  
however ,  when water is removed ,  hydrogen bonds form between the unbranched polysaccharide chains ,  which then aggregate .  
large starch aggregates called starch grains can be observed in the storage tissues of plant seeds  ( see figure  three  .  one  eight c )  .  
these aggregates are broken up when starch is heated ,  breaking the hydrogen bonds .  
the starch becomes less solid and crystalline and water is absorbed ,  making the starch even more amorphous .  
this is what happens in baking with wheat flour ,  and is what gives bread its texture .  
next time you eat some bread ,  think of hydrogen bonds !  
figure  three  .  one  eight  representative polysaccharides 
cellulose ,  starch ,  and glycogen have different levels of branching and compaction of the polysaccharides .  
glycogen is a water - insoluble ,  highly branched polymer of glucose .  
it is used to store glucose in the liver and muscles and is thus an energy storage compound for animals ,  as starch is for plants .  
both glycogen and starch are readily hydrolyzed into glucose monomers ,  which in turn can be broken down to liberate their stored energy .  
but if it is glucose that is needed for fuel ,  why store it in the form of glycogen ?  
the reason is that  one  ,  zero  zero  zero  glucose molecules would exert  one  ,  zero  zero  zero  times the osmotic pressure of a single glycogen molecule ,  causing water to enter cells where glucose is stored  ( see key concept  six  .  three  )  .  
if it were not for polysaccharides ,  many organisms would expend a lot of energy expelling excess water from their cells .  
as the predominant component of plant cell walls ,  cellulose is by far the most abundant organic compound on earth .  
like starch and glycogen ,  cellulose is a polysaccharide of glucose ,  but its individual monosaccharides are connected by    -  rather than by    - glycosidic linkages .  
starch is easily degraded by the actions of chemicals or enzymes .  
cellulose ,  however ,  is chemically more stable because of its    - glycosidic linkages .  
thus whereas starch is easily broken down to supply glucose for energy - producing reactions ,  cellulose is an excellent structural material that can withstand harsh environmental conditions without substantial change .  
some carbohydrates are chemically modified by the addition of functional groups such as phosphate ,  amino ,  or n - acetyl groups  ( see figure  three  .  one  nine  )  .  
for example ,  a phosphate group may be added to one or more of the    oh sites  ( figure  three  .  one  nine a )  .  
some of the resulting sugar phosphates ,  such as fructose  one  ,  six  - bisphosphate ,  are important intermediates in cellular energy reactions ,  which you   ll see in chapter  nine  .  
figure  three  .  one  nine  chemically modified carbohydrates 
added functional groups can modify the form and properties of a carbohydrate .  
when an amino group  ( nh two  )  is substituted for an    oh group ,  amino sugars ,  such as glucosamine and galactosamine ,  are produced  ( see figure  three  .  one  nine b )  .  
these compounds are important in the extracellular matrix  ( see key concept  five  .  four  )  ,  where they form parts of glycoproteins ,  which are molecules involved in keeping tissues together .  
galactosamine is a major component of cartilage ,  the material that forms caps on the ends of bones and stiffens the ears and nose .  
a derivative of glucosamine is present in the polymer chitin  ( see figure  three  .  one  nine c )  ,  the principal structural polysaccharide in the external skeletons of insects and many crustaceans  ( such as crabs and lobsters )  ,  and a component of the cell walls of fungi .  
 three  .  three  recap 
carbohydrates are composed of carbon ,  hydrogen ,  and oxygen and have the general formula  ( c one h two o one  ) n .  
they provide energy and structure to cells and are precursors of numerous important biological molecules .  
monosaccharide monomers can be connected by glycosidic linkages to form disaccharides ,  oligosaccharides ,  and polysaccharides .  
learning outcomes 
you should be able to  
identify the primary functions of carbohydrates in living organisms .  
explain why polysaccharides are useful structures for energy storage .  
use the chemical structures of polysaccharides to explain their properties .  
what qualities of the polysaccharides starch and glycogen make them useful for energy storage ?  
after looking at the cellulose molecule in figure  three  .  one  eight a ,  can you see why a large number of hydrogen bonds are present in the linear structure of cellulose shown in figure  three  .  one  eight b ?  
why is this structure so strong ?  
you have seen how amino acid monomers form protein polymers and how sugar monomers form the polymers of carbohydrates .  
now we will look at the lipids ,  which are unique among the four classes of large biological molecules in that they are not ,  strictly speaking ,  polymers .  
chapter  three  continues with 
 three  .  four  lipids are defined by their solubility rather than by chemical structure 
fats and oils are triglycerides 
phospholipids form biological membranes 
some lipids have roles in energy conversion ,  regulation ,  and protection 
carotenoids 
steroids 
vitamins 
waxes 
lipids   colloquially called fats   are hydrocarbons that are insoluble in water because of their many nonpolar covalent bonds .  
as you saw in key concept  two  .  two  ,  nonpolar hydrocarbon molecules are hydrophobic and preferentially aggregate together ,  away from water ,  which is polar .  
when nonpolar hydrocarbons are sufficiently close to one another ,  weak but additive van der waals forces help hold them together .  
the huge macromolecular aggregations that can form are not polymers in a strict chemical sense ,  because the individual lipid molecules are not covalently bonded .  
with this understanding ,  it is still useful to consider aggregations of individual lipids as a different sort of polymer .  
focus your learning 
triglycerides are simple lipids composed of glycerol bonded to three fatty acids via ester linkages .  
because phospholipids are amphipathic ,  they are able to aggregate to form phospholipid bilayers ,  which are useful in creating membrane structures .  
carotenoids ,  steroids ,  certain vitamins ,  and waxes are classified as lipids and have a variety of functions ,  depending on their chemical structures .  
there are several different types of lipids ,  and they play a number of roles in living organisms  
fats and oils store energy .  
phospholipids play important structural roles in cell membranes .  
carotenoids and chlorophylls help plants capture light energy .  
steroids and modified fatty acids play regulatory roles as hormones and vitamins .  
fat in animal bodies serves as thermal insulation .  
a lipid coating around nerves provides electrical insulation .  
oil or wax on the surfaces of skin ,  fur ,  feathers ,  and leaves repels water and prevents excessive evaporation of water from terrestrial animals and plants .  
chemically ,  fats and oils are triglycerides ,  also known as simple lipids .  
triglycerides that are solid at room temperature  ( around  two  zero   c )  are called fats  those that are liquid at room temperature are called oils .  
triglycerides are composed of two types of building blocks  fatty acids and glycerol .  
glycerol is a small molecule with three hydroxyl  (    oh )  groups  ( thus it is an alcohol )  .  
a fatty acid is made up of a long nonpolar hydrocarbon chain and an acidic polar carboxyl group  (    cooh )  .  
these chains are very hydrophobic because of their abundant c   h and c   c bonds ,  which have similar *electronegativity values and are therefore nonpolar .  
*connect the concepts as discussed in key concept  two  .  two  ,  electronegativity is a measure of the attraction an atomic nucleus exerts on electrons in a covalent bond .  
when one interacting atom is much more electronegative than the other ,  a complete transfer of one or more electrons may take place .  
a triglyceride contains three fatty acid molecules and one molecule of glycerol .  
making a triglyceride involves three condensation  ( dehydration )  reactions .  
in each reaction ,  the carboxyl group of a fatty acid bonds with a hydroxyl group of glycerol ,  resulting in a covalent bond called an ester linkage and the release of a water molecule  ( figure  three  .  two  zero  )  .  
the three fatty acids in a triglyceride molecule need not all have the same hydrocarbon chain length or structure  some may be saturated fatty acids ,  whereas others may be unsaturated  figure  three  .  two  zero  synthesis of a triglyceride 
in living things ,  the reaction that forms a triglyceride is more complex ,  but the end result is the same as shown here .  
in saturated fatty acids ,  all the bonds between the carbon atoms in the hydrocarbon chain are single bonds   there are no double bonds .  
that is ,  all the bonds are saturated with hydrogen atoms  ( figure  three  .  two  one a )  .  
these fatty acid molecules are relatively straight ,  and they pack together tightly ,  like pencils in a box .  
in unsaturated fatty acids ,  the hydrocarbon chain contains one or more double bonds .  
linoleic acid is an example of a polyunsaturated fatty acid that has two double bonds near the middle of the hydrocarbon chain ,  causing kinks in the molecule  ( figure  three  .  two  one b )  .  
such kinks prevent the unsaturated fat molecules from packing together tightly .  
figure  three  .  two  one  saturated and unsaturated fatty acids 
 ( a )  the straight hydrocarbon chain of a saturated fatty acid allows the molecule to pack tightly with other ,  similar molecules .  
 ( b )  in unsaturated fatty acids ,  kinks in the chain prevent close packing .  
the color convention in the models shown here  ( gray ,  h  red ,  o  black ,  c )  is commonly used .  
the kinks in fatty acid molecules are important in determining the fluidity and melting points of lipids .  
the triglycerides of animal fats tend to have many long - chain saturated fatty acids packed tightly together  these fats are usually solids at room temperature and have high melting points .  
the triglycerides of plants ,  such as corn oil ,  tend to have short or unsaturated fatty acids .  
because of their kinks ,  these fatty acids pack together poorly and have low melting points ,  and these triglycerides are usually liquids at room temperature .  
fatty acids are excellent storehouses for chemical energy .  
as you will see in chapter  nine  ,  when the c   h bond is broken ,  it releases significant energy that an organism can use for its own purposes ,  such as movement or building up other complex molecules .  
we have mentioned the hydrophobic nature of the many c   c and c   h bonds in fatty acids .  
but what about the carboxyl functional group at the end of the molecule ?  
when it ionizes and forms coo    ,  it is strongly hydrophilic .  
so a fatty acid is a molecule with a hydrophilic end and a long hydrophobic    tail .    ?  
it has two opposing chemical properties   part hydrophobic and part hydrophilic  the technical term for this is amphipathic .  
like triglycerides ,  phospholipids contain fatty acids bound to glycerol by ester linkages .  
in phospholipids ,  however ,  any one of several phosphate - containing compounds replaces the first or third fatty acid ,  giving phospholipids amphipathic properties  ( figure  three  .  two  two a )  .  
the phosphate functional group has a negative electric charge ,  so this portion of the molecule is hydrophilic ,  attracting polar water molecules .  
but the two fatty acids are hydrophobic ,  so they tend to avoid water and aggregate together or with other hydrophobic substances .  
in an aqueous environment ,  phospholipids line up in such a way that the nonpolar ,  hydrophobic    tails   ?  pack tightly together and the phosphate - containing    heads   ?  face outward ,  where they interact with water .  
the phospholipids can form a bilayer  a sheet two molecules thick ,  with water excluded from the core  ( figure  three  .  two  two b )  .  
biological membranes have this kind of phospholipid bilayer structure ,  and we will devote chapter  six  to their biological functions .  
figure  three  .  two  two  phospholipids 
 ( a )  phosphatidylcholine  ( lecithin )  demonstrates the structure of a phospholipid molecule .  
in other phospholipids ,  the amino acid serine ,  the sugar alcohol inositol ,  or other compounds replace choline .  
 ( b )  in an aqueous environment ,  hydrophobic interactions bring the  and #x two  zero  one c tails and #x two  zero  one d  of phospholipids together in the interior of a bilayer .  
the hydrophilic  and #x two  zero  one c heads and #x two  zero  one d  face outward on both sides of the bilayer ,  where they interact with the surrounding water molecules .  
in the paragraphs above we focused on triglycerides and phospholipids   lipids that are involved in energy storage and cell structure .  
however ,  there are other nonpolar and amphipathic lipids that have different structures and roles .  
the carotenoids are a family of light - absorbing pigments found in plants and animals .  
beta - carotene  (    - carotene )  is one of the pigments that traps light energy in leaves during photosynthesis .  
in humans ,  a molecule of    - carotene can be broken down into two vitamin a molecules .  
vitamin a is used to make the pigment cis - retinal ,  which is required for vision .  
carotenoids are responsible for the colors of carrots ,  tomatoes ,  pumpkins ,  egg yolks ,  and butter .  
the brilliant yellows and oranges of autumn leaves are also from carotenoids .  
the steroids are a family of organic compounds whose multiple rings are linked through shared carbons .  
the steroid cholesterol is an important constituent of membranes ,  helping maintain membrane integrity  ( see key concept  six  .  one  )  .  
other steroids function as hormones  chemical signals that carry messages from one part of the body to another  ( see chapter  four  zero  )  .  
cholesterol is synthesized in the liver and is the starting material for making steroid hormones such as testosterone and estrogen .  
vitamins are small molecules that are not synthesized by the human body or in some cases are synthesized in inadequate amounts and so must be acquired from the diet  ( see chapter  five  one  )  .  
for example ,  vitamin a is formed from the    - carotene found in green and yellow vegetables  ( see above )  .  
in humans ,  a deficiency of vitamin a leads to dry skin ,  eyes ,  and internal body surfaces ,  retarded growth and development ,  and night blindness ,  which is a diagnostic symptom for the deficiency .  
you   ll see in chapter  one  eight  how plant biologists are producing crops that contain more vitamin a to alleviate this condition .  
vitamins d ,  e ,  and k are also lipids .  
birds and mammals have glands in their skins that secrete waxy coatings onto their hair or feathers .  
these coatings repel water and help keep the hair and feathers pliable .  
the shiny leaves of plants such as holly ,  familiar during winter holidays ,  also have waxy coatings .  
waxy coatings on plants can help them retain water and exclude pathogens .  
bees make their honeycombs out of wax .  
waxes are substances that are hydrophobic and plastic ,  or malleable ,  at room temperature .  
each wax molecule consists of a saturated ,  long - chain fatty acid and a saturated ,  long - chain alcohol joined by an ester linkage .  
the result is a very long molecule with  four  zero     six  zero  ch two  groups .  
investigatinglife 
what are practical uses for spider silk ?  
spider silk protein has many glycine and alanine resides ,  which are hydrophobic and cause the protein to fold into a fibrous shape .  
more than  one  ,  zero  zero  zero  individual polypeptide chains hydrogen bond and hydrophobically interact with one another to form long silk fibers .  
because of the strength arising from its protein structure ,  spider silk is much desired for human uses .  
using genetic engineering ,  biologists have been able to harvest composite silk fibers produced by silkworms in industrial quantities .  
now that this composite silkworm and #x two  zero  one  three  spider silk is available ,  numerous applications  ( functions related to structure )  can be contemplated .  
for example ,  a recent study compared surgical sutures made from spider silk with widely used sutures made from synthetic fibers to hold together injured tendons .  
the spider silk sutures were far superior ,  holding their strength over many cycles of tendon movement during healing .  
another application on the horizon is bulletproof vests  the energy required to break a spider silk filament is at least  one  zero  zero  times greater than the energy of a typical bullet in impact .  
future directions 
perhaps the most widespread use for spider silk may be in textiles .  
by definition ,  textiles are flexible materials made of natural or artificial fibers  ( threads )  that are woven together .  
the clothes you are wearing are textiles ,  perhaps made of cotton fibers  ( made up of cellulose )  or polyester fibers  ( an artificial polymer )  or a combination .  
of course ,  silk fibers from silkworms have a long history in textiles ,  particularly in asia .  
the addition of spider silk fibers ,  or combined spider and # eight  two  one  one  silkworm silk to existing textiles ,  holds great promise to increase the strength and in some cases the flexibility of the textile .  
 three  .  four  recap 
lipids include both hydrophobic and amphipathic molecules that are largely composed of carbon and hydrogen .  
they are important in energy storage ,  light absorption ,  intercellular communication ,  and biological structures .  
a phospholipid is composed of two hydrophobic fatty acids linked to glycerol and a hydrophilic phosphate group .  
cell membranes contain phospholipid bilayers .  
learning outcomes 
you should be able to  
compare and contrast triglycerides in fats and oils .  
describe how the polar and nonpolar natures of phospholipids result in the formation of a membrane bilayer .  
explain why carotenoids ,  steroids ,  certain vitamins ,  and waxes are classified as lipids .  
if phospholipids were placed in a nonpolar solvent ,  would a membrane - type bilayer structure form ?  
explain your answer ,  using a diagram .  
what is the difference between fats and oils ?  
why are steroids and some vitamins classified as lipids ?  
in this chapter we discussed three of the classes of macromolecules that are characteristic of living organisms .  
all organisms are made up of these three types of macromolecules ,  a fact that shows the wonderful biochemical unity of life .  
this unity in turns implies that all life has a common origin  ( see key concept  one  .  one  )  .  
essential to this origin was a fourth class of macromolecule ,  the nucleic acids .  
in the next chapter we will turn to the related topics of nucleic acids and the origin of life .  
chapter  three  continues with 
chapter summary 
 three  .  one  
macromolecules characterize living things 
see animation  three  .  one  
macromolecules are polymers constructed by the formation of covalent bonds between smaller molecules called monomers .  
macromolecules in living organisms include polysaccharides ,  proteins ,  and nucleic acids .  
organizationally ,  large lipid structures may also be considered like macromolecules .  
functional groups are small groups of atoms that are consistently found together in a variety of different macromolecules .  
functional groups have particular chemical properties that they confer on any larger molecule of which they are a part .  
review figure  three  .  one  ,  activity  three  .  one  
structural ,  cis - trans ,  and optical isomers have the same kinds and numbers of atoms but differ in their structures and properties .  
review figure  three  .  two  
the many functions of macromolecules are directly related to their three - dimensional shapes ,  which in turn result from the sequences and chemical properties of their monomers .  
monomers are joined by condensation reactions ,  which release a molecule of water for each bond formed .  
hydrolysis reactions use water to break polymers into monomers .  
review figure  three  .  four   three  .  two  
the function of a protein depends on its three - dimensional structure 
the functions of proteins include support ,  protection  ( e .  g .   ,  skin surface )  ,  catalysis ,  transport ,  defense ,  regulation ,  movement ,  signaling ,  and storage .  
review table  three  .  one  
proteins consist of one or more polypeptide chains ,  which are polymers of amino acids .  
four atoms or groups are attached to a central carbon atom  a hydrogen atom ,  an amino group ,  a carboxyl group ,  and a variable r group .  
the particular properties of each amino acid depend on its side chain ,  or r group ,  which may be charged ,  polar ,  or hydrophobic .  
review table  three  .  two  ,  activity  three  .  two  
peptide linkages ,  also called peptide bonds ,  covalently link amino acids into polypeptide chains .  
these bonds form by condensation reactions between the carboxyl and amino groups .  
review figure  three  .  six  
the primary structure of a protein is the sequence of amino acids in the chain .  
this chain is folded into a secondary structure ,  which in different parts of the protein may form an    helix or a    pleated sheet .  
review focus  key figure  three  .  seven a   c 
disulfide bridges and noncovalent interactions between amino acids cause polypeptide chains to fold into three - dimensional tertiary structures .  
these bridges as well as noncovalent interactions allow multiple polypeptide chains to form quaternary structures .  
review figure focus  key figure  three  .  seven c and d 
heat ,  alterations in ph ,  and certain chemicals can all result in a protein becoming denatured .  
this involves the loss of tertiary and / or econdary structure as well as biological function .  
review figure  three  .  one  zero  
the specific shape and structure of a protein allow it to bind noncovalently to other molecules .  
in addition ,  amino acids may be modified by the covalent bonding of chemical groups to their side chains .  
such binding may result in a protein changing its shape .  
review figures  three  .  one  two  ,   three  .  one  three  
chaperone proteins enhance correct protein folding and prevent inappropriate binding to other molecules .  
review figure  three  .  one  four   three  .  three  
simple sugars are the basic structural unit of carbohydrates 
carbohydrates contain carbon bonded to hydrogen and oxygen atoms and have the general formula  ( c one h two o one  ) n .  
monosaccharides are the monomers that make up larger carbohydrates .  
hexoses such as glucose are six - carbon monosaccharides  pentoses have five carbons .  
review figure  three  .  one  six  ,  activity  three  .  three  
glycosidic linkages ,  which have either an    or a    orientation in space ,  are covalent bonds between monosaccharides .  
two linked monosaccharides are called a disaccharide  larger units are oligosaccharides and polysaccharides .  
review figure  three  .  one  seven  
starch is a polymer of glucose that stores energy in plants ,  and glycogen is an analogous polymer in animals .  
they can be easily broken down to release stored energy .  
review figure  three  .  one  eight  
cellulose is a very stable glucose polymer and is the principal structural component of plant cell walls .   three  .  four  
lipids are defined by their solubility rather than by chemical structure 
lipids are hydrocarbons that are insoluble in water because of their many nonpolar covalent bonds .  
they play roles in energy storage ,  membrane structure ,  light harvesting ,  intercellular communication ,  and protection .  
fats and oils are triglycerides .  
a triglyceride is composed of three fatty acids covalently bonded to a molecule of glycerol by ester linkages .  
review figure  three  .  two  zero  
a saturated fatty acid has a hydrocarbon chain with no double bonds .  
these molecules can pack together tightly .  
the hydrocarbon chain of an unsaturated fatty acid has one or more double bonds that bend the chain ,  preventing close packing .  
review figure  three  .  two  one  
a phospholipid has a hydrophobic hydrocarbon    tail   ?  and a hydrophilic phosphate    head   ?   that is ,  it is amphipathic .  
in water ,  the interactions of the tails and heads of phospholipids generate a phospholipid bilayer .  
the heads are directed outward ,  where they interact with the surrounding water .  
the tails are packed together in the interior of the bilayer ,  away from water .  
review figure  three  .  two  two  
other lipids include vitamins a ,  d ,  e ,  and k ,  steroids ,  and plant pigments such as carotenoids .  
go to learningcurve  ( in launchpad )  for dynamic quizzing that helps you solidify your understanding of this chapter .  
learningcurve adapts to your responses ,  giving you the practice you need to master each key concept .  
apply what you   ve learned 
review 
 three  .  two  a protein   s tertiary structure describes its three - dimensional shape and is stabilized by hydrogen bonds ,  hydrophobic interactions ,  ionic attractions ,  and in some proteins ,  disulfide bonds .  
 three  .  two  exposed surface groups on a protein provide both shapes and chemical groups that can interact specifically with other molecules or ions .  
original paper  conlon ,  j .  m .   two  zero  zero  one  .  
evolution of the insulin molecule  insights into structure - activity and phylogenetic relationships .  
peptides  two  two    one  one  eight  three     one  one  nine  three  .  
dogs ,  like people ,  tend to have more health problems as they age .  
about one in every  one  zero  zero  dogs that reach age  one  two  loses the ability to synthesize insulin ,  a hormone in the body that regulates cell uptake of glucose from the blood .  
veterinarians prescribe injections of porcine insulin for treatment .  
porcine insulin is extracted from pigs    blood and has the same amino acid sequence as canine  ( dog )  insulin .  
figure a shows the structure of canine insulin ,  which is composed of two polypeptides ,  an a chain and a b chain ,  linked by disulfide bridges .  
figure b shows how these chains fold to form secondary and tertiary structures .  
labels a two  ,  a three  ,  a one  nine  ,  b two  three  ,  and b two  four  indicate three amino acids on the a chain and two on the b chain thought to be directly involved in the binding of insulin to target proteins on body cell surfaces .  
since insulin is a protein found in all vertebrate animals ,  scientists have compared the structures of insulin from different vertebrate species .  
the table shows a comparison of a few amino acids in the a chain and b chain of insulins from a wide range of vertebrates .  
species a one  a two  a three  a four  a five  a one  nine  a two  one  b one  two  b one  six  b two  three  b two  four  b two  five  b two  six  canine gly ile val glu gln tyr asn val tyr gly phe phe tyr guinea pig  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   asp  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   casiragua  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   asp  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   tyr arg arg  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   asp  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   cuis  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   asp  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   ser iguana  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   gln  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   tyr  and #x two  zero  one  three   rattlesnake  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   phe  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   tyr  and #x two  zero  one  three   caecilian  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   lys  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   wood frog  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   ser  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   surinam toad  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   his  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   cod  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   asp  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   eel  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   phe tilapia  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   glu  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   bowfin  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   phe  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   spiny dogfish  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   his  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   tyr  and #x two  zero  one  three   hammerhead shark  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   asp his  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   tyr  and #x two  zero  one  three   striped gudgeon fish  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   lys  and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three    and #x two  zero  one  three   tyr  and #x two  zero  one  three   
source  conlon ,  j .  m .   two  zero  zero  one  .  
evolution of the insulin molecule  insights into structure - activity and phylogenetic relationships .  
peptides  two  two    one  one  eight  three  and #x two  zero  one  three   one  one  nine  three  .  
note  a dash indicates the amino acid is the same as in the canine .  
questions 
 one  .  
what types of forces are involved in the binding of insulin to its target ?  
what would be true about the positions of the amino acids a two  ,  a three  ,  a one  nine  ,  b two  three  ,  and b two  four  that would allow them to be involved in binding ?  
 two  .  
what evidence shown in the table supports the hypothesis that amino acids a two  ,  a three  ,  a one  nine  ,  b two  three  ,  and b two  four  are important in insulin   s binding activity ?  
 three  .  
what conclusion can you draw about the finding that there are amino acid variations in some positions across vertebrate species ?  
what could account for the finding that only certain amino acids are found at those positions and not at a wide range of amino acids ?  
 four  .  
develop a hypothesis about the importance of cysteine residues in canine insulin .  
how could you test your hypothesis ?  
go to launchpad for the ebook ,  learningcurve ,  animations ,  activities ,  flashcards ,  and additional resources and assignments .  
end of chapter  three  .  
a camera on nasa   s mars curiosity rover  ( inset )  took this photo of the martian surface in  two  zero  one  two  .  
note the mountains in the distance .  
key concepts  
nucleic acid structures reflect their functions 
the small molecules of life originated on primitive earth 
the large molecules of life originated from small molecules 
cells originated from their molecular building blocks 
investigatinglife 
looking for life 
on earth you can find organisms and the chemical signatures of life everywhere   even deep under the sea ,  inside volcanoes ,  buried in ice ,  and floating in the air .  
determining life   s origin is difficult because  ( with few exceptions )  the simple organisms that first existed left no fossils .  
on mars ,  however ,  things might be different .  
mars has fascinated scientists  ( and science - fiction writers )  since its discovery by astronomers more than  three  ,  zero  zero  zero  years ago .  
a cold planet ,  mars has a geology that has changed little over several billion years ,  and so any evidence of life may be preserved .  
by the late nineteenth century ,  distinguished professors of astronomy firmly believed there was life on mars ,  based on observations through telescopes that showed polar ice caps that changed with the seasons ,  darker areas thought to be liquid water ,  and even markings that resembled canals .  
better telescopes ,  chemical analyses based on light emission  ( spectroscopy )  ,  orbiting satellites ,  and landers controlled from earth have laid to rest many of the initial ideas about life on mars .  
but the challenge of finding present or past life on mars remains .  
the search revolves around finding organisms ,  evidence of a current or past environment where life could exist ,  and chemical signatures of present or past life .  
unlike earth ,  mars now lacks a magnetic field to protect against cosmic radiation arriving from space .  
the surface of mars is assaulted with very high levels of radiation ,  making it inhospitable to life .  
so any current life would have to be below the surface ,  where radiation is much lower .  
since life as we know it requires water ,  determining whether mars now has or ever had water has been a central question .  
it is now established that water exists on the surface of mars   at the poles ,  frozen ,  and in water vapor in its atmosphere .  
there is even evidence that trickles of water may exist on the surface ,  kept liquid in the bitter cold by a high salt concentration .  
the discovery of methane  ( ch four  )  in the atmosphere of mars has generated additional excitement and speculation .  
might this methane be a by - product of an organic reaction ?  
the search for evidence of the chemical elements  ( c ,  h ,  o ,  p ,  n ,  and s )  of life introduced in chapter  two  continues .  
can we find evidence of life on mars ?  
chapter  four  continues with 
 four  .  one   biological membranes are lipid   protein bilayers 
nucleic acids are informational macromolecules 
base pairing occurs in both dna and rna 
dna carries information and is expressed through rna 
the dna base sequence reveals evolutionary relationships 
nucleotides have other important roles 
nucleic acids contain life and #x two  zero  one  nine  s genetic code .  
from medicine to evolution ,  from agriculture to forensics ,  the properties of nucleic acids affect our lives every day .  
it is with nucleic acids that the concept of  and #x two  zero  one c information and #x two  zero  one d  entered the biological vocabulary .  
nucleic acids are uniquely capable of coding for and transmitting biological information .  
focus your learning 
the structures of dna and rna enable their functions in storing and transferring genetic information .  
base pairing between nucleotides in dna and rna provides the structure needed for transfer of genetic information .  
base sequences of nucleotides in dna provide the chemical diversity needed for storage of genetic information .  
nucleotides other than those found in dna and rna have diverse functions within the cell .  
nucleic acids are polymers specialized for the storage ,  transmission ,  and use of genetic information .  
there are two types of nucleic acids  dna  ( deoxyribonucleic acid )  and rna  ( ribonucleic acid )  .  
although you have heard of it in countless pronouncements as a metaphor for the essence of something  (  and #x two  zero  one c it and #x two  zero  one  nine  s in her dna and #x two  zero  one d  )  ,  dna is first and foremost a macromolecule .  
its structure encodes hereditary information and passes it from generation to generation .  
through rna intermediates ,  the information encoded in dna specifies the amino acid sequences of proteins and controls the expression  ( that is ,  the synthesis )  of other rnas .  
in chapter  one  one  you will learn how ,  during cell division and reproduction ,  information is preserved from the dna of the parental cell when both the cell and its dna are duplicated to form two new daughter cells .  
chapter  one  three  will describe how information flows from dna to rna to the proteins that ultimately carry out many of life and #x two  zero  one  nine  s functions .  
here we focus on the chemistry of the nucleic acids ,  revealing how their structures reflect their functions .  
figure  four  .  one   nucleotide chemistry 
nucleic acids are polymers composed of monomers called nucleotides .  
a nucleotide has three components  a nitrogencontaining base ,  a pentose sugar ,  and one to three phosphate groups  ( figure  four  .  one  )  .  
molecules consisting of a pentose sugar and a nitrogenous base and #x two  zero  one  four  but no phosphate group and #x two  zero  one  four  are called nucleosides .  
the nucleotides that make up nucleic acids contain just one phosphate group and #x two  zero  one  four  they are nucleoside monophosphates .  
the bases of the nucleic acids take one of two chemical forms  a six - membered single - ring structure called a pyrimidine ,  or a fused double - ring structure called a purine  ( see figure  four  .  one  )  .  
in dna ,  the pentose sugar is deoxyribose ,  which differs from the ribose found in rna by the absence of one oxygen atom  ( see figure  three  .  one  six  )  .  
figure  four  .  two   linking nucleotides together 
a nucleic acid forms when nucleotide monomers are added to an existing chain one at a time .  
the pentose sugar in the last nucleotide of the existing chain and the phosphate on the new nucleotide undergo a condensation reaction  ( meaning h two o is removed  see figure  three  .  four  )  ,  and the resulting bond is called a phosphodiester linkage  ( figure  four  .  two  )  .  
the phosphate on the incoming nucleotide is attached to the  five     carbon atom of its sugar ,  and the linkage occurs between it and the  three     carbon on the last sugar of the existing chain .  
because each nucleotide is added to the  three     carbon of the last sugar ,  nucleic acids are said to elongate in the  five     - to -  three     direction .  
as with carbohydrates  ( see key concept  three  .  three  )  ,  nucleic acids can range in size .  
oligonucleotides are relatively short ,  with about  two  zero  nucleotide monomers ,  whereas polynucleotides can be much longer .  
oligonucleotides include rna molecules that function as  and #x two  zero  one c primers and #x two  zero  one d  to begin the duplication of dna  rna molecules that regulate the expression of genes  and synthetic dna molecules used for amplifying and analyzing other ,  longer nucleotide sequences .  
polynucleotides ,  more commonly referred to as nucleic acids ,  include dna and some rna .  
polynucleotides can be very long ,  and indeed are the longest polymers in the living world .  
some dna molecules in humans contain hundreds of millions of nucleotides .  
dna and rna differ somewhat in their sugar groups ,  bases ,  and strand structure  ( table  four  .  one  )  .  
four bases are found in dna  adenine  ( a )  ,  cytosine  ( c )  ,  guanine  ( g )  ,  and thymine  ( t )  .  
rna is also made up of four different monomers ,  but its nucleotides include uracil  ( u )  instead of thymine .  table  four  .  one   distinguishing rna from dna nucleic acid sugar bases name of nucleoside strands rna ribose adenine adenosine one cytosine cytidine guanine guanosine uracil uridine rna deoxyribose adenine deoxyadenosine two cytosine deoxycytidine guanine deoxyguanosine thymine deoxythymidine 
a key to understanding the structure and function of nucleic acids is the principle of complementary base pairing .  
in dna ,  thymine and adenine pair  ( t - a )  ,  and cytosine and guanine pair  ( c - g )  .  
in rna ,  the base pairs are a - u and c - g .  
base pairs are held together primarily by hydrogen bonds .  
as you can see ,  there are polar c==o and n and #x two  zero  one  four  h covalent bonds in the bases  these can form hydrogen bonds between the       on an oxygen or nitrogen of one base and the   + on a hydrogen of another base .  
individual hydrogen bonds are relatively weak ,  but there are so many of them in a dna or rna molecule that collectively they provide a considerable force of attraction ,  which can bind together two polynucleotide strands ,  or a single strand that folds back onto itself .  
this attraction is not as strong as a covalent bond ,  however .  
this means that individual base pairs are relatively easy to break with a modest input of energy .  
as you will see ,  the breaking and making of hydrogen bonds in nucleic acids is vital to their role in living systems .  
rna even though rna is generally single - stranded  ( figure  four  .  three a )  ,  base pairing can occur between different regions of the molecule .  
portions of the single - stranded rna molecule can fold back and pair with one another  ( figure  four  .  three b )  .  
thus complementary hydrogen bonding between ribonucleotides plays an important role in determining the three - dimensional shapes of some rna molecules .  
complementary base pairing can also take place between ribonucleotides and deoxyribonucleotides .  
adenine in an rna strand can pair either with uracil  ( in another rna strand )  or with thymine  ( in a dna strand )  .  
similarly ,  an adenine in dna can pair either with thymine  ( in the complementary dna strand )  or with uracil  ( in rna )  .  
figure  four  .  three   rna 
q  what would happen if a folded rna molecule were heated ?  
recall the effect of heat on hydrogen bonds .  
dna usually ,  *dna is double - stranded  that is ,  it consists of two separate polynucleotide strands of the same length that are held together by hydrogen bonds between base pairs  ( focus  key figure  four  .  four a )  .  
in contrast to rna and #x two  zero  one  nine  s diversity in three - dimensional structure ,  dna is remarkably uniform .  
the a - t and g - c base pairs are about the same size  ( each is a purine paired with a pyrimidine )  ,  and the two polynucleotide strands form a  and #x two  zero  one c ladder and #x two  zero  one d  that twists into a double helix  ( focus  key figure  four  .  four b )  .  
the sugar   phosphate groups form the sides of the ladder ,  and the bases with their hydrogen bonds form the  and #x two  zero  one c rungs and #x two  zero  one d  on the inside .  
dna carries genetic information in its sequence of base pairs rather than in its three - dimensional structure .  
the key differences among dna molecules are their different nucleotide base sequences .  
focus  key figure 
figure  four  .  four  dna 
 ( a )  dna usually consists of two strands running in opposite directions that are held together by hydrogen bonds between purines and pyrimidines on the two strands .  
 ( b )  the two strands in dna are coiled in a right - handed double helix .  
q  for replication or transcription ,  dna must  and #x two  zero  one c unwind and #x two  zero  one d  to expose bases .  
what bonds must be broken for this to occur ?  
*connect the concepts as explained in key concept  one  three  .  two  ,  the two strands of a dna molecule fit together perfectly because they run in opposite directions and #x two  zero  one  four  that is ,  they are antiparallel to one another .  
equal distance between strands is maintained because a purine on one strand is always found opposite a pyrimidine on the other .  
dna is an informational molecule .  
the information is encoded in the sequence of bases carried in its strands .  
for example ,  the information encoded in the sequence tcagca is different from the information in the sequence ccagca .  
dna transmits information in two ways  
dna can be reproduced exactly .  
this process ,  called dna replication ,  is done by polymerization using an existing strand as a base - pairing template .  
certain dna sequences can be copied into rna ,  in a process called transcription .  
the nucleotide sequence in the rna can then be used to specify a sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide chain ,  in the process called translation .  
the overall process of transcription and translation is called gene expression .  
the details of these important processes will be described in later chapters ,  but it is important to realize two things at this point  
dna replication and transcription depend on the base - pairing properties of nucleic acids .  
recall that the hydrogen - bonded base pairs are a - t and g - c in dna and a - u and g - c in rna .  
consider ,  for example ,  this double - stranded dna region  
 five     - tcagca -  three  
 three     - agtcgt -  five  
transcription of the lower strand will result in a single strand of rna with the sequence  five     - ucagca -  three     .  
can you figure out the sequence that the top strand would produce ?  
dna replication usually involves the entire dna molecule .  
since dna holds essential information ,  it must be replicated completely and accurately so that each new cell or new organism receives a complete set of dna from its parent  ( figure  four  .  five a )  .  
the complete set of dna in a living organism is called its genome .  
however ,  not all of the information in the genome is needed at all times and in all tissues ,  and only small sections of the dna are transcribed into rna molecules .  
the sequences of dna that are transcribed into rna are called genes  ( figure  four  .  five b )  .  
figure  four  .  five  dna replication and transcription 
q  what do you think determines whether a particular cell transcribes a sequence of dna into rna ?  
in humans ,  the gene that encodes the major protein in hair  ( keratin )  is expressed in skin cells that produce hair .  
the genetic information in the keratin - encoding gene is transcribed into rna and then translated into a keratin polypeptide .  
in other tissues such as the muscles ,  the keratin gene is not transcribed ,  but other genes are and #x two  zero  one  four  for example ,  the genes that encode proteins present in muscles but not in skin or hair .  
these genes are turned on and off by the control of gene expression ,  which we will describe in chapter  one  six  .  
dna carries hereditary information from one generation to the next ,  gradually accumulating changes in its base sequences over long periods of time .  
a series of dna molecules stretches back through the lineage of every organism to the beginning of biological evolution on earth ,  about  three  .  eight  billion years ago .  
therefore closely related living species have more similar base sequences than do species that are more distantly related .  
the same is true for closely related versus distantly related individuals within a species .  
the details of how scientists use this information will be covered in chapter  two  four  .  
improvements in methods for dna sequencing and analysis by computer programs have enabled scientists to determine the entire dna base sequences and #x two  zero  one  four  the genome and #x two  zero  one  four  of many organisms ,  including humans ,  whose genome contains about  three  billion base pairs .  
these studies have confirmed many of the evolutionary relationships that had been inferred previously from more traditional comparisons of body structure ,  biochemistry ,  and physiology .  
for example ,  traditional comparisons had indicated that the closest living relative of humans  ( homo sapiens )  is the chimpanzee  ( genus pan )  .  
in fact ,  the chimpanzee genome shares more than  nine  eight  percent of its dna base sequence with the human genome .  
increasingly ,  scientists turn to dna analyses to elucidate evolutionary relationships when other comparisons are not possible or are not conclusive .  
for example ,  dna studies revealed a close relationship between starlings and mockingbirds that was not expected on the basis of their anatomy or behavior .  
nucleotides are more than just the building blocks of nucleic acids .  
as we will describe in later chapters ,  there are several nucleotides  ( or modified nucleotides )  with other functions  
atp  ( adenosine triphosphate )  acts as an agent of energy transfer in many biochemical reactions  ( see key concept  eight  .  two  )  .  
gtp  ( guanosine triphosphate )  serves as an energy source ,  especially in protein synthesis .  
it also plays a role in the transfer of information from the environment to cells  ( see key concept  seven  .  two  )  .  
camp  ( cyclic adenosine monophosphate )  is a special nucleotide with an additional bond between the sugar and the phosphate group .  
it is essential in many processes ,  including the actions of hormones and the transmission of information by the nervous system  ( see key concept  seven  .  three  )  .  
nucleotides play roles as carriers in the synthesis and breakdown of carbohydrates and lipids .  
 four  .  one  recap 
the nucleic acids dna and rna are polymers made up of nucleotide monomers .  
the sequence of nucleotides in dna carries the information that is used by rna to specify primary protein structure .  
the genetic information in dna is passed from generation to generation and can be used to understand evolutionary relationships .  
learning outcomes 
you should be able to  
explain how purines and pyrimidines differ .  
explain how biological information is encoded in dna .  
identify cellular functions of nucleotides other than information processing .  
what are the key differences between purines and pyrimidines and how does this relate to the structure of dna ?  
how can dna molecules be very diverse ,  even though they appear to be structurally similar ?  
single - stranded nucleic acids about  two  five  bases long are called aptamers .  
because many sequences are possible ,  particular aptamers can be used to bind to specific targets ,  either as drugs to a protein target or for quantitating a small molecule in tissues or fluids .  
how can aptamers have such diversity and specificity for binding ?  
we have seen that the nucleic acids rna and dna carry the blueprint of life ,  and that the inheritance of these macromolecules reaches back to the beginning of evolutionary time .  
but when ,  where ,  and how did nucleic acids arise on earth ?  
how did the building blocks of life ,  such as amino acids and sugars ,  originally arise ?  
chapter  four  continues with 
 four  .  two  the small molecules of life originated on primitive earth 
living organisms do not repeatedly come from inanimate nature 
life began in water 
prebiotic synthesis experiments model early earth 
hot chemistry 
cold chemistry 
life may have come from outside earth 
you learned in chapter  two  that living things are composed of the same elements as the inanimate universe  ( e .  g .   ,  c ,  h ,  o ,  p ,  n ,  and s )  .  
but usually the arrangements of these atoms into molecules are unique in biological systems .  
you will not find biological molecules such as proteins in nonliving matter unless they came from a once - living organism .  
focus your learning 
experimental evidence was used to refute the idea that life could arise from nonliving materials .  
water did not always exist on earth ,  and its presence on earth was necessary before life could arise .  
experimental evidence supports the theory that life evolved as the result of chemical and physical changes on early earth .  
evidence discovered in meteorites and on mars raises questions about whether life evolved on bodies other than earth .  
we can   t know for certain how life on earth began .  
but one thing is sure  life  ( or at least life as we know it )  is not constantly being restarted .  
that is ,  spontaneous generation of life from inanimate nature is not happening repeatedly before our eyes .  
now and in the past ,  all life has come from life that existed before .  
but people ,  including scientists ,  did not always believe this .  
many cultures and religions have suggested that life can arise repeatedly from nonliving matter .  
during the european renaissance  ( from the fourteenth to seventeenth centuries ,  a period that witnessed the birth of modern science )  ,  most people thought that at least some forms of life arose repeatedly and directly from inanimate or decaying matter by spontaneous generation .  
people thought ,  for example ,  that mice arose from sweaty clothes placed in dim light  that frogs sprang directly from moist soil  and that rotting meat produced flies .  
one scientist who doubted these assumptions was the italian physician and poet francesco redi .  
redi hypothesized that flies arose not by some mysterious transformation of decaying meat ,  but from other flies that laid their eggs on the meat .  
in  one  six  six  eight  ,  redi performed a scientific experiment   a relatively new concept at the time   to test his hypothesis .  
he set out three jars containing chunks of meat  
one jar contained meat exposed to both air and flies .  
a second jar was covered with a fine cloth so that the meat was exposed to air but not to flies .  
the third jar was sealed with a lid so the meat was exposed to neither air nor flies .  
as he had hypothesized ,  redi found maggots ,  which then hatched into flies ,  only in the first jar .  
this finding demonstrated that maggots could occur only where flies were present before .  
the idea that a complex organism like a fly could appear spontaneously from a nonliving substance in the meat ,  or from  and #x two  zero  one c something in the air ,  and #x two  zero  one d  was laid to rest .  
well ,  perhaps not quite to rest .  
in the  one  six  six  zero s ,  the newly invented microscope revealed a vast biological world that had never been seen before .  
virtually every environment on earth was found to be teeming with tiny organisms .  
some scientists believed these organisms arose spontaneously from their rich chemical environment ,  by the action of a  and #x two  zero  one c life force .   and #x two  zero  one d  but experiments in the nineteenth century by the great french scientist louis pasteur showed that microorganisms can arise only from other microorganisms ,  and that an environment without life remains lifeless  ( figure  four  .  six  )  .  
experiment 
figure  four  .  six   disproving the spontaneous generation of life 
source  pasteur gave a talk on his research at the  and #x two  zero  one c sorbonne scientific soir and #x zero  zero e nine  e and #x two  zero  one d  on april  seven  ,   one  eight  six  four  .  
this talk has been translated into english  rc .  usf .  edu /  - levineat / pasteur .  pdf .  
previous experiments disproving the spontaneous generation of larger organisms were called into question when microorganisms were discovered .  
louis pasteur   s classic experiments disproved the spontaneous generation of microorganisms .  
hypothesis microorganisms come only from other microorganisms and cannot arise by spontaneous generation .   .  
method 
resultsmicrobial life grows only in the flasks exposed to microorganisms .  
there is no  and #x two  zero  one c spontaneous generation and #x two  zero  one d  of life in the sterile flask .  
conclusion living organisms arise from preexisting living organisms .  
pasteur   s and redi   s experiments showed that living organisms cannot arise from nonliving materials under the conditions that exist on earth now .  
but their experiments did not prove that spontaneous generation never occurred .  
eons ago ,  conditions on earth and in the atmosphere above it were vastly different than they are today .  
indeed ,  conditions similar to those found on primitive earth may have existed ,  or may exist now ,  on other bodies in our solar system and elsewhere .  
as we emphasized in chapter  two  ,  water is an essential component of life as we know it .  
this is why there was great excitement when remotely controlled spacecraft sent from earth detected water ice on mars .  
astronomers believe our solar system began forming about  four  .  six  billion years ago ,  when a star exploded and collapsed to form the sun and about  five  zero  zero  bodies called planetesimals .  
these planetesimals collided with one another to form the inner planets ,  including earth and mars .  
the first chemical signatures indicating the presence of life on earth are about  four  billion years old .  
so it took  six  zero  zero  million years for the chemical conditions on earth to become just right for life .  
key among those conditions was the presence of water .  
ancient earth probably had a lot of water high in its atmosphere .  
but the new planet was hot ,  and the water remained in vapor form and dissipated into space .  
as earth cooled ,  it became possible for water to condense on the planet   s surface   but where did that water come from ?  
one current view is that comets  ( loose agglomerations of dust and ice that have orbited the sun since the planets formed )  struck earth and mars repeatedly ,  bringing to those planets not only water but also other chemical components of life ,  such as nitrogen and carbon - containing molecules .  
as the planets cooled and chemicals from their crusts dissolved in the water ,  simple chemical reactions would have taken place .  
some of these reactions might have led to life ,  but impacts by large comets and rocky meteorites released enough energy to heat the developing oceans almost to boiling ,  thus destroying any early life that might have existed .  
on earth ,  these large impacts eventually subsided ,  and around  three  .  eight  billion years ago ,  life gained a foothold .  
there has been life on earth ever since .  
several models have been proposed to explain the origin of life on earth .  
the next sections will discuss two alternative theories  that life arose on earth through chemical evolution ,  or that life came from outside earth .  
one theory for the origin of life on earth ,  chemical evolution ,  holds that conditions on primitive earth led to the formation of simple molecules such as monomers  ( see key concept  three  .  one  )  ,  and that these molecules led to the formation of life forms .  
scientists have sought to reconstruct those primitive conditions ,  both physically  ( by varying temperature )  and chemically  ( by re - creating the mixes of elements that may have been present )  .  
in oxygenated water ,  some trace metals such as molybdenum and rhenium are soluble ,  and their presence in sediments under oceans and lakes is directly proportional to the amount of oxygen gas  ( o two  )  that was present in and above the water at the times the rocks were formed .  
measurements of dated sedimentary cores indicate that none of these rare metals was present prior to  two  .  five  billion years ago .  
this and other lines of evidence suggest that there was little o two  in earth   s early atmosphere .  
oxygen gas is thought to have accumulated about  two  .  five  billion years ago as the by - product of photosynthesis by single - celled life forms  today  two  one  percent of our atmosphere is o two  .  
in the  one  nine  five  zero s stanley miller and harold urey at the university of chicago set up an experimental  and #x two  zero  one c atmosphere and #x two  zero  one d  containing the  gases they thought were present in earth   s early atmosphere  hydrogen gas ,  ammonia ,  methane gas ,  and water vapor .  
they passed an electrical spark through these gases to simulate lightning ,  a source of energy to drive chemical reactions .  
then they cooled the system so the gases would condense and collect in a watery solution ,  or  and #x two  zero  one c ocean and #x two  zero  one d   ( figure  four  .  seven  )  .  
after a week of continuous operation ,  the system contained numerous organic molecules ,  including a variety of amino acids   the building blocks of proteins .  
experiment 
figure  four  .  seven  could biological molecules have been formed from chemicals present in earth and # eight  two  one  seven  s early atmosphere ?  
original papers  miller ,  s .  l .   one  nine  five  three  .  
a production of amino acids under possible primitive earth conditions .  
science  one  one  seven    five  two  eight  and # eight  two  one  one   five  one  nine  .  
miller ,  s .  l .  and h .  c .  urey .   one  nine  five  nine  .  
organic compound synthesis on the primitive earth .  
science  one  three  zero    two  four  five  and # eight  two  one  one   two  five  one  .  
with an increased understanding of the atmospheric conditions that existed on primitive earth ,  the researchers devised an experiment to see if these conditions could lead to the formation of organic molecules .  
hypothesis organic chemical compounds can be generated under conditions similar to those that existed in the atmosphere of primitive earth .  
method 
results 
conclusion the chemical building blocks of life could have been generated in the probable atmosphere of early earth .  
stanley miller also performed a long - term experiment in which the electrical spark was not used .  
in  one  nine  seven  two  he filled test tubes with ammonia gas ,  water vapor ,  and cyanide  ( hcn )  ,  another molecule that is thought to have formed on primitive earth .  
after checking that there were no contaminating substances or organisms that might confound the results ,  he sealed the tubes and cooled them to     seven  eight   c ,  the temperature of the ice that covers europa ,  one of jupiter   s moons .  
opening the tubes  two  seven  years later ,  miller found amino acids and nucleotide bases .  
apparently ,  pockets of liquid water within the ice had allowed high concentrations of the starting materials to accumulate ,  thereby speeding up chemical reactions .  
the important conclusion is that the cold water within ice on ancient earth ,  and other celestial bodies such as mars ,  europa ,  and enceladus  ( one of saturn   s moons  satellite photos have revealed geysers of liquid water coming from its interior )  ,  may have provided environments for the prebiotic synthesis of molecules required for the subsequent formation of simple living systems .  
the results of these experiments were profoundly important in giving weight to speculations about the chemical origin of life on earth and elsewhere in the universe .  
decades of experimental work and critical evaluation followed miller and urey   s original experiments .  
in science ,  an experiment and its results must be repeatable and be reinterpreted and refined as more knowledge accumulates .  
for example ,  ideas about earth   s original atmosphere have changed .  
there is abundant evidence indicating that major volcanic eruptions occurred  four  billion years ago  these would have released carbon dioxide  ( co two  )  ,  nitrogen  ( n two  )  ,  hydrogen sulfide  ( h two s )  ,  and sulfur dioxide  ( so two  )  into the atmosphere .  
experiments using these gases in addition to the ones in the original miller   urey experiment have produced a more diverse list of organic products  
all five bases that are present in dna and rna  ( i .  e .   ,  a ,  t ,  c ,  g ,  and u )  
all of the  two  zero  amino acids used in protein synthesis 
many three -  to six - carbon sugars 
certain fatty acids 
vitamin b six   ( pantothenic acid ,  a component of coenzyme a )  
nicotinamide  ( part of nad ,  which is involved in energy metabolism )  
carboxylic acids such as succinic and lactic acids  ( also involved in energy metabolism )  
figure  four  .  eight   the murchison meteorite 
in  one  nine  six  nine  a remarkable event led to the discovery that a meteorite from space carried molecules that were characteristic of life on earth .  
on september  two  eight  of that year ,  fragments of a meteorite fell around the town of murchison ,  australia .  
using gloves to avoid earth - derived contamination ,  scientists immediately shaved off tiny pieces of the rock ,  put them in test tubes ,  and extracted them in water  ( figure  four  .  eight  )  .  
they found several of the molecules that are unique to life ,  including purines ,  pyrimidines ,  sugars ,  and ten amino acids .  
were these molecules truly brought from space as part of the meteorite ,  or did they get there after the rock landed on earth ?  
there are a number of reasons to believe the molecules were not earthly contaminants  
the scientists took great care to avoid contamination .  
they used gloves and sterile instruments ,  took pieces from below the rock   s surface ,  and did their work very soon after the meteorite landed  ( they hoped before organisms from earth could contaminate the samples )  .  
amino acids in most living organisms on earth are l - amino acids  that is ,  the amino acids of living things are found in only one of the two possible optical isomeric forms  ( see figure  three  .  two  )  .  
the amino acids in the meteorite ,  however ,  were a mixture of l -  and d - isomers ,  with a slight majority of the l form .  
thus the amino acids in the meteorite were not likely to have come from a living organism on earth .  
in the story that opened chapter  two  ,  we described how the ratio of isotopes in a living organism reflects the ratio of the same isotopes in the environment where the organism lives .  
the isotope ratios for carbon and hydrogen in the sugars from the meteorite were different from the ratios of those elements found on earth .  
more than  nine  zero  meteorites from mars have been recovered on earth .  
many show signs of water   for example ,  in minerals such as carbonates that are precipitated from aqueous solution .  
some also contain organic molecules that are the chemical signatures of life .  
while the presence of such molecules suggests that these rocks once harbored life ,  it does not prove that there were living organisms in the rocks when they landed on earth .  
many scientists find it hard to believe that an organism could survive thousands of years of traveling through space in a meteorite ,  followed by intense heat as the meteorite passed through earth   s atmosphere .  
but there is evidence that the heat at the centers of some meteorites may not have been extreme .  
if this were the case ,  then a long interplanetary trip by living organisms might have been possible .  
life does not have to reach earth from space to prove it exists elsewhere .  
there is an ongoing search for life in celestial bodies .  
for example ,  as mentioned in the opening story of this chapter ,  both orbiting satellites and vehicles probing the landscape of mars search for conditions suitable for present or past life on mars .  
perhaps the most dramatic attempt to discover life on mars came in  one  nine  seven  six  ,  when nasa celebrated the  two  zero  zero th anniversary of the political independence of the united states by landing two stationary probes ,  or landers ,  called viking  one  and viking  two  on the planet .  
investigating life  can we find evidence of life on mars ?  describes how scientists on earth directed onboard instruments to evaluate soil on mars for signs of life .  
investigatinglife 
can we find evidence of life on mars ?  
experiment 
original papers  levin ,  g .  v .  and o .  straat .   one  nine  seven  six  .  
viking labeled release biology experiment  interim results .  
science  one  nine  four    one  three  two  two  and #x two  zero  one  three   one  three  two  nine  .  
ponnamperuma ,  c .  ,  a .  shimoyama ,  m .  yamada ,  t .  hobo and r .  pal .   one  nine  seven  seven  .  
possible surface reactions on mars  implications for viking biology results .  
science  one  nine  seven    four  five  five  and #x two  zero  one  three   four  five  seven  .  
the viking landers on mars scooped up some of the soil and tested it for chemical interconversions consistent with life .  
gilbert levin and colleagues designed experiments to show remotely ,  at a distance of millions of miles ,  that there could be life on mars at the present time .  
hypothesis  martian soil can be tested by a probe on mars to show chemical changes consistent with life .  
method 
results radioactive gas detected  ( counts per minute )  after  four  martian days control  ( no soil )  martian sample  one  martian sample  two   five  zero  zero   nine  ,  five  zero  zero   one  two  ,  zero  zero  zero  
conclusion  martian soil shows chemical changes consistent with life .  
work with the data 
while it   s challenging to design experiments in the lab here on earth ,  imagine the challenge of designing experiments done remotely on mars !  
a team of biologists and chemists led by levin and straat sent instruments to mars to test for the presence of life by measuring the emission of gases after nutrients were supplied to soils possibly containing martian organisms .  
a scoop was used to obtain a  zero  .  two  ml sample of soil which was then placed in a sealed container .  
the mixture was warmed to about  one  eight oc  ( much higher than the surrounding martian environment )  .  
radioactive nutrients  ( formate ,  glycolate ,  glycine ,  alanine ,  and lactate )  with their carbon atoms labeled in  one  four c were added .  
at intervals after nutrient injection ,  a radioactive detector was employed to test for the release of  one  four c radioactive gases .  
questions 
table a shows data from two of the experiments .  
plot the data as  one  four c radioactive gas versus martian days after nutrient addition .  
what can you conclude ?  
laboratory experiments prior to the two viking departures showed that the total radioactivity that could be released if all of the nutrients were completely converted to gases was  two  five  seven  ,  zero  zero  zero  counts per minute  ( cpm )  .  
calculate the fraction of this that appeared in the martian sample and comment on the result .  
table a shows data from martian soil that had been heated for  three  h at  one  six  zero   c before nutrient addition .  
plot these data on the same graph you made for question  one  .  
what types of molecules are destroyed by heat ,  and how does this occur ?  
how do these data affect your conclusions from question  one  ?  
back on earth ,  ponnamperuma and colleagues simulated martian soil by using a major component of martian soil called hematite  ( fe two o three  )  and added the nutrients in the same way as had been done in the mars experiment .  
their results ,  including a preheated experiment ,  are shown in table b .  how do these results affect the conclusions you drew after considering questions  one  and  two  ?  
table a  one  four c gases detected  ( counts per minute )  time  ( days )  experiment  one  experiment  two  preheated soil initial  one  eight  five   one  ,  one  zero  zero   six  five  five   zero  .  two   three  ,  zero  zero  zero   five  ,  five  zero  zero   five  four  zero   zero  .  five   four  ,  eight  zero  zero   seven  ,  two  zero  zero   five  zero  zero   one  .  zero   six  ,  two  zero  zero   nine  ,  five  zero  zero   five  two  five   two  .  zero   seven  ,  zero  zero  zero   one  one  ,  three  zero  zero   five  nine  zero   three  .  zero   seven  ,  six  zero  zero   one  one  ,  eight  zero  zero   six  one  zero   four  .  zero   eight  ,  zero  zero  zero   one  two  ,  zero  zero  zero   six  two  zero  
table b  one  four c gases detected  ( counts per minute )  hematite +  one  four cnutrients hematite withoutnutrients experiment  one  zero  ,  one  four  zero   one  five  zero  preheated  one  six  zero   c  three  zero  eight   one  zero  seven  
a similar work with the data exercise may be assigned in launchpad .  
a distinctive aspect of living systems is their ability to use molecules from the environment to extract chemical energy for growth .  
during this process ,  waste products are released .  
you are familiar with this  you breathe in oxygen gas  ( o two  )  ,  take in nutrients in food ,  and breathe out carbon dioxide  ( co two  )  .  
other organisms do not use o two  but take in other molecules .  
in the mars experiments ,  scientists directed the viking landers to scoop up some martian soil and then exposed it to seven organic molecules as nutrients ,  all of which can be formed in miller   urey experiments  ( e .  g .   ,  amino acids  see figure  four  .  seven  )  .  
the seven molecules were labeled with a radioisotope of carbon  (  one  four c )  .  
after a period of exposure ,  a detector was used to measure any radioactive gases  ( possibly co two  )  produced .  
the results of some of the experiments were astonishing  radioactive gas was detected in some experiments ,  and some scientists concluded that there might be life on mars .  
the fact that there was little radioactive gas produced when the soil was preheated to  one  six  zero   c to kill living organisms gave credence to this conclusion .  
later ,  simulations in the lab on earth showed that radioactive gas could could be formed in this experiment with certain kinds of soils ,  without organisms .  
so there is an alternative ,  nonbiological explanation for the mars data .  
nevertheless ,  some biologists still adhere to the biological explanation for the mars data ,  and the quest for life on mars continues .  
 four  .  two  recap 
life does not arise repeatedly through spontaneous generation ,  but comes from preexisting life .  
water is an essential ingredient for the emergence of life .  
chemical synthesis experiments provide support for the idea that life   s simple molecules formed in the prebiotic environment on earth .  
meteorites that have landed on earth provide some evidence for an extraterrestrial origin of life ,  as do experiments with landers on mars showing possible chemical interconversions that may reflect life .  
learning outcomes 
you should be able to  
explain how redi   s and pasteur   s experiments disproved spontaneous generation .  
describe conditions on early earth and theories about how these conditions affected the origin of life on earth .  
justify the conditions used by miller and urey in their experiments .  
what conditions existing on earth today might preclude the origin of life from the prebiotic molecules miller and urey used ?  
the interpretation of pasteur   s experiment  ( see figure  four  .  six  )  depended on the inactivation of microorganisms by heat .  
we now know of microorganisms that can survive extremely high temperatures  ( see chapter  two  six  )  .  
does this change the interpretation of pasteur   s experiment ?  
what experiments would you do to inactivate such microbes ?  
the miller   urey experiment  ( see figure  four  .  seven  )  showed that it was possible for amino acids to be formed from gases that were hypothesized to have been in earth   s early atmosphere .  
these amino acids were dissolved in water .  
knowing what you do about the polymerization of amino acids into proteins  ( see figure  three  .  six  )  ,  how would you set up an experiment to show that proteins can form under the conditions of early earth ?  
chemistry experiments modeling the conditions of ancient earth provide clues about the origins of the monomers  ( such as amino acids )  that make up the polymers  ( such as proteins )  that characterize life .  
how did these polymers develop ?  
chapter  four  continues with 
 four  .  three   the large molecules of life originated from small molecules 
complex molecules could be formed from simpler ones on primitive earth 
rna may have been the first biological catalyst 
the miller   urey experiment and others that followed provide a plausible scenario for the formation of the building blocks of life under conditions that prevailed on primitive earth .  
the next step in forming and supporting a general theory on the origin of life would be an explanation for how polymers formed from these monomers .  
focus your learning 
evidence from simulation experiments supports the theory that biological polymers formed from chemical reactions taking place in early earth conditions .  
scientists hypothesize that the presence of catalysts would have been necessary during the evolution of biological polymers .  
scientists have used a number of model systems to try to simulate conditions under which the first biological polymers might have been made .  
each of these systems is based on several observations and speculations  
solid mineral surfaces ,  such as powderlike clays ,  have large surface areas .  
scientists speculate that the silicates in clay may have catalyzed  ( sped up )  the condensation reactions that resulted in organic polymers .  
hydrothermal vents deep in the ocean ,  where hot water emerges from beneath earth   s crust ,  lack oxygen gas and contain metals such as iron and nickel .  
in laboratory experiments ,  these metals have been shown to catalyze the polymerization of amino acids in the absence of oxygen .  
in hot pools at the edges of oceans ,  evaporation may have concentrated monomers to the point where polymerization was favored  ( the  and #x two  zero  one c primordial soup and #x two  zero  one d  hypothesis )  .  
in whatever ways the earliest stages of chemical evolution occurred ,  they resulted in the emergence of monomers and polymers that have probably remained unchanged in their general structures and functions for several billion years .  
many chemical changes occur in living organisms  an example is dna replication ,  which we described earlier in this chapter as the process by which a molecule of dna is duplicated  ( see figure  four  .  five  )  .  
many other chemical changes occur in living systems ,  often involving the hydrolysis or synthesis of macromolecules or conversions among small molecules .  
as you will see in chapter  eight  ,  these chemical changes can occur spontaneously in aqueous solutions like those that exist in biological systems ,  but most would occur extremely slowly .  
catalysts   molecules that speed up biochemical conversions   solve this problem .  
so a key to the origin of life is the appearance of catalysts .  
today ,  the main catalysts in organisms are proteins called enzymes .  
the many shapes of proteins allow them to bind to diverse substances in solution and speed up chemical reactions .  
but we know that proteins are made based on information in nucleic acids .  
so we have a chicken - or - egg problem  if proteins are needed for life ,  nucleic acids must have appeared first ,  so that the proteins could be made .  
but if nucleic acids appeared before proteins ,  proteins could not have been the first catalysts .  
could nucleic acids be catalysts ,  in addition to their role as blueprints for protein synthesis ?  
the answer is yes .  
like a protein ,  the three - dimensional structure of a folded rna molecule presents a unique surface to the external environment  ( see figure  four  .  three  )  .  
the surfaces of rna molecules can be every bit as specific as those of proteins .  
the three - dimensional shapes and other chemical properties of certain rna molecules allow them to function as catalysts .  
catalytic rnas ,  called ribozymes ,  can speed up reactions involving their own nucleotides as well as other cellular substances .  
although in retrospect it is not too surprising ,  the discovery of catalytic rnas was a surprise to a community of biologists who were convinced that all biological catalysts were proteins  ( enzymes )  .  
it took almost a decade for the work of the scientists involved ,  thomas cech and sidney altman ,  to be fully accepted by other scientists ,  but when it was ,  the two were awarded the nobel prize .  
figure  four  .  nine   the  and #x two  zero  one c rna world and #x two  zero  one d  hypothesis 
given that rna can be both informational  ( in its nucleotide sequence )  and catalytic  ( because of its ability to form unique threedimensional shapes )  ,  it has been hypothesized that early life consisted of an  and #x two  zero  one c rna world and #x two  zero  one d  and #x two  zero  one  four  a world before dna .  
it is thought that when rna was first made ,  it could have acted as a catalyst for its own replication as well as for the synthesis of proteins .  
dna could eventually have evolved from rna  ( figure  four  .  nine  )  .  
several lines of evidence support this scenario  
in living organisms today ,  the formation of peptide linkages  ( see figure  three  .  six  )  is catalyzed by ribozymes .  
in certain viruses called retroviruses ,  there is an enzyme called reverse transcriptase that catalyzes the synthesis of dna from rna .  
when a short ,  naturally occurring rna molecule is added to a mixture of nucleotides ,  rna polymers are formed at a rate  seven  million times greater than the formation of polymers without the added rna .  
this indicates that the added rna is a catalyst ,  not just a template .  
an artificial ribozyme has been developed that can catalyze the assembly of short rnas into a longer molecule that is an exact copy of itself .  
this may be how nucleic acid replication evolved .  
an artificial ribozyme has been developed that can catalyze the assembly of short rnas into a longer molecule that is an exact copy of itself .  
this may be how nucleic acid replication evolved .  
 four  .  three  recap 
the formation of the large polymers that are characteristic of life may have occurred on the surfaces of clay particles ,  near hydrothermal vents ,  or in hot pools at the edges of oceans .  
rna may have been the first genetic material and catalyst .  
learning outcomes 
you should be able to  
justify the need for catalysts in the origin of life .  
describe the proposed role for rna in the formation of long - chain polymers .  
provide evidence supporting rna as a catalyst in prebiotic chemical reactions that gave rise to other biological polymers .  
why was the ability to both encode information and catalyze reactions important for the origin of life ?  
why was the discovery of ribozymes important for the development of the  and #x two  zero  one c rna world and #x two  zero  one d  hypothesis ?  
in living organisms ,  the catalyst for the formation of the peptide bond is an rna that does not have an informational role .  
how does this relate to the  and #x two  zero  one c rna world and #x two  zero  one d  hypothesis ?  
the discovery of mechanisms for the formation of small and large molecules is essential to answering questions about the origin of life on earth .  
but we also need to understand how organized living systems formed .  
such systems display the characteristic properties of life ,  including reproduction ,  energy processing ,  and responsiveness to the environment .  
these are properties of cells ,  whose origin we will explore in the next section .  
chapter  four  continues with 
 four  .  four   cells originated from their molecular building blocks 
how did the first cells with membranes come into existence ?  
some ancient cells left a fossil imprint 
as you have seen from many of the theories on the origin of life ,  the evolution of biochemistry occurred under localized conditions .  
that is ,  the chemical reactions of life could not occur in a dilute aqueous environment with the molecular participants far apart .  
there had to be a compartment of some sort that brought together and concentrated the compounds involved in these events .  
biologists have proposed that initially this compartment may have simply been a tiny droplet of water on the surface of a rock .  
but another major event in the origin of life was necessary  the evolution of the cell membrane .  
focus your learning 
membrane development was critical for the evolution of the cell as the smallest unit of life .  
scientists have discovered fossils of structures that may have been early cells .  
life as we know it is separated from the environment within structurally defined units called cells .  
the internal contents of a cell are separated from the nonbiological environment by a special barrier   a membrane .  
the membrane is not just a barrier  it regulates what goes into and out of the cell ,  as we will describe in chapter  six  .  
this role of the surface membrane is very important because it permits the interior of the cell to maintain a chemical composition that is different from that of its external environment .  
jack szostak and his colleagues at harvard university built a laboratory model that gives insights into the origin of cells .  
to do this ,  they first put fatty acids  ( which can be made in prebiotic experiments )  into water .  
recall from chapter  three  that fatty acids are amphipathic  they have a hydrophilic polar head and a long ,  nonpolar tail that is hydrophobic  ( see figure  three  .  two  two  )  .  
when placed in water ,  fatty acids will arrange themselves in a round    huddle   ?  much like a football team  the hydrophilic heads point outward to interact with the aqueous environment ,  and the fatty acid tails point inward ,  away from the water molecules .  
figure  four  .  one  zero  protocells 
what if some water becomes trapped in the interior of this    huddle   ?  ?  
now the layer of hydrophobic fatty acid tails is in water ,  which is an unstable situation .  
to stabilize this structure ,  a second layer of fatty acids forms .  
this lipid bilayer has the polar heads of the fatty acids facing both outward and inward ,  because they are attracted to the polar water molecules present on each side of the double layer .  
the nonpolar tails form the interior of the bilayer  ( figure  four  .  one  zero  )  .  
these prebiotic ,  water - filled structures ,  defined by a lipid bilayer membrane ,  very much resemble living cells .  
scientists refer to these compartments as protocells .  
examining their properties revealed that  
large molecules such as dna and rna could not pass through the bilayer to enter the protocells ,  but small molecules such as sugars and individual nucleotides could .  
nucleic acids inside the protocells could replicate using the nucleotides from outside .  
when the investigators placed a short nucleic acid strand capable of self - replication inside protocells and added nucleotides to the watery environment outside ,  the nucleotides crossed the barrier ,  entered the protocells ,  and became incorporated into new polynucleotide chains .  
this replication ,  which can occur without protein catalysis ,  may have been the first step toward cell reproduction .  
were these protocells truly cells ,  and was the lipid bilayer produced in these experiments a true cell membrane ?  
certainly not .  
the protocells could not fully reproduce ,  nor could they carry out all the metabolic reactions that take place in modern cells .  
the simple lipid bilayer had few of the sophisticated functions of modern cell membranes .  
nevertheless ,  the *protocell may be a reasonable facsimile of a cell as it evolved billions of years ago  
it can act as an organized system of parts ,  with substances interacting and reacting ,  in some cases catalytically .  
it includes an interior that is distinct from the exterior environment .  
it is capable of limited replication .  
these are all fundamental characteristics of living cells .  
*connect the concepts protocells more closely resemble bacteria than plant or animal cells .  
the evolution of the latter two cell types is believed to have occurred in a series of steps ,  as explained in key concept  two  six  .  one  .  
figure  four  .  one  one  the earliest cells ?  
in the  one  nine  nine  zero s scientists made a rare find  a formation of ancient rocks in australia that had remained relatively unchanged since the rocks first formed  three  .  five  billion years ago .  
in one of these rock samples ,  geologist j .  william schopf of the university of california ,  los angeles ,  saw chains and clumps of what looked tantalizingly like contemporary cyanobacteria ,  or    blue - green   ?  bacteria  ( figure  four  .  one  one  )  .  
cyanobacteria are believed to have been among the first organisms because they can perform photosynthesis ,  converting co two  and water into carbohydrates .  
schopf needed to prove that the chains were once alive ,  not just the results of simple chemical reactions .  
he and his colleagues looked for chemical evidence of photosynthesis in the rock samples .  
the use of carbon dioxide in photosynthesis is a hallmark of life and leaves a unique chemical signature   a specific ratio of carbon isotopes  (  one  three c  one  two c )  in the resulting carbohydrates .  
schopf showed that the australian material had this isotope signature .  
furthermore ,  microscopic examination of the chains revealed internal substructures that are characteristic of living systems and were not likely to be the result of simple chemical reactions .  
schopf   s evidence suggests that the australian sample is indeed the remains of a truly ancient living organism .  
in  two  zero  one  one  a different team of scientists ,  working about  three  two  km from schopf   s discovery ,  found similar - looking microfossil structures in sandstone rocks that were about  three  .  four  billion years old .  
in this case ,  a chemical analysis of the rocks indicated that these cells used sulfur instead of oxygen in the series of cellular reactions that release chemical energy .  
figure  four  .  one  two  the origin of life 
taking geological ,  chemical ,  and biological evidence into account ,  it is plausible that it took about  five  zero  zero  million to a billion years from the formation of earth until the appearance of the first cells  ( figure  four  .  one  two  )  .  
life has been cellular ever since .  
in the next chapter we will begin our study of cell structure and function .  
investigatinglife 
can we find evidence of life on mars ?  
in  two  zero  one  four  ,  nasa declared that finding evidence for current or past life on mars is a primary goal .  
at this writing ,  the curiosity rover is still there ,  doing experiments and analyses .  
later rovers are planned for early in the coming decade .  
in addition ,  the european space agency ,  collaborating with russia ,  is planning to launch several    exomars   ?  rovers in the middle of the decade ,  which will drill  two  m into the surface of mars to get cores to analyze them for chemical traces of life below the surface .  
most exciting ,  although uncertain ,  is a mars sample return mission ,  in which soil samples will be brought back to earth for careful experimentation and analysis in laboratories ,  just as samples from the moon were brought back more than  four  zero  years ago .  
if you had a martian soil sample here on earth ,  what analyses and experiments would you perform ?  
future directions 
a daring space mission is in the final planning stages that may provide key information on the origin of life on earth .  
there are more than  six  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  known asteroids ,  most of them rocks from the early solar system orbiting the sun between mars and jupiter .  
but a few thousand have been kicked out of the typical location and are relatively near earth ,  some getting closer than our moon .  
one ,  called bennu ,  was discovered in  one  nine  nine  nine  and has been well studied .  
it is just the right size and composition to contain organic molecules .  
in  two  zero  one  eight  ,  a probe called osiris - rex will arrive at the asteroid ,  spend about a year near it ,  and collect a sample of material and then return it to earth in  two  zero  two  three  for analysis .  
this sample of the early solar system will provide scientists with a window onto not just what the asteroid is made of ,  but perhaps the earliest molecules that could have led to life .  
 four  .  four  recap 
the chemical reactions that preceded living organisms probably occurred in specialized compartments ,  such as water droplets on the surfaces of minerals .  
life as we know it did not begin until the emergence of cells .  
protocells made in the laboratory have some of the properties of modern cells .  
cell - like structures fossilized in ancient rocks date early cells to about  three  .  five  billion years ago .  
learning outcomes 
you should be able to  
justify the reasoning behind the hypothesis that a membrane was critical in the evolution of life on earth .  
describe the evidence suggesting that microfossils may be the remains of early cells .  
why is the cell membrane important to the evolution of living organisms ?  
if you wanted to find evidence for the existence of cells more than  three  billion years ago ,  what would you look for ?  
chapter  four  continues with 
chapter summary 
 four  .  one  
nucleic acid structures reflect their function 
the unique functions of the nucleic acids   dna and rna   are information storage and transfer .  
dna is the hereditary material that passes genetic information from one generation to the next ,  and rna uses that information to specify the structures of proteins .  
nucleic acids are polymers of nucleotides .  
a nucleotide consists of a phosphate group ,  a pentose sugar  ( ribose in rna and deoxyribose in dna )  ,  and a nitrogen - containing base .  
review figure  four  .  one  ,  animation  four  .  one  
in dna ,  the nucleotide bases are adenine  ( a )  ,  guanine  ( g )  ,  cytosine  ( c )  ,  and thymine  ( t )  .  
uracil  ( u )  replaces thymine in rna .  
c ,  t ,  and u have single - ring structures and are pyrimidines .  
a and g have double - ring structures and are purines .  
the nucleotides in dna and rna are joined by phosphodiester linkages involving the sugar of one nucleotide and the phosphate of the next ,  forming a nucleic acid polymer .  
review figure  four  .  two  ,  activity  four  .  one  
complementary base pairing due to hydrogen bonds between a and t ,  a and u ,  and g and c occurs in nucleic acids .  
in rna ,  the hydrogen bonds result in a folded molecule .  
in dna ,  the hydrogen bonds connect two strands into a double helix .  
review figure  four  .  three  ,   focus  key figure  four  .  four  ,   activity  four  .  two  
the information content of dna and rna resides in their base sequences .  
the information in dna is expressed as rna in transcription .  
rna can then specify the amino acid sequence of a protein in translation .  
review figure  four  .  five   four  .  two  
the small molecules of life originated on primitive earth 
the historical belief that life can originate repeatedly by spontaneous generation was disproven experimentally .  
review figure  four  .  six  ,  animation  four  .  two  
a prerequisite for life is the presence of water .  
one hypothesis for the origin of life on earth is chemical evolution  the idea that organic molecules were formed on earth before life began .  
chemical experiments modeling the prebiotic conditions on earth support the idea of chemical evolution .  
review figure  four  .  seven  ,  animation  four  .  three  
some meteorites that have landed on earth contain organic molecules ,  suggesting that life might have originated extraterrestrially .  
experiments with lands on mars yielded some data consistent with the existence of life on that planet .  
review investigating life  can we find evidence of life on mars ?   four  .  three  
the large molecules of life originated from small molecules 
chemical evolution may have led to the polymerization of small molecules into polymers .  
this may have occurred on the surfaces of clay particles ,  in hydrothermal vents ,  or in hot pools at the edges of oceans .  
a catalyst speeds up a chemical reaction .  
today most catalysts are proteins ,  but some rna molecules can function as both catalysts and information molecules .  
a catalytic rna is called a ribozyme .  
the existence of ribozymes supports the idea of an  and #x two  zero  one c rna world and #x two  zero  one d  and #x two  zero  one  four  a world before dna .  
on early earth ,  rna may have acted as a catalyst for its own replication as well as for the synthesis of proteins .  
dna could eventually have evolved from rna .  
review figure  four  .  nine  
in support of the  and #x two  zero  one c rna world and #x two  zero  one d  hypothesis ,  an artificial self - replicating ribozyme was developed in the laboratory .  
review figure  four  .  one  zero   four  .  four  
cells originated from their molecular building blocks 
a key to the emergence of living cells was the prebiotic generation of compartments enclosed by membranes .  
such enclosed compartments permitted the generation and maintenance of internal chemical conditions that were different from those in the exterior environment .  
in the laboratory ,  fatty acids assemble into protocells that have some of the characteristics of cells .  
review figure  four  .  one  one  
ancient rocks  (  three  .  five  billion years old )  have been found with imprints that are probably fossils of early cells .  
go to learningcurve  ( in launchpad )  for dynamic quizzing that helps you solidify your understanding of this chapter .  
learningcurve adapts to your responses ,  giving you the practice you need to master each key concept .  
apply what you   ve learned 
review 
 four  .  one  the structures of the polynucleotides dna and rna enable their functions in storing and transfering genetic information .  
 four  .  one  base pairing between nucleotides in the polynucleotides dna and rna provides the structure needed for transfer of genetic information .  
 four  .  one  base sequences of nucleotides in dna provide the chemical diversity needed for storage of genetic information .  
original paper  chargaff ,  e .   one  nine  five  zero  .  
chemical specificity of nucleic acids and mechanisms for their enzymatic degradation .  
experientia .   six    two  zero  one     two  four  zero  .  
nucleic acids show structural similarity across organisms ,  whether you   re looking at dna from a bacterium ,  a wheat plant ,  or a human .  
if you run chemical analyses on dna extracted from several organisms ,  you always find a one - to - one molar ratio of phosphate groups to deoxyribose groups .  
this one - to - one ratio results from the repeating backbone structure of dna ,  which is constructed from many nucleotide monomers polymerized together .  
all organisms share this structural similarity .  
dna base composition  ( % )  organism and tissue adenine guanine cytosine thymine herring sperm  two  seven  .  eight   two  two  .  two   two  two  .  six   two  seven  .  five  rat bone marrow  two  eight  .  six   two  one  .  four   two  one  .  five   two  eight  .  four  human sperm  three  zero  .  seven   one  nine  .  three   one  eight  .  eight   three  one  .  two  escherichia coli  two  six  .  zero   two  four  .  nine   two  five  .  two   two  three  .  nine  yeast  three  one  .  three   one  eight  .  seven   one  seven  .  one   three  two  .  nine  rna base composition  ( % )  organism and tissue adenine guanine cytosine uracil rat liver  one  nine  .  two   two  eight  .  five   two  seven  .  five   two  four  .  eight  carp muscle  one  six  .  four   three  four  .  four   three  one  .  one   one  eight  .  one  yeast  two  five  .  one   three  zero  .  two   two  zero  .  one   two  four  .  six  rabbit liver  one  nine  .  seven   two  six  .  eight   two  five  .  eight   two  seven  .  six  cat brain  two  one  .  six   three  one  .  eight   two  six  .  zero   two  zero  .  six  
you know ,  however ,  that dna from different organisms is not identical .  
after all ,  dna carries biological information specific to each organism .  
what can you learn about dna if you analyze base composition across several species ?  
what can you learn about rna ?  
the tables below provide data for analyzing these questions .  
questions 
 one  .  
calculate the purine - to - pyrimidine ratio for each dna data set .  
what pattern do you observe ?  
what does this pattern indicate about dna structure ?  
 two  .  
calculate the purine - to - pyrimidine ratio for each rna data set .  
what pattern do you observe ?  
what does this pattern indicate about rna structure ?  
 three  .  
what is the significance of any difference in patterns you found for dna and rna as you answered questions  one  and  two  ?  
 four  .  
calculate the combined at content and combined gc content in the dna of each organism listed in the table .  
how does dna from different organisms compare with respect to this calculation ?  
 five  .  
identify two organisms having similar at content and gc content in their dna from your answer to question  four  .  
explain how these organisms can share this similarity yet have completely different genetic makeups .  
go to launchpad for the ebook ,  learningcurve ,  animations ,  activities ,  flashcards ,  and additional resources and assignments .  
end of chapter  four  .  
chapter  five   cells  the working units of life 
compartmentation is a prominent feature of these plant cells ,  each of which has a nucleus and several green chloroplasts .  
key concepts  
cells are the fundamental units of life 
prokaryotic cells are the simplest cells 
eukaryotic cells contain organelles 
extracellular structures have important roles 
eukaryotic cells evolved in several steps 
investigatinglife 
natural sunscreen 
sunlight plays a key role in life ,  providing the energy that is transformed into stored chemical energy in green plants through the process of photosynthesis .  
when we eat food ,  the energy stored in its chemical bonds ultimately came from the sun .  
but sunlight has a nasty side effect  part of it ,  the highly energetic ultraviolet light ,  damages the genetic material ,  dna .  
even without knowing this chemistry ,  some people take measures to minimize exposure to excess sunlight ,  either by staying in the shade or using chemical sunscreens .  
but there is also a biological mechanism that has evolved to reduce the sun   s damage to organisms .  
in most animals ,  dark brown or black chemical pigments called melanins are made inside cells ,  the basic units of life .  
melanins absorb ultraviolet light ,  thereby protecting dna .  
in humans ,  melanin is made in certain skin cells called melanocytes .  
humans first evolved in africa ,  and the intense sunlight near the equator acted as an evolutionary selective agent for the development of large numbers of melanocytes .  
as some of these dark - skinned people migrated to more northern regions where the sun is not as intense ,  the selection pressure for melanocytes was reduced ,  and over millennia ,  genetic changes leading to fewer melanocytes persisted in offspring ,  resulting in lighter skin .  
exposure to intense sunlight in these people results in the production of more melanin ,  the familiar tanning response .  
melanocytes are specialized cells .  
you find them in the skin but not typically in internal organs .  
we will return to the process of how different cells have different functions in later chapters .  
but even inside the melanocyte ,  there is specialization .  
melanin is made inside a special cell compartment called the melanosome .  
these compartments can be expelled from melanocytes and transferred to other skin cells ,  so they too become loaded with pigment .  
this occurs spontaneously in dark - skinned people ,  while in paler people it is stimulated by exposure to intense sunlight .  
the observation that the chemistry of life takes place within cells ,  and in some cases within specialized compartments in them ,  is a key concept of biological science .  
are pigments compartmentalized in all types of cells ?  
chapter  five  continues with 
 five  .  one  cells are the fundamental units of life 
what is the cell theory ?  
cell size is limited by the surface area - to - volume ratio 
microscopes reveal the features of cells 
the cell membrane forms an outer boundary of every cell 
cells may be classified as either prokaryotic or eukaryotic 
chapter  one  introduced some of the characteristics of life  chemical complexity ,  growth and reproduction ,  the ability to refashion substances from the environment ,  and the ability to move specific substances into and out of the organism .  
cells have all of these characteristics .  
just as atoms are the building blocks of chemistry ,  cells are the building blocks of life .  
focus your learning 
cell theory states that the cell is the smallest unit of life ,  that cells make up all living organisms ,  and that cells come from existing cells .  
microscopy allows visual examination of cells .  
membranes provide a structural role in a cell and also allow the cell to maintain homeostasis and communicate with other cells .  
the cell theory is an important unifying principle of biology .  
there are three components of the cell theory  
cells are the fundamental units of life .  
all living organisms are composed of cells .  
all cells come from preexisting cells .  
to the original cell theory ,  first stated in  one  eight  three  eight  ,  should be added  
modern cells evolved from a common ancestor .  
cells contain water and other small and large molecules ,  which we examined in chapters  two     four  .  
each cell contains at least  one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  different types of molecules ,  most of them present in many copies .  
cells use these molecules to transform matter and energy ,  to respond to their environments ,  and to reproduce .  
the cell theory has three important implications  
studying cell biology is in some sense the same as studying life .  
the principles that underlie the functions of the single cell of a bacterium are similar to those governing the approximately  six  zero  trillion human cells of your body .  
life is continuous .  
all the cells in your body came from a single cell ,  a fertilized egg  ( zygote )  .  
that zygote came from the fusion of two cells ,  a sperm and an egg ,  from your parents .  
the cells of your parents    bodies were all derived from their parents ,  and so on back through generations and evolution to the initial cell .  
the origin of life on earth was marked by the origin of the first cells  ( see chapter  four  )  .  
even the largest creatures on earth are composed of cells ,  but the cells themselves are usually too small for the naked eye to see .  
why are cells so small ?  
most cells are tiny .  
in  one  six  six  five  robert hooke estimated that in  one  square inch of cork ,  which he examined under his magnifying lens ,  there were  one  ,  two  five  nine  ,  seven  one  two  ,  zero  zero  zero  cells !  
the diameters of cells range from about  one  to  one  zero  zero  micrometers  (   m )  .  
there are some exceptions  the eggs of birds are large single cells ,  and individual cells of several types of algae and bacteria are large enough to be viewed with the unaided eye  ( figure  five  .  one  )  .  
figure  five  .  one  the scale of life 
this logarithmic scale shows the relative sizes of molecules ,  cells ,  and multicellular organisms .  
figure  five  .  two  why cells are small 
small cell size is a practical necessity arising from the change in the surface area - to - volume ratio of any object as it increases in size .  
as an object increases in volume ,  its surface area also increases ,  but not at the same rate  ( figure  five  .  two  )  .  
this phenomenon has great biological significance .  
to appreciate this point ,  let   s assume that the amount of chemical activity carried out by a cell is proportional to its volume .  
the surface area of the cell determines the amount of substances that can enter it from the outside environment ,  and the amount of waste products that can exit to the environment .  
as a living cell grows larger ,  its chemical activities ,  and thus its need for resources and its rate of waste production ,  increase faster than its surface area .  
 ( the surface area ,  being two - dimensional ,  increases in proportion to the square of the radius ,  whereas the volume ,  being three - dimensional ,  increases much more   in proportion to the cube of the radius .   )  
in addition ,  substances must move from one site to another within the cell  the smaller the cell ,  the more easily this is accomplished .  
this explains why large organisms must consist of many small cells  cells must be small in volume in order to maintain a large enough surface area - to - volume ratio and an ideal internal volume .  
the large surface area represented by the many small cells of a multicellular organism enables it to carry out the many different functions required for survival .  
most cells are too small to be seen with the unaided eye .  
microscopes allow cells and details within them to be seen .  
the property that allows detail to be seen is called resolution .  
formally defined ,  resolution is the minimum distance two objects can be apart and still be seen as two objects .  
resolution for the human eye is about  zero  .  two  mm  (  two  zero  zero    m )  .  
most cells are much smaller than  two  zero  zero    m and thus are invisible to the human eye .  
microscopes magnify and increase resolution so that cells and their internal structures can be seen clearly  ( figure  five  .  three  )  .  
research tools 
figure  five  .  three  looking at cells 
the six images on this page show some techniques used in light microscopy .  
the three images on the following page were created using electron microscopes .  
all of these images are of a particular type of cultured cell known as hela cells .  
note that the images in most cases are flat ,  two - dimensional views .  
as you look at images of cells ,  keep in mind that they are three - dimensional structures .  
there are two basic types of microscopes   light microscopes and electron microscopes   that use different forms of radiation  ( see figure  five  .  three  )  .  
while the resolution is better in electron microscopy ,  only dead cells are visualized because they must be prepared in a vacuum .  
light microscopes ,  by contrast ,  can be used to visualize living cells  ( for example ,  by phase - contrast microscopy  see figure  five  .  three  )  .  
before we look at cell structure ,  it is useful to consider the many uses of microscopy .  
here is an example  an entire branch of medicine ,  pathology ,  makes use of many different methods of microscopy to aid in the analysis of cells and the diagnosis of diseases .  
for instance ,  a surgeon might remove from a body some tissue suspected of being cancerous .  
the pathologist might  
examine the tissue quickly by phase - contrast microscopy to determine the size ,  shape ,  and spread of the cells  
stain the tissue with a general dye and examine it by brightfield microscopy to bring out features such as the shapes of the nuclei ,  or cell division characteristics  
examine the tissue under the transmission electron microscope to observe internal structures such as the mitochondria or the chromatin  ( these are described in key concept  five  .  three  )   
stain the tissue with a specific dye and examine it by microscopy for the presence of proteins that are diagnostic of particular cancers .  
the results can influence the choice of therapy .  
while light microscopy shows many types of cells and even some structure inside them ,  the cell membrane is best observed with an electron microscope .  
this very thin structure forms the outer boundary of the cytoplasm of every cell ,  and it has similar thickness and molecular structure in all cells .  
you will learn about membranes in more detail in chapter  six  .  
for now ,  keep in mind that  ( with the exception of some species of archaea discussed in chapter  two  six  )  the cell membrane consists of a phospholipid bilayer  ( see key concept  three  .  four  )  ,  and that a variety of proteins are embedded within the bilayer .  
the membrane has several important roles  
the cell membrane acts as a selectively permeable barrier ,  preventing some substances from crossing it while permitting other substances to enter and leave the cell .  
by regulating transport across it ,  the cell membrane allows the cell to maintain a more or less constant internal environment .  
the maintenance of a constant internal environment  ( known as homeostasis )  is a key characteristic of life and will be discussed in detail in chapter  four  zero  .  
as the cell   s boundary with the outside environment ,  the cell membrane is important in communicating with adjacent cells and receiving signals from the environment .  
you will learn about this in chapter  seven  .  
the cell membrane often has proteins protruding from it that are responsible for binding and adhering to adjacent cells .  
thus the cell membrane plays an important structural role and contributes to cell shape .  
as you saw in key concept  one  .  one  ,  biologists classify all living things into three domains  archaea ,  bacteria ,  and eukarya .  
the organisms in archaea and bacteria are collectively called prokaryotes ,  and they have in common a prokaryotic cell organization .  
a prokaryotic cell does not typically have membrane - enclosed internal compartments  in particular ,  it does not have a nucleus .  
the first cells were probably similar in organization to those of modern prokaryotes .  
eukaryotic cell organization is found in members of the domain eukarya  ( eukaryotes )  ,  which includes the protists ,  plants ,  fungi ,  and animals .  
in contrast to prokaryotic cells ,  eukaryotic cells contain membrane - enclosed compartments called organelles .  
the most noticeable organelle is the cell nucleus ,  where most of the cell   s dna is located and where gene expression begins  
just as a cell is an enclosed compartment ,  separating its contents from the surrounding environment ,  so each organelle provides a compartment that separates molecules and biochemical reactions from the rest of the cell .  
this    division of labor   ?  provides possibilities for regulation and efficiency that were important in the evolution of complex organisms and helps explain the complexity of eukaryotic cells relative to prokaryotic cells .  
 five  .  one  recap 
the cell theory is a unifying principle of biology .  
cell size is limited in order to maintain a high surface area - to - volume ratio .  
both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells are enclosed within a cell membrane ,  but prokaryotic cells lack the membrane - enclosed organelles that are found in eukaryotic cells .  
learning outcomes 
 and # one  six  zero   and # one  six  zero  you should be able to  
list the three tenets of the original cell theory .  
explain the importance of membranes in cell function .  
how does cell biology embody all the principles of life ?  
what is the importance of the cell membrane and the membranes that surround organelles ?  
as we mentioned in this section ,  there are two structural themes in cell architecture  prokaryotic and eukaryotic .  
we will now turn to the organization of prokaryotic cells .  
chapter  five  continues with 
 five  .  two  prokaryotic cells are the simplest cells 
what are the features of prokaryotic cells ?  
specialized features are found in some prokaryotes 
cell walls 
internal membranes 
flagella and pili 
cytoskeleton 
with diameters or lengths in the range of  one     one  zero    m ,  prokaryotic cells are generally smaller than eukaryotic cells ,  whose diameters are usually in the range of  one  zero     one  zero  zero    m .  each individual prokaryote is a single cell ,  but many types of prokaryotes form chains or small clusters of cells ,  and some occur in large clusters containing hundreds of cells .  
in this section we will first consider the features shared by cells in the domains bacteria and archaea .  
then we will examine structural features that are found in some ,  but not all ,  prokaryotes .  
focus your learning 
all prokaryotic cells contain a cell membrane ,  nucleoid with dna ,  cytoplasm ,  and ribosomes .  
all *prokaryotic cells have the same basic structure  ( figure  five  .  four  )   
the cell membrane encloses the cell ,  regulating the traffic of materials into and out of the cell ,  and separating its interior from the external environment .  
the nucleoid is a region in the cell where the dna is located .  
as we described in key concept  four  .  one  ,  dna is the hereditary material that controls cell growth ,  maintenance ,  and reproduction .  
the rest of the material enclosed in the cell membrane is called the cytoplasm  ( cytosol )  .  
ribosomes are complexes of rna and proteins in the cytoplasm that are about  two  five  nanometers  ( nm )  in diameter .  
they can be visualized only with the electron microscope .  
they are the sites of protein synthesis ,  where information coded for in nucleic acids directs the sequential linking of amino acids to form proteins .  
*connect the concepts in terms of sheer numbers ,  prokaryotes are the most successful organisms on earth .  
as we examine prokaryotic cells in this section ,  bear in mind that there are vast numbers of prokaryotic species ,  and that bacteria and archaea are distinguished in numerous ways .  
these differences ,  and the vast diversity of organisms in these two domains ,  will be the subject of chapter  two  six  .  
the cytoplasm is not static .  
rather ,  the substances in this environment are in constant motion .  
for example ,  a typical protein moves around the entire cell within a minute ,  and it collides with many other molecules along the way .  
this motion helps ensure that biochemical reactions proceed at rates sufficient to meet the needs of the cell .  
although they are structurally less complex than eukaryotic cells ,  prokaryotic cells are functionally complex ,  carrying out thousands of biochemical reactions .  
figure  five  .  four  a prokaryotic cell 
this electron micrograph and drawing of the bacterium pseudomonas aeruginosa illustrate the typical structures shared by all prokaryotic cells .  
in addition ,  this bacterium has a protective outer membrane that is not present in all prokaryotes .  
the flagellum and capsule are also structures found in some ,  but not all ,  prokaryotic cells .  
as they evolved ,  some prokaryotes developed specialized structures that gave them a selective advantage  cells with these structures were better able to survive and reproduce in particular environments than cells lacking them .  
most prokaryotes have a cell wall located outside the cell membrane .  
the rigid wall supports the cell and determines its shape .  
the cell walls of most bacteria ,  but not archaea ,  contain peptidoglycan ,  a polymer of amino sugars that is linked at regular intervals to short peptides .  
cross - linking among these peptides results in a single giant molecule around the entire cell .  
in some bacteria ,  another layer ,  the outer membrane  ( a polysacchariderich phospholipid membrane )  ,  encloses the peptidoglycan layer  ( see figure  five  .  four  )  .  
unlike the cell membrane ,  this outer membrane is not a major barrier to the movement of molecules across it .  
enclosing the cell wall in some bacteria is a slimy layer composed mostly of polysaccharides and referred to as a capsule .  
in some cases these capsules protect the bacteria from attack by white blood cells in the animals they infect .  
capsules also help keep the cells from drying out ,  and sometimes they help bacteria attach to other cells .  
some groups of bacteria   including the cyanobacteria   carry out photosynthesis  they use energy from the sun to convert carbon dioxide and water into carbohydrates .  
these bacteria have an internal membrane system that contains molecules needed for photosynthesis .  
the development of photosynthesis ,  which requires membranes ,  was an important event in the early evolution of life on earth .  
other prokaryotes have internal membrane folds that are attached to the cell membrane .  
these folds may function in cell division or in various energy - releasing reactions .  
some prokaryotes swim by using appendages called flagella ,  which sometimes look like tiny corkscrews  ( figure  five  .  five a )  .  
in bacteria ,  the filament of the flagellum is made of a protein called flagellin .  
 ( as you will see in key concept  five  .  three  ,  the flagella of eukaryotes are quite different in structure ,  but similar in function .   )  
a complex motor protein spins the bacterial flagellum on its axis like a propeller ,  driving the cell along .  
the motor protein is anchored to the cell membrane and ,  in some bacteria ,  to the outer membrane of the cell wall  ( figure  five  .  five b )  .  
we know that the flagella cause the motion of cells because if they are removed ,  the cells do not move .  
figure  five  .  five  prokaryotic flagella 
 ( a )  flagella contribute to the movement and adhesion of prokaryotic cells .  
 ( b )  complex protein ring structures anchored in the cell membrane form a motor unit that rotates the flagellum and propels the cell .  
pili are structures made of protein that project from the surfaces of some types of bacterial cells .  
these hairlike structures are shorter than flagella and are used for adherence .  
conjugative pili  ( sex pili )  help bacteria join to one another to exchange genetic material .  
fimbriae are composed of the same proteins as pili but are shorter ,  and help cells adhere to surfaces such as animal cells ,  for food and protection .  
the cytoskeleton is the collective name for protein filaments that play roles in cell division ,  cell movement ,  and in maintaining the shapes of cells .  
one such protein forms a ring structure that constricts during cell division ,  whereas another forms helical structures that extend down the lengths of rod - shaped cells ,  helping maintain their shapes .  
in the past it was thought that only eukaryotic cells had cytoskeletons  ( see key concept  five  .  three  )  ,  but more recently ,  biologists have recognized that cytoskeletal components are also widely distributed among prokaryotes .  
 five  .  two  recap 
prokaryotic cells share basic features ,  including the cell membrane and a region called the nucleoid .  
the rest of the material enclosed by the cell membrane ,  including the ribosomes ,  is called the cytoplasm .  
other features ,  such as cell walls ,  internal membranes ,  and flagella ,  are present in some but not all prokaryotes .  
learning outcomes 
 and # one  six  zero   and # one  six  zero  you should be able to  
describe the major features of a prokaryotic cell .  
identify specialized features found in some prokaryotic cells .  
what are the structure and function of the following specialized prokaryotic cell features  cell wall ,  capsule ,  and flagellum ?  
what are the chemical compositions of the nucleoid and cytoplasm in a prokaryotic cell ?  
as we have already noted ,  the prokaryotic cell is one of two types of cell recognized in cell biology .  
the other is the eukaryotic cell .  
eukaryotic cells are more structurally and functionally complex than prokaryotic cells .  
chapter  five  continues with 
 five  .  three  eukaryotic cells contain organelles 
compartmentalization is important to eukaryotic cell function 
organelles can be studied by microscopy or isolated for chemical analysis 
ribosomes are factories for protein synthesis 
the nucleus contains most of the genetic information 
the endomembrane system is a group of interrelated organelles 
endoplasmic reticulum 
golgi apparatus 
lysosomes 
some organelles transform energy 
there are several other membrane - enclosed organelles 
the cytoskeleton is important in cell structure and movement 
microfilaments 
intermediate filaments 
microtubules 
cilia and flagella 
biologists can manipulate living systems to establish cause and effect 
you are probably familiar with several types of cells in your body ,  such as blood cells ,  skin cells ,  and brain cells .  
while these cells have distinctive structures and functions ,  they and other eukaryotic cells share many features ,  and it is these common features that we will discuss in this section .  
focus your learning 
eukaryotic cells differ from prokaryotic cells in that they contain membrane - bound structures known as organelles .  
each organelle carries out a different specific function that ,  when combined with others ,  allows the cell to function as a whole .  
eukaryotic cells generally have lengths or diameters about ten times greater than those of prokaryotes .  
like prokaryotic cells ,  eukaryotic cells have a cell membrane ,  cytoplasm ,  and ribosomes .  
other structures in eukaryotic cells analogous to those in prokaryotes include a cytoskeleton composed of protein fibers and ,  outside the cell membrane ,  an extracellular matrix .  
but as you learned earlier in this chapter ,  eukaryotic cells also have compartments within the cytoplasm that are separated by membranes .  
the membranous compartments of eukaryotic cells are called organelles .  
all eukaryotic cells have many organelles and structures in common  the most obvious is the cell nucleus .  
but they also have some differences .  
for example ,  many plant cells have chloroplasts that perform photosynthesis .  
each type of organelle has a specific role  some organelles have been characterized as factories that make specific products ,  whereas others are like power plants that take in energy in one form and convert it to a more useful form .  
these functional roles are defined by the chemical reactions that occur within the organelles .  
ion concentrations differ from one organelle to another .  
for instance ,  the ph  ( a reflection of the concentration on h+ )  is  seven  .  four  inside the nucleus ,  but  four  .  five   ( a concentration  one  ,  zero  zero  zero  times higher )  inside another organelle ,  the lysosome .  
cell organelles and structures were first detected by light and then by electron microscopy .  
the functions of the organelles could sometimes be inferred by observations and experiments ,  leading ,  for example ,  to the hypothesis  ( later confirmed )  that the nucleus contained the genetic material .  
later ,  the use of stains targeted to specific macromolecules allowed cell biologists to determine the chemical compositions of organelles .  
another way to analyze cells is to take them apart in a process called differential centrifugation ,  or cell fractionation .  
this process permits cell organelles and other cytoplasmic structures to be separated from each other and examined using chemical methods .  
cell fractionation begins with the destruction of the cell membrane ,  which allows the cytoplasmic components to flow out into a test tube .  
the various organelles can then be separated from one another on the basis of size or density  ( figure  five  .  six  )  .  
biochemical analyses can then be done on the isolated organelles .  
microscopy and cell fractionation have complemented each other ,  giving us a more complete picture of the composition and function of each organelle and structure .  
research tools 
figure  five  .  six  cell fractionation 
organelles can be separated from one another after cells are broken open and their contents suspended in an aqueous medium .  
the medium is placed in a tube and spun in a centrifuge ,  which rotates about an axis at high speed .  
centrifugal forces  ( measured in multiples of gravity ,   and #x zero  zero d seven   g )  cause particles to sediment  ( form a pellet )  at the bottom of the tube ,  which may be collected for biochemical study .  
heavier particles sediment at lower speeds  ( lower centrifugal forces )  than lighter particles .  
by adjusting the speed of centrifugation ,  researchers can separate and partially purify cellular organelles and large particles such as ribosomes .  
microscopy of eukaryotic cells has revealed that many of the organelles are similar in appearance in each cell type  ( figure  five  .  seven  )  .  
by comparing figures  five  .  seven  and  five  .  four  you can see some of the prominent differences between eukaryotic cells and prokaryotic cells .  
figure  five  .  seven  eukaryotic cells 
in electron micrographs ,  many plant cell organelles are nearly identical in form to those observed in animal cells .  
cellular structures found in plant but not animal cells include the cell wall and the chloroplasts .  
note that the images are two - dimensional    slices ,    ?  whereas cells are three - dimensional structures .  
the *ribosomes of prokaryotes and eukaryotes are similar in that both types consist of two different - sized subunits .  
eukaryotic ribosomes are somewhat larger than those of prokaryotes ,  but the structure of prokaryotic ribosomes is better understood .  
chemically ,  ribosomes consist of a special type of rna called ribosomal rna  ( rrna )  .  
ribosomes also contain more than  five  zero  different protein molecules ,  which fit together noncovalently ,  employing forces for protein interaction such as hydrophobic interactions  ( see figure  three  .  one  two  )  .  
additionally ,  some of the proteins bind noncovalently to the rrna .  
*connect the concepts as discussed in key concept  one  four  .  five  ,  the ribosome is the molecular workbench where mrna is translated into protein .  
in prokaryotic cells ,  ribosomes generally float freely in the cytoplasm .  
in eukaryotic cells they are found in multiple places  floating freely in the cytoplasm or attached to the surface of the endoplasmic reticulum  ( a membrane - bound organelle  see below )  ,  inside the mitochondria ,  and inside the chloroplasts in plant cells .  
in each of these locations ,  the ribosomes are molecular factories where proteins are synthesized .  
although they seem small in comparison with the cells that contain them ,  by molecular standards ribosomes are huge complexes  ( about  two  five  nm in diameter )  ,  made up of several dozen different molecules .  
because they lack membranes and are not a compartment ,  ribosomes are not classified as organelles .  
rather ,  like the cytoskeleton  ( see below )  they are called cell structures .  
as we discussed in chapter  four  ,  hereditary information is stored in the sequence of nucleotides in dna molecules .  
most of the dna in eukaryotic cells resides in the nucleus  ( see figure  five  .  seven  )  .  
information encoded in the dna is translated into proteins at the ribosomes  ( a process we will describe in detail in chapter  one  four  )  .  
most cells have a single nucleus ,  which is usually the most prominent organelle .  
the nucleus of a typical animal cell is approximately  five    m in diameter   substantially larger than many entire prokaryotic cells  ( figure  five  .  eight a )  .  
the nucleus has several functions in the cell  
figure  five  .  eight  the nucleus ,  chromatin ,  and chromosomes 
 ( a )  chromatin consists of nuclear dna and the proteins associated with it .  
when the cell is not dividing ,  the chromatin is dispersed throughout the nucleus .  
this two - dimensional image was made using a transmission electron microscope .  
 ( b )  the nuclear envelope has many pores that regulate traffic of large molecules such as rna and proteins in and out of the nucleus .  
 ( c )  the chromatin in dividing cells becomes highly condensed ,  so that the individual chromosomes can be seen .  
this three - dimensional image of isolated metaphase chromosomes was produced using a scanning electron microscope .  
it is the location of most of the cell   s dna and the site of dna replication .  
it is the site where gene transcription is turned on or off .  
a region within the nucleus ,  the nucleolus ,  is where ribosomes begin to be assembled from rna and proteins .  
the contents of the nucleus ,  aside from the nucleolus ,  are referred to as the nucleoplasm .  
similar to the cytoplasm ,  the nucleoplasm consists of the liquid content of the nucleus and the insoluble molecules suspended within it .  
the nucleus is surrounded by an integrated structure composed of two membranes ,  called the nuclear envelope .  
this structure separates the genetic material from the cytoplasm .  
functionally ,  it separates dna transcription  ( which occurs in the nucleus )  from translation  ( which occurs in the cytoplasm )   ( see key concept  four  .  one  )  .  
the two membranes of the nuclear envelope are perforated by thousands of nuclear pores  ( figure  five  .  eight b )  ,  each measuring approximately  nine  nm in diameter ,  which connect the nucleoplasm with the cytoplasm .  
the pores act as    traffic cops ,    ?  allowing some molecules to pass into and out of the nucleus and blocking others .  
this allows the nucleus to regulate its information - processing functions .  
small substances ,  including ions and other molecules with molecular weights of less than  one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  daltons ,  move through the pores .  
but larger molecules ,  such as most proteins that are made in the cytoplasm ,  can   t get through .  
in some cases ,  however ,  there is a special transport mechanism to get such proteins into the nucleus  you   ll learn about this in chapter  one  four  .  
inside the nucleus ,  dna is combined with proteins to form a fibrous complex called chromatin .  
chromatin occurs in the form of exceedingly long ,  thin threads called chromosomes .  
different eukaryotic organisms have different numbers of chromosomes  ( ranging from two in one kind of australian ant to hundreds in some plants )  .  
prior to cell division ,  the chromatin becomes tightly compacted and condensed so that the individual chromosomes are visible under a light microscope .  
this facilitates distribution of the dna during cell division  ( figure  five  .  eight c )  .  
at the inside edge of the nucleus ,  the chromatin is attached to a protein meshwork ,  called the nuclear lamina ,  which is formed by the polymerization of proteins called lamins into long ,  thin structures called intermediate filaments  ( see below )  .  
the nuclear lamina maintains the shape of the nucleus by its attachment to both the chromatin and the nuclear envelope .  
on the outside of the nucleus ,  the outer membrane of the nuclear envelope folds outward into the cytoplasm and is continuous with the membrane of another organelle ,  the endoplasmic reticulum ,  which we will discuss next .  
much of the volume of some eukaryotic cells is taken up by an extensive endomembrane system .  
this is an interconnected system of membrane - enclosed compartments that are sometimes flattened into sheets and sometimes have other characteristic shapes  ( see figure  five  .  seven  )  .  
the endomembrane system includes the cell membrane ,  the nuclear envelope ,  the endoplasmic reticulum ,  the golgi apparatus ,  and lysosomes ,  which are derived from the golgi apparatus .  
tiny ,  membrane - surrounded droplets called vesicles shuttle substances between the various components of the endomembrane system  ( focus  key figure  five  .  nine  )  .  
in drawings and electron microscope pictures ,  this system appears static ,  fixed in space and time .  
but these depictions are just snapshots  in the living cell ,  the membranes and the materials they contain are in constant motion .  
membrane components have been observed to shift from one organelle to another within the endomembrane system .  
thus all these membranes must be functionally related .  
focus  key figure 
figure  five  .  nine  the endomembrane system 
membranes of the nucleus ,  endoplasmic reticulum ,  and golgi apparatus form a network connected by vesicles .  
q  what processes in the endomembrane system are mediated by vesicles ?  
electron micrographs of eukaryotic cells reveal networks of interconnected membranes branching throughout the cytoplasm ,  forming tubes and flattened sacs .  
these membranes are collectively called the endoplasmic reticulum ,  or er .  
the interior compartment of the er ,  referred to as the lumen ,  is separate and distinct from the surrounding cytoplasm  ( see figure  five  .  nine  )  .  
the er can enclose up to  one  zero  percent of the interior volume of the cell ,  and its folds result in a surface area many times greater than that of the cell membrane .  
there are two types of endoplasmic reticulum ,  the so - called rough and smooth .  
is called    rough   ?  because of the many ribosomes attached to the outer surface of the membrane ,  giving it a    rough   ?  appearance in electron microscopy  ( see figure  five  .  seven  )  .  
the bound ribosomes are actively involved in protein synthesis ,  but that is not the entire story  
the rer receives into its lumen certain newly synthesized proteins  ( including proteins destined for lysosomes ,  the cell membrane ,  and export from the cell )  ,  segregating them away from the cytoplasm .  
the rer also participates in transporting these proteins to other locations in the cell .  
while inside the rer ,  proteins can be chemically modified to alter their functions and to    tag   ?  them for delivery to specific cellular destinations .  
proteins are shipped to destinations elsewhere in the cell enclosed within vesicles that pinch off from the rer .  
most membrane - bound proteins are made in the rer .  
a protein enters the lumen of the rer through a pore as it is synthesized .  
as with a protein passing through a nuclear pore ,  there is a special transport mechanism to get proteins into the er ,  which you   ll learn about in chapter  one  four  .  
once in the lumen of the rer ,  proteins undergo several changes ,  including the formation of disulfide bridges and folding into their tertiary structures  ( see figure  three  .  five  )  .  
some proteins are covalently linked to carbohydrate groups in the rer ,  thus becoming glycoproteins .  
in the case of proteins directed to the lysosomes ,  the carbohydrate groups are part of an    addressing   ?  system that ensures that the right proteins are directed to those organelles .  
this addressing system is very important because the enzymes within the lysosomes are some of the most destructive the cell makes .  
were they not properly addressed and contained ,  they could destroy the cell .  
lacks ribosomes and is more tubular  ( and less like flattened sacs )  than the rer ,  but it shows continuity with portions of the rer  ( see figure  five  .  nine  )  .  
certain proteins that are synthesized in the rer are chemically modified within the lumen of the *ser .  
the ser has four other important roles  
it is responsible for the chemical modification of small molecules taken in by the cell that may be toxic to the cell .  
these modifications make the targeted molecules more polar ,  so they are more water - soluble and easily removed .  
it is the site for glycogen degradation in animal cells .  
we will discuss this important process in chapter  nine  .  
it is the site where lipids and steroids are synthesized ,  as well as some polysaccharides in plant cells .  
it stores calcium ions ,  which when released trigger a number of cell responses .  
*connect the concepts regulating muscle contraction is one of the important roles played by the calcium ions stored by the ser .  
see key concept  four  eight  .  one  .  
cells that synthesize a lot of protein for export are usually packed with rer .  
examples include glandular cells that secrete digestive enzymes and white blood cells that secrete antibodies .  
in contrast ,  cells that carry out less protein synthesis  ( such as storage cells )  contain less rer .  
liver cells ,  which modify molecules  ( including toxins )  that enter the body from the digestive system ,  have abundant ser .  
the golgi apparatus  ( or golgi complex ,  or just golgi )  is another part of the diverse ,  dynamic ,  and extensive endomembrane system  ( see figure  five  .  nine  )  .  
this structure was named after its discoverer ,  camillo golgi .  
its appearance varies ,  but it almost always consists of two components  flattened membranous sacs called cisternae  ( singular cisterna )  that are piled up like saucers ,  and small membrane - enclosed vesicles .  
the entire apparatus is about  one    m long .  
the golgi apparatus has several roles  
it receives protein - containing vesicles from the rer .  
it modifies ,  concentrates ,  packages ,  and sorts proteins before they are sent to their cellular or extracellular destinations .  
it adds carbohydrates to proteins and modifies other carbohydrates that were attached to proteins in the rer .  
it is where some polysaccharides for the plant cell wall are synthesized .  
the cisternae of the golgi apparatus have three functionally distinct regions  
the cis region lies nearest to the nucleus or a patch of rer .  
the trans region lies closest to the cell membrane .  
the medial region lies in between  ( see figure  five  .  nine  )  .  
the terms cis ,  trans ,  and medial derive from latin words meaning ,  respectively ,     on the same side ,    ?     on the opposite side ,    ?  and    in the middle .    ?  ) 
